[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1991](./) >> **[1991] LKSC 1**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1991+1 or 1991+LKSC+1) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1991+LKSC+1) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Gomez v. Bernard - SLR - 396, Vol 1 of 1993 [1991] LKSC 1; (1993) 1 Sri LR
396 (30 May 1991)

**396**

**GOMEZ** **  
vs.** **  
BERNARD**

SUPREME COURT.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J., FERNANDO. J. AND  
AMERASINGHE, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 24/87.  
C.A. APPEAL NO. 148/81 (F).  
D.C. NEGOMBO 2352/RE.  
MAY 30th, 1991.

_     Landlord and tenant - Defendant coming into premises let to a doctor -
Subtenant/employee/licensee of doctor? - Doctor's death in 1976 at which time
deceased plaintiff was landlord, doctor tenant and defendant sub-tenant-
Doctor's widow granted limited letters to sell cars - No evidence of grant
without limitation or payment of rent - Abandonment \- Rei vindicatio suit -
Rent Act, Section 36(2)(c) (iii) - Burden of proof._

The deceased plaintiff let the premises in suit to the original tenant who
however in September 1970 sub-let them to the defendant. The defendant then
offered rent to the plaintiff who refused to accept it. She sued the defendant
for declaration of title, ejectment and damages. It was contended for the
defendant that when he proved he was a sub-tenant under the original tenant he
thereby proved a right to possession until the tenant's right was terminated.

**Held**

1\. Per Fernando J. " while I am inclined to agree that a sub-letting created
in violation of a statutory prohibition is not effective to confer on the sub-
tenant rights as against the landlord ..... yet so long as the tenancy
subsists, it is the tenant who is entitled to possess the premises and the
landlord cannot obtain a decree for possession as against the sub - tenant in
derogation of the tenants right.

2\. The burden was on the defendant to establish that his occupation was
lawful after 1976 and he had therefore to prove his allegation that the widow
succeeded the deceased tenant. A person who obtained a limited grant to sell
the cars of the deceased cannot properly be described as an administrator of
the estate of the deceased. Section 36 (2)(iii) refers to a person who has
obtained a grant of administration without any limitation expressed therein,
and perhaps

397

even a limited grant which refers to the rented premises and confers the power
of dealing therewith. The widow did not fall within section 36(2)(c) (iii).

Further she did not assert or exercise any rights in relation to the premises,
or in relation to the plaintiff as landlord or to the defendant as sub-tenant.
Hence, even if she had been eligible to claim a right to succeed to the
tenancy, she was in no better position than a tenant who repudiates or
disclaims, or abandons, the tenancy; consequently her right to possession of
the premises came to an end; she lost the protection of the Rent Act, and was
liable to ejectment without notice in an action brought by the owner. The
defendant's position ceases to be protected.

3\. The language of sub-sections (3) and (4) of section 36 contemplates an
application being made by the landlord to the Rent Board to determine whom he
should accept as tenant when the original tenant has died where there are two
or more persons who appear to satisfy the requirements of section 36(2)(c).
The only exception might be where there is only one person who appears to be
qualified, but some doubt exists as to his right. Where, however, there is no
person prima facie eligible to succeed, there is no obligation on the landlord
to make an application under section 36(3). Section 36(2)(c) provides for a
number of possible successors when the tenant dies but they succeed only upon
the fulfilment of specified conditions - thus the surviving spouse or child
can succeed only if he carries on in the premises the business carried on by
the deceased tenant; a partner or heir to the business only if he is a partner
in the business or an heir to the business carried on by the deceased tenant;
an administrator if he is the administrator of the estate of the deceased
tenant.

4\. Section 10 (2) of the Rent Act debars the plaintiff from obtaining relief
based on unlawful sub-letting but does not affect his common law right to
maintain an action for declaration of title, ejectment and damages against the
defendant who has failed to establish a right of possession (based on sub-
tenancy or otherwise).

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Ibrahim Saibo v. Mansoor (1953) 54 NLR 217._  
_  
2\. Zubair Kannu (1984) 2 Sri Kantha Rep. 87._  
_  
3\. Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar [1986] 2 Sri LR 219._  
_  
4\. Hameed v. Weerasinghe S.C. 13/86 S.C. Minutes of 16th March 1986._  
_  
5\. Kalyoom v. Mansoor [1988] 1 Sri L.R. 361._  
_  
6\. Dharmawardena v. Walwattage [1987] 1 Sri L.R. 57._  
_  
7\. Allis Appu v. Endris Hamy (1984) 3 S.C.R. 87, 90._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_J. W. Subasinghe, P.C. with Harsha Soza_ for the appellant.

398

  
  
_A. K. Premadasa, P.C. with R. K. Suresh Chandra and J. Ratnayake_ for
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 05, 1991.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

A substantial building abutting Main Street, Negombo, had been let to a
doctor. The premises were partitioned in 1966 into two allotments, and the
doctor continued in occupation as the tenant of the two allottees. The larger
portion of the building was allotted to the Plaintiff's sister, and was used
by the doctor for his nursing home. The smaller portion (admittedly "business
premises") was allotted to the Plaintiff, and was used by the doctor for other
business purposes. In September 1970, the Defendant came into those premises,
and the dispute is whether he was a sub-tenant, or an employee or licensee of
the doctor. The Plaintiff had not given her prior written consent for any sub-
letting. The Plaintiff's evidence was that she believed the doctor to be
carrying on a business (connected with photography) on the premises, and that
the doctor had brought the Defendant onto the premises. The doctor paid the
rent to the Plaintiff. It was only after the doctor's death on 21.10.76 that
she became aware that the Defendant was claiming rights of occupation; the
Defendant tendered rent to her, but this she declined to accept.

It was contended on behalf of the Substituted-Plaintiff-Appellant (the
Plaintiff having died while this appeal was pending) that the Defendant was no
more than a licensee. However, there was evidence that the Defendant paid rent
to the doctor, and that the doctor had treated him as a sub-tenant; after the
doctor's death the Plaintiff had instituted an action against him describing
him as a sub-tenant, but this was withdrawn with liberty to bring a fresh
action. On this question the District Court and the Court of Appeal have come
to concurrent findings of fact, that the Defendant was a sub-tenant, which I
see no reason to disturb. Accordingly, at the time of the doctor's death in
1976, the Plaintiff was the landlord, the doctor was the tenant, and the
Defendant was his sub-tenant, but without the knowledge or consent of the
Plaintiff.

399

The doctor's widow applied for letters of administration; according to the
document produced, what was granted to her was " Limited Letters of
Administration ", whereby she was " fully empowered and authorised ........ to
sell motor car bearing No 3 Sri 761 and to bring the proceeds of the sale to
the credit of this case ". No other document was produced, and there is no
evidence or admission that she obtained a grant without limitation. There was
no evidence that she paid or tendered rent to the Plaintiff, or that she made
any claim to be the tenant of the premises or acted as such; or that the
Defendant paid or tendered rent to her, or that she accepted or acknowledged
the Defendant as her tenant. The Defendant testified that he deposited rent
with the Municipal Council, but there was no evidence as to whether this was
in the name and to the credit of the deceased, his widow or the Plaintiff.

The Plaintiff instituted action against the Defendant for declaration of
title, ejectment and damages, without joining the widow (or any other legal
representative or successor of the deceased tenant). The District Court
dismissed the action, and that order was affirmed by the Court of Appeal. The
reasoning in the judgments of the District Court and the Court of Appeal may
be summarized as follows: The Defendant had been a sub-tenant; upon the death
of the tenant the widow had been appointed Administratrix, and therefore
became the tenant, by operation of law, namely section 36 (2) (c) (iii) of the
Rent Act; the Defendant by continuing in occupation of the premises became the
sub-tenant of the widow; even though the sub-letting was contrary to the
provisions of the then prevailing law (section 9 of the Rent Restriction Act)
section 10 (7) of the Rent Act " legalised the prior unlawful sub-letting,
thereby creating a state of lawful subtenancy no action could be instituted,
either against the tenant or the sub-tenant, on the ground of an unlawful sub-
letting which commenced prior to the Rent Act; such sub-tenant could not be
treated as a trespasser, and in any event no action could be instituted for
the ejectment of the sub-tenant, without first obtaining a decree for
ejectment against the tenant.

A preliminary question in regard to the burden of proof arises. Learned
President's Counsel for the Defendant contended that it was not enough for the
Plaintiff to establish title to the premises; when the Defendant established
that he was a sub-tenant under the original

400

tenant, he thereby proved a right to possession - a right derived from the
tenant's right to possession; the burden then lay on the Plaintiff, he
submitted, to prove that the tenancy had been terminated, thereby rendering
the sub-tenant's possession unlawful (citing Ibrahim _Saibo v. Mansoor_ (1),
_Zubair v. Kannu_ (2), and _Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar_ (3). In
Ibrahim Saibo it was laid down that the sub-tenant's right of occupation is
fragile, being " essentially dependent on the lawful continuation of the main
tenancy ":

"........ a landlord has one distinct cause of action against the tenant
(based on contract) for; the recovery of the property, and another (based on
delict) for the ejectment of the sub-tenant who remains in occupation after
the main tenancy has expired. "

While it was recognised that a sub-tenant can shelter behind the protection
afforded to the tenant if that protection had not ceased to exist, the burden
of proof was not discussed.

Theivandran dealt with a vindictory action; the defendant was in occupation
under a partnership agreement with the tenant; the plaintiff admitted the
tenancy; it was held that the burden shifted to the plaintiff to establish
that the tenancy had been terminated by surrender of possession or that the
defendant was claiming adversely to the tenant:

"......... in the case of premises which have been let...... if the landlord
qua owner....... chooses to sue for ejectment of a third party in occupation,
the burden will be on him to show that the right of the tenant to be in
possession has revested in him....... Had the tenant abandoned or surrendered
possession of the premises ......... the plaintiff might then have treated the
tenancy....... as determined and thus having become entitled to possession,
sued for the ejectment of the defendant:"

Zubair v. Kannu was similar; the defendant's claim to be a partner of the
tenant was rejected, and it was held that the tenant continued to be entitled
to possession; the landlord was therefore refused a decree for possession.-

401

The position here is entirely different. What has been proved is that the
tenancy and sub-tenancy subsisted until the doctor's death in 1976. There was
no automatic devolution or transmission of tenancy rights to a particular
successor. Section 36 (2)(c) provides for a number of possible successors, but
they succeed only upon the fulfilment of specified conditions; thus the
surviving spouse or child can succeed only if he carries on in the premises
the business carried on by the deceased tenant; a partner or heir, only if he
was a partner in the business, or an heir to the business, carried on by the
deceased tenant; an administrator, if he is the administrator " of the estate
of the deceased tenant ". Thus there may be no qualified successor, and
sometimes even no potential successor. It was therefore incumbent on the
defendant to establish who became the new tenant, and to show by what right he
continued to occupy the premises, after the death of the old tenant (cf.
_Hameed v. Weerasinghe_ (4)). The burden was thus on the defendant to
establish that the widow did become the tenant, and not on the plaintiff to
prove the negative.

Where the landlord is aware that there are two or more persons who satisfy, or
appear to satisfy, the requirements of section 36(2)(c), he would be uncertain
whom to accept as the tenant; section 36 (3) would oblige him to apply to the
Rent Board for an order to determine that question, as held in _Kalyoom v.
Mansoor_ (5). I find it difficult to agree with the observations of S. N.
Silva, J., suggesting that even if there is only one qualified person, the
landlord must make an application under section 36 (3) : if, for instance,
there is an executor who has obtained probate, and there are no persons
qualified under, clauses (i) and (ii) of section 36 (2) (c), there seems to be
no good reason why the landlord should apply under section 36 (3). The
language of sub-sections (3) and (4) contemplates an application being made,
and notice being issued, where there are " persons " who may be deemed to be
tenants. The only exception might be where there is only one person who
appears to be qualified, but some doubt exists as to his right. Where,
however, there is no person prima facie eligible to succeed, there is no
obligation on the landlord to make an application under section 36 (3). It was
not contended in the present case that. the Plaintiff was obliged to make an
application under section 36 (3); probably because it was clear that she was
unaware that there was any person prima facie eligible to succeed under
section 36 (2) (c).

402

The Substituted-Plaintiff's contentions in appeal may be summarised as follows

1\. The transaction whereby the premises had been sub-let by the doctor to the
defendant was tainted with illegality, as it was entered into in violation of
section .9 (1) of the Rent Restriction Act (corresponding to section 10 (2) of
the Rent Act) which imperatively requires the prior consent in writing of the
landlord; whatever rights the defendant might have had thereunder as against
the original tenant, his occupation was unlawful as against the plaintiff,
from September 1970.

2.(a) Upon the death of the doctor, no one qualified to be deemed the tenant
under section 36 (2) (c). There was no spouse or child carrying on the
business in the rented premises, there was no partner in or heir to the
deceased's business, and there was no ' executor or administrator of the
estate of the deceased '. The limited grant obtained by the widow did not
satisfy section 36 (2) (c) (iii).

(b) Even if the widow did qualify under that section, she never asserted or
exercised rights as tenant, and abandoned whatever rights she may have had in
respect of a tenancy.

(c) There being no tenancy after the death of the original tenant, the
occupation of the defendant became unlawful as against the plaintiff at least
in 1976.

1\. While I am inclined to agree that a sub-letting created in violation of a
statutory prohibition is not effective to confer on the sub-tenant rights as
against the landlord (cf. _Dharmawardena v. Walwattage_ (6), yet so long as
the tenancy subsists, it is the tenant - who is entitled to possess the
premises, and the landlord cannot obtain a decree for possession as against
the sub-tenant in derogation . of the tenant's right (Zubair v. Kannu). In
Theivandran, Sharvananda, ' C.J., held the landlord to be entitled to a
declaration of title as against a person in occupation with the tenant's
consent. If a tenant unlawfully sublets part of the rented premises to a
person who, for instance, later uses the premises for purposes connected with
terrorism, narcotics or kasippu, is the landlord entitled to seek ejectment of
the sub-tenant

403

only, perhaps expressly acknowledging and reserving the tenant's right of
possession (as in _Allis Appu v. Endris Hamy_ (7). However, in view of my
decision on the other matters, it is unnecessary to decide this question.

2\. In regard to the second submission, the -burden was on the defendant to
establish that his occupation was lawful after 1976, and he had therefore to
prove his allegation that the widow succeeded the deceased tenant. It was not
suggested that the widow was eligible under clauses (i) or (ii); she was not
an executor (whether executor " includes a person named as executor in a last
will, or means only a person who has obtained probate). " Administrator"
clearly means a person who has obtained such status by virtue of the order of
a competent court. Here the widow only obtained a limited grant to enable her
to sell a specific asset. Can she be considered to be the " administrator of
the estate of the deceased "? At the time section 36 was enacted, the relevant
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code dealing with the grant of letters of
administration were sections 539 and 540 (corresponding to sections 296 and
290 of the Administration of Justice Law, No 44 of 1973). Section 539 provided
for a grant of administration limited in respect of the property to be
administered or the power of dealing with that property; i.e. limited to a
particular property, and for a particular purpose, such as selling a specific
asset for payment of estate duty. A person who obtained a limited grant of
that nature cannot properly be described as an administrator of the estate of
the deceased. I am of the view that section 36 (2) (c) (iii) refers to a
person who has obtained a grant of administration without any limitation
expressed therein, and perhaps even a limited grant which refers to the rented
premises and confers the power of dealing therewith. The widow did not fall
within section 36 (2) (c) (iii).

Further, she did not assert or exercise any rights in relation to the
premises, or in relation to the plaintiff as landlord or to the defendant as
sub-tenant. Hence, even if she had been eligible to claim a right to succeed
to the tenancy, she was in no better position than a tenant who repudiates or
disclaims, or abandons, the tenancy:

404

 consequently her right to possession of the premises came to an end; she lost
the protection of the Rent Act; and was liable to ejectment without notice in
an action brought by the owner. The defendant's occupation ceased to be
protected.

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant contended that the plaintiff's
right of action was barred by the provisions of section 10 (7)

" Nothing in subsection 2, subsection 5 or subsection 6 shall apply to the
subletting of any premises or part thereof without the prior consent in
writing of the landlord where such premises or part have been sublet prior to
the date of commencement of this Act to any person, so long as that person
continues to be the subtenant of the premises or part thereof."

Learned President's Counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that this provision
applies only to a lawful sub-letting; that the sub-letting to the defendant
was without the Plaintiffs consent, and section 10 (7) had no application. It
is clear, however, that ' sub-letting " in section 10 (7), and indeed in the
whole of section 10, refers to the physical act of sub-letting, namely parting
with possession, or relinquishing control of the premises, and not to the
conditions which make subletting lawful. However, section 10 (7) does not
operate to bar all actions for recovery of possession; it is no more than an
exception to some of the provisions of section 10. Looked at from the point of
view of the owner of the premises, this provision merely precludes resort to
the remedies provided by section 10 (2), (5) and (6), but does not affect his
other proprietory remedies. In this instance section 10 (7) debars the
Plaintiff from obtaining relief based on unlawful sub-letting, but does not
affect his common law right to maintain an action for declaration of title,
ejectment and damages against the defendant who has failed to establish a
right of possession (based on sub-tenancy or otherwise):

I therefore allow the appeal, and set aside the judgments and decrees of the
District Court and the Court of Appeal. The substituted-plaintiff will be
entitled to a declaration of title, to a decree for the ejectment of the
defendant, and to damages, as prayed for in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c) of the
prayer to the plaint, together

405

with costs in a sum of Rs. 3,000 in this Court, as well as costs in both
Courts below.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/1.html_  

