[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1984](./) >> **[1984] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1984+12 or 1984+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1984+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Withanaratchi v. Gunawardena and Others - SLR - 253, Vol 1 of 1996 [1984]
LKSC 12; (1996) 1 Sri LR 253 (15 September 1984)

**253**

**WITHANARATCHI  
****v** **.  
GUNAWARDENA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G.P.S DE SILVA, C.J.,  
RAMANATHAN, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 64/94.  
C.A. (WRIT) APPLICATION NO. 377/88.  
CHP BOARD OF REVIEW NO. 1713.  
03 AND 07 JUNE, 1996.

_Ceiling_ _on_ _Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973 ‑Application by tenant to
purchase tenement‑Definition of house in section 47 of the Law‑ Application of
section 39 (3) of the Law_ _read with section 22 of the Interpretation
Ordinance_ _as amended by Interpretation_ __ _(Amendment) Act, No. 18 of 1972
‑ Error on "Jurisdictional Fact"._

The respondent made an application to purchase her residing tenement under the
Ceiling of Housing Property Law. The definition of house in section 47 of the
Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973 includes a tenement. Here there
was a connecting door which was kept closed for 32 years. This interconnecting
door served as access from the tenement to a book depot and not to a living
accommodation though no doubt there was an attic in the book depot which
however provided living accommodation. The Board of Review held this tenement
was a house within the definition of the expression "house" in section 47 of
the Ceiling on Housing Property Law.

**Held :** ****

The Board of Review in holding in favour of the Respondent did not err in
respect of a jurisdictional fact but the error if at all, is one made within
the area of the jurisdiction of the Board of Review.

An ouster clause must be strictly construed and there is a presumption in
favour of judicial review.

Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance does not exclude review of
juris­dictional questions. The bar applies only to erroneous decisions made
within the area of the tribunal's jurisdiction. The error of the Board of
Review is at most an error made within jurisdiction and the ouster clause
would accordingly apply.

**254**

**Case referred to :**

_Chandralatha_ _Wijewardena v._ _People's Bank and others. (S.C. Appeal No.
3/80 S.C. Minutes of 20.5.1981._

**APPEAL** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_T. B. Dilimuni with Miss S. Moragoda _ and  _Miss._ _N. Jayawardena _ for the
Petitioner‑Appellant.

_E. D. Wikremanayake_ with _Miss Anandi Cooray _for 5th Respondent.

_Cur._ _adv. vult._

20 June, 1996.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.**

The Petitioner‑Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) is the
owner of premises Nos. 45 and 45/6, Maligakanda Road, Colombo 10,. The 5th
Respondent is the tenant under the Appellant of premises No. 45/6, which are
the premises in suit.

The 5th Respondent made an application dated 8.11.82 under the provisions of
section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973 (hereinafter
referred to as the Law) for the purchase of premises __ No. 45/6. The
Appellant sought to resist the application on the ground that premises No.
45/6 was not a "house" within the meaning of sec­tion 47 of the Law. After
inquiry, the Commissioner of National Housing upheld the objection and
rejected the 5th Respondent's application to purchase the house. The decision
of the Commissioner was notified to the 5th Respondent by letter dated
15.9.84. The 5th Respondent there ­upon preferred an appeal to the Board of
Review seeking to set aside the decision of the Commissioner and for a
declaration that the premises No. 45/6 was a "house" within the meaning of
section 47 of the law. After inquiry, the Board of Review allowed the appeal
of the 5th Re­spondent and set aside the decision of the Commissioner and
directed the Commissioner to take steps under section 17 (1) of the law to
"vest" the premises. Thereupon the Appellant filed an application in the Court
of Appeal seeking a writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the Board of
Review on the ground that the order has been made with­out and/or in excess of
jurisdiction.

**255**

At the hearing before the Court of Appeal, Counsel for the 5th Respondent took
the preliminary objection that the application cannot be maintained in view of
the **provisions of section 39 (3) of the law read with section 22 of the
Interpretation Ordinance as amended by Interpretation (Amendment) Act No. 18
of 1972.** The principle submission of Mr. Dilimuni, Counsel for the
Appellant, was that the Board of Review has erred on a "jurisdictional fact"
in reaching the conclusion that premises No. 45/6 is a "house" within the
meaning of that expression in the law. Counsel urged that the Board of Review
has failed to take into consideration (a) the evidence of the 5th Respond­ent
given before the Commissioner on 9.3.83; (b) the observations made by the
Assistant Commissioner who inspected the premises in suit with a view to
ascertaining whether the premises fell within the definition of "house", (c)
the complaint made by the Appellant to the Police on 22.9.84 and also the
statement made by the 5th Respondent to the police on the same day.

Mr. Dilimuni drew our attention to the evidence given on 9.3.83 by the 5th
Respondent before the Commissioner. The gist of her evidence was that between
the premises No. 45/6 where she resides and premises No. 45 which is a book
depot, there is a door and that this door provided access to premises No. 45.
While admitting the existence of the door, she further stated that the door
had been closed for the last 32 years. It was her position that she was in
occupation of the premises for 32 years.

The next item of evidence relied on by Mr. Dilimuni is the record of the
observations made by the Assistant Commissioner who inspected the premises.
This officer has stated that premises No. 45/6 is situated behind the premises
No. 45. It is a room attached to premises No. 45. She has specifically stated
that there is an "interconnecting door" between the two premises and she had
concluded that the premises No. 45/6 cannot be considered as an "independent
unit" as it is connected by a door to premises No. 45. This is a minute made
in the relevant file of the Commissioner and is dated 27.8.84.

The other item of evidence relied on by the Appellant is the complaint made to
the police on 22.9.84. In this complaint the Appellant has stated that the 5th
Respondent is preparing to construct a wall on

**256**

her side in order to close the door. The 5th Respondent who made a statement
to the police on the same day admitted "the construction of the wall" and
further stated that was done for "her protection".

In short, Mr. Dillimuni submitted that the Board of Review has failed to take
into account evidence which is intensely relevant on the issue whether the
premises in suit is a "house" within the meaning of the law. By such failure,
Counsel contended, the Board of Review has seriously erred on a
"jurisdictional fact" and thereby acted in excess of its jurisdiction. It was
the contention of Mr. Dillimuni that the preclu­sive clause contained in
section 39 (3) of the law read with section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance
as amended by Act No. 18 of 1972, has no application when the impugned order
is one made outside or in excess of jurisdiction.

I now turn to the definition of the expression "house" in section 47 of the
law. It reads as follows :‑

"House" means an independent living unit whether assessed or not for the
purpose of levying rates, constructed mainly or solely for residential
purposes, and having a separate access, and through which unit access cannot
be had to any other living accommodation, and includes a flat or tenement, but
shall not include‑

(1) subdivisions of, or extensions to„ a house which was first occupied as a
single unit of residence; and

(2) a house used mainly or solely for a purpose other than a resi­dential
purpose for an uninterrupted period of ten years prior to March 1, 1972.

Mr. Dillimuni drew our attention to the words "through which unit access
cannot be had to any other living accommodation" and stressed that the
existence of the "inter‑connecting door" provided access from the premises No.
45/6 to premises No. 45. Therefore, Counsel urged that the premises in suit
did not fall within the meaning of the expres­sion "house" in the law. In
short, the existence of the "inter‑connecting door" takes the premises in suit
out of the definition.

**257**

Mr. E.D. Wikremanayake for the 5th Respondent presented his case before us on
the assumption that there was an "inter connecting door" between the two
premises. Mr. Wikremanayake submitted that having regard to the evidence and
the terms of the definition of the expression "house", the existence of an
inter connecting door does not take the premises out of the definition‑ The
assessment registers show that from 1941 to 1948 there was one assessment
number given for the entire building, namely No. 45. The assessment registers
further show that in 1949 there was a sub‑division of the premises, namely,
assessment Nos. 45 and 45/6.

Premises No. 45 is described as a "book depot", while premises No. 45/6 has
been described as a "tenement" in the assessment register for 1949. Mr.
Wikremanayake first submitted that the inter-connecting door therefore
provided access from the "tenement" to the "book depot" and not into any
"living accommodation" as contemplated in the definition of a "house". It is
right to state here that Mr. Dillimuni's submission was that in premises No.
45 there is an attic which provided "living accommodation".

Mr. Wikremanayake next submitted that the words "whether as­sessed or not for
the purpose of levying rates, constructed mainly or solely for residential
purposes, and having a separate access and through which unit access cannot be
had to any other living accom­modation" qualify only the preceding words "an
independent living unit." Mr. Wikremanayake emphasized that the definition
expressly includes a "tenement" and the assessment register of 1949 described
the premises in suit as a "tenement". Counsel further pointed out that the
unchallenged evidence is that the door was closed for the past 32 years. It is
not disputed that the 5th Respondent was residing in these premises long
before the Appellant purchased the premises in 1979. I am inclined to the view
that there is force in these submissions made by Mr. Wikremanayake.

On a consideration of the entirety of the facts and circumstances of this
case, it seems to me that it cannot be said that the decision of the Board of
Review is unreasonable; nor can it be said that it is unsupported by the
evidence on record. At most, the alleged error of the Board of Review lies in
the evaluation and the assessment of the oral

**258**

and documentary evidence. I find myself unable to agree with Mr. Dilimuni for
the Appellant that the Board of Review has erred in respect of a
"jurisdictional fact." The error, if at all, is one made within the area of
the jurisdiction of the Board of Review.

In this view of the matter, it is necessary to consider whether the provisions
of section 39 (3) of the law read with section 22 of the Interpretation
Ordinance as amended by Act No. 18 of 1972 preclude judicial review of the
decision of the Board of Review.

I think it would be correct to say that generally speaking an ouster clause is
strictly construed and that there is a presumption in favour of judicial
review. As observed by H.W.R. Wade .........there is a firm judicial policy
against allowing the rule of law to be undermined by weakening the powers of
the Court. Statutory restrictions on judicial remedies are given the narrowest
possible construction, sometimes even against the plain meaning of the words.
This is sound policy, since otherwise administrative authorities and tribunals
would be given uncontrollable power and could violate the law at will (at page
720 of the 6th Edition on Administrative Law. At page 722 of the same edition
Wade states "An even bolder, though equally justifiable, judicial policy was
that Certiorari would be granted to quash an act or decision which was _ultra
vires_ even in the face of a statute saying expressly that no Certiorari
should issue in such a case."

Mr. Dillimuni relevantly cited the case of _Chandralatha_ _Wijewardena v.
People's Bank and Others_ (1) _._ This was a case where Sharvananda, J. (as he
then was) considered the scope of section 22 of the Interpreta­tion Ordinance
as amended by Act No. 18 of 1972. Said the learned Judge, "In my view, section
22 of the Interpretation Ordinance as amended by the Interpretation
(Amendment) Act No. 18 of 1972, has no application when the question of
jurisdiction to make the impugned order is in issue, when the order or
determination is outside or in excess of the jurisdiction of the tribunal.
Section 22 deals with decisions and orders which any person, authority or
tribunal is **empowered to make or issue,** The court's jurisdiction to
pronounce on the authority of the tribunal to make an order is not ousted by
any such exclusionary clause "shall not be called in question in any court" if
the tribunal was not empowered to make the order. The question of the
tribunal's juris-

**259**

diction to make the order or decision can always be agitated. Section 22 of
the Interpretation Ordinance does not exclude review of jurisdictional
questions. The bar applies only to erroneous decisions made within the area of
the tribunal's jurisdiction...." I am in entire agreement with the view of the
learned Judge that the section does not shut out judicial review on
jurisdictional ‑grounds; it is a bar to the review of erroneous decisions made
within the area of the jurisdiction of the tribunal. As stated earlier, the
error of the Board of review is at most an error made within jurisdiction, and
the ouster clause would accordingly apply.

For these reasons the appeal fails and is dismissed, but in all the
circumstances, without costs.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/12.html_  

