[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [2001](./) >> **[2001] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+2001+12 or 2001+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=2001+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Jiffry v. Colombage and Others - SLR - 119, Vol 1 of 2003 [2001] LKSC 12;
(2003) 1 Sri LR 119 (4 October 2001)

119

**JIFFRY** ****

**v.** ****

**COLOMBAGE AND OTHERS** ****



SUPREME COURT

S .N. SILVA, CJ

ISMAIL, J. AND

EDUSSURIYA, J.

S.C. APPEAL No.19/2001

C.A. APPLICATION No. 894/99

4TH OCTOBER 2001

  _  
  
Writ of certiorari - Celing on Housing Property _\- _Information given by
tenant_ _that the appellant owned eleven houses — Commissioner's decision
vesting_ _a house - Validity of the decision in view of Act, No. 4 of 1988._

 The appellant and his deceased brother being owners of 10 houses made their
declaration under the Ceiling on Housing Property Law ("the Law") on
31.08.1976. The declaration stated that they were joint owners of 10 houses
but gave particulars of only 09 houses, including the house in dispute. The
6th respondent the Commissioner for National Housing ("the Commissioner")
vested 06 houses excluding the premises in question. Thereafter another house
of which particulars had not been disclosed was also vested; and all
proceedings in respect of the houses including payment of compensation for the
vested houses were finalized by 31.05.1985.



The first respondent ("the tenant") who succeeded to the tenancy of the house
in dispute in 1992 sent an affidavit dated 21.12.1994 to the Commissioner that
the appellant and the 2nd respondent were excess house owners. After in
inquiry into this matter, the Commissioner by a decision dated 08.09.1995
purported to vest the house in dispute. The Board of Review Ceiling on Housing
Property set aside that decision on the ground that the Commissioner had no
jurisdiction to make it in view of the provisions of the Ceiling on Housing
Property (Special Provisions) Act, No.4 of 1988.

**Held :**

In view of the provisions of section 3 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law
(Special Provisions) Act, No.4 of 1988 ('The Act") which precluded a tenant
from making an application under the Law after 01.01.1987 the tenant was not
entitled to make his "application" dated 21.12.1994.

120

_2._ Section 4(c) of the Act which provided for the completion of pending
matters had no application as all proceedings in respect of the decla­ration
made by the appellant and the other co-owner had been con­cluded by 31.5.1985.

**APPEAL** from the decision of the Court of Appeal reported in (2000) 3 Sri
LR 367

_ _

_Faiz Musthapha,_ PC with _Reza Muzni_ and _AM. Jeefry_ for appellant.



_N.B.D.S. Wijesekera_ for 1st respondent

_ _

_N. Pulle,_ State Counsel for 6th respondent.  

# Cur. adv. vult

## Editor's note



Vide (2000) 3 Sri L.R.367 for a detailed statement of the facts relating to
the purported vesting.

October 04, 2001

**S.N. SILVA, C.J.**

This is an appeal from the judgment dated 4.9.2000 of the Court of Appeal. By
that judgment, the Court of Appeal directed the issue of a Writ of Certioari
to quash the decision of the Board of Review established under the Ceiling on
Housing Property Law. That decision is dated 25.8.1999. In the proceedings in
question the Board of Review considered the appeal of the pre­sent appellant
in respect of a decision made by the Commissioner of National Housing dated
8.9.1995. By that decision, the Commissioner purported to vest premises
bearing No.90, Yatinuwara Veediya, Kandy owned by the appellant and the 2nd
respondent. The decision dated 8.9.1995 was made by the Commissioner pursuant
to an application made by the tenant on 21.12.1994.



The Board of Review has set aside the order of the Commissioner on the basis
that the tenant could not have made an application in respect of the premises
bearing assessment

121

  
 No.90, after 01.01.1987 in view of the provisions of the Celing on Housing
Property (Special Provisions) of Act. No. 4 of 1988\. Section 3 of that Act
specifically precludes an application being made by the tenant in terms of the
principal Act after 01.01.1987. In this instance, the application was made on
21.12.1994. The Court of Appeal has gone on the basis that the order could
have been made by the Commissioner in view of the provisions of Section 4(c)
of Act, No. 4 of 1988. This provison reads thus.



"Any action proceeding or thing commenced under the prin­cipal enactment and
pending or incomplete on 01.01.1987 which action, proceeding or thing may be
carried on and completed as if the principal enactment had not been amended by
this Act."



The Court of Appeal has observed that the proceedings before the Commissioner
were pending since the declaration made under the Act by the owners was false
or incorrect.



It is to be noted that a declaration was made by the appel­lant and the 2nd
respondent being joint owners of several hous­es on 31.8.1976. In that
declaration, they have disclosed the fact that they owned 10 houses. However,
only the particulars with regard to 9 houses have been specified. This
includes premises bearing No. 90 Yatinuwara Veediya, Kandy which is the
subject matter of this appeal. Pursuant to inquiries that were held,
Commissioner vested 6 of these houses of which particulars were disclosed
excluding the premises in question. Thereafter the 7th house of which
particulars were not disclosed was also vested. The decision of the Board of
Review reveals that the appellant was paid compensation in respect of the
vested houses on 31.5.1985.



Thus all proceedings with regard to the declaration made by the appellant and
the other co-owner had been concluded as far back as 31.5.1985. The premises
bearing No. 90 Yatinuwara Veediya, Kandy was a permitted house which the
owners were entitled to retain. In the circumstances, there was no basis
what­soever for the tenant, the 1st respondent, to make an application in 1994
in respect of these premises. According to the material available, he
succeeded to the tenancy only in 1992 long after the

122



period for making an application lapsed in terms of provisions of Act, No. 4
of 1988.



Accordingly, we hold that the basis on which, the Court of Appeal issued a
Writ of certiorari quashing the decision of the Board of Review is incorrect.
We allow this appeal and set aside the judgment dated 4.9.2000. We make no
order for costs.

**ISMAIL, J.** **** \- I agree.

** **

**EDUSSURIYA** , **J.** **-** I agree.

_ _

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/12.html_  

