[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [2000](./) >> **[2000] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+2000+12 or 2000+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=2000+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Indrakumar v. Premawardena and Others - SLR - 7, Vol 1 of 2001 [2000] LKSC
12; (2001) 1 Sri LR 7 (1 December 2000)

**7**

**INDRAKUMAR  
v.  
PREMAWARDENA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
EDUSSURIYA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 37/2000  
SC SPECIAL LA APPLICATION NO. 110/2000  
CA APPLICATION NO. 213/2000  
24TH OCTOBER, 2000  
  
_Writ of mandamus - Tenant's application to purchase the house let to him -
Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973 - Sections 13 and 17(1) of the
Law - Writ application to compel sale made after the landlord had obtained
judgement for ejectment of tenant \- Power of Court of Appeal to stay
execution of the decree in the action pending the determination of the writ
application.  
  
_One Gananathan, father of the Appellant (now deceased) was the landlord of
the premises in dispute. He had instituted D.C. Colombo Case No. 6908/RE for
the ejectment of the 1st respondent-tenant from the said premises and obtained
a judgement for ejectment. That judgement was affirmed by a judgement of the
Supreme Court.  
  
Before the execution of the decree in the Supreme Court action the 1st
respondent made an application dated 28th February, 2000 to the Court of
Appeal for a writ of mandamus for directions on the 2nd respondent (the
Commissioner for National Housing) and the 3rd respondent (the Minister of
Housing) to take steps under section 17(1) of the Ceiling on Housing Property
Law, No. 1 of 1973 to vest the premises in the 2nd respondent and to transfer
it to the 1st respondent pursuant to an application he had made under section
13 of the Law. The 15th respondent averred that by a letter dated 7th February
1977 the then Commissioner for National Housing had informed that he had
decided to vest the premises in him pursuant to the section 13 application
made by him to purchase the premises. The 1st respondent sought an order
directing the 2nd respondent (the present Commissioner) to notify that
decision to the 3rd respondent, for an order directing the 3rd respondent to
vest the premises in the 2nd respondent and for an order directing the 2nd
respondent to convey the ownership of the premises to him (the 1st respondent)
after the vesting.

**8**

The 1st respondent also sought an order staying further proceeding in D.C.
Colombo Case No. 6908/RE which was in effect an interim order staying the
execution of the decree entered in favour of Gananathan (now deceased) in
whose place the appellant had been substituted. The Court of Appeal issued the
interim order sought until the final disposal of the application for writ.
This resulted in staying the execution of a decree which had been affirmed by
the Supreme Court.  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. There is no basis on which the Court of Appeal could have stayed the
execution of the decree of the Supreme Court in D.C. Colombo Case No. 6908/RE
even if the Court of Appeal had a right to do so since in this case neither
the 1st respondent nor the Commissioner for National Housing had any manner of
title to the premises in suit.  
  
2\. The 1st respondent had no "legitimate expectation" to have the writ
application concluded in his favour in that the Commissioner had failed to
communicate his decision to the landlord before he notified his decision to
the Minister to enable the landlord to avail himself of his right of appeal to
the Board of Review under section 39(1) of the Law.  
  
3\. An order for vesting of the premises can only be published in the Gazette
after the appealable period expires in the event of there being no appeal to
the Board of Review or after a decision of the Board of Review in favour of
the 1st respondent in the event of an appeal being filed by the appellant.
Hence the 1st respondent's application to the Court of Appeal was premature.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Neliya Silva v. Commissioner of National Housing and Another (1999) 1
Sri L.R. 291 at 293  
  
_2\. _Broome v. Cassell and Co. (1972) A.C 1027 at 1054  
  
_**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_S. Mahenthiran_ with _E.A. Premalingam_ and _M.S.C. Rajasingam_ for
appellant.  
  
_A.K. Premadasa, P.C_. with _C.E. de Silva_ for 1st respondents.  
  
_K. Sripavan, Deputy Solicitor General_ for 2nd and 3rd respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**9**

**Editor's Note :** _Vide Premawardena v. Indrakumar_ (2000) Sri LR 139 for
the judgement of the Supreme Court in DC Colombo Case No. 6908/RE referred to
above.  
  
December 01, 2000.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J.  
  
**The 1st Respondent to this appeal made an application dated 28th February
2000 to the Court of Appeal for the issue of;  
  
(a) a writ of Mandamus compelling the Commissioner of National Housing (2nd
Respondent to this Appeal) to notify the Minister of Housing (3rd Respondent
to this Appeal) to vest premises bearing assessment No. 137 - 1/1, Ananda
Rajakaruna Mawatha,  
  
(b) a writ of Mandamus directing the 3rd Respondent on being so notified by
the 2nd Respondent, to vest the said premises in the 2nd Respondent by
publishing a vesting order in the Government Gazette,  
  
(c) to issue an order directing the 2nd Respondent to convey by deed the
ownership of the said premises to the 1st Respondent after the said premises
had vested in the 2nd Respondent,  
  
on the basis that the then Commissioner of National Housing had informed him
(1st Respondent) by letter dated 7th February 1977 (XI) that he had decided to
have the premises in question vested in him (then Commissioner of National
Housing), pursuant to an application made by the 1st Respondent (as tenant)
under Section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973 to the
then Commissioner of National Housing to purchase the said premises belonging
to the then landlord K.C. Gananathan (the father of the Appellant).

**10**

The 1st Respondent also sought from the Court of Appeal an interim order
staying further proceedings in D.C. Colombo Case No. 6908/RE which was in
effect an interim order staying the execution of the decree of this Court
entered in favour of K. C. Gananathan (now deceased) in whose place the
Appellant has been substituted in action No. 6908/RE which said action had
been instituted by K.C. Gananathan for the ejectment of the 11 Respondent from
the premises relevant to this Appeal on the ground that the tenant (1st
Respondent to this Appeal) was guilty of conduct amounting to a nuisance to
the adjoining occupiers including the landlord as set out in Section 22(2)(d)
of the Rent Act.  
  
The Court of Appeal had in the first instance issued an interim order staying
the proceedings in D.C. Colombo Case No. 6908/RE and thereafter the Court of
Appeal had after inquiry into an application to vacate the said order extended
it until the final disposal of the application for writ, thereby in effect
staying the execution of a decree of this Court.  
  
The Appeal now before this Court is from that order of the Court of Appeal.  
  
It is evident from the contents of the Application for the writ of Mandamus
made to the Court of Appeal that the alleged decision to vest the premises in
question in the Commissioner of National Housing had not been gazetted and is
devoid of any force or avail in law and it was for that reason that the 1st
Respondent filed the application for a writ of Mandamus in the Court of
Appeal.  
  
I refer to XI as the alleged decision to vest the premises, since it purports
to have been signed by someone on behalf of the Commissioner of National
Housing, but it does not bear the official frank of the Commissioner of
National Housing or the person who signed it. The position is the same with
regard to document X3. Further, only alleged true copies of these documents
have been produced but not the originals.

**11**

Even assuming that these are copies of genuine documents, XI does not show
that a copy of the same had been sent to the **landlord** nor is there any
other evidence placed before either the Court of Appeal or this Court to
establish that the alleged decision of the Commissioner of National Housing
was ever communicated to the landlord. Nor has the 1st Respondent to this
Appeal averred in his Petition and Affidavit, filed in the Court of Appeal,
that the Commissioner of National Housing had communicated his decision under
Section 17(1) of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973 to the
landlord K.C. Gananathan who is now deceased.  
  
Before an order of vesting is made by the Minister by publishing in the
Gazette, the decision of the Commissioner of National Housing must necessarily
be communicated to the landlord to enable the landlord to avail himself of the
right of appeal to the Board of Review (Neliya Silva v. Commissioner for
National Housing and Another(1)). Hence, the relief prayed for by the 1st
Respondent before the Court of Appeal cannot be granted.  
  
Even if the law permits the substitution of the present owner (the Appellant)
namely, the son of the former owner - landlord K.C. Gananathan (now deceased)
in the place of the said K.C. Gananathan, in the proceedings before the
Commissioner of National Housing, the decision of the Commissioner of National
Housing will first have to be communicated to the present owner, the
Appellant, to enable the Appellant to exercise his right of appeal to the
Board of Review under Section 39(l) of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No.
1 of 1973. Thus, the order of vesting can only be published in the Gazette,
after the appeasable period expires in the event of there being no appeal to
the Board of Review, or after a decision of the Board of Review in favour of
the 1st Respondent in the event of an appeal being filed by the Appellant.
Therefore, in any event the 1st Respondent's application to the Court of
Appeal is premature.

**12**

On a reading of the order appealed from it is clear that the sole basis for
extending the order staying further proceedings in D.C. Colombo Case No.
6908/RE is that the Petitioner Respondent has a "legitimate expectation" to
have the matter concluded in his favour in as much as the Commissioner of
National Housing had informed him, that he the Commissioner of National
Housing had decided to have the house in question vested in him after inquiry
into the Petitioner-Respondent's application to purchase the house and also
required the Petitioner-Respondent to deposit one quarter of the estimated
sale price of the house.  
  
However, at the hearing of this appeal not only did the Petitioner-
Respondent's Counsel not pursue this line of argument but also denied making
submissions on that basis in the Court of Appeal, until Counsel for the
Respondent Appellant drew the attention of Court to paragraph 7 of the written
submissions tendered to the Court of Appeal by none other than the Counsel for
the Petitioner-Respondent himself. So that, having "planted" the argument
based on the doctrine of "legitimate expectation" in the mind of the Judge in
the Court of Appeal, he then sought to disassociate himself from such
submission when he realized the futility of pursuing such a line of argument
before this Court. Therefore I do not think that there is any need to dwell
any further on this topic.  
  
Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Court of Appeal had issued the
order to stay further proceedings in D.C. Colombo Case No. 6908/RE in the
first instance without notice to the Appellant in violation of the Rules of
Court.  
  
Though there is provision in the Rules to issue interim stay orders without
notice for a limited period on grounds of urgency, the question is whether
even with notice the Court of Appeal has the authority to issue an order
staying the execution of a decree affirmed by this Court.

**13**

In this connection it is appropriate to quote Lord Hailsham from his judgment
in Broome v. Cassell and Co.(2) where His Lordship said "The fact is, and I
hope it will never be necessary to say so again, that, in the hierarchical
system of Courts which exists in this country, it is necessary for each lower
tier, including the Court of Appeal, to accept loyally the decisions of the
higher tiers".  
  
In this case now in appeal before this Court, the Court of Appeal has issued
an order staying the execution of a decree entered by this Court after a
carefully considered judgment.  
  
Although in issuing such order the Court of Appeal had not questioned the
correctness of the judgment of this Court, the said order had been issued to
enable the 1st Respondent judgment-debtor in Case No. 6908/RE to pursue
another course of action, namely, the application for a writ of Mandamus
compelling the gazetting of a decision taken by the Commissioner of National
Housing twenty three (23) years ago, in order to vest the premises in suit in
the Commissioner of National Housing. Even if the relief's applied for by the
1st Respondent are granted, still certain steps will have to be taken
thereafter before the premises in suit can be conveyed to the 1st Respondent.
Hence, at the moment there is no basis on which the Court of Appeal could have
stayed the execution of the decree of this Court in 6908/RE even if the Court
of Appeal had a right to do so, since neither the 1st Respondent nor the
Commissioner of National Housing has any manner of title to the premises in
suit.  
  
In the circumstances, the interim order of the Court of Appeal dated 2nd June
2000 is set aside and this Appeal is allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 10,500/-.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/12.html_  

