[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1998](./) >> **[1998] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1998+12 or 1998+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1998+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Eugene Nona v. Karunadasa and Others - SLR - 306, Vol 1 of 1998 [1998]
LKSC 12; (1998) 1 Sri LR 306 (12 February 1998)

**306**

**EUGENE NONA  
v.  
KARUNADASA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 126/96  
CA NO. 300/94  
C.N.H. NO. CH/6/51788/2417  
JUNE 3, 1997.  
  
Writ of Certiorari - Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973 - Appeal
under section 39 (1) - Procedure of Appeal to the Board of Review - Validity
of the Appeal.  
_  
The appellant who sought to appeal to the Board of Review under section 39 (1)
of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973, against the decision of
the Commissioner for National Housing dated 12.08.91 in favour of an
application made by the appellant's tenant under section 13 of the Law to
purchase the house let to him was unaware of the address of the Board of
Review; whereupon the appellant sent a registered letter to the Commissioner
dated 26.8.91, within one month of the impugned decision as required by
section 39 (1). In that letter the appellant objected to the Commissioner's
decision and asked him to consider the matter sympathetically and to restore
the house to her. As per the postal receipt the address on the envelope of
that letter was The Department of National Housing Ceiling on Housing Property
Board of Review (Unit for the implementation of section 39), Department of
National Housing, Maligawatte, Colombo 10" No action was taken on the
appellant's letter until July, 1992, when on representations made

**307**

by the appellant the Board of Review considered the matter but rejected the
appeal upholding a preliminary objection that there was no properly
constituted appeal preferred to the Board within the stipulated time limit The
Court of Appeal affirmed the order of the Board of Review. In doing so the
Court added that the appellant had also failed to state any grounds of appeal.  
  
**Held:**  
  
In the circumstances of the case, the receipt of the appeal by the
Commissioner amounted to receipt by the Board. The burden was on the tenant to
establish that the appellant's letter dated 26.8.91 was received after the
appealable period by producing the relevant  
documents from the Commissioner's file. This the tenant had failed to do.  
  
The Court must assume that it had been received by the Commissioner soon after
26.8.91.  
  
It is unnecessary to set out all the points in support of an appeal,
particularly where the order appealed from baldly stated a conclusion, without
any findings. In any event by asking that her case be considered
sympatheti­cally, the appellant raised the issue whether upon a consideration
of the equities she should have been allowed to retain her house. Hence, there
was no failure by her to specify grounds of appeal.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_A.K. Premadasa, P.C with C. E. de Silva_ for the appellant  
  
_Manohara R. de Silva_ for the 1st respondent.  
  
2nd respondent absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 12, 1998  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The question for decision in this appeal is whether the appellant's letter
dated 26.8.91 constitutes a valid appeal to the Board of Review set up under
the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973, conforming to section 39
(1) of that law, which provides:  
  
"Any person aggrieved by any decision or determination made by the
Commissioner under this law may, within one month of the date on which such
determination is communicated to such person, appeal against such decision or
determination to the Board, stating the grounds of such appeal".

**308**

It is common ground that there are no regulations as to the form and content
of appeals, and how they are to be lodged.  
  
The 1st respondent, the tenant of a house owned by the appellant, made an
application to purchase that house, under section 13 of the Law. After
inquiry, the 2nd respondent, the Commissioner of National Housing (the
Commissioner), informed the appellant by letter dated 12.8.91 that he had
decided to report to the Minister that he was satisfied that the requirements
of section 17 (1) (a) to (d) of the Law had been met; he added that if she was
not satisfied with that order she could appeal to 'the Ceiling on Housing
Property Board of Review under section 39 of the Law" within 30 days. He did
not disclose the address of the Board, and his own address was given as:  
  
"Unit for the implementation of section 13, Ceiling on Housing Property
Branch, Department of National Housing, Maligawatte, Colombo 10".  
  
The appellant sent a registered letter dated 26.8.91 addressed to:  
  
"The Commissioner of National Housing, Ceiling on Housing Property Branch,
Department of National Housing, Maligawatte, Colombo 10".  
  
She briefly set out her version of the facts, as to her family circumstances,
the ownership of the house, and how she wished to dispose of it. She then
stated: echoing the Commissioner's words, that in no way was she satisfied
with his order, and that she strongly objected to it; and she asked him to
"kindly [consider ?] this sympathetically and restore the house to her".  
There is some mystery as to how and when that letter was received by the
Commissioner and/or the Board, and that I will deal with later.  
  
By letter dated 1.7.92 to the appellant, the Secretary to the Board
acknowledged that the appeal dated 26.8.91 sent by her had been received; that
it had been assigned a number; and that the date, time and place of inquiry
would be notified later. By letters dated 18.8.92 both parties were informed
that the appeal would be taken up for inquiry on 29.9.92, and were warned that
no application for a post­ponement would be considered. The 1st respondent was
not present

**309**

on 29.9.92, and the Board ordered that he be noticed for 19.11.92. On that day
both parties were represented, but the inquiry was postponed for 30.1.93; and
on 30.1.93 a preliminary objection was taken that there was no valid appeal
addressed to the Board.  
  
It is clear from the order of the Board, dated 21.8.93, that the Board had
examined the Commissioner's file. The Board upheld the preliminary objection:  
  
"... There is a minute in the journal of the Commissioner's file to show that
as at 11.12.91 there was no appeal against the said decision of the
Commissioner. The so-called appellant's letter of 26.8.91 has been filed of
record in the Commissioner's file after letters received by the Commissioner
in 1992, and indeed along with [an Attorney-at-law's letter] dated 3.6.92.
Furthermore, the said letter of 26.8.91 in its contents is no appeal and it
has not been addressed to the Board of Review. Even if we were to construe the
said letter of 26.8.91 as an appeal, it is clearly out of time as an appeal in
terms of section 39 must be lodged within one month of the date of
communication. The so-called appellant has thereafter written an undated
letter addressed to the Chairman ... received by this Board on 11.6.92. Having
examined its contents we are unable to construe it as an appeal. In any event
it cannot cure the failure of the so-called appellant to prefer to this Board
a properly constituted appeal within the stipulated time limit . . ."  
  
The appellant applied to the Court of Appeal for Certiorari to quash the order
of the Board of Review, and for an order directing the Board to accept, and to
hear and determine, the appellant's appeal. There was also a prayer that the
relevant records maintained by the Commissioner and the Board be called for
and examined, but unfortunately that was not done.  
  
The Court of Appeal held that the appellant's letter was addressed to the
Commissioner and not to the Board; that it contained no request to the
Commissioner to consider it as an appeal to the Board; and that the only
request made therein was for the Commissioner to reconsider his decision
sympathetically and give back the house to her Thus, it concluded, there was
no basis for the Commissioner to treat the letter as an appeal against his
order, and to forward it to the Board. Further, according to the record
maintained by the

**310**

Commissioner, the letter had been received at his office after 3.6.92 -
Clearly more than one month after she received the Commissioner's order; and
in any event it did not state any grounds of appeal.  
  
The appellant comes to this court with special leave to appeal against that
order. The question whether there was a valid appeal has three aspects: Was
the appellant's letter addressed to the Board of Review? If so, was it lodged
within the prescribed period of 30 days? If so, did it specify the grounds of
appeal?  
  
The Board of Review had to decide whether it's appellate juris­diction had
been duly invoked. It could have determined that question by reference only to
its own record. The first document in its record was an undated letter from
the appellant to the Chairman, received in June, 1992; and to that were
annexed copies of the Commissioner's letter of 12.8.91, her letter of 26.8.91
and the registered postal article receipt. The file shows that it was on these
documents alone that the Secretary acknowledged the appellant's appeal and
gave it a number. Perhaps the Board might have disposed of the matter by
holding that there was no document validly invoking its jurisdiction: that the
June, 1992 letter, even if it was a proper appeal addressed to the Board, had
been received long after the appealable period had lapsed; that the copy of
the August, 1991 letter had also been received after the appealable period;
and that in any event that had not been addressed to the Board.  
  
But, instead, the Board paid great attention to the contents of the
Commissioner's file, almost as if that was a proper place in which to search
for a valid appeal to the Board. The Board stated that there was a minute
dated 11.12.91 in that file that no appeal had been filed; and a letter dated
3.6.92 from an Attorney-at-law; and that the appellant's letter had been filed
along with that letter. That approach gives rise to a question: Would the
Board have come to a different conclusion if the appellant's letter had been
placed in the Commis­sioner's file in August, 1991, and/or if the minute of
11.12.91 stated that an appeal had been lodged?  
  
Let me note, in passing, that it would not have been strange for the law to
have allowed an appeal against the order of a tribunal to be lodged with that
same tribunal, as in the case of the District Court. While section 39 does not
stipulate that an appeal must be

**311**

lodged with the Board, yet it does not expressly allow an appeal to be lodged
with the Commissioner, and I do not wish to rest this judgment on a mere
inference that section 39 allows that.  
  
After hearing Counsel for the appellant and the 1st respondent -regrettably,
the Commissioner was not represented when special leave was sought and at the
appeal \- we directed the Registrar to call for the relevant files from the
Commissioner and the Board of Review; and to make them available to Counsel
with the right to make written submissions; and judgment was reserved. The
Board of Review sent its file, but the Commissioner did not; and no written
submissions were filed.  
  
Particularly in view of the registered postal article receipt (which I refer
to below), several efforts were made to obtain the Commis­sioner's file. As it
was not produced, the present Commissioner was directed to be present in
person on 9.7.97, whereupon she said that the file had been sent to the
Attorney-General in 1994, and that Department had informed her by a letter
dated 8.7.97 that it had been misplaced. She was asked to tender a photocopy
of that letter to the Registry, but it was only after several reminders that
she finally did so on 2.1.98. In the meantime, upon inquiry from the Attorney-
General's Department, the Registrar was informed by letter dated 28.10.97 that
the department's own file had been sent to its record room and could not be
traced, but that as a matter of practice files received from other departments
are returned before its own files are sent to its record room. Thus even six
months after the conclusion of the hearing this court was unable to examine
the record which was the subject-matter of the Certiorari proceedings, and
which was of crucial importance to our efforts to find the truth. The delay in
preparing this judgment was due to those efforts to obtain the Commissioner's
file.  
  
I must now refer to one important matter not dealt with in the impugned
orders, the pleadings or the submissions. The appellant's letter was sent by
registered post, and the original registered postal article receipt was filed
in the Court of Appeal. That describes the addressee of the letter as:  
  
"The Department of National Housing, Ceiling on Housing Property Board of
Review, (Unit for the implementation of section 39), Department of National
Housing, Maligawatte, Colombo 10."

**312**

The authenticity of that receipt was never disputed. It must be presumed,
therefore, that the envelope tallied with the receipt. Further, the Board of
Review found that letter in the Commissioner's file. The envelope would, in
the normal course, have been retained in the file. The Board has made no
comment about the envelope. That file would have answered numerous questions.  
  
First, when was that letter received? Unfortunately, the date stamp on the
receipt is undecipherable. However, it must have been, in the usual course,
date-stamped the very day it was received in the Commissioner's office. In the
absence of any suggestion that the letter was posted long after August, 1991,
I must assume that it had been received by the Commissioner soon after
26.8.91, and thus within 30 days of his order.  
  
Second, how did it happen that a letter enclosed in an envelope addressed to
the Board of Review - and more fully described as the "Unit for the
implementation of section 39" \- was accepted by or on behalf of the
Commissioner? Why was it either not accepted, or not immediately forwarded,
unopened, to the Board? Or had some administrative arrangement been made for
letters addressed to the Board to be accepted and opened by the staff of the
Commissioner? On the other hand, if it was by some mistake that it had been
accepted and opened, why was it not returned promptly to the appellant-who
might then have sent it to the Board?  
  
Third, how and why was a minute made on 11.12.91 that there was no appeal? If
the invariable practice was for appeals to be lodged with the Board of Review,
had an inquiry been made from the Board, and if so, what was the response from
the Board? The Board of Review file, however, does not indicate that there had
been any such inquiry or response. If no inquiry had been made from the Board,
then on what material was that minute made? Was it simply on the basis that
there was no appeal in the Commissioner's file?  
  
Fourth, by letter dated 1.7.92 the Secretary to the Board asked the
Commissioner to forward the relevant file. The Commissioner had the
appellant's letter by early June: why did he not forward the file or that
letter without waiting for the Secretary's letter?  
  
The proceedings of 30.1.93 do not show that the Board made any reference to
the Commissioner's file in open court, or made it available

**313**

for perusal by the parties. It appears that after reserving its order, the
Board examined the file, and acted on material therein which remained
undisclosed to the parties; and to the Court of Appeal and this Court.  
  
On the available material, I hold that the appellant sent a letter addressed
to the Commissioner in an envelope addressed to the Board. There is no
evidence as to the address of the Board at the relevant point of time, and it
is quite possible that the Board functioned in the same premises as the
Commissioner. Both Counsel were unable to tell us what the address of the
Board was at the relevant time. When asked how the appellant could have
ascertained that address, Counsel for the 1 st respondent was only able to
suggest the telephone directory. But that is no safe guide: the directories
for 1994, 1995 and 1996 list the Chairman and the Secretary "C H P Board of
Review" \- without an address \- under "National Housing Department". The
Commissioner having failed to specify the address of the Board, it was not
unreasonable for the appellant to have sent her letter to the same address.
However, she did not address the letter itself to the Board.  
  
The question whether, in the circumstances of this case, the appellant's
letter constituted a valid appeal to the Board could not have been decided by
ignoring the address appearing on the envelope, and looking only at the
letter: it was the address on the envelope, more than anything else, which
determined who would receive the letter. The letter and that address must
therefore be considered together: Do they constitute a purported appeal to the
Commissioner, in which event the envelope must be treated as mistakenly
addressed to the Board? Or a purported appeal to the Board, in which event the
letter must be treated as mistakenly addressed to the Commissioner? There is
no third interpretation possible. I think the second interpretation must be
preferred. The appellant was told that if she was dissatisfied with the order,
she could appeal to the Board; accordingly, in her letter she expressed her
dissatisfaction and strong objections, and asked for relief; and, what is most
important, if delivered in accordance with the address on the envelope, her
letter would have been received by the Board, and by no one else. And in that
event the Board would have had to consider whether the reference to the
Commissioner was just a mistake. But the Board did not appreciate the
significance of the postal article receipt (of which it had a copy);

**314**

and therefore failed to look for the envelope; and consequently failed to
address that vital question.  
  
It might have been further argued that even assuming the appellant's letter to
have been addressed to the Board, yet it was not actually received by the
Board. However, it is quite clear that when the Board became aware that the
letter had been received by the Commissioner it did not dissociate itself from
the Commissioner - even by a passing remark that receipt by the Commissioner
did not amount to receipt by the Board. Instead, it approached the issue
whether an appeal had been duly lodged as if receipt by the Commissioner would
have been sufficient, provided that it was in due form and within time. The
circumstances make it probable that receipt by the Commissioner was not
unauthorised vis-a-vis the Board.  
  
As to whether the appellant's letter was received in due time, the argument
proceeded on the basis that posting was in order. It was neither suggested
that it should have been delivered by hand, nor that it had been posted after
the expiry of the appealable period of 30 days. The objection was that it had
not reached the Board of Review in time. I have already held that, in this
instance, receipt by the Commissioner amounted to receipt by the Board. As for
the date of receipt, copies of the appellant's letter of 26.8.91 and postal
article receipt were in the record of the Board; the burden was on the 1st
respondent to establish the facts relevant to his preliminary objection by
proof that the letter had been received after the appealable period. The best
evidence of the date of receipt would have been the date-stamp on the original
letter and the post-mark on the envelope: but the 1st respondent did not seek
to produce those documents from the Commissioner's file, and the Board itself
did not look at them, and filled the gap in the 1 st respondent's case by
relying on equivocal matters without even giving the parties an opportunity to
comment about them \- the Commissioner's minute of 11.12.91 and that the
original had been **filed** in June, 1992. On the evidence, the Board should
have held that the 1st respondent had failed to prove that the letter had not
been received within time.  
  
Finally, I must deal with the contention that the letter did not set out any
ground of appeal. That requirement must not be construed with greater
strictness than in regard to appeals from original courts and tribunals such
as District Courts, Magistrate's Courts and Labour

**315**

Tribunals - where an appellant is often permitted to argue even points not
contained in the petition of appeal, particularly because the appeal was
against an order which baldly stated a conclusion, without any findings, let
alone reasons. Here, one issue was whether, upon a consideration of the
equities, the appellant should have been allowed to retain her house. The
equities depended on the factual position of the parties: ownership of houses,
family circumstances, income, etc. The appellant stated her version of the
facts. (It is immaterial whether there were errors or omissions, because that
would not affect the formal validity of her appeal, but went to the merits,
and the merits would have had to be considered only if Board decided that the
appeal was in due form.) She then asked for "sympathetic" consideration and
for the restoration of her house. Had she asked for "equitable" consideration,
there could have been no argument about the formal validity of the appeal;
indeed, had she merely stated the facts and asked for restoration of her
house, that would have been enough. I hold that the use of the word
"sympathetic" did not vitiate her appeal.  
  
For these reasons, I allow the appeal and set aside the order of the Court of
Appeal. I quash the order of the Board of Review, overrule the preliminary
objection taken by the 1st respondent in the Board of Review, and direct the
Board to entertain, hear and determine the appeal on the merits. The Registrar
is directed to return its file to the Board of Review.  
  
The appellant is entitled to the costs incurred in the Board of Review, the
Court of Appeal and in this court, at the stage of special leave and at the
appeal. It would not be just or equitable to order the 1st respondent to pay
those costs, because it was the Commis­sioner's acts and omissions which
resulted in the preliminary objection and the subsequent litigation. I
therefore order the Commissioner to pay the appellant costs in a sum of Rs.
30,000 within one month.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree.  
**  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/12.html_  

