[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1996](./) >> **[1996] LKSC 13**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1996+13 or 1996+LKSC+13) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1996+LKSC+13) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Perera v. Lokuge and Others - SLR - 282, Vol 2 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 13;
(1996) 2 Sri LR 282 (1 January 1996)

**282**

PERERA  
**v.  
****LOKUGE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S DE SILVA, C.J.,  
KULATUNGA, J AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 58/95.  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 1531/84.  
30TH JANUARY, 1996.

_Writ of Certiorari ‑ Ceiling on Housing Property Law ‑ Sections 39 (3) and 17
‑ Tenant's application to purchase a house ‑ Equities ‑ Board of Review
Decision ‑ Board's Jurisdiction to consider equities ‑ Interpretation
Ordi­nance section 22._

The Board of Review under the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973
after a full inquiry and on the ground of equity set aside a decision of the
Commissioner for National Housing to recommend the vesting of a House owned by
the Appellant to enable the tenant thereof to purchase it under

**283**

section 13 of the Law. The Court of Appeal quashed the decision of the Board.
It was argued that the Commissioner has to be satisfied only on the matters
set out in Section 17 of the Law. If he is so satisfied he must, subject to an
appeal to the Board on those matters, notify the Minister of such fact;
whereupon the Minister alone is empowered to decide whether a vesting order
may be made. Hence, in considering equities, the Board acted outside its
jurisdiction.

**Held:**

(1) There is an area of discretion in the Commissioner to consider the
equities of the case and decide whether he will accept the application and
notify the Minister that an application has been made.

(2) Even assuming that the Commissioner has no power to reject an application
on the ground of equities, he is under a duty to consider equities in addition
to the matters set out in Section 17 to enable the Minister to make a fair
decision as the Minister's power to make a vesting order is discretionary. The
Commissioner's decision including the question of equities is subject to an
appeal to the Board.

(3) The Board of Review acted within its jurisdiction. It cannot be said that
the decision of the Board is ex facie not within the power conferred on it
within the meaning of Section 22 of the Interpretation Ordinance. To succeed
on that ground there has to be a patent lack of jurisdiction. Mere excess of
jurisdiction is not sufficient.

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Beatrice Sitamparanthan v._ _Premaratne_ _,_ S.C. __ Appeal No.53/95 S.C. Minutes of 6th February 1996.

2\. _Caderamanpulle v._ _Keuneman_ , S.C. __ Appeal No.15/79 S.C. Minutes of
19th September, 1980.

**AN APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_A. K. Premadasa, P.C._ with _C. E._ _de Silva_ and _Ms._ _Mangali
Wickramasena_ for Appellant.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C. _with _Hemasiri Withanachchi_ for Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**284**

8th February, 1996.

**KULATUNGA, J.**

The Appellant is the owner of house No. 20/1, Sri Dharmapala Road, Mount
Lavinia. The 2nd Respondent (Commissioner for National Housing) decided to
recommend the vesting of the said house to enable the 1st Respondent who is
the tenant thereof to purchase it under section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing
Property Law No. 1 of 1973. On an appeal by the Appellant, the Board of Review
reversed the 2nd Respondent's decision.

The Board of Review found that 5 houses owned by the father of the Appellant
had vested under section 11 of the law leaving the Appellent with only two
houses namely, 20/1 and 20 which are twin houses under one roof. The Appellant
lives in No. 20 with his two daughters aged 20 and 16. These are the only
houses he owns which he intends to gift to his daughters on the occasion of
their marriage. The 1st Respondent's wife owned a building site at Bellanwila
which she sold for Rs. 60,000/‑ after the 2nd Respondent decided to recommend
the vesting of house No. 20/1.

On the above facts, the Board of Review after a full inquiry set aside the
decision of the 2nd Respondent on the ground of equity. The 1st Respondent
then applied to the Court of Appeal for a writ of certiorari against the order
of the Board which was allowed by that Court on the ground that the Board had
acted in excess of its jurisdiction when it varied the 2nd Respondent's
decision without first making a finding that the 2nd Respondent had either
failed to consider the respective interests of the parties or to exercise his
discretion in that regard reasonably. The Court opined that by its decision,
the Board had effectively prevented the application from receiving the
attention of the Minister who had the final discretion in vesting the house,
to enable the tenant to purchase the same.

I am of the opinion that in view of the preclusive clause in section 39(3) of
the Law, the Court of Appeal had no power to quash the decision of the Board
of Review in the absence of a ground for such quashing provided by section 22
of the Interpretation Ordinance. One such ground is a failure of natural
justice. On the facts of this case that ground is not available. The other
ground is that the Board was _ex facie_ without

**285**

power to make the impugned decision. To succeed on that ground the applicant
must establish a patent lack of jurisdiction. Mere excess of jurisdiction as
adverted to by the Court of Appeal is not sufficient ‑see _Beatrice
Sithamparanathan v. Premaratne._ (1) __

Mr. Samarasekera PC for the Respondent submitted that in consider­ing an
application for the purchase of a house under section 13 of the Law, the
Commissioner had to be satisfied only on the matters set out in section 17
namely;

(a) that the house is situated in an area which in his opinion will not be
required for slum clearance, development or redevelopment or any other public
purpose;

(b) that it is feasible to alienate such house as a separate entity; and

(c) that the applicant is in a position to make the purchase.

Counsel argued that where the Commissioner is so satisfied he must, subject to
an appeal to the Board of Review on the aforesaid matters, notify the Minister
of such fact; where upon the Minister alone is then empowered **** to decide
whether a vesting order may be made.

Counsel contended that consideration of equities is not a pre­requisite to the
making of a notification under section 17; hence it would be outside the
jurisdiction of the Commissioner and the Board of Review to consider equities;
and that they have no power to reject an application on the ground **** of
equities **.** He said that the dicta in _Caderamanpulle v. Keuneman_ (2) __
as to the Commissioner's discretion to consider equities is obiter. There the
Court held that the Commissioner need not act on every application made under
S. 13 and notify the Minister under section 17 even if paras (a), (b) and (c)
are satisfied; and that there is an area of discretion in the Commissioner to
consider the equities of the case and decide whether he will accept the
application and notify the Minister that an application has been made.

In _Caderamanpulle's_ case _(supra)_ there was no decision of the Board of
Review. The Commissioner notified the Minister a recommendation for a vesting
without having informed the owner of that decision; whereupon the Minister
made order vesting the house in

**286**

the Commissioner. The Court quashed the vesting order primarily on the ground
that it was inequitable; and that the Commissioner failed to hold a fair
inquiry affording the owner an adequate opportunity to state his case; he also
failed to inform the owner of his decision to recommend; the vesting; hence
the vesting order was in breach of natural justice and void.

On the submission of the State that in the course of an application under
section 13 the final determination is that of the Minister, Thamotharan, J.
said

"It seems to me that the effective decision or determination in regard to the
tenant's application is made by the Commissioner and not by the Minister."

In the circumstances, I am unable to agree that the dicta in Caderamanpulle's
case were obiter; that decision has been consistently followed in other
decisions. I do not consider it necessary or appropriate to reconsider it.
Even assuming that the Commissioner had no power to reject an application on
the ground of equities, I am of the opinion that he has incidental power to
consider equities for the reason that the Minister's power to make the vesting
order is discretionary; and the Commissioner is under a duty to consider
equities in addition to the matters set out in section 17 to enable the
Minister to make a fair decision. The Commissioner's decision including the
question of equities is subject to an appeal to the Board of Review.

In the result it is my conclusion that on the facts of this case, the Board of
Review acted within its jurisdiction in making its decision. It cannot be said
that the said decision is ex facie not within the power conferred on the
Board. The decision in favour of the Appellant is eminently equitable. Hence
the specific finding that the Commissioner had failed to consider equities is
unnecessary. I accordingly allow the appeal set aside the judgment of the
Court of Appeal and restore the decision of the Board of Review, dated
21.09.94. In all the circumstances, I make no order as to costs.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.** ‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J. ‑ ** I agree. ****

_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/13.html_  

