[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1990](./) >> **[1990] LKSC 13**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1990+13 or 1990+LKSC+13) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1990+LKSC+13) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Bernedette Valangenberg v. Hapuarachchige Anthony - SLR - 190, Vol 1 of
1990 [1990] LKSC 13; (1990) 1 Sri LR 190 (4 April 1990)

**

190

BERNEDETTE VALANGENBERG  
v.  
HAPUARACHCHIGE ANTHONY

**

SUPREME COURT,  
H. A. G. de SILVA, J. BANDARANAYAKE, J. KULATUNGA, J  
S. C. APPEAL No. 47/88.  
DECEMBER 05,06, 07, 13, 14 and 15, 1989.  
JANUARY 22, 23 and 24, 1990.

_

Trusts - Purchase of property for mistress - Consideration -Constructive
Trusts - Parole evidence to vary terms of deed - Prevention of Frauds
Ordinance s. 2, - Evidence Ordinance ss, 91 and 92 -Trusts Ordinance ss.
2,5,83 and 84 - Doctrine of advancement - Application of English Law to extend
doctrine of advancement to the case of a mistress.

_

The plaintiff, H. Anthony a middle grade hotel employee lived with the
defendant-appellant Bernedette Vanlangenberg a hairdresser and mother of four
children as man and mistress, Both worked in the same hotel. Thereafter the
plaintiff proceeded to Sweden where he learned the language and received an
income of about Rs. 9,000/= a month. The defendant went over to Sweden for a
short spell and she too found employment receiving about Rs. 2,000/= a month.
The plaintiff purchased a house property in 1976 for Rs. 8,40,000/= paying the
consideration out of his earnings. On 12.5.77 as he had to go to Sweden again
he conveyed the said house property to the defendant-appellant his mistress by
a deed of transfer in the attestation to which the consideration of
Rs.40,000/= was acknowledged to have been received earlier. Parties fell out n
November, 1979. The plaintiff then sued the defendant for a return of the
house pleading a trust The defendant claimed absolute title and that she paid
the consideration of Rs. 40,000/= on the deed in her favour.

**

Held:

**

(1) Section 2 of the Frauds Ordinance is not meant to govern trusts arising
under chapter IX of the Trusts Ordinance i. e. constructive or implied trusts.
A person has therefore to make out a case falling within the provisions of ss
83 to 96 of the Trusts Ordinance.

(2) The plaintiff initiated the moves to buy the house whilst still in Sweden
: he had paid the purchase price. The defendant's resources were insufficient
to enable her to pay the consideration on the transfer to her. She had written
to the plaintiff that she would transfer the house to him if he returns her
gold chain and money amounting to Rs. 4,000/=.

(3) The trial judge rejected the claim of the defendant that she paid the
consideration after considering the financial resources of the parties as
being highly improbable. The defendant's claim was very probably false and her
denial of the existence of a constructive case amounts to fraud. In the result
s. 2 of the Trusts Ordinance and s. 92 of the Evidence Ordinance do not apply
and plaintiff can lead parole evidence of the existence of a constructive
trust in his favour on the basis that he retained the beneficial interest in
the property at the time he transferred it to the defendant.

**191**

(4) The presumption of advancement in favour of mistress though available in
England is not part of Sri Lankan Law. Section 2 of the Trusts Ordinance
cannot be utilised to bring .n English Law.

**

Cases referred to

**_

(1) Perera v. Fernando 17 NLR 486, 488_  

_

(2) Adaicappa Chetty v. Karuppan Chetty 22 NLR 417._  

_

(3) Mohamadu v. Pathumah et al (1930) 1X Ceylon Law Recorder 48._  

_

(4) Saverimuttu v. Thangavelauthem 55 NLR 529, 535, 536 (PC)_  

_

(5) Sethuwa v. Ukkuwa 56 NLR 337, 340, 342_  

_

(6) Fernando v. Cooray 59 NLR 164, 174_  

_

(7) Siriwardena v Don Saranelis 59 NLR 182_  

_

(8) Muthuamma v. Thiagarajah 62 NLR 559_  

_

(9) Saminathan Chetty v. Vanderpoorten 34 NLR 287, 294 (PC)_  

_

(10) ValliammAchchy v Abdul Majid 45 NLR 169 (SC)_  

_

(11) Valliamma Achchi v. Abdul Majid 48 NLR 289 (PC)_  

_

(12) Muthalibu v Hameed 52 NLR 97, 100, 101_  

_

(13) Fernando v Fernando (1918) 20 NLR 244_  

_

(14) Ammal v Kangany (1910) 13 NLR 65_  

_

(15) Gissing v Gissing 1970 2 All ER 780 (HL)_  

_

(16) Cooks v Head 1972 2 All ER 38_  

_

(17) Ewes v Ewes 1975 3 All ER 768_  

_

(18) Bernard v Joseph 1982 3 All ER 162_  

_

(19) Narayan Chetty v James Finlay Ltd (1927) 29 NLR 65, 70_  

_

(20) Jonga v Nanduwa 45 NLR 128, 130, 132_  

_

(21) Davis Singho v Herath 64 NLR 492_  

_

(22) Moonesinghe v Vithanage 69 NLR 97 (PC)_  

_

(23) Nadarajah v Ramalingam 21 NLR 39

_**

APPEAL** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Dr H. W Jayewardene Q. C with B. Rajapaksa, H. Amerasekera, and H. Cabraal_
for defendant - appellant.  

_

J. W. Subasinghe P.C. with D. J C. Wilanduwa and K. S. Tillakeratne_ for
plaintiff - respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

April 4, 1990  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.

**

The plaintiff- respondent filed action in the District Court against the
defendant -appellant claiming, that the defendant-appellant had lived with him
as his mistress for some years that he had purchased a house property to wit
32, Temple Road, Negombo belonging to Garwin de Silva,

**192**

Attorney-at-Law on 17.11.76 by Deed No. 3871 - marked P2 - for a total
consideration of Rs. 45,000/- of which Rs. 5,000/- was paid on 12.11.76 - P1
out of monies saved by him whilst employed abroad; and that on Deed No. 3974
dated 12.5.77 marked P3 he conveyed the legal interest in the said house
property to his mistress the defendant -appellant retaining the beneficial
interest in himself; and prayed that the said property be declared subject to
a trust in favour of himself (the plaintiff) and for an order that the
defendant transfer the said property to the plaintiff and for other incidental
reliefs.

The defendant-appellant contended that the property was purchased on Deed P2
on monies provided by her although she was not a party to that transaction on
the face of the deed; that upon discovery later that the conveyance on P2 was
in the name of the plaintiff which was wrongful and unwarranted she prevailed
upon the plaintiff to convey the property to her (the defendant) which he did
by P3 aforesaid; and that thereby the defendant-appellant had become the sole
and absolute owner of the property and that P3 was not subject to any trust in
favour of the plaintiff respondent and was never intended to be so.

After trial, the District Judge held with the plaintiff. Upon appeal, the
Court of Appeal upheld the judgment of the District Court and dismissed the
appeal. Learned Counsel for the defendant-appellant has raised several matters
of law and fact before us at the hearing of this appeal and submits that the
plaintiff's action be dismissed.

The relationship between the parties is germane to the issues in this case;
the plaintiff, a married man was receptionist at the Blue Lagoon Hotel,
Negombo from 1971 - 1974. The defendant a married woman with 4 children was a
hairdresser also working at that hotel. An association developed between them
and they became intimate friends - they lived together. In 1974 the plaintiff
moved to the Sunflower Hotel in Negombo frequented by Swedish tourists.
Plaintiff went to Sweden on a prepaid ticket to learn that language. Whilst
there he attended language classes and worked in a home for elders. He was
paid a salary. Board and lodging was free. In October 1975 plaintiff returned
to Sri Lanka to the Sunflower Hotel bringing with him 4500 Swedish Croners. In
May 1976 the plaintiff returned to Sweden and resumed language classes and
also worked as before. He took with him on this occasion, the defendant's
daughter. She was also found work and paid a honorarium. The defendant joined
him in

**193**

Sweden three months later, the airfare having been paid by the plaintiff. The
defendant was also found work and paid a honorarium. They returned to Sri
Lanka in November 1976. On 17.11.76 P2 was executed. The plaintiff had resumed
work at the Sunflower Hotel. In May 1977 the plaintiff again went to Sweden.
Three days before his departure he executed P3 transferring the said house
property to the defendant. The defendant followed him to Sweden and both
returned to Sri Lanka in October, 1977. On deed No. 4598 of 17.8.79 \- P4 -the
defendant leased the aforesaid premises for a period of two years to Ibrahim,
an Arab working for Air Lanka. Ibrahim paid a sum of Rs. 60,000/= as an
advance so that the house could be refurbished for new furniture, fittings,
air conditioning, etc. to be installed. The plaintiff and defendant went to
Singapore for a short trip to make the purchases for the house. Sometime
thereafter the plaintiff and defendant fell out. Plaint was filed on 23.1.80
wherein plaintiff claimed a trust and demanded a transfer back of the
property.

Counsel for appellant contended the plaintiff cannot now contradict the terms
of the deed P3. He cannot say it is a deed of trust and not what it purports
to be to wit: a deed of outright transfer as he is not entitled in law to
contradict the terms of his own deed. Sections 91 and 92 of the Evidence
Ordinance prohibits such a course as does s.2 of the Prevention of Frauds
Ordinance which is a stringent provision different to the English Law. For
purposes of comparison he cited the English Statute of Frauds enacted in 1676
and made effective in 1677 and the English Law of Property Act, 1925
(Appellant's Counsel also criticized the amended plaint filed. He complained
that by several new averments and amendments made to paragraph 4, so called
"attendant circumstances" were enumerated seeking thereby to set up a trust.
Counsel submitted that these new averments were trumped up for the purpose of
bringing it within the ambit of s.83 of the Trusts Ordinance).

Reliance was placed on a series of decisions Perera v. Fernando (1) and
Adaicappa Chetty v. Karuppan Chetty (2) which held that parole evidence was
not permissible to explain or vary terms of a deed. It was also a
contravention of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance -

Mohamadu v. Pathumah et al (3) and Saverimuttu v. Thangavelautham (4). Counsel
stressed in his argument that this case had been correctly decided and should
be applied to the instant case.

**194**

Sethuwa v. Ukkuwa (5) Fernando v. Cooray(6) and Siriwardena v. Don Saranelis
(7) ;Counsel also cited "Law of Trusts" by A. W. Scott, Vol l, p.38.

Appellant's Counsel examining the contents of deed P3 highlighted that:

(a) P3 is not a deed of gift.

(b) it is an outright transfer " for the absolute sale and assignment
........... to her of the said premises .....................for consideration
.............. ........

(c) Plaintiff acknowledged receipt of consideration in a sum of Rs. 45,000/-
"...................well and truly paid to the said Vendor by the said Vendee
(the receipt) whereof the said Vendor do hereby admit and
acknowledge.......................... not for love and affection.

(d) The Notary Mr. Karunaratne who testified that the consideration was not
paid in his presence has in the attestation clause stated that
"...............the full consideration here in mentioned was acknowledged to
have been received...........................

Submission

In the circumstances there is no room to admit parole evidence to explain P3
was different. The provisions of s. 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance,
the provisions of ss. 91 and 92 of the Evidence Ordinance and the provisions
of s. 5 of the Trusts Ordinance all militate against the admission of any
parole evidence to alter, explain or change the ordinary meaning of the clear
language of P3. The Court was invited to follow the dicta of the cases cited
(supra) and dismiss the plaintiff's action and declare the defendant to be the
owner of the said property.

Dealing with the plaintiff's contention that upon the attendant facts and
circumstances a constructive trust had arisen in favour of the plaintiff, it
was the appellant's position that there were no attendant contemporaneous
circumstances which could be proved in law in this case favouring a finding of
a constructive trust. Counsel submitted the treatment of the facts by the
District Judge was erroneous as the proved facts did not warrant the
inferences drawn by the Court; the Court had failed to consider the fact that
the defendant and her daughter too had earned foreign currency in Sweden and
would have contributed substantially to

**195**

the joint savings; that the Court of Appeal failed to consider and critically
examine the facts but merely relied upon the findings of the lower Court and
that therefore it could not be said that there were concurrent findings of
fact in favour of the plaintiff which should not be interferred with. Pointing
to the plaint filed appellant's Counsel commented that it contained no concise
statement of the facts and circumstances relied on as constituting an inferred
trust. The amended plaint brought in several averments to its paragraph 4,
which then for the first time made reference to s. 83 of the Trusts Ordinance
and declared that the plaintiff was enjoying the beneficial interest in the
property at the time. It was submitted that nevertheless, s. 83 of the Trusts
Ordinance covered several areas of property both immovable and movable and
that s. 83 was governed by s. 5 of the Trusts Ordinance and s. 92 of the
Evidence Ordinance. This being so, Adaicappa Chetty's case and Saverimuttu's
case (supra) contained correct statements of the law.

Thus, the judgments cited (supra) settled the law, and if the terms of a
document were clear and unambiguous one cannot admit parole evidence to show
that it meant something else. Counsel confined this submission to situations
involving transactions of immovable property such as land. His arguments did
not extend to situations such as financial investments like monies deposited
in Financial Institutions or the transfer of shares in respect of which trusts
may be created without a notarial document. Counsel contended that a problem
arose because of the decisions in Muthuamma v. Thiagaraja (8) which he
submitted was wrongly decided ; wrongly because the Court admitted an oral
promise to return the property as an attendant circumstance ignoring thereby
the provisions of s. 92 of the Evidence Ordinance and s. 5 of the Trusts
Ordinance. Counsel submitted that such a promise should have been by a
notarially executed document. The Court had held that the father held the
property in trust for the son but the Court did not examine the question
whether the son intended to convey the beneficial interest in the property to
his father. There was also no reference to Thangavelautham's case or to
Fernando v. Cooray (supra). In any event Counsel submitted this case was not
relevant for a proper consideration of the instant case. Counsel also
submitted that the cases of Saminathanchetty v. Vanderpoorten (9) and of
ValliammAchchy v. Abdul Majid reported in 45 NLR 169 (S.C) (10)

**196**

and 48 NLR (P. C) (11) were concerned with exceptional situations and had been
decided on their special facts. Oral evidence went in upon the language of the
deeds themselves which indicated that the land was to be returned. In these
two cases vast complicated transactions were involved with creditor-debtor
relationships and hence these cases should not be applied willy-nilly.

To summarise the submissions made on behalf of the appellant on this aspect of
the case, it was argued that

(a) on the basis of the plaint and on the facts, the deed P3 was an absolute
transfer in favour of the defendant for a consideration acknowledged to have
been received ;

(b) it was not open to the plaintiff to controvert or contradict the plain
meaning of the language of P3 by parole evidence seeking to prove that P3
created a constructive trust recognised by s. 83 of the Trusts Ordinance ;

(c) no plea under s. 83 of the Trusts Ordinance of a trust is available
because of the stringency of the provisions of the Prevention of Frauds
Ordinance and of s. 5 of the Trusts Ordinance ;

(d) S. 92 of the Evidence Ordinance precludes the plaintiff from controverting
the terms of P3 and proving a trust as alleged in the plaint

(e) further, the evidence in the case does not prove a trust and that the fact
of the marking in evidence of paragraph 4 of the amended plaint does not make
it evidence or establish the alleged trust ;

(f) the rest of the evidence does not prove a trust. Further,

(g) the evidence discloses the circumstances in which the plaintiff came to
purchase the property on P2 ; that it was held by the plaintiff on his own
behalf and on behalf of the defendant and on P3 when he transferred to the
defendant, it must be presumed he was transferring for a consideration he had
received and which has not been rebutted.

**197**

Next, learned Counsel for the appellant contended that the doctrine of
advancement should be applied to the instant facts ; that doctrine was known
to our law even before the enactment of the Trusts Ordinance ;that the facts
warranted a strong initial presumption that the plaintiff transferred the
property to the defendant on P3 as she had admittedly been his mistress for a
number of years, they had lived together as husband and wife openly both in
Sri Lanka and abroad and that presumption cannot be rebutted by the
application of s. 83 or s. 84 of the Trusts Ordinance. Counsel strongly relied
on the case of Mutalibu v. Hameed (12) which held that where a father or
person in loco parentis purchases property in the name of his wife or child
there is a strong initial presumption that such transfer was intended for the
advancement of such wife or child and the provisions of s. 84 of the Trusts
Ordinance do not apply to such transaction. The onus in such cases is on the
party seeking to establish a trust to prove that fact. Fernando v. Fernando
(13) and Animal v. Kangany (14) were approved and applied by the Court in
Mutalibu v. Hameed (ante). Counsel sought to extend this doctrine to the case
of a mistress. To do so he pointed to s. 2 of the Trusts Ordinance which he
submitted provided for recourse to the English Law in the absence of provision
covering the subject in the Trusts Ordinance or in any other law. Seeking to
use this means Counsel cited a number of decisions of the English Courts which
he claimed had recently contributed to the development of the law of trusts in
England vis-a-vis man and mistress. The matrix upon which the law of trusts
developed in this regard in England was, it was submitted, the case of Gissing
v. Gissing (15) per Lord Diplock where a new line was taken for the first time
in the area of the law of trusts. Where a lady had contributed to the running
of the matrimonial house then she had rights to a beneficial interest.

"Any claim to a beneficial interest in land whether spouse or stranger in whom
the legal interest in the land is vested must be on the proposition that the
person in whom the legal interest is vested holds it as trustee on trust to
give effect to the beneficial interest of the claimant as cestui que trust."

This was extended to a mistress by Lord Denning in the case of Cooks v. Head
(16) followed by Ewes v. Ewes (17) an unmarried couple a joint acquisition of
property-transfer of property into name of one party inference of agreement-
mistress entitled to beneficial interest-appropriate share-house to be held in
trust by man-3/4 to himself-1/4 to mistress.

**198**

Bernard v. Joseph (18). Reference was also made to Halsbury's Laws of England,
Vol 48, 4th Ed. para. 610, p. 341 under title "unmarried cohabiters". It was
submitted that these developments should be adopted and absorbed into the law
of Sri Lanka through s. 2 of the Trusts Ordinance and that therefore, the
presumption that the plaintiff transferred property on P3 for her advancement
has not been rebutted and no question of trust in his favour arises.

On behalf of the plaintiff-respondent learned Counsel first referred to the
relationship between the parties which he submitted must be at the forefront
of this case. Intimacy between the parties commenced in 1971 when they were at
the Blue Lagoon Hotel. In 1974 October when plaintiff moved to the Sunflower
Hotel he rented a house in Sea Street, Negombo, repaired it and paid the rent,
purchased furniture and moved in with the defendant who came with her
children. At that time the defendant was earning Rs. 750% per month. Plaintiff
left for Sweden in June 1975 - he went alone for 5 months, acquired
proficiency in the Swedish language obtaining a Diploma \- P5. He was also
employed as an attendant in a home for elders earning Rs. 9,000/-to
Rs.10,000/-per month. He saved as he was given free board and lodging. He
opened a Bank account - P6 - and remitted part earnings to Sri Lanka to help
maintain the defendant and her children. He returned to Sri Lanka.

Plaintiff made a second trip to Sweden in May 1976 going there on a student
visa and was again employed on the same salary with free board and lodging. He
took defendant's daughter with him. Defendant joined him three months later on
a prepaid ticket for which the plaintiff had paid having given up the house in
Sea Street and moving the furniture to her sister's house at Asarappa Road.
Defendant stayed only for 3 months and returned home before the plaintiff. The
plaintiff had got the defendant to assist him in his work as the defendant did
not know Swedish and could not have got a job. Daughter also worked in a
similar way. Defendant was paid only an honorarium but with free board and
lodging. So also her daughter. It was the plaintiff's evidence that the
defendant was paid sums amounting to about Rs. 1,500/-to Rs. 2,000/-per month.
(which would be about 1 /4th of what he earned). It was also the plaintiff's
evidence that when the defendant returned to Sri Lanka she had no money.
Plaintiff wrote to one Beverly Jansz in 1976 asking him to look out for a
house for purchase. Jansz says he contacted Garwin de Silva. Jansz wrote to
the plaintiff about the availability of Garwin de Silva's house. Defendant
also

**199**

met Garwin de Silva who testified that she told him that Hapuarachchi
(plaintiff) will buy the house. After the plaintiff returned home in November
1976 he met Garwin de Silva, made an advance payment of Rs. 5,000/- vide P1,
and on 17.11.76 when P2 was executed he paid the balance Rs. 40,000/-. The
Notary says that this amount of Rs. 40,000/- was paid in his presence at the
time of execution but he cannot remember by whom. The defendant too was
present at the time. She did not protest about anything. Garwin de Silva says
that the money was paid to him by the plaintiff. The defendant did not say
anything about the money. In this respect therefore he corroborates the
plaintiff and flatly contradicts the defendant who has said that she paid the
money. The Notary also says that the plaintiff paid his fees and paid the
stamp duty as well. As regards P3 however, as stated earlier, the Notary says
that no money was paid in his presence on that transaction but the plaintiff
paid his fees as well as the stamp duty and it was the plaintiff who gave him
instructions for the preparation of P3.

As regards the subsequent lease on deed No. 4598 of 17.08.79 by the lessor the
defendant to the lessee Ibrahim, the same Notary says that he attested it.
Instructions concerning the lease were given to him by the plaintiff. Both
parties i.e. Ibrahim and the plaintiff paid his fees as was the custom in the
case of a lease. It was the plaintiff-respondent's case that he had wanted to
lease the house he bought. In order to expedite matters and as he was due to
return to Sweden almost immediately, he executed P3 so that in his absence,
leasing this property would be facilitated it the property was in the name of
the defendant who was to remain in Sri Lanka. He left for Sweden 3 days after
the execution of P3. He was in a hurry. It was submitted that as a layman he
was not familiar with giving a power of attorney to someone to act on his
behalf.

The parties finally separated with the plaintiff making a complaint to the
Police on 22.11-79 -P8. In that statement the plaintiff has stated in third
person -

"that he was living with the defendant as man and mistress and that because of
the confidence he had in her he had transferred his house property in her name
... Today when he visited the house he found she had left. He learnt she had
gone to her sister's house in Asarappa Road, He does not know what she has
removed from the house-He made this statement in order that a settlement be
effected ..."

**200**

Counsel points out that the reason why he executed P3 is given in P8. in
consequence of P8 the defendant had made a statement to the Police on 24.11.79
P10. In P10 the defendant has stated "... this house is in my name" - P1 0B.
Again, it says "... if my passport and my sovereign chain and Rs. 4,000/-that
1 had obtained from my sister are returned, l shall retransfer the land and
the house".

Thus, it was the contention of respondent's Counsel that:

(a) the evidence relating to the foreign earnings of the plaintiff as
supported by P6 showed that he would have had sufficient savings to have
purchased this property on P2;

(b) that the earning capacity of the defendant (and her daughter) was low and
that the District Judge was right in holding that she had insufficient funds
to have paid Rs. 40,000/- on P2 as asserted by her;

(c) that the plaintiff had played a dominant role as regards P2, P3, and even
P4;

(d) that all of the above matters were attendant circumstances within the
meaning of s.83 of the Trusts Ordinance and could have been properly
considered as proved facts in construing a constructive trust;

(e) the contents of P10 were admissions made by the defendant against her
interests.

(f) that the contradictions between the evidence of the defendant and that of
Garwin de Silva as regards the payment of consideration in P2 cast the
defendant's evidence in grave doubt;

(g) that if the plaintiff wanted to gift the premises to the defendant there
was nothing to prevent him from doing so. Thus the probabilities from all the
surrounding circumstances were that the plaintiff was speaking the truth.

With regard to the propositions of law taken on behalf of the appellant and
referred to earlier in this judgment, the respondent argued that

(a) Section 2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance does not prohibit or
prevent the plaintiff from proving by parole evidence attendant circumstances
as envisaged in s.83 of the Trusts Ordinance. It has

**201**

no application to Chapter IX of the Trusts Ordinance. Saminathan Chetty v,
Vanderpoortan (9), Valliamma Achchi v. Abdul Majid (10) \- 48 NLR 289 (PC)
(11). Muthuamma v. Thiagarajah (19). It was submitted that s.2 provided only
for legal interests and not equitable interests in immovables. Equitable
interests may be proved by parole evidence. Reliance was placed on the
decision in Narayan Chetty v. James Finlay Ltd. (20) where it had been argued
that s.2 provided only for the legal estate and not for an equitable interest.
Reference was made to the comment by Garvin, J. "Our Statute of Frauds left
out those portions of the English statute-to wit: ss. 7,8,9 and 10 that
provided for equitable interests". As those sections have not been
incorporated in our statute, it was submitted they had been deliberately left
out and supported the submission that s.2 does not apply to equitable
interest.

(b) The denial of a trust is a fraud - vide s. 5 of the Trusts Ordinance.
Counsel referred to Valliamma Achchi's case as the first where the principle
of fraud was considered. Counsel also referred to "Equity and the law of
trusts" by Philip H. Pettit - p.19: 80\. Counsel submitted that, in the
instant case, the denial by the defendant of a constructive trust vis-a-vis P3
was a fraud, and therefore, neither s.2 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance
or s.92 of the Evidence Ordinance were applicable - vide s.92(1).

(c) that the cases relied on by the appellant (supra) which applied s.2 of the
Prevention of Frauds Ordinance and s.92 of the Evidence Ordinance and declared
those transactions void or held that there was no trust could all be
distinguished, as those transactions did not relate to the creation of
constructive or express trusts but related to other dispositions of land such
as mortgages and were therefore irrelevant for present purposes. Trusts had
failed on the facts in those cases. Chapter IX of the Trusts Ordinance was in
the scheme of the written laws of Sri Lanka and had to be given effect to.

(d) that the doctrine of advancement was not pleaded by the defendant, no
issue was raised on it and no reference was made to it in the evidence and not
adjudicated upon in the District Court. It was raised for the first time in
appeal. The defendant's evidence has in

**202**

fact the effect of denying it. Furthermore the evidence adduced does not
warrant such a conclusion.

(e) that modern trends in the development of the English Law of Trusts as
detailed by the case law cited (ante) in regard to unmarried cohabiters have
no place in the law of Sri Lanka. Section 2 of the Trusts Ordinance does not
permit the introduction of these trends into Sri Lanka Law and should never be
regarded as a vehicle which was intended to admit new species of constructive
or resulting trusts as and when they are evolved by application of English
equitable principles to changing English society. What situations could be
regarded as creating constructive trusts are set out in Chapter IX of the
statute. One cannot add more categories to the statute by judicial decision.

**Conclusions:**

Mindful of the case law that has been cited (ante) it is my view that a trust
may be said to arise where a person proves a case which falls within the
language of one of the provisions in Chapter IX of the Trusts Ordinance;
therefore s.2 of the Frauds Ordinance would not be relevant. Section 5(1) of
the Trusts Ordinance specially enacts that a trust created under Chapter 11 of
that Ordinance must be notarially executed in the manner prescribed by s.2 of
the Frauds Ordinance. In the absence of a similar provision which makes s.2 of
the Frauds Ordinance applicable to trusts arising under Chapter IX it is a
safe approach to say that s.2 of the Frauds Ordinance is not meant to govern
trusts arising under Chapter IX i.e. constructive or implied trusts. A person
has therefore to make out a case failing within the provisions of ss.83 to 96
of the Trusts Ordinance -vide - Jonga v. Nanduwa (21). In the instant case the
plaintiff has sought to make out that he did not intend to dispose of his
beneficial interest and that the instant situation is one governed by s.83 of
the Trusts Ordinance. The plaintiff also asserts that the defendant's denial
that she was holding the property in trust for the plaintiff is fraudulent. If
he succeeds in proving this, then certainly s.2 of the Frauds Ordinance and
ss.91 and 92 of the Evidence Ordinance would not be applicable and would not
be a bar to his proving a constructive trust upon parole evidence: .

The plaintiff relies on a chain of facts and circumstances in support of his
claim. Each case has to be viewed on its particular facts. In this case,

**203**

the parties claim to have been man and mistress. Both depended on their
employment incomes, the plaintiff being a middle grade hotel employee and the
defendant a hairdresser with four dependent children, who, before she lived
with the plaintiff, lived in her sister's house. The contest revolves around
the purchase of a house. With their employment incomes in Sri Lanka, neither
could have had sufficient funds to purchase a house and garden. There is no
evidence of their savings in Sri Lanka. Thus we seethe plaintiff in 1975
seeking to improve himself - he proceeds abroad, learns a foreign language and
earns and saves money and that is the starting point of the circumstances
which ultimately led to the purchase of the house. What both earned during
their spells abroad in Sweden has been placed before the trial Court through
P6 the plaintiff's Swedish Bank Book. We have the evidence that the plaintiff
spent a longer time in Sweden in 1975 and 1976 and plaintiff says he earned
much more than the defendant who spent only a few months. The defendant claims
she earned as much as him. According to the plaintiff's evidence he earned
about Rs. 9,000 per month (converted from Swedish Croners) whereas the
defendant earned about Rs. 2,000 per month and her daughter a 15 year old girt
earned something for a period of 4 months in 1976. The defendant who knew no
Swedish does not claim she worked as a hairdresser in Sweden. She has said her
duty was to assist in attending to the meals and personal needs of the inmates
of a home for elders. The trial Judge has considered the evidence regarding
the earnings of the parties in Sweden. He has concluded that the plaintiff was
more qualified than the defendant in that he had gained in the Swedish
language and therefore was better placed to secure a better paid job than the
defendant who was there only for 3 months, had visa problems and knew no
Swedish. In the result the trial Judge has accepted the plaintiff's evidence
as more probable and concluded the defendant could not have had sufficient
money to have purchased the house. I see no reason to interfere with those
findings. No other source of income or wealth concerning the parties has been
adduced in evidence. In this background one has to examine the claim of the
defendant-appellant that she paid the money on the occasion of the purchase of
the house on P2 - i.e. Rs. 40,000 cash. The seller Garwin de Silva, Attorney-
at-Law, specifically alluding to this testified that it was the plaintiff who
paid him first Rs. 5,000 advance and then Rs. 40,000 on the date of the
execution of the deed. He therefore flatly contradicts the defendant. He has
to be regarded as a disinterested witness and he supports the plaintiff. There
are the further facts that the plaintiff paid the Notary's fees and stamp fees
for both P2

**204**

and P3 according to the Notary. There is also the evidence that no money in
fact passed at the time of execution of P3 - vide evidence of the Notary. His
mere attestation on P3 that consideration was paid is therefore of little
value and has been rebutted by his testimony. The attestation on P3 is
therefore not conclusive. - vide - Davis Singho v. Herath (12), Moonesinghe v.
Vithanage (23), Nadarajah v. Ramalingam (24).

The trial Judge has in the light of the foregoing, rejected the claim of the
defendant that she paid the consideration on P2. He has come to a firm
conclusion that the plaintiff paid Rs. 45,000 out of his money on P2 It is
also probable that no consideration was paid at the time of the execution of
P3. There is no reason to interfere with these findings. We now have the
situation that the defendant's claim to have paid the consideration on P2 has
been rejected as highly improbable. These circumstances could be regarded as
showing that the defendant very probably made a false claim. Such conduct on
her part is highly relevant to the question whether the defendant's denial of
the existence of a constructive trust in this case amounts to fraud. There is
also the letter P9 and the defendant's statement to the Police - P10. The
trial Judge having considered all relevant facts has concluded that P9 was
written by the defendant. I cannot disagree. By P9 it is stated that "Now Hapu
...... the house is in my name ...... I am willing to write the house in your
name ...... you took every cent I saved......" The trial Judge points to the
language of P9 and concludes it suggests an admission by the defendant that
the house was merely written in her name on P3. That is a finding that Court
could have come to on the evidence. Appellant's Counsel submitted that P10 is
long after the events of 1976 and should not be regarded as attendant
circumstances. But no objection has been taken to the admission of P10 at the
trial. The Civil Procedure Code permits a document to go in if not objected
to. Furthermore, its contents to wit: that she will transfer the house back to
the plaintiff if he returns her gold chain and money amounting to Rs. 4,000
could be regarded as an admission against her interests and therefore relevant
and admissible. This conduct too is relevant to the question of fraud. The
findings of fact that the defendant had insufficient savings or capital to buy
the property at the time P2 was executed coupled with the high probability
upon the circumstances set out earlier that the defendant had falsely said
that she paid the money as consideration for P2 together with her admissions
in P9 and P10 makes it probable that her denial of the plaintiff's assertion
of the existence of a constructive trust is fraudulent. It is my view that the
plaintiff has

**205**

succeeded in showing fraud on the part of the defendant in denying the claim
of the plaintiff. In the result s.2 of the Frauds Ordinance and s.92 of the
Evidence Ordinance have no application to this case and the plaintiff can lead
oral evidence of the existence of a constructive trust in his favour on the
basis that he retained the beneficial interest in the property at the time P3
was executed.

The unreliability of her evidence that she paid the money for P2 also affects
her evidence that she later discovered that the property had been transferred
in the plaintiff's name and she persuaded him to execute P3. Her evidence as
to the circumstances in which P3 came to be executed in her name has therefore
to be rejected as probably untrue. The trial Judge has correctly answered
issue 3(c) in the affirmative. This leaves one with only the plaintiff's
version that he executed P3 in defendant's name to facilitate the leasing of
the property to generate further income for him whilst he was abroad and the
trial Judge has believed him. P4 has therefore to be viewed in this light
despite the fact that the defendant was the lessor. I see nothing
intrinsically improbable about the plaintiff's explanation for transferring
the premises to the defendant on P3. The plaintiff initiated the moves to buy
the house whilst still in Sweden; he has paid the purchase price; the trial
Judge holds that in all the circumstances he retained a beneficial interest in
the property. The Court was entitled to come to this conclusion on the facts
and circumstances of this case.

I now turn to the question of a presumption of advancement in favour of the
defendant-appellant who admittedly was the mistress of the plaintiff, and not
the wife. Learned Counsel for appellant sought to extend the rationale in
Mutalibu v. Hameed (ante) to the case of a man and mistress relationship. As
no such presumption can arise in such a relationship in the taw of Sri Lanka,
Counsel sought to introduce modern trends in the law of England through s.2 of
the Trusts Ordinance. I do not think this can be done. The decisions of the
English Courts have given rise to qualified trusts based on property concepts
and rules of English property law which is not the law of Sri Lanka.
Furthermore, the Courts of this country have been disinclined to introduce
categories of English constructive and resulting trusts not mentioned in
Chapter IX of the Trusts Ordinance. As 1 said earlier this case has been
fought on the basis that the defendant was the sole owner of the property in
question. I am unable to say that an initial presumption of advancement arises
on the facts.

**206**

The trial Judge has held that the plaintiff has proved that he conveyed only a
legal interest in the property to the defendant on P3 and retained a
beneficial interest in the property and that there was a constructive trust
operating in his favour. I agree with the decision and uphold it. I
accordingly affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and dismiss this appeal
with costs.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  

**

KULATUNGA, J. -** I agree.

_**Appeal** **dismissed**.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/13.html_  

