[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1998](./) >> **[1998] LKSC 13**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1998+13 or 1998+LKSC+13) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1998+LKSC+13) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Leelawathie v. Manel Ratnayake - SLR - 349, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 13;
(1998) 3 Sri LR 349 (24 June 1998)

**349**

**LEELAWATHIE  
v.  
MANEL RATNAYAKE**

SUPREME COURT

G. P. S. DE SILVA CJ.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 73/95

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 64/85

JUNE 15, 1998.

_Ceiling on Housing Property Law - Writ of Certiorari - Tenant's application
to purchase the house let to him - S. 13 of the law - Death of tenant pending
writ application - Right of deceased tenant's daughter to proceed with S. 13
application._

The tenant applied in terms of S.13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law,
No.1 of 1973 to purchase the house let to her. The Commissioner for National
Housing decided to recommend to the Minister the vesting of the house for the
purpose of sale to the tenant. On an appeal by the owner of the house under S.
39 of the law, the Board of Review set aside the Commissioner's decision. The
tenant moved the Court of Appeal by way of certiorari to quash the order of
the Board of Review. The tenant died pending the hearing of the application
and her daughter (the respondent) was substituted after which the court set
aside the order of the Board of Review.

**Held:**

The tenant's right conferred by S.13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law is
personal to the tenant making the application. That right ceased upon the
tenant's death; and the respondent is not entitled to proceed with the
application under S. 13 made by the original tenant.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Caderamanpulle v. Keuneman_ SC Appeal No. 15/79 SC Minutes 19, September,
1980.

_2\. Perera v. Lokuge and Others_ (1996) 2 Sri L.R 282.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera, PC with Peter Jayasekera and R. Y. D. Jayasekera_ for
the respondent.

_T. B. Dillimuni with Tissa Bandara_ for the substituted petitioner
respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

350

June 24, 1998.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The 5th respondent-appellant (appellant) is the owner of premises No. 35,
Ananda Mawatha, Colombo 10, which forms the subject-matter of these
proceedings. The tenant of these premises Aslin Ratnayake (now deceased) made
an application to the Commissioner of National Housing in terms of section 13
of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law (CHP law) to purchase the premises. The
Commissioner of National Housing held an inquiry and informed the appellant
and the tenant of his decision to recommend to the Minister to vest the
premises in terms of section 17 of the CHP law. Thereupon the appellant
preferred an appeal to the Board of Review against the decision of the
Commissioner of National Housing. (Section 39 of the CHP law). The Board of
Review, after inquiry, allowed the appeal and set aside the decision of the
Commissioner of National Housing recommending the vesting of the premises.
Thereafter the tenant moved the Court of Appeal by way of a writ of Certiorari
to quash the order of the Board of Review. The Court of Appeal set aside the
order of the Board of Review. The present appeal is against the judgment of
the Court of Appeal.

It is common ground that pending the hearing of the application for a writ of
Certiorari, the tenant (Aslin Ratnayake) of the premises died. The daughter of
the tenant was formally substituted in the room of her deceased mother. She is
the present substituted petitioner-respondent. It would appear that the
appellant did not object to the substitution as the substitution was of a
formal nature in order to proceed with the hearing and disposal of the
application before the Court of Appeal. I am therefore of the view that the
failure of the appellant to object to the substitution of the daughter in the
room of the deceased tenant has no relevance to the question that arises for
decision on this appeal.

The short point that arises for consideration before us is whether the
application made by the tenant in terms of section 13 of the CHP law can be
proceeded with by the substituted petitioner-respondent after the death of the
tenant. In other words, has the substituted petitioner-respondent the locus
standi to maintain the application made by her mother (now deceased) who was
the tenant of the premises?

351

The material provisions in the CHP Law are sections 9, 13 and 17 (1) and (2):

**Section 9** \- The tenant of a surplus house or any person who may succeed
under section 36 of the Rent Act to the tenancy of such house may, within four
months from the date of commencement of this law, apply to the Commissioner
for the purchase of such house.

**Section 13** \- Any tenant may make application to the Commissioner for the
purchase of the house let to him where no action or proceedings may under the
Rent Act be instituted for the ejectment of the tenant of such house on the
ground that such house is reasonably required for occupation as a residence
for the landlord of such house or for any member of his family.

Provided, however, that where the application made is to purchase a house in
respect of which an application may be made under section 14 (1), the
Commissioner shall not take any action in respect of the application made
unless the owner of such house consents to the sale of such house; and such
consent may be withheld under this law in respect of only one of the permitted
number of houses.

For the purpose of this section and section 12, tenant includes a tenant in
whose favour an order for the delivery of possession of a house has been made
under section 5 of the Protection of Tenants (Special Provisions) Act.

In this section, the expression 'house' does not include a house owned by a
local authority, a Government department or public corporation.

**Sections 17 (1) and (2)** \- (1) Where an application has been made under
this law for the purchase of a house, and the Commissioner is satisfied-

(a) that such house is situated in an area which in his opinion will not be
required for slum clearance, development or redevelopment or for any other
public purpose;

(b) that it is feasible to alienate such house as a separate entity; and

352

(c) that the applicant is in a position to make the purchase.

the Minister may, on being so notified by the Commissioner, by Order
(hereinafter referred to as a vesting order) published in the Gazette vest
such house in the Commissioner with effect from such date as may be specified
therein.

(2) as soon as may be after a house is vested in the Commissioner under
subsection (1), the Commissioner shall enter into an agreement with the
applicant for the sale of such house to the applicant, subject to the
following conditions:

(a) that the applicant shall pay to the Commissioner a lump sum or on rent
purchase terms or in such instalments as may be determined by the
Commissioner, the amount determined under this law as the price payable for
such house to the former owner and an additional sum of five per centum of
such amount to cover the costs incurred by the Commissioner;

(b) that until the amount payable as the price of such house is finally
determined under this law, the applicant shall make to the Commissioner a
monthly payment of an amount not less than the monthly rent payable for such
house, which payment shall be set off against the amount payable as the price
of such house;

(c) that the applicant shall be responsible for the repairs to, and the
maintenance of, the house and shall insure the house against loss or damage by
fire, civil commotion and riot and pay all rates and taxes due to any local
authority; and such other conditions as may be determined by the Commissioner.

Section 9 applies to a surplus house within the meaning of section 8 (5).
Thamotheram, J. in Caderamanpulle v. Keuneman(1) referring to an application
under section 9 observed, In regard to such an application no question of an
inquiry arose as between landlord and tenant as the landlord had already lost
his rights of ownership. On the other hand, section 13 (the section relevant
to this case) applies to a house which is within the permitted number which a
landlord is

**353**

entitled to retain as owner. In regard to section 13, Thamotheram, J. in
Caderamanpulle's case (supra) stated : As the application under section 13 is
in respect of a house permitted by law to be owned by the landlord, his
consent is always relevant even where the Commissioner has the discretion to
act under section 17 notwithstanding the landlord refusing consent. The
Commissioner has to hear the landlord and consider his position fairly before
deciding to act under section 17.

Moreover, there is a significant difference in the language of section 9 and
section 13, insofar as the person entitled to make the application is
concerned. While the entitlement to make an application for the purchase of
the house is confined to any tenant in terms of section 13, the provisions of
section 9 speak of the tenant. . . _ _or any person who may succeed under
section 36 of the Rent Act to the tenancy__. . .. The words underlined above
are not found in section 13\. It seems to me that the difference in the
language tends to show that the right conferred by section 13 is personal to
the tenant who makes the application. In this connection, it is also relevant
to note (as stated earlier) that section 13 applies to houses which are within
the permitted number allowed to be owned by the landlord.

Once an application is made in terms of section 13 to purchase a house, the
Commissioner of National Housing has to be satisfied in regard to the specific
matters set out in sections 17 (1) (a), (b) and (c). Analysing the provisions
of section 13 read with section 17, Thamotheram, J. in Caderamanpulle's case
(supra) expressed himself in the following terms: It seems to me that the
effective decision or determination in regard to the tenant's application
under section 13 is made by the Commissioner and not by the Minister. . .
Under section 13 an application has to be made under the law for the purchase
of a house. This does not mean that every application purporting to be validly
made under section 13 has to be acted on and a notification made to the
Minister under section 17 even if (a), (b) and (c) of the latter section are
satisfied. It was rightly conceded by Mr. H. L. de Silva that there was an
area of discretion left to the Commissioner for him to consider the equities
in the case and decide whether the application should be entertained. Before
going into the question raised at (a), (b) and (c) of section 17, he must
decide whether he is going to accept an application under section 13 and
notify the Minister that an application has been made under this law. The
Commissioner is not a mere conduit pipe through whom an application of a
tenant under

**354**

section 13 goes to the Minister even if conditions (a), (b) and (c) are
satisfied. It would also be relevant to refer to the case of Perera v. Lokuge
and others(2), wherein Kulatunga, J. held (1) that the Minister's power to
make the vesting order is discretionary, (2) the Commissioner is under a duty
to consider equities in addition to the matters set out in section 17 to
enable the Minister to make a fair decision. It is thus abundantly clear that
the CHP law requires the Commissioner of National Housing to address his mind
to the equities in the case and to act fairly. This again is a pointer to the
true nature of the application made under section 13, namely, that the right
conferred is personal to the tenant making the application. The position of
the present substituted-petitioner-respondent may well be different from the
position of the original applicant. In short, the equities in the case could
be different.

Furthermore, there is the significant fact that in the present case the tenant
who made the application in terms of section 13 died before an Order was made
by the Minister under section 17 (1) vesting the house in the Commissioner of
National Housing. There was not even a notification by the Commissioner to the
Minister under section 17 (1). Thus the deceased tenant had no proprietary
rights in respect of the house which could pass to her heirs on her death.

Admittedly, the present substituted petitioner-respondent is not the person
who made the application under section 13 to purchase the premises in suit.
For the reasons stated above, I hold that the substituted petitioner-
respondent is not entitled to proceed with the application made under section
13 by the original applicant, namely, the deceased tenant (Aslin Ratnayake)
and the Commissioner of National Housing himself has now no right to entertain
the application. The right conferred by section 13 is personal to the tenant
who makes the application and comes to an end upon her death - Actio
personalis moritur cum persona. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the
judgment of the Court of Appeal is set aside. In all the circumstances, I make
no order for costs.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/13.html_  

