[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1998](./) >> **[1998] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1998+14 or 1998+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1998+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Nelia Silva v. Commissioner For National Housing and Another - SLR - 291,
Vol 1 of 1999 [1998] LKSC 14; (1999) 1 Sri LR 291 (10 December 1998)

**291**

**NELIA SILVA  
v.  
COMMISSIONER FOR NATIONAL HOUSING AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 105/97  
C.A. NO. 362/90  
NOVEMBER 14 AND DECEMBER 4, 1998

_Writ of certiorari - Tenants application to purchase a house - Sections 13
and 17 (1) of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law - Requirements of a valid
vesting order under section 17 (1) of the Law._

In 1976 the respondent who was the tenant of a house owned by the appellant
made an application under section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law to
purchase the house let to him. The parties were not properly heard. However,
on 20.10.1976 the Minister had made a minute in the file which was regarded as
a "vesting" of the house under section 17 (1) of the Law. The purported
"vesting" was communicated to the parties on 07.02.1977. Thereafter in 1982
the Commissioner for National Housing held a proper inquiry and refused the
tenant's application. That decision was communicated to the tenant. On an
appeal by the tenant the Board of Review reversed the Commissioner's decision
on the ground that the Commissioner had no jurisdiction to have held an
inquiry in 1982 in view of the "vesting order' made in 1976.

**Held:**

1\. There was no valid vesting of the house in 1976, in that firstly there was
no vesting order published in the Gazette at that point of time, as required
by section 17 (1) of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law; secondly the
Commissioner's decision under section 17 had not been communicated to the
owner of the house prior to the "vesting".

2\. A publication of the purported "vesting order" in the Gazette in 1996
after the owner had applied to the Court of Appeal for a writ of certiorari
was of no force or avail in law in that the said publication was founded on an
illegal decision 'to vest' the premises.

**292**

**Case referred to:**

_Caderamanpulle v. Pieter Keuneman_ and _Others_ \- SC Appeal No. 15/79 SC __
Minutes 19th September, 1980.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera, PC_ with _Upali de Almeida_ for the petitioner-
appellant.

_Faiz Musthapha. PC_ with _Ananda Kasturiarachchi_ for the 2nd respondent-
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 10, 1998.  
**  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The petitioner-appellant (petitioner) is the owner of premises bearing
assessment No. 279 Mutuwella Mawatha, Colombo 15. The 2nd respondent's husband
was the tenant of the premises at the time the Ceiling on Housing Property Law
(the Law) came into force. The tenant made an application in terms of section
13 of the Law to purchase the premises. The 1st respondent (The Commissioner
of National Housing) held an inquiry some time in 1976. The Court of Appeal
has described this inquiry as "an abortive inquiry"; it appears to have been a
perfunctory inquiry where the parties were not properly heard. (The notes of
this inquiry have not been produced).

The 1st respondent thereafter proceeded to hold a second inquiry in 1982. The
notes of this inquiry have been produced marked P1. A perusal of P1 shows that
both the owner and the tenant had been fully heard by the 1st respondent. At
the conclusion of the inquiry, the 1st respondent on the grounds of "equities"
refused the application of the tenant to purchase the premises. This decision
was communicated to the tenant by P2 dated 25.9.84.

The tenant (ie the 2nd respondent's husband) thereupon preferred an appeal to
the Board of Review. The Board of Review by its order

293

P4 dated 8.9.98 allowed the appeal. The petitioner unsuccessfully moved the
Court of Appeal by way of a writ of certiorari to quash the order P4. Having
failed before the Court of Appeal, the petitioner has now preferred the
present appeal to this Court.

The principal ground upon which the Board of Review allowed the appeal of the
tenant was that as far back as 28th October, 1976, the premises had "vested"
in the 1st respondent and the 1st respondent had no jurisdiction to hold the
second inquiry and "override or cancel" the "vesting order". However, what
needs to be stressed is that the Board of Review held that the premises had
"vested" in the 1st respondent solely on the basis of a letter at folio 12 of
the Commissioner's file. Furthermore, the Board of Review proceeded to hold
that the "decision or determination of the Commissioner had been communicated"
to both the owner and the tenant by the letter dated 7th February, 1977.

Now, in the first place a "vesting" of the premises could not be effected by
the Minister making a minute in the departmental file or by writing a letter
which is placed in the departmental file. This finding of the Board of Review
is in the teeth of the express provisions of section 17 (1) of the Law.
Admittedly, there was no "vesting order" published in the Gazette at that
point of time.

More importantly, on the undisputed facts as set out by the Board of Review in
its order P4, the petitioner was informed of the purported "vesting" more than
three months later. The purported "vesting" was on 28.10.76 while the
communication of the "vesting" to the petitioner was as late as 7th February,
1977\. This procedure is manifestly contrary to the ruling in _Caderamanpulle
v. Pieter Keuneman and others_ ,(1) wherein Thamotheram, J. held. "There is a
duty cast on the Commissioner to act fairly. The failure therefore to inform
the landlord of the Commissioner's decision or determination under section 17
before the Order of vesting was made deprived the landlord of his right under
section 39 to appeal to the Board of Review". Thus, it is clear that the Board
of Review was in grave error in making the order P4.

The Court of Appeal too agreed with the reasoning and conclusion of the Board
of Review. Said the Court of Appeal, "The Commissioner was in error in holding
the second inquiry whilst the order of vesting

294

by the Minister stood without being quashed. In other words upon the vesting
by the Minister title to the property passed to the 1st respondent under
section 15 (2) of the Law. The 1st respondent therefore could not have held a
fresh inquiry into the vesting on an application under section 13 in respect
of property which had already vested in him. Thus, it follows he could not
have made order refusing to vest a house which had already vested in him under
section 17 (1) **. . .** "The judgment of the Court of Appeal is vitiated by
the fact that it has failed to appreciate that there was no valid "vesting" in
terms of section 17 (1) of the Law.

The 2nd respondent, however, now relies on a Gazette notification published as
late as 23rd February, 1996, in support of his submission that the premises in
suit are lawfully vested in the 1st respondent. It is to be noted that the
petitioner's application for a writ of certiorari to quash the order of the
Board of Review (P4) was filed as far back as 20th April, 1990. While the
matter was pending before the Court of Appeal, the Minister had proceeded to
publish the Gazette notification which has been produced for the first time
before this Court.

In any event, I am of the view that this Gazette notification is of no avail
to the 2nd respondent as it follows upon an invalid decision or determination
to "vest" the premises made on 28.10.76. In other words, the "vesting order"
published in the Gazette on 23.2.96 is founded on an illegal decision "to
vest" the premises. It, therefore, has no force or avail in law.

For these reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal
is set aside and we direct that a writ of certiorari do issue to quash the
order of the Board of Review (P4). In all the circumstances, I make no order
for costs of appeal.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

_Writ of Certiorari issued to quash the Order of the Board of Review._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/14.html_  

