[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1998](./) >> **[1998] LKSC 15**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1998+15 or 1998+LKSC+15) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1998+LKSC+15) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Sirisena v. Doreen De Silva and Others - SLR - 199, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998]
LKSC 15; (1998) 3 Sri LR 199 (31 July 1998)

**199**

**SIRISENA  
v.  
DOREEN DE SILVA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

G.P.S. DE SILVA, CJ.,

WADUGODAPITIYA, J., AND

GUNASEKERA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 190/96

C.A. NO. 563/88

C. H./1/5/1423/26

JULY 10, 1988

_Writ of Certiorari - Ceiling on Housing Property Law - Tenant's application
to purchase the house let to him - Sections 13 and 17 (1) of the Law - Invalid
vesting order - Board of Review Order to implement the invalid order._

Pursuant to an application by the 4th respondent tenant under S. 13 of the
Ceiling on Housing Property Law against the then owner of the house let to him
to purchase it and a recommendation by the Commissioner for National Housing,

**200**

the Minister signed an order on 10.09.1976 for vesting the house. However,
that Order was not published in the Gazette as required by S. 17 (1). Hence
there was no valid vesting Order. No steps were taken on that order when in
November, 1982 the Commissioner summoned the appellant who was now the owner
of the premises for an inquiry and decided to recommend the vesting of the
house. The appellant who was informed of that decision by a communication
dated 16.12.83 appealed against that decision to the Board of Review in terms
of S. 39 of the law. The Board of Review dismissed the appeal, affirmed the
Commissioner's decision made in 1976 and directed the Commissioner to take
steps on the vesting made on 10.09.1976.

**Held:**

In making its decision the Board of Review acted without jurisdiction firstly,
because the appeal was not against the Commissioner's decision made in 1976,
but against the decision communicated to the appellant on 16.12.83; secondly,
The Board had no jurisdiction to direct the Commissioner to act on the Vesting
made in 10.9.76 for the reason that there was no valid vesting order made in
terms of s. 17 (1) of the Law.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for the appellant.

_A. K. Premadasa, P.C, with C. E. de Silva_ for the 4th respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

July 31, 1998.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The 4th respondent was the tenant of premises No. 473, Liyanage Mawatha,
Nawala. She made an application to the 5th respondent (Commissioner of
National Housing) in terms of section 9 and/or section 13 of the Ceiling on
Housing Property Law (the law) to purchase the premises. The respondent to the
application was one M. W. Perera who was the owner and landlord of the
premises.

The 5th respondent held an inquiry and recommended to the Minister on 10.9.76
to vest the premises. The Minister signed the order on 12.10.76. However, it
is very relevant and important to note that the order was NOT published in the
Gazette as expressly required by the provisions of section 17 (1) of the law.
Thus it is manifest that there was no valid order vesting the premises in the

201

5th respondent. No rights could therefore flow from the purported order signed
by the Minister on 12.10.76. Moreover, the recommendation of the 5th
respondent to the Minister to vest the premises was not communicated to the
owner and landlord M. W. Perera. (Caderamanpulle v. Pieter Keuneman, SC Appeal
No. 15/79, SCM of 19.9.80).

The 5th respondent does not appear to have taken any steps in terms of the Law
until November 1982 when the present petitioner, who was now the owner and
landlord of the premises, received a notice stating that an inquiry will be
held into the application made by the 4th respondent in terms of section 13 of
the law to purchase the premises. Both the petitioner and the 4th respondent
participated at the inquiry. At the conclusion of the inquiry, by a
communication dated 16.12.83 (marked P5) the 5th respondent informed the
petitioner of his decision to recommend to the Minister to vest the premises.

The petitioner appealed to the Board of Review in terms of section 39 of the
law against the decision of the 5th respondent communicated to him by P5. The
Board of Review by its order dated 15.3.88 (marked P7) dismissed the appeal of
the petitioner. The petitioner moved the Court of Appeal by way of certiorari
to quash both P5 and P7. The Court of Appeal dismissed the petitioner's
application and hence the present appeal to this court.

This appeal turns on the legality of the order of the Board of Review (P7).
The Board of Review having referred to the first inquiry held in 1976, the
recommendation to vest made by the 5th respondent on 10.9.76, and the Order
signed by the Minister on 12.10.76, expressed its findings in respect of the
second inquiry in 1983 in the following terms: When a Commissioner makes a
decision that decision stands until it is reversed in appeal by the Board of
Review ... In this instance the Commissioner having made an Order to vest on
8.9.76 (sic) and thereafter having obtained the Minister's approval for the
vesting has held a second inquiry after which he has come to the same finding.
In holding the second inquiry in the year 1983 the Commissioner has manifestly
acted without jurisdiction. Therefore the decision made after the inquiry in
1983 and conveyed by the Commissioner's letter dated 16.12.83 (i.e. P5) has
also been made without jurisdiction. On this finding, as submitted by Mr.
Jayawardena for the petitioner-appellant, the Board of Review should have set
aside

**202**

P5 and allowed the appeal. Instead, the Board of Review proceeded to hold that
the Commissioner's decision made on 10.9.76 is the decision in respect of this
application. As the Minister has signed the Vesting Order the Commissioner is
directed to take the necessary steps on the basis of the vesting made on
10.9.76. The appeal is dismissed and the Commissioner's decision made on
10.9.76 is affirmed.

In so holding the Board of Review acted without jurisdiction for two reasons.
First, the petitioner's appeal was not against the Commissioner's decision
made on 10.9.76 but against the decision of the Commissioner communicated to
the petitioner on 16.12.83, by P5. The validity of the decision made on
10.9.76 was never a matter in issue before the Board of Review at any time.
Secondly, the Board of Review, had no jurisdiction to direct the Commissioner
to act on the basis of the vesting made on 10.9.76 for the reason that there
was no valid vesting Order made in terms of section 17 (1) of the law in 1976.
It is also to be noted that a period of 12 years had passed since the Minister
signed the purported Order.

The Court of Appeal fell into the same error as the Board of Review when it
took the view that. . . the Board could not ignore the earlier recommendation
of the 5th respondent to vest the premises and the follow-up action of the
Minister in signing the vesting order. The Board was acting within its
jurisdiction in directing what action the 5th respondent was to take on the
earlier order. As I have pointed out above, no rights could flow from the
earlier order which had no force or avail in law. The Court of Appeal too was
in grave error when it held that the Board of Review was acting within its
jurisdiction.

For these reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal
is set aside and I direct that a writ of certiorari do issue to quash P5 and
P7. I make no order as to costs of appeal.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/15.html_  

