[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1991](./) >> **[1991] LKSC 16**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1991+16 or 1991+LKSC+16) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1991+LKSC+16) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  The Bishop of Chilaw v. Wijenathan - SLR - 153, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991] LKSC
16; (1991) 2 Sri LR 153 (10 September 1991)

### 153



**THE BISHOP OF CHILAW**

**v.**

**WIJENATHAN**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J., AMERASINGHE, J. AND DHEERARATNE, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 30/87

C. A. APPEAL NO. 10/80.

M.C. COLOMBO (CIVIL) 31/GE.

JULY 15 AND 18, 1991.



            _Landlord and Tenant  Rent and ejectment  Reasonable requirement charitable Trust  Landlord lacking beneficial interest \- Capacity of Land ‑ lord ‑ Devise under last will ‑ Succession to trust property ‑ Trustee of char‑stable trust ‑ Sections 12, 22 (1) (b), 22 (2) (b), 22(7) of Rent Act._



            The appellant, the Bishop of Chilaw was a Corporation incorporated

under the Roman Catholic Archbishop and Bishops of Ceylon Ordinance. The
appellant was appointed Executor under a last will wherein the follow­ing
bequests, inter alia, were made:__



            (i)         Udalawela Estate to the Roman Catholic Bishop of Chilaw to be

used solely for the support of St. Anne's Nursing Home, Marawila.



             (ii)       Two flats Nos. 33 and 33/1, Guildford Crescent, Colombo 7 to the Roman Catholic Bishop of Chilaw to be used solely for the support of St. Joseph's Home for the Aged, Lansigama, Marawila.



In 1964 the respondent became tenant of 33/1, Guildford Crescent. The

testator died in 1971. As Executor, the appellant informed the respondent that
the premises were required for Church work and one years' notice was given. In
1976 the appellant instituted action for ejectment by a petition under the
Administration of Justice Law in the Magistrate's Court. The premises are
residential premises the standard rent of which exceeded Rs.100/‑ per mensem.
It was pleaded in the concise statement of facts that the premises were
required for Church work and in the concise statement of law that the premises
were reasonably required for the purposes of the appellant.



The Appeal held that the legal title (but not the beneficial title) subject to
a charitable trust solely for the support of St. Joseph's Home for the Aged.



### 154



The case was argued on two issues:__



1.         Were the premises reasonably required by the appellant for the reasons set out in the concise statement of facts?



2\.         Was the appellant's action barred by section 22(7) of the Rent
Act?



The trial judge held in favour of the appellant but the Appeal Court re­versed
the judgement as follows:__



(a)        A landlord cannot succeed on the ground of reasonable requirement
where he has no beneficial interest in the premises.



(b)        The object of the trust was the support of St. Joseph's Home, but
this was not the reasonable requirement pleaded in the concise statement of
facts.



(c)        The appellant had acquired ownership of the premises by inheritance
or gift otherwise than from a parent or spouse after the respondent became the
tenant.



The respondent was a partner of a coconut and copra business in Dan­kotuwa. He
had one son studying at St. Thomas College, Mount Lavinia. Residence in
Colombo was necessary for purposes connected with his busi­ness, meeting
workers, attending auctions, purchasing raw materials etc. He had built a
house in 1974 in the adjoining permises but sold it in 1975 (after receiving
notice to quit). Efforts to find alternative accommodation at the same rent as
at present (Rs. 422/‑ p.m.) were unsuccessful.



St. Joseph's Home had 108 inmates cared for by 16 nuns. A new building for 45
inmates had been built but could not be made functional for want of funds.
Government assistance was received at Rs. 38/50 p.m. per inmate but the cost
of maintenance, on food alone was Rs. 6,000/‑ p.m. The deficit was met by
public support which however was dwindling. The net income from the premises
in suit was Rs. 300/‑ per month. Five nuns were residing at 33, Guildford
Crescent. The premises were required to run social charitable activities to
raise funds such as a nursery school, a Home for Orphan Girls and a centre for
the sale of the products made by the girls.



**Held:**



1.         Between the two competing needs, that of the beneficiaries of the char­itable trust was more urgent and far outweighed the needs of the respondent.



**155**



2.         Section 12 of the Rent Act prohibits the landlord and tenant of resi­dential premises from using them for other purposes. It does not prohibit an owner (or his agent) from using his premises for non‑residential purposes. A landlord can use residential premises for non‑residential purposes after re­covering the premises from his tenant, if he refrains from letting the premises. Accordingly such non‑residential purposes can be taken into account by the Court in considering whether the premises are reasonably required by the landlord. The competing requirements being balanced by the court need not be identical i.e. both residential or both non‑residential. The appellant's need for non‑residential purposes can be considered even though the pre­mises are residential or are used by the tenant solely for residential purposes.



3.         The seeming discrepancy between Church work and charitable pur­poses in no way prejudiced or misled the respondent.



4\.         The landlord's requirement does not have to be an immediate one, a
genuine need which will come into existence in the near future is sufficient
such as residence for a child not yet married, but soon to be married, a
pub­lic officer living in government quarters due to retire soon or business
to be commenced in the future. Here however the need was not dependent on an
event yet to occur but was both immediate and urgent; an increase in income
was essential to supply the day‑to‑day requirements of 108 inmates and to
accommodate 45 others awaiting admission to the new building. The pro­posed
activities could not be commenced unless and until the premises are recovered.



5\.         All that the Court had to decide was whether the premises were
rea­sonably required for the purposes of the business or vocation of the
appel­lant and so long as the proposed activities were not patently unlawful
or _Ultra Vires_ the strict enforcement of the terms of the charitable trust
was neither the tenant's concern nor 'a matter falling within the jurisdiction
of the Court in this action. However here the proposed activities were
substan­tially in conformity with the testator's wishes.



6.         Under our Rent Act the definition of landlord does not make benefi­cial interest the critereon. A person with bare legal title or even without a shred of title can be landlord. The person for the time being entitled to receive the rent is the landlord and need not have title. A tenant who sublets the premises is also a landlord vis‑a‑vis his subtenant and can recover pos­session on the ground of reasonable requirement.



            7.         The appellant in his capacity as executor was the landlord. He therefore had to institute action in his representative capacity and not in his per­sonal capacity. The cause of action that accrued to the appellant in his



### 156



representative capacity as Executor was founded on the contract of tenancy and
it was sufficient for that to be pleaded, put in issue or admitted.



8\.         The contention that as the ownership was acquired after the
specified date by inheritance or gift (being by last wilt) but not from a
parent or spouse does not apply here. In view of the duties and obligations
imposed on the trustee of a charitable trust he does not acquire ownership of
the trust property by inheritence or gift but by transfer _inter_ vivos or
upon decla­ration by will. Section 22(7) does not bar appellant's action.



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Noorbhoy v. Sellappa Chettiar_ (1957) 58 NLR 389  


2\.         _Thamby Lebbe v. Ramasamy_ (1965) 68 NLR 356

  
3\.         _Thomas v. Rodrigo_ (1964) 66 NLR 437



4\.         _Ismail v. Herft_ (1948) 50 NLR 112

  
5\.         _Andree v. De Fonseka_ (1950) 51 NLR 213

  
6\.         _Swamy v. Gunawardena_ (1958) 61 NLR 85

  
7\.         _Abdul Rahim v. Gunasena_ (1964) 66 NLR 419

  
8\.         _Kader Mohideen v. Nagoor Gany_ (1958) 60 NLR 16

  
9\.         _Arnolis Appuhamy v. De Alwis_ (1958) 60 NLR 141

  
10\.       _Martin Appuhamy v. Urban Council Gampaha_ (1960) 62 NLR 156

  
11\.       _Mamuhewa v. Ruwanpatirane_ (1948) 50 NLR 184

  
12\.       _Nanayakkara v. Pawlis Silva_ (1959) 60 NLR 490

  
13\.       _Gunasekera v. Mathew_ (1953) 54 NLR 299

  
14\.       _Appuhamy v. De Silva_ (1964) 67 NLR 188

  
15\.       _Gunasena v. Sangarapillai_ (1948) 49 NLR 473

  
16\.       _Hamedu Lebbe v. Adam Saibo_ (1948) 50 NLR 181

  
17\.       _Aloysius v. Pillaipody_ [1982] 1 Sri LR 106

  
18\.       _Parker v. Rosenberq_ [1947] 1 KB 371

  
19\.       _Sharpe v. Nicholls_ [1945] 1 KB 382

  
20\.       _Patel v. Patel_ [1982] 1 All ER 68

  
21\.       _Harrison v. Hopkins_ [1949] 2 All ER 597

  
22\.       _Alles v. Krishnan_ (1952) 54 NLR 154

  
23\.       _Viswalingam v. Gajaweera_ (1954) 56 NLR 111

  
24\.       _Blacker v. David_ (1951) 53 NLR 499

  
25\.       _Senanayake v. Dissanayake_ (1908) 12 NLR 01

  
26\.       _Visaladchypillai v. Sivapakkiamma_ (1938) 40 NLR 114

  
27\.       _Murugiah v. Jainudeen_ (1954) 56 NLR 176, 181

  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_H. L. De Silva P.C._ with _K. Kanag ‑ Iswaran P.C. _and _E. R. S. R.
Coomar­aswamy_ (Jr.) for appellant.



### 157



_Miss. Maureen Seneviratne P.C._ with _Neville ‑Jacolyn_ _Seneviratne_ and
_Miss_

_  Damayanthi Perera _for Respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._

September 10, 1991.



**FERNANDO, J.:**



The Petitioner‑Respondent‑Appellant ("the Appellant"), a Corporation
incorporated under the Roman Catholic Archbi­shop and Bishops of Ceylon
Ordinance (Cap. 338), was appointed Executor of a Last Will. Apart from two
small lega­cies, the entirety of the estate was devised for charitable
pur­poses. There was a bequest of Rs. 50,000/‑ to the priest in‑charge of St.
Anthony's Church, Kochchikade, for charity and church repairs, and the
residuary estate was to be distrib­uted among charitable organisations at the
Executor's sole dis­cretion. The following provision of that Will is relevant
to this appeal:



"I do hereby give and devise :



(a)        ...........Udalawela Estate to the Roman Catholic Bishop of Chilaw
to be used solely for the support of St. Anne's Nursing Home, Marawila;



(b)        My two flats Nos. 33 and 33/1 Guildford Crescent, Colombo 7 to the
Roman Catholic Bishop of Chilaw to be used solely for the support of St.
Joseph's Home for the Aged, Lansigama, Marawila".



In 1964, the Respondent‑Appellant‑Respondent ("the Respondent") became tenant
of 33/1 Guildford Crescent. The testator died in 1971. As Executor, the
Appellant informed the Respondent that the premises were required for Church
work, but the Respondent did not vacate the premises; having given





### 158



one year's notice, in 1976 the Appellant instituted action for ejectment by a
petition to the Magistrate's Court under the Administration of Justice Law.
The premises are, admittedly, residential premises the standard rent of which
exceeded Rs. 100/‑p.m. In the concise statement of facts it was pleaded that
the Appellant informed the Respondent "that the said pre­mises are required
for Church work"; in the concise statement of the law, it was averred that
"the premises are reasonably required for the purposes of the [Appellant]". It
is common ground that upon the death of the testator the legal title to the
premises (but not the beneficial interest therein) vested in the Appellant,
subject to a charitable trust "solely for the support of St. Joseph's Home for
the Aged". Both in the Magistrate's Court and the Court of Appeal, the case
was fought on two issues;



(1)        Were the premises reasonably required by the Appellant for the
reasons set out in the concise statement of facts?



(2)        Was the Appellant's action barred by section 22(7) of the Rent Act?



The trial judge answered these issues in the Appellant's favour and further
ordered that when the Respondent has' vacated, or is ejected from the
premises, in terms of section 22(8) the premises should be maintained by the
Appellant as a Home for orphan girls and/or a nursery school and/or a cen­tre
for the sale of articles produced by the girls, for the main­tenance of St.
Joseph's Home for the Aged, Lansigama, Marawila.



The Court of Appeal set aside that order, taking the view that (a) a landlord
cannot succeed on the ground of reasonable requirement where he has no
beneficial interest in the pre­mises, (b) the object of the trust was the
support of St. Joseph's Home, but this was not the reasonable requirement
pleaded in the concise statement of facts, and (c) the Appellant has acquired
ownership of the premises by inheritance or gift,



**159**



otherwise than from a parent or spouse, after the Respondent became the
tenant.



It was in evidence that the Appellant was engaged in a number of charitable
activities in the diocese of Chilaw, including orphanages and homes for elders
such as St. Joseph's Home. The running of that Home had been entrusted by the
Appellant to a religious congregation; at the relevant time (in 1976) it had
108 inmates who were being cared for by 16 runs; a new building had been
constructed to accommodate another 45 persons, but these could not be admitted
due to lack of funds for maintenance; Government assistance was received at
the rate of Rs. 38/50 p.m. per inmate; food alone cost Rs. 6,000/‑ p.m., and
the deficit was met out of public contributions; however public support, was
dwindling. The nett income received by way of rent from the premises in suit,
after deduction of rates, was about Rs. 300/‑ p.m. Five nuns were residing in
the upstairs flat (33 Guildford Crescent). One of these was teaching at St.
Bridget's Convent, and she donated her entire salary for the Home; although
there were training facilities at Lansigama, special training was provided at
Aqui­nas College, Colombo, and two others were undergoing such training. The
upstairs flat had only one bedroom, in which three nuns slept; one slept in
the kitchen and the other in the servant's room. That flat was also used to
accommodate nuns on visits to Colombo. In an affidavit filed with the
peti­tion one of the nuns deposed that the nuns proposed "to undertake social
charitable activities in the premises to raise funds" for the Home, and that
"the premises are required for the said purposes of the Church work". In her
evidence a few months later, she stated that the premises were required "in
order to derive some income as well as for social service activi­ties" such as
a nursery school, a Home for orphan girls, and a centre for the sale of
products made by the girls. The Respondent was a partner of a coconut oil and
copra business in Dankotuwa; he had one son studying at St. Thomas's Col­lege,
Mount Lavinia; it was necessary for him to reside in



**160**



Colombo for purposes connected with his business, namely to meet his brokers,
to attend auctions, purchase raw materials etc. In 1957 he had bought a block
of land, adjoining the pre­mises in suit, on which he commenced building a
house in 1970. When this was completed in 1974, he was unable to repay the
construction loans utilising the rental income from that house, and
accordingly sold the house in 1975 (after receiving the notice to quit); after
settling his debts, he was left with Rs. 75,000/‑. He had made unsuccessful
efforts to find alternative accommodation, at the same rent (of Rs. 422/­-
p.m.) as he was paying for the premises in suit.



There can be no doubt that as between these two compet­ing needs, that of the
beneficiaries of the charitable trust was more urgent and far outweighed the
need of the Respondent. On behalf of the Respondent it was strenuously
contended that, by reason of the provisions of the Rent Act and the Last Will,
the premises could not be said, in law, to be reasonably required by the
Appellant. Relying on the Rent Act, it was submitted that the Appellant's need
for non‑residential pur­poses could not, in law, be weighed against the
Respondent's need for residential purposes; that section 12 precluded the use
of residential premises wholly or mainly for any purpose other than that of
residence; that though the pleadings referred to "Church work", the purposes
disclosed in evidence were quite different; that in any event those activities
were not actually being carried on but were only activities proposed for the
future. Relying on the Last Will, it was contended that the testator intended
only that the rent from the premises be uti­lised for the purpose of the Home;
that "Church work" was outside the scope of the charitable trust; that the use
of the premises for residential purposes by the nuns, or for the pro­posed
future activities, would contravene the testator's direc­tive that the
premises be used "solely" for the support of the Home.



**Reasonable requirement: sections 12 and 22(1)(b):** Section 12 of the Rent
Act prohibits the landlord and the tenant of residen‑





### 161





tial premises from using it for other purposes; it does not pro­hibit an owner
(or his agent) from using his premises for non-­residential purposes; a
landlord can use residential premises for non residential purposes, after
recovering the premises from his tenant, if he refrains from letting the
premises; accordingly such non‑residential purposes can be taken into account
by the Court in considering whether the premises are reasonably required by
the landlord. It was also stated that the use of residential premises for
other purposes was prohibited by the Urban Development Authority Law, No. 41
of 1978; this was enacted after the conclusion of the evidence but before
judgment, and there was no pleading; issue, evidence or submission at the
trial as to whether the premises in suit was affected by any such prohibition,
and it is too late to raise that question now. Therefore the Appellant's need
must be assessed on the basis that there was no bar on the use of the premises
by the owner for non‑residential purposes. Where the tenant is using the
premises for residential purposes sections 22(1)(b) and 22(2)(b) do not
provide that, in assessing the relative needs of landlord and tenant, the
landlord's need for non­residential purposes cannot be considered. If that was
the legislative intent, the relevant provision would have read __



"......such premises, being residential premises,......are in the opinion of
the Court reasonably required for occupation as a residence for the
landlord......, and such premises, being business premises, are......
reasonably required for the purpose of the business of the landlord ......."

           

Further, sections 22(1)(b) and 22(2)(b) do not refer only to"residence" and
"business"; "trade", "profession", "voca­tion" and "employment" are also
contemplated; if the tenant is using the premises for residence (or business),
can the land­lord's need for professional use be excluded from considera­tion?
I think not. The legislature intended that the **requirement** of one be
balanced against the **requirement** of the other; but it did not further
prescribe that the basis of such requirement





### 162



should be identical. Where the legislature intended that the landlord's need
for residence alone can be considered, express provision was made, as in
section 22(2)(bb), but even there the legislature did not restrict the
landlord's right only to the case where his need for residential purposes
outweighted the tenant's need for residential purposes; section 22(2)(bb)
entitles him to recover any "premises" let to a tenant, and not merely "
**residential** premises"; thus if the tenant is using the premises for
business purposes his need must be weighed against the landlord's need for
residential purposes. The last paragraph of section 22(2) is also relevant. A
corporation's need for busi­ness premises can be considered in relation to
"any premises" (and not merely "any **business** premises") of which it is the
landlord. In that legislative background, to accept the Respondent's
submission would necessitate, under the guise of interpretation, the
modification of several provisions of the Act. I therefore hold that the
Appellant's need for non-­residential purposes can be considered even though
the pre­mises are residential, or are used by the tenant solely for
resi­dential premises. I am fortified in this conclusion by the decision of
H.N.G. Fernando J., (as he then was) in _Noorbhoy v. Sellappa Chettiar_ , (1).
There the landlord sought to recover premises in which his tenant was carrying
on business; having pleaded a requirement for business purposes, he raised an
issue at the trial relating to his need for residential purposes. This change
of position was held, in the circumstances, to be _bona fide_ , and his need
for residential purposes was held to prevail as against the tenant's need for
business purposes. In view of that decision, the seeming discrepancy between
"Church work" and the charitable purposes referred to in evidence can­not be
regarded as being of any significance: the premises were required for the
purposes (whether business or vocation) of the Appellant, and the Respondent
was in no way prejudiced or misled by the pleadings or the issue. The
particular purpose did not have to be mentioned in the notice to quit _Thamby
Lebbe v. Ramasamy_ , (2), and it was sufficient to raise an appropriate issue
as in _Noorbhoy_. In _Thomas v. Rodrigo_ ,(3),



### 163





the landlord apparently required the rented premises both for her residence
and for her vocation (of teaching music), but the issue raised was only
whether the premises were required for occupation as a residence, and Sri
Skanda Rajah, J., held that she had failed to establish this. That seems to me
an unduly strict view ‑ as the purposes of residence and vocation were, in
those circumstances, closely intertwined ‑ unless of course the other party
was misled by the failure to refer to "vocation" in the issue. Here, however,
the issue was not limited in that way; it made reference to the concise
statement of facts, which, as already stated, was clarified in the concise
statement of the law, and there was no question of the Respondent having been
misled. In any event, it was unreal to regard the Respondent's need as being
purely for residence, as he resided in Colombo partly for reasons connected
with his business; and any com­parison was thus between his
residential‑cum‑business purposes on the one hand, and
vocational‑cum‑business‑cum-­residential purposes on the other. What had to be
balanced was the **requirement** and not the factors which gave rise to the
requirement.



It is apparent from the pleadings, the affidavits and the evidence that the
nuns had a general idea as to how they intended to use the premises, but had
not developed detailed plans. The Respondent submitted that the business
contem­plated by them was a future business. It is settled law that reasonable
requirement has to be determined not as at the date of institution of action,
but at the conclusion of the trial _Ismail v. Herft_ (4), _Andree v. de
Fonseka_ (5), _Swamy v. Gunawardena_ (6), _Abdul Rahim v. Gunasena_ , (7) and
_Kader Mohideen v. Nagoor Gany_ (8), which took the contrary view can no
longer be regarded as good law. While the landlord's need must exist at the
time the action was instituted, circum­stances occurring thereafter can
strengthen his requirement:  


_Aranolis Appuhamy v. de Alwis_ (9), where Sansoni, J., took the view that
events subsequent to judgement would not be relevant (disagreeing on that
point with _Ismail v. Herft_ ). _Mar ‑_



**164**

  

_tin Appuhamy v. Urban Council Gampaha_ , (10) was cited in support of the
proposition that where the landlord had to do many things before a business
could be commenced, the pre­mises could not be regarded as reasonably required
by him; however, in that case Sansoni, J., (as he then was), did not hold that
the landlord failed on the ground that the business was not in existence, and
expressly disagreed with the views of Basnayake, C.J., in _Mamuhewa v.
Ruwanpatirane_ (11) and _Nanayakkara v. Pawlis Silva_ (12). I hold that the
landlord's requirement does not have to be an immediate need; a genuine need
which will come into existence in the near future is suffi­cient, such as a
residence for a child, not yet married, but soon to be married _Appuhamy v. de
Silva_ (13), or for a public officer living in Government quarters, but due to
retire soon _Appuhamy v. de Silva_ (14), or for a business to be commenced in
the future _Gunasena v. Sangarapillai_ (15), _Hamedu Lebbe v. Adam Saibo_
(16), _Andree v. de Fonseka_ (5), _Thamby Lebbe v. Ramasamy_ , (2) _Aloysius
v. Pillaipody_ , (17). Here the need was not dependent on an event yet to
occur (such as a prospective marriage or retirement) but was both immediate
and urgent: an increase in income was essential to supply the day‑to‑day
requirements of 108 inmates and to accommodate 45 others awaiting admissions
to the new building. The proposed activi­ties could not be commenced unless
and until the premises were recovered.



**Reasonable requirement: breach of trust:** The trust created by the testator
required that ".........  flat No ........ 33/1, Guildford Crescent........ be
used solely for the support of St.Joseph's Home". The Respondent seeks to read
this as **" the income from **the flat.......". The words are plain, and
require no interpretation. Read as a whole, the Last Will discloses a general
charitable intention, and this is an additional reason to resist a restrictive
Zonstruction. The premises could be used in any manner conducive to the
support of St. Joseph's Home: by deriving an income from it (as by renting it
or by using it for income‑generating purposes) or by using it directly or
indi‑



### 165

  

rectly for purposes necessary or beneficial thereto (as by accommodating
inmates and those who serve inmates). "Sup­port" cannot be restricted to
financial support, for the care of the aged requires many skills and services
(to meet their men­tal, emotional, spiritual, psychological and other needs)
which money cannot always buy or provide. It seems to me that all that the
Court had to decide was whether the premises were reasonably required for the
purposes of the business or vocation of the Appellant, and so long as the
proposed activi­ties were not patently unlawful or **_ultra vires_** , the
strict enforcement of the terms of the charitable trust was neither the
tenant's concern nor a matter falling within the jurisdiction of the Court in
that action. Could the Court come to a conclu­sion, in proceedings in which
neither the Attorney‑General nor the inmates of the Home are heard, that
providing accommo­dation for nuns who donate their earnings or undergo
train­ing is a breach of trust? It is only in proceedings under section 101 of
the Trusts Ordinance that such questions can properly be decided. Conceivably,
there might be an exception in the case of a patent breach of trust, where the
making of the claim itself (apart from its interpretation) constitutes a
breach of trust; e.g. in the case of a charitable trust if the trustee pleads
requirement as a residence for his relative, or in a (non­charitable) trust
for the sole benefit of A, if the trustee claims the premises as being
required for B's use. This case does not even remotely approach that
situation. Since this contention was vigorously pursued I would express my
view ‑concious that it is **_obiter_ ** __  that the proposed activities were
substan­tially in conformity with the testator's wishes. Learned Presi­dent's
Counsel for the Respondent did not question the verac­ity of the affidavits
and the evidence shows a **_bona fide_** general intention to use the premises
for the purposes of the trust, the nature and scope of the proposed activities
being progressively identified, elaborated and clarified. The reference to
"Churcl work" in the notice to quit and the concise statement of fact cannot
be taken isolation, to mean only Church work outside the scope of the
charitable trust; the provision of accom-



### 166

  

modation for nuns (engaged in work connected with the sup­port of the Home, or
undergoing appropriate training, or raising funds for the Home, etc.), and
running income generat­ing projects (such as a nursery school and a sales
centre) were clearly for the "support" of the Home. The Appellant's
requirement for these purposes satisfied the provisions of the trust and of
section 22(2)(b). A Home for orphan girls may not be a source of income or
other support for the Home for the aged, but such a Home together with a sales
centre for the products made by them might well yield a profit; sympathy for
the products may loosen the purse strings of customers; the facts before us
are insufficient to enable a decision either way. In any event, the fact that
such a Home was contemplated was, by itself, not sufficient to displace or
outweigh the Appel­lant's proved requirement for other purposes. If it is
proved in appropriate proceedings that a Home for orphan girls would be
contrary to the trust, appropriate orders would be made: that possibility does
not disprove the Appellant's requirement of the premises for the purposes of
the charitable trust.



**Reasonable requirement: landlord lacking beneficial interest:** One of the
grounds on which the Court of Appeal held against the Appellant was that he
had only the legal title to the pre­mises, and that a claim based on
reasonable requirement must fail where the landlord had no beneficial interest
in the pre­mises; _Parker v. Rosenberg_ , (18) was relied on. In support of
this view, learned President's Counsel for the Respondent submitted that while
the law relating to landlord and tenant was the Roman‑Dutch law, the Rent Act
had imposed statu­tory restrictions on the landlord's common law rights; that
the concept of "reasonable requirement" was imported from Eng­lish statutes,
and on that matter English decisions should be followed; _Sharpe v. Nicholls_
(19), was also cited. "Lease of immovable property" is not one of the matters
specified in the Civil Law Ordinance (Cap. 79), which is therefore not an open
licence for the free importation of the English law relating to



**167**



reasonable requirement. The fact that our common law relating to lease has
been modified by a statutory provision based on English law does not mean that
the matter thereupon becomes governed entirely by English law, and subject to
change according to current English decisions. Even if the provisions are
identical, English decisions are not **** binding, and are no more than an aid
to construction (see Weeramantry, Contract, Vol 1 pages 50, 53‑54). Here,
however, the statutory provisions are **not** identical, and English decisions
are not a sure guide. The decisions cited dealt with provisions in an Eng­lish
Act of 1933, which enabled the landlord (on proof of rela­tive hardship) to
recover possession of any protected dwelling­house if "the dwelling‑house is
reasonably required by the landlord....or occupation as a residence for
himself" or a child over eighteen or a parent; there was no definition of
"landlord"; that expression had been defined in an Act of 1920, to include
"any person....... who is or could but for this Act be entitled to possession
of the dwelling‑house", but it was doubted whether this definition was
applicable to the later provision. In _Sharpe v. Nicholls_ , personal
representa­tives of a deceased landlord were held not to be "landlords" within
the meaning of the 1933 Act. In _Parker v. Rosenberg_ _(supra)_ that decision
was regarded as authority for the proposi­tion that "personal representatives
having no beneficial inter­est in the dwelling‑house cannot avail themselves
of the provi­sions" of the 1933 Act. Learned President's Counsel for the
Appellant drew our attention to a more recent decision in _Patel v. Patel_ ,
(20) which makes it unnecessary for me to scru­tinize the earlier decisions.
It was held in _Patel_ , that although those cases were regarded as deciding
that personal representatives cannot be landlords unless they have a
beneficial interest in the premises, that is not (as pointed out in _Harrison
v. Hopkins_ , (21) what they in fact deckled; the correct position is that
personal representatives and trustees can be landlords, but it would not be
reasonable to permit them to recover protected premises if they claimed
possession for their own occupation,



### 168



if to make such a claim would be to act in breach of trust. [In the case
before us, for the Appellant to claim possession for use and occupation for
the purposes of the charitable trust, as distinct from his personal use, is no
breach of trust.] Recourse to English law is thus of no avail to the
Respondent. Our Rent Act contains a very different definition of "landlord",
which does not make beneficial ownership the criterion; a person with bare
legal title, or even without a shred of title, can be a landlord. "The person
for the time being entitled to receive the rent" need have no title; a tenant
who sublets the premises is also a landlord vis‑a‑vis the subte­nant, and can
recover possession on the ground of reasonable requirement. (See also _Alles
v. Krishnan_ , (22) and _Viswalin­gam v. Gajaweera_ (23)]. The lack of
beneficial ownership of the premises was thus no bar to the Appellant's claim.



**Action not instituted in capacity of landlord:** It was then con­tended that
the Appellant instituted this action in his capacity as Executor; that an
action based on reasofble requirement must be instituted in the capacity of
landlord. Although there was no specific averment in the plaint that the
Appellant was the landlord, it was admitted in the answer that after the death
of the testator the Respondent attorned to the Appellant. _Blacker v. David_ ,
(24) was cited to show that a person cannot be sued in his personal capacity
in respect of a cause of action which arose against him in a representative
capacity. But that has no application here; the Appellant, in his capacity as
Executor, was the landlord; he therefore had to institute action in his
reprcsr.ntative capacity, and not in his personal capacity. The Appellant's
contractual position as landlord does not require or permit him to institute
action in his capacity as landlord, just as an action on a mortgage or a sale
does not have to be instituted in the "capacity" of mortgagor or vendor. The
cause of action that accrued to the Appellant in his representative capacity
as Executor, was founded on a con­tract of tenancy, and it was sufficient for
that to be pleaded, put in issue or admitted.



**169**

  

**Section 22(7):** Section 22(7) of the Rent Act provides:__



"....... no action or proceedings for the ejectment of thetenant of any
premises referred to in........ subsection (2)(i) shall be instituted:__



(a)        on the ground that the premises are reasonably required for
occupation as a residence for the land­lord or any member of the family of the
landlord or for the purposes of the trade, business, profession, vocation or
employment of the landlord;



.......where the ownership of such premises was acquired by the landlord, on a
date subsequent to the specified date, by purchase or by inheritance or gift
other than inheritance or gift from a parent or spouse who had acquired
ownership of such premises on a date prior to the specified date".



The Appellant acquired the legal title to the premises in 1971, a date
subsequent to the "specified date" (which in this context meant the date on
which the Respondent came into occupation). The Court of Appeal held that the
Appellant had "inherited the premises in question by the Last Will which
gifted the premises" to the Appellant, and that section 22(7), therefore
barred the Appellant's action. Section 22(7) imposes a bar on a landlord
re‑covering possession. "Ownership" in that context would generally include
the right, title and inter­est whereby a plaintiff became the landlord; since
I hold that legal title is sufficient to enable a person to be the "landlord",
despite the lack of a beneficial interest, "ownership" must include such legal
title. Ownership of the premises was thus "acquired" by the landlord after the
specified date, and the first ingredient of section 22(7) was satisfied. The
disputed question is whether such acquisition was "by purchase or by
inheritance or gift". Quite clearly the exception does not apply as the
acquisition was not "from a parent or spouse". Acquisi­tion was not by
purchase. The question we have to decide is



**170**



whether the acquisition of legal title, without any beneficial interest
whatsoever, by the trustee of a charitable trust created by Last Will
constitutes either "inheritance" or "gift". Learned President's Counsel for
the Appellant submitted that the section contemplates only limited modes of
acquisition of ownership; purchase and gift, being transactions _inter vivos_
, and inheritance, namely devolution on death, whether testate or intestate;
while those who take on intestacy are "heirs" related to the deceased by blood
or marriage, he conceded that those who "inherit" under a Last Will consist
not only of "heirs" in that sense but even strangers to whom property is
bequeathed or devised. He submitted however, that "inherit­ance" contemplated
a bequest which was primarily or princi­pally beneficial, and did not include
an obligation which was a burden rather than a benefit. For the Respondent it
was con­tended that, notwithstanding the restrictions on the Appel­lant's
right to use the trust property, the Appellant acquired the property either by
gift or by inheritance; thus a _fideicom­missum_ can be created by gift
although the fiduciary's benefi­cial ownership is restricted _Senanayake v.
Dissanayake_ (25), and a trust can be created by a deed of gift
_Visaladchypillai v. Sivapakkiammal_ (26).



The Rent Act imposes restrictions on the common law rights of a landlord.
Statutes which encroach on the rights of the citizen must be subjected to a
strict construction at least in that any uncertainty as to the extent of
derogation must be resolved in favour of preserving common law rights
(Maxwell, Interpretation of Statutes, 12th ed., pp 251‑253; Craies, Statute
Law, 7th ed., pp 121, 339; _Murqgiah v..Jainudeen_ (27)). While the Rent Act
restricts a landlord's proprietary right to recover possession of the rented
premises, section 22(2)(b) preserves his common law right in the case of
"reasonable requirement"; section 22(7) is a proviso which restricts even that
right, and a proviso creating a restriction on common law rights must in case
of doubt or ambiguity be narrowly, rather than broadly,



**171**



construed. Viewed in that light, "purchase, inheritance or gift" would cover
transactions whereby a landlord acquires the beneficial ownership of property,
and not those whereby an obligation in the nature of a charitable trust
(devoid of any beneficial interest) is imposed on him. It true that by a deed
of gift a _fideicommissum_ or a trust can be created, but it does not follow
that every instrument whereby a trust is created is in the nature of a gift.
Very different considerations apply in the case of a charitable trust; had the
Appellant declined to accept the trust, being a charitable trust it would not
have failed for want of a trustee; another trustee would thereupon have been
appointed, perhaps by a competent Court, in accor­dance with appropriate legal
procedures. Can such new trustee be properly described as having acquired
ownership by inher­itance or gift? Considering the nature of the duties and
obliga­tions imposed on the trustee of a charitable trust, I am of the view
that he does not acquire ownership of the trust property by "inheritance or
gift", but by "transfer" _inter vivos_ or upon "declaration" by will (cf
section 6 of the Trusts Ordinance). Section 22(7) does not bar the Appellant's
action.



I therefore set aside the judgment and decree of the Court of Appeal, and
restore the judgment and decree of the trial Court, subject to one variation.
Section 22(8) requires the Court in its decree to direct "that no person,
other than the landlord or some member of his family whose name shall be
specified in the decree, shall enter into occupation of the pre­mises" upon
vacation by, or ejectment of, the tenant; it does not authorise the Court to
specify the purposes for which the premises may be used. That part of the
order of the trial Court specifying the purpose for which the premises may be
used is also set aside, and a direction that no person other than the
Appellant (and his servants and agents) shall enter into occu­pation upon such
vacation or ejectment is substituted. The Appellant will therefore be entitled
to a decree for ejectment



**172   **



and damages, with costs in a sum of Rs. 7,500/‑ in this Court, and costs in
both Courts below.



**Amerasinghe, J ‑** I agree.  


**Dheeraratne, J ‑** I agree.



**Appeal allowed.**

** **

_**Decree for ejectment entered subject to variation under section 22B.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/16.html_  

