[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1982](./) >> **[1982] LKSC 11**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1982+11 or 1982+LKSC+11) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1982+LKSC+11) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Abeysekera v. Wijetunge and Others - SLR - 737, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC
11; (1982) 2 Sri LR 737 (11 November 1982)

#  737

**  ABEYSEKERA**

**v.**

**WIJETUNGE AND OTHERS**

#### SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C.J., COLIN THOME, J., AND SOZA, J.

SC NO. 12/82;

SC SPL. LA 10/81;

CA 1578/79

OCTOBER 25, 1982



    Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973, Sections 2(1), 11, 16, 47 Vesting of surplus house ‑ Test to determine what a house is. Appeal to Board of Review ‑ Absence of determination or decision of Commissioner ‑ Does appeal lie to Board of Review?



The respondent owned six houses on Udupila Road and 5 other premises bearing
the following assessment Nos. viz. C 280/1, C 280/2, C 280/3 and C 280/4,
Makola South, stated to be business premises.



The respondent's family was made up of the respondent, his wife and 5 minor
children and therefore the permitted number of houses was seven in terms of
Section 2(1) of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law.



The respondent did not make any declaration under Section 8 as he owned only 6
houses as permitted under the law. The Commissioner of National Housing (CNH.)
informed the respondent that one house No. 294, Kehelpandura vested in him on
13.1.73 in terms of Sections 11 and 16.



On appeal to the Board of Review it was held that the respondent owned only
the permitted number of houses and that CNH should divest the said premises.
The CNH divested the house on 11.1.80. The petitioner‑tenant applied to, the
Court of Appeal praying for a Writ of Certiorari quashing the order of the
Board. The Court quashed the order and divesting order.



# Held -



An objective test whether No. 294, Kehelpandura junction was an independent
living unit constructed mainly or solely for residential purposes must be
applied. On this test the premises were a wayside boutique constructed for the
purpose of business. It was not  a house within the meaning of Section 47.



2\. In the absence of a decision or determination by the Commissioner, there
was no right of appeal. to the Board of Review and consequently the Board had



#  738



no jurisdiction to entertain an appeal. Thus the proceedings of the Board were
void and the vesting order had no consequence in law.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_J.W. Subasinghe, S.A.,_ with _K. Thevarajah_ and _Miss E.M.S. Edirisinghe_
for the 4th defendant‑appellant.



_J.C.T. Kotalawela for_ the 1st substituted‑respondent. .



_Cur. adv. vult._



#### November 11, 1982



**SAMARAKOON, C. J.**

The Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No.1 of 1973 came into operation on the
13th January, 1973. On this date the 4th res­pondent‑appellant owned eleven
buildings. They comprised of six houses bearing assessment Nos. 242/6 and
242/4, Udupila Road and C 280/1, C 280/2, C 280/3, and C 280/4 Makola South.
The other five premises are stated to be business premises bearing assessment
Nos. 242/‑2, 242/3 and 242/1, Udupila Road and C 280/5, Makola South and 294,
Kehelpandura Junction, Udupila Road. The appellant was the father of five
minor children and the family was therefore entitled to seven houses in terms
of section 2(1) of the said Property Law. He states that he did not make a
declaration in terms of section 8 of the said Law for the reason that he owned
only six houses and, therefore owned no house in excess of the Law. He was, he
states, not obliged to make a declaration in terms of section 8. By letter
dated 30.6.1975 (marked X4) the 5th respondent‑informed the appellant that
premises No.294, Kehelpandura Junction vested in him on the 13th January 1973
in terms of section 11 and section 16 of the Law. This letter refers to a
declaration sent by the Appellant to the 5th respondent. There was in fact no
such declaration and that is the reason why the space provided in the letter
for the date of the declaration is left blank. The 5th respondent appears to
have used and adapted a printed form meant for a different set of
circumstances. The appellant appealed to the Board of Review in terms of
section 39 of the Law against this contention of the 5th respondent. The Board
held that the premises in question was a "house" within the Law and that it
was not owned in excess of the permitted number of houses in view of the fact
that the appellant and his family were entitled to seven houses. The Board
therefore ordered the 5th respondent to divest the said premises No. 294,
Kehelpandura Junction. This he purported to do by Order dated 11.01.1980
(marked X7). The petitioner‑respondent who claimed to be the tenant of the

**  739**

 premises, then came into the picture. He filed an application in the Court of
Appeal praying for a Writ of Certiorari quashing the Order of the Board of
Review. The Court of Appeal by its Order delivered on 6.2.1981 quashed both
the Order of the Board and the divesting Order X7 of the 5th Respondent. Hence
this appeal to this Court.

 The first question to be decided is whether premises No. 294, Kehelpandura
Junction, Udupila Road, is a house within the meaning of section 47 of the
Property Law. It defines "House" thus ‑

 "house" means an independent living unit, whether assessed or not for the
purpose of levying rates, constructed mainly or solely for residential
purposes, and having a separate access, and through which unit access cannot
be had to any other living accommodation, and includes a flat or tenement,
but, shall not include

 (1)        sub‑divisions of, or extensions to, a house which was first
occupied as a single unit of residence; and

(2)        a house used mainly or solely for a purpose other than a
residential purpose for an uninterrupted period of ten years prior to March 1,
1972;"

 The test is whether this is an "independent living unit", "constructed mainly
or solely for residential purposes". The petitioner‑respondent states that for
very many years prior to the 13th January, 1973,, these premises had been
occupied as a residence by him and before him by his parents and grand
parents. The test must be an objective one and not, as contended by the
petitioner‑respondent (now represented by the 1st substituted respondent) a
subjective one. It's construction and the purpose of the construction is what
matters.

 A description of the building has been given by witness K.J.W.Perera, Private
Assessor, before the Board of Review. His description of the building is as
follows:

 "The front doors of the premises were plank doors about 6" broad. There were
about 27 such planks which made up the front door. In the middle there was a
pillar. There were two door frames About 12'x 10' and 12'x 6'. There were no
doors fixed with hinges. The front door was a boutique type door On entering
the premises there is a hail about 6' broad and 26' long. About 3 planks of
the front door were open and the other planks were closed 'at the time I went
for the

**740**

 inspection. There were no rooms inside the premises but there was a wooden
partition. partitioning the hall into two portions. The walls are of brick
masonry. There is no lavatory to the premises. It was an attached temporary
kitchen built out of wood and the roof was of cadjan. There were two small
windows near the roof. These two windows were about 14' high quite near the
roof and these windows had no panes."

 This building has no rooms, no lavatory, and no doors the entrance was
provided with 27 planks each 6" in width, which type is common to wayside
boutiques in this country. It is situated at the junction It is clear to my
mind that this was a typical wayside boutique constructed for the purpose of
business. It is not a house within the meaning of section 47 of the Property
Law, and therefore did not vest in the 5th respondent. The existence or
absence of a declaration under the provisions of section 8 has little bearing
on the question of vesting.

The events that followed unnecessarily complicated matters. The whole matter
flew off at a tangent. The 5th respondent claimed it as vested property. He
had no right to it. But there, appears to have been some sort of inquiry by
him followed by communications dated 26.06.1975 and 30.06.1975 (X4). The
appellant then appealed to the Board of Review in terms of the provisions of
section 39 of the Property Law. There was no "decision or determination made
by the Commissioner" under the provisions of the Law. Hence there was no right
of appeal to the Board of Review. In the absence of such decision or
determination the Board could not have entertained such appeal and therefore
its proceedings and order were devoid of jurisdiction. The entire exercise
from beginning to end was. a futile one. I would therefore quash the Order of
the Board and declare that the contention of the 5th respondent that it was
vested property (X4) has no legal consequences whatsoever. Premises No. 294,
Kehelpandura Junction, Udupila Road, did not vest in the 5th respondent in
terms of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law.

The appellant will be entitled to costs of this appeal and the proceedings
before the Court of Appeal.

**COLIN ‑THOME, J.** ‑ I agree.

**SOZA, J**. ‑ I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/11.html_  

