##  Colombage v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation - SLR - 150, Vol 3 of 1999
[1993] LKSC 13; (1999) 3 Sri LR 150 (25 June 1993)

**150**

**COLOMBAGE  
v.  
CEYLON PETROLEUM CORPORATION**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,

KULATUNGA, J.,  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. NO. 6/93.

LT NO. 8/2928/89.  
JANUARY 28, 1993.  
MAY 14, 1993.

Industrial Disputes Act \- Section 36 (4) - Termination - Assaulting a fellow
workman - Finding on inadmissible hearsay - Evidence Ordinance._

**Held:**

1\. A Labour Tribunal is not bound by the provisions of the Evidence
Ordinance.

2\. However, s. 36 (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act does not permit a Labour
Tribunal to act in total disregard of one of the fundamental principles
underlying the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance.

3\. Inadmissible hearsay is excluded on the plainest considerations of
fairness and justice, for it is material upon which no reliance could be
placed. A Labour Tribunal is clearly under a duty to judicially evaluate the
evidentiary material placed before it.

**APPEAL** from the High Court of Colombo.

**Case referred to:**

_Ceylon Transport Board v. Ceylon Transport Workers' Union - 71 NLR 158 at
163._

_R. B. Seneviratne for applicant-appellant._

_Bimal Rajapakse with Yasalal Kodithuwakku for respondent-respondent._

_ _

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._

**151**

June 25, 1993.  
**DE SILVA, CJ.**

The services of one Colombage, a labourer employed at the Ceylon Petroleum
Corporation (respondent) were terminated on the ground that he had assaulted a
fellow workman named Gunaratne while on duty and caused serious injury.
Colombage made an application to the Labour Tribunal for reinstatement and
backwages. The application was dismissed; the Labour Tribunal held that the
charge was proved. He appealed unsuccessfully to the High Court. He has now
preferred an appeal to this Court.

The injured Gunaratne called to testify before the Labour Tribunal. There was
no evidence whatever, direct or circumstantial, to show that Colombage
assaulted Gunaratne. However, the Labour Tribunal dismissed the application
solely on the basis of a report marked R1 made by an Assistant Security
Officer of the respondent, named Basnayake. R1 contained a summary of
statements alleged to have been made by Colombage, Gunaratne and two other
persons to Basnayake. Though Gunaratne did not give evidence before the Labour
Tribunal, in his statement in R1 he claimed that Colombage assaulted him.
Moreover, R1 contained a statement of one Abeywardena who claimed that he saw
Colombage assaulting Gunaratne. Abeywardena too was not called as a witness
before the Labour Tribunal.

Thus, on a scrutiny of the report R1, it is clear that the Labour Tribunal has
reached the finding that the charge against Colombage has been established
purely on inadmissible hearsay. No doubt a Labour Tribunal is not bound by the
provisions of the Evidence Ordinance (s. 36 (4) of the Industrial Disputes
Act). Tennekoon, J. (as he then was) in Ceylon Transport Board v. Ceylon
Transport Workers' Union(1) at 163, referred to section 36 (4) and stated:
"This is only intended to permit a Labour Tribunal in its discretion \- which
of course must be exercised reasonably - to admit as evidence all matters
which he considers material even though a court of law would not regard it as
judicial evidence". In my view this section does not permit a Labour Tribunal
to act in total disregard of one of the fundamental principles underlying the
provisions of the Evidence Ordinance. A Labour Tribunal is clearly under a
duty to judicially

**152**

evalute the evidentiary material placed before it. This the Labour Tribunal
has failed to do, for it has acted solely on inadmissible hearsay contained in
R1. Inadmissible hearsay is excluded on the plainest considerations of
fairness and justice, for it is material upon which no reliance could be
placed. The evidentiary value of R1 is nil.

The resulting position is that the Labour Tribunal has reached a finding
against the workman for which there is no evidence. This, clearly, is an error
of law; the High Court erred in refusing to disturb the finding of the Labour
Tribunal on the ground that there was no error of law.

The order of the Labour Tribunal and the' judgment of the High Court are
accordingly set aside and the appeal is allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 500. 1
direct that the workman be reinstated with backwages.

Counsel for the respondent has stated in his written submissions that the
terminal salary was Rs. 952/50 per month according to the personal file of the
workman. The date of interdiction was 18.03.1987. The backwages payable would
be for a period of 76 months, and would amount to Rs. 952/50 x 7 Rs. 72,390.
The workman may be reinstated on or before 18th July, 1993.

As an alternative to reinstatement, it is open to the respondent to pay in
addition to the backwages amounting to the aforesaid sum of Rs. 72,390, a sum
of Rs. 952/50 x 12 = Rs. 11,430 as compensation. The quantum of compensation
is limited to a period of one year, owing to the special facts and
circumstances of this case; the proceedings reveal that Gunaratne had
sustained a serious injury while at work and his failure to testify before the
Labour Tribunal was due to threats directed at him. The respondent is directed
to deposit the money payable to the workman with the Assistant Commissioner of
Labour, Colombo South Labour Secretariat, on or before 31.08.1993.

**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/13.html_  

