##  Hunter and Company Ltd. v. The Minister of Labour and Vocational Training
and Others - SLR - 337, Vol 1 of 1997 [1987] LKSC 1; (1997) 1 Sri LR 337 (6
November 1987)

_**337** ** **_

**HUNTER AND COMPANY LTD.**

**v.**

**THE MINISTER OF LABOUR AND VOCATIONAL TRAINING  
AND OTHERS  
 **



SUPREM COURT.

DHEERARATNE, J.,

ANANDACOOMARASWAY, J. AND

DR. GUNAWARDANA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 65/95

S.L. SLA NO. 102/95

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 157/93

MARCH 14, APRIL 9, AND MAY **** 5, 1997.



_Industrial dispute ‑ Repudiation of a Collective Agreement under Section 8(1)
of the Industrial Disputes Act ‑ Whether the implied terms of the Agreement
continue to be in force ‑ Applicability of the doctrine of respect for
acquired rights ‑ Whether the Arbitrator's Award is Just and Equitable._



The Employers' Federation of Ceylon, acting on behalf of a number of
employers, including the appellant‑company, entered into a Collective
Agreement with the 4th respondent Union. The Employers' Federation repudiated
the said Collective Agreement in so far as it related to the appellant‑company
by Notice dated 6.11.1987. The appellant‑company itself gave notice of
repudiation on 13.11.1987. The Commissioner of Labour published a Notice in
the Government Gazette stating that the said Collective Agreement has ceased
to be of force with effect from 1.1.1988, in so far as the appellant‑company
is concerned. Although the said Collective Agreement was repudiated by the
appellant‑company with effect from 1.1.1988, it continued to pay the NRCOLG
allowance to its workmen, for a further period of 1 year 3 months i.e. till
April 1989.



The appellant‑company entered into a Memorandum of Settlement with the Branch
Union of the 4th Respondent Union, on 28th April 1989, and thereafter
discontinued the payment of the said NRCOLG allowance. The parent Union
disowned the said Memorandum of Settlement by letter dated 24th November 1989.



The 1st respondent referred the dispute for arbitration to 3rd respondent in
regard to the non‑payment of the said NRCOLG allowance and the terms of
remuneration of the clerical, supervisory and allied staff employed by the
appellant‑company.



The 3rd respondent by his Award held that the repudiation of the said
Collective Agreement did not bring "the statutory implied terms" to an end.
Further he ordered the payment of the said NRCOLG allowance, and approved the
said terms of remuneration of the said staff, as set out in the said
Agreement, on the basis that such payments were just and equitable.

338

  **Held:**



(1) (Dheeraratne, J. dissenting) That there was evidence before the Arbitrator
that NRCOLG allowance was paid to the workmen for nearly 1 year and 3 months,
even after the repudiation of the said Collective Agreement by the
appellant-­company. It was also the evidence of the appellant‑company's
Personnel Manager that the Company realised that, to stop the NRCOLG allowance
the Company needed to have an Agreement with employees. In the absence of an
Agreement the Company continued to pay the NRCOLG allowance, till the
Memorandum of Settlement was signed. Hence the workmen can be said to have
acquired a right for the continued payment of the said NRCOLG allowance.



**_Per_** **Gunawardana, J.** "The concept of 'acquired rights' is based on
the recognition of the sanctity of property rights under a particular
municipal legal system. Thus the recognition of the continuation of the
"Statutory implied terms", under the said Collective Agreement, will be in
conformity, with the doctrine of respect for acquired rights."



(2) (Unanimously) That it was just and equitable for the Arbitrator to have
held that, the repudiation of the Collective Agreement did not bring the
"Statutory implied" terms to an end.



(3) (Unanimously) That the deprivation of the rights and privileges of the
workmen, was an unfair labour practice.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of Court of Appeal. __

_ _

_Faisz Musthapha, P.C._ with _Anil Silva_ and _Sanjeewa Jayawardana_ for the
petitioner‑appellant.

_ _

_Gomin Dayasiri_ with _Aravinda R.I. Athurupane_ for the 4th
respondent‑respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



June 16, 1997\.  


**DR.** **GUNAWARDANA, J.**



The Employers' Federation of Ceylon acting on behalf of a number of employers
including the appellant‑company, entered into a Collective Agreement (P1) with
the 4th respondent Union, on 20th November 1981. The said Collective Agreement
whilst comprehensively covering the terms and conditions of the employment
dealt with in particular the following:‑



(a) the consolidation of salaries, (Clause 13).  


(b) the payment of a non‑recurring cost of living gratuity (NRCOLG) (Clause
15) and  


(c) the modalities for the revision of salaries. (Clause 13(6)).

339



The Employers' Federation repudiated the said Collective Agreement insofar as
it related to the appellant‑company by Notice dated 6.11.1987 (P3). The
appellant‑company itself gave notice of the repudiation on 13.11.1987 (P2).
The Commissioner of Labour published a Notice in the Government Gazette
stating that the said Collective Agreement has ceased to be of force with
effect from 1.1.1988, insofar as the appellant‑company is concerned. Although
the said Collective Agreement was repudiated by the appellant-­company with
effect from 1.1.1988, it continued to pay the NRCOLG allowance to its workmen,
for a further period of 1 year and 3 months i.e. till April 1989.



On 28th April 1989 the appellant‑company entered into a Memorandum of
Settlement (P5) with the Branch Union of the 4th respondent Union, purporting
to act under Section 12 of the Industrial Disputes Act. It is significant to
note that this Memorandum was not signed by the office bearers of the parent
Union but was signed by three workmen of the appellant‑company, purporting to
act on behalf of the parent Union. The parent Union by letter dated 24th
November 1989 (P6) disowned the said Memorandum of Settlement, and informed
the appellant‑company that the 'persons who signed the said Memorandum of
Settlement were not authorised by the parent Union to do so.



The 1st respondent referred the dispute for arbitration by the 3rd respondent,
at first, in the following terms. (P8).



"The matter in dispute between the aforesaid parties is whether the
non‑payment of cost of living gratuity to employees who are members of the
Ceylon Mercantile Industrial and General Workers Union with effect from
September 1987 by the Management of M/S Hunter & Co. Ltd. is justified and to
what relief each of them is entitled."



During the pendency of the said arbitration, the 1st respondent referred, a
further matter, for arbitration in the following terms. (P13).



"(2) what should be the terms of remuneration of the clerical, supervisory and
allied staff employed at M/S Hunter & Co. Ltd."

340  


 The item (1) referred to arbitration by P13 is identical to the matter
referred for arbitration by P8. The second reference was taken up for
arbitration along with the first, with the consent of the parties, and an
award was made in favour of the 4th respondent Union in respect of both
matters referred for arbitration. The appellant‑company being aggrieved by the
said award made an application for a Writ of Certiorari, to the Court of
Appeal to have the said award quashed. The Court of Appeal by its judgment
dated 13.2.1995 (P23) dismissed the application of the appellant‑company.
Thereafter the appellant‑company made an application for Special Leave to
Appeal to this Court and leave to appeal was granted against the said judgment
of the Court of Appeal.



The learned Counsel for the appellant‑company pointed out that the Court of
Appeal in its judgment has held that, "the repudiation of the Collective
Agreement did not bring the implied contracts of employment that was in
existence at the time the Collective Agreement was in force, to naught, but
the conditions remained till a new contract of employment was brought into
force." This conclusion he submitted was untenable in law in view of the
provisions of Section 8(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act which reads as
follows:‑



"8 (1) Every Collective Agreement which is for the time being in force shall,
for the purposes of this Act be binding on the parties, trade Unions,
employers and workmen referred to in that agreement in accordance with the
provisions of Section 5(2); and the terms of the agreement shall be implied
terms in the contract of employment between the employers and workmen bound by
the agreement."



The learned Counsel for the appellant‑company further submitted that the said
conclusion reached by the Court of Appeal set at naught, the legislative
injunction that, terms of the Collective Agreement shall be implied terms in
the contract of employment only so long as the Collective Agreement is, "for
the time being in force" and that too in respect of workman, "bound by the
agreement." He argued that in the instant case, since there is a valid
repudiation of the said Collective Agreement under Section 9 of the Industrial
Disputes Act, the implied terms **** of contract of employment in terms of

**341  
 **

the said Collective Agreement, which had been repudiated, would cease to have
effect.  


 The learned Counsel for the 4th respondent submitted that the said Section
8(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act is separated into two limbs by a
semicolon. The first limb of Section 8(1) accomplished two purposes. The first
limb firstly speaks as to "who" are bound by a Collective Agreement and
secondly as to, "during when", they would be so bound. In the first limb, only
the Collective Agreement is spoken of. The words, "which is for the time being
in force" occur in the first limb which is separated by a semicolon from the
second limb. Therefore, he argued that, those words do not apply to the second
limb of Section 8(1). The function of those words is to specify during which
time the Collective Agreement shall be binding on the parties to the
Collective Agreement. It is most vital to note that the words, "Contract of
Employment" do not occur in the 1st limb of Section 8(1). He added that, the
second limb of Section 8(1) speaks as to the terms of the Collective Agreement
being made "statutorily implied terms" in the contracts of employment between
the employer and workman. The second Section 8(1) has the words, "employers
and workmen bound by the agreement." These words he submitted are there to
specify or describe whose contracts of employment are affected by the
provision, and not for the purpose of limiting the applicability of the
implied terms, to any period within which the Collective Agreement itself is
to be in force. Those words are only descriptive as to whose contracts of
employment are dealt with by the second limb of Section 8(1).



The learned Counsel for the 4th respondent contended that if the legislature
intended to provide that once the Collective Agreement is repudiated the,
"statutory implied terms" also should cease to have effect, then it would
have, in its wisdom, expressly stated so. It is to be noted that Industrial
Disputes Act does not expressly state so. He submitted that if the
"statutorily implied terms" ceased to apply with the repudiation of the
Collective Agreement, the workmen would be without terms and conditions in
their contracts of employment until a fresh Collective Agreement is entered
into. There is much substance in that argument of the learned Counsel for the
4th respondent.

342  


Furthermore the Court of Appeal in its judgment has referred to the practical
difficulty that would arise if the repudiation is to be treated as abrogating
"statutory implied terms". It has pointed out that according to Clause 13(4)
of the Collective Agreement, the consolidated salaries payable under the
Agreement included the allowances received by employees prior to the said
Collective Agreement, and it's specifically stated in the Collective Agreement
that the allowances set out at Clause 13(4) (a) to (e) would not be payable,
after the Collective Agreement came into effect. Similarly, clause 14 of the
Collective Agreement sets out the conversion scales of the consolidated
salaries. In that context, the Court of Appeal has observed that, "If the
submission of the learned Counsel is accepted, with the repudiation of P1 then
all the conditions in clause 13(4) would have to be reintroduced and all the
benefits that was bestowed by one would be made nugatory. (pages 10 and 11 of
P23).



In this regard it is pertinent to refer to the observation made by S.R. de
Silva in his book titled, "Legal Framework of Industrial Relations" at pages
94 which states as follows:‑



"At the termination of a Collective Agreement in terms of Section 9 of the
Industrial Disputes Act the Agreement ceases to have statutory effect under
the first part (limb) of Section 8(1), but would continue to form part of the
contract of employment of each of the workmen who were bound by it since the
provisions of the agreement have been incorporated into such contracts of
employment by the latter part (2nd limb) of Section 8(1)."



There was evidence before the Arbitrator that, NRCOLG allowance was paid to
the workmen for nearly 1 year and 3 months, even after the repudiation of the
said Collective Agreement by the appellant­-company. It was also the evidence
of the appellant‑company's Personnel Manager that the Company realised that,
to stop NRCOLG allowance the Company needed to have an agreement with the
employees. (Page 41) and that in the absence of an agreement the Company
continued to pay the NRCOLG allowance (Page 41), till the Memorandum of
Settlement was signed. (Page 30). Hence the workmen can be said to have
acquired a right for the continued payment of the said NRCOLG allowances. In
that context in my view

**343  
 **

it is appropriate to consider this issue in light of the doctrine of respect
for acquired rights. The doctrine of respect for "acquired rights" or "vested
rights" has gained recognition as a general principle of law both in Municipal
law and in International law. In considering this doctrine I will first turn
to the question as to what is meant by "acquired rights". Although there is no
uniformity in various municipal legal systems in regard to the character and
content of acquired rights, broadly "rights" may be divided into two
categories viz. "property" rights and "personal" rights. "Property" rights in
general will not be limited to only real or movable property, but will also
include rights _in_ _rem_ in tangible and intangible goods and contractual
rights, whose content is economic. "Personal" rights relate to moral or
political matters. O 'Connell in his book International Law. Vol. 2 (Second
Edition ‑ London 1970) at Page 763 defines acquired rights as, "Acquired
rights are any right, corporal or incorporal, property vested under the
municipal law in a natural or juristic person and of an assessable monetary
value." The concept of "acquired rights" is based on the recognition of the
sanctity of property rights under a particular Municipal legal system. Thus
the recognition of the continuation of the "statutory implied terms" under the
Collective Agreement, will be in conformity, with the doctrine of respect for
acquired rights.



In view of all the matters discussed above, I hold that it was just and
equitable for the Arbitrator to have held that repudiation of the Collective
Agreement did not bring "the statutory implied terms" to an end, but that they
continued to remain valid till a new contract of employment is brought into
force.



The learned Counsel for the appellant‑company also contended that the
Arbitrator erred in law in holding in the Award that, the repudiation of the
said Collective Agreement _per se_ was an unfair labour practice. The learned
Counsel for the 4th respondent submitted that there is no such finding
anywhere in the said Award (P21). The learned Counsel for the 4th respondent
added that it was the deprivation of the rights and privileges of the workmen
who were bound by the Collective Agreement that was held to be an unfair
labour practice, and cited page 5 of the Award (P21). He pointed out that, the
Arbitrator has examined the circumstances under which the

**344  
 **

said rights and privileges were deprived of namely, by entering into a
purported memorandum of settlement by the appellant‑company with two committee
members of the 4th respondent Trade Union's Branch at the appellant's company.
The Arbitrator has referred to the fact that the "parent Union" i.e. the 4th
respondent, had not been notified before or after the said settlement was
signed. It is stated in the said Award that, the, "two signatories on behalf
of the Union has been unjustly benefited by consenting to sign the settlement.
"The evidence of the Personnel Manager of the appellant‑company led before the
Arbitrator show that, one Kulawansa, who was one of the signatories to the
said settlement, was given a promotion after the said settlement, from the
Clerical Grade to the Executive Grade and a salary increase of about Rs.
1000/‑ to Rs. 1500/‑. One Grenier, who was another signatory to the said
settlement was given an extension of service, although he was over 60 years of
age, at that time, and also received a salary increase of about Rs. 640/‑. The
third signatory to the said settlement, one Vitharana, was given a salary
increase of Rs. 346/‑, although he was a mental patient, and was hospitalised
in that regard. After reviewing the evidence, the Arbitrator had come to the
conclusion that, "If the company had effected this settlement with the Branch
Union behind the back of the Parent Union, the Company will have to blame
itself for this irregularity. As such it is my view that this memorandum of
settlement should be rejected."



The Court of Appeal after careful consideration of the facts and circumstances
of the case also came to the conclusion that the, "said purported settlement
was an unfair labour practice adopted by the petitioner."



Furthermore the learned Counsel for the 4th respondent drew our attention to
the following relevant points from the evidence of the said Personnel Manager
of the appellant's company.



(i) that the Employers' Federation of Ceylon, the appellant's Trade Union,
conceded **** that the Memorandum of Settlement was not valid ‑ page 68.



(ii) that the Company realised that, to stop NRCOLG the Company needed to have
an agreement with the employees. (Page 41).

345



(iii) that in the absence of such an agreement the Company continued to pay
NRCOLG (despite the repudiation of the Collective Agreement). (Page 41).



(iv) that NRCOLG was being paid up to April 1989 (even after the repudiation
in November 1987) and that with the said settlement the NRCOLG was stopped.
(Page 30).



(v) that the Company had declared 30% profit dividend. (Page 30).



(vi) that NRCOLG was stopped not because of financial incapacity.(Page 34).



(vii) that NRCOLG is about Rs. 300/‑ to Rs. 400/‑ per person per month. (Page
35).



(viii) that NRCOLG is a payment made to the workman (each month) to cushion
the effects of rising cost of living. (Page 36).



The learned Counsel for the 4th respondent submitted that upon a consideration
of the above items of evidence it is apparent that Award made by the
Arbitrator is just and equitable as envisaged under the provisions of Section
17 of the Industrial Disputes Act.



In the circumstances I see no basis to interfere with finding of the
Arbitrator, and affirmed by the Court of Appeal, that the deprivation of the
rights and privileges of the workmen, was an unfair labour practice.



Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 5000/‑, to be
paid to the 4th respondent.



**DHEERARATNE, J.**



I agree with my brother Gunawardana, J. that the order made by the Arbitrator
is just and equitable in the circumstances and that the appeal should be
dismissed. However, I have my reservations on that part of his reasoning based
on the "acquired rights" of workmen.



**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. ‑ **I **** agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/1.html_  

