##  Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. v. Sri Nandalochana and Another - SLR - 254, Vol 2
of 1989 [1988] LKSC 15; (1989) 2 Sri LR 254 (14 December 1988)

**

254

CEYLON COLD STORES LTD.  
v.  
SRI NANDALOCHANA AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
RANASINGHE, C.J., G.P.S. DE SILVA, J., AND JAMEEL, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 43/87  
CA (LA-SC) 8/87  
CA 621/81  
LT 2/15052/81  
SC APPEAL 44/87  
CA (LA-SC) 9/87  
CA 622/81  
LT 2/15053/81  
NOVEMBER 09, 1988

_

industrial Dispute - Gratuity_ \- _Is gratuity payable to an employee who
resigns? -Payment of Gratuities Act, No. 12 of 1983, ss. 3, 5 and 6 -
Computation during period before the Act.

_

(1) The Gratuities Act. No. 12 of 1983 certified on 18.03.83 regulates and
prescribes the mode and computation of gratuity after its passage. During the
period before the Act came into operation the principles governing the
computation of gratuity are as follows:

(a) A month's salary for each year of service when there has been no benefit
of a Provident Fund.

(b) Half a month's salary for each year of service as gratuity when there has
been a contribution to a Provident Fund at the minimum statutory rate.

When the employer has made contributions considerably higher than the
statutory rates, gratuity awards which are relatively less have been made.

(2) Gratuity is payable even on resignation and notwithstanding the fact that
the workman had been contributing to a Provident Fund Scheme. The gratuity
ordered must be just and equitable.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

(1) Karunaratne _v _Appuhamy_ 74 NLR 46

_

(2) Employees Union_ v. _CWE_ 74 NLR 344

_

(3) N.U.M _v. _Scottish Tea Co Ltd._ 78 NLR 133

_

(4) Boyd Moss _v. _George Stuat & Co. Ltd. _S.C. 119/74; Supreme Court Minutes
24 03 76

(5) _Silva_ v. _Southern Freighters_ 74 NLR 239

_

(6) Y G. Silva _v. _A.N.C.L. Bar Association I.J._ Reports Vol. I Part III p.
87

_

(7) Wickremasekera v. Ganegoda _76 NLR 452

**255**

_

(8) Ran Banda _v. _Ft. V.D.B._ 71 NLR 25

_

(9) RVDB _v. _Sheriff_ S.C. Minutes of 24.11.1971

(10) _CWE_ v. Superintendent Beragala Estate S.C. Minutes of 03.02.72

_

(11) U.P.W.U. _v. _Kaliappa -_ Sri Lanka Labour Gazette No. 52 of 23.03.72

_

(12) Mayen (Ceylon) Tea & Rubber Co. Ltd. _v. _C.E.S.U._ \- S.C. 13/71: S.C.
Minutes of 16.10.72

_

(13) U.E.W.U. _v. _Kandiah Chetty -_ S.C. 81/72: S.C. Minutes 12.02.72

_

(14) C.E.S.U. _v. _Ambalamana Tea Estates Ltd._ \- Sri Lanka Labour Gazette
No. 13 of 23.06.72, 76 NLR 457

(15) Peiris v. _A.C.C. & I.W.U. _S.C. 34/72 - S.C. Minutes of 29.01.74

(16) Swadeshi Industrial Works Ltd. v. _De Silva 11_ NLR 211

_

(17) H.W. Amarasuriya _v C.F.S.: C.A. (S.C.) 254/75 Court of Appeal Minutes of
17.11.80

_

(18) R.V.D.B. _v. All Ceylon R.V.D.B. 8 State Corporation General Employees
Union et al : S.C. Application 29/83 - S.C. Minutes of 20.03.84

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Crossette Tambiah _for appellant

_

D.R.P. Goonetilleke _with _Sidath Sri Nandalochana_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 14, 1988

**

JAMEEL, J.

**

Mr. Nandaiochana, the Applicant in S/C43/87 had been an employee of the
Appellant for twenty years and had resigned his post of Marketing Manager on
31.3.81 in order to better his prospects. At the time of resignation he was
drawing a salary of Rs. 4725/- a month and was a contributor to the Provident
Fund. He had to his credit, at the time of resignation, a sum of Rs.
311,013/80, out of which sum of Rs. 97,409/25 had been, admittedly, the
contribution made by the Employer-Appellant. The Applicant had filed action in
the Labour Tribunal in December 1981 claiming gratuity, as none had been
awarded to him by the Appellant.

Similarly, Mr. Wijesinghe, the Applicant in S.C. 44/87 had been an employee
under the Appellant for 17 years and he too had resigned his post of Assistant
Factory Manager on 1.2.81 in order to better his own prospects. He had then
been in receipt of a salary of Rs. 3100/-per month. His Provident Fund account
stood at Rs. 141,446/31, out

**256**

of which the Employer-Appellant's contribution had been Rs. 32,590/-. He too
had been refused a gratuity payment and had thereupon gone to the Labour
Tribunal in June 1981.

Of consent of parties, both cases had been taken up together on 24/8/81 at the
Labour Tribunal. The questions that had arisen in each case were whether
gratuity was due, and, if so, in what amount-Each party had been directed to
file written submissions on these matters in each case. The employer had done
so in each case. The learned President of the Labour Tribunal had made a
consolidated order, rejecting their claims. Both Applicants appealed and the
Court of Appeal, after due hearing, made a consolidated order granting
Applicant Nandalochana Rs. 47,250/- and Applicant Wijesinghe Rs. 27,350/- as
gratuity, based on a computation of HALF a months salary at termination for
each year of service.

These appeals are by the employer from that decision. Leave to appeal to this
Court had been granted to each of these Appellants by the Court of Appeal
itself. In this Court, too, of consent, both cases were argued together and
one consolidated order is being made in respect of them.

It is not without significance that each of these applicants went before the
Tribunal claiming that they had retired from service when in fact they had
resigned, presumably that was because there did exist at that time a measure
of ambiguity and uncertainty as to whether gratuity will be available to the
worker who resigns his job. Indeed the Employer in these cases, in the answer
filed by him. has taken up that position, namely, that in practice no gratuity
is paid to those who resign their posts vide _Karunaratne v. Appuhamy (1),
Employees Union v. C.W.E.(2).

_

After a careful analysis of the law and the reported precedents the learned
President held that in the circumstances gratuity is payable even on
resignation - vide _N.U.M. v. Scottish Tea Co. Ltd.{3); Boyd Moss v. George
Stuart & Co. Ltd. _ (4).

The learned President also held that gratuity was available notwithstanding
the fact that the workman had been contributing to a Provident Fund Scheme.
The Court of Appeal affirmed these findings and we see no reason to differ.
_(Scottish Tea Co. Case_ \- _supra)_ This does reflect the current thinking on
this matter. (Vide _Silva v. Southern Freighters (5); Y.G. de Silva v._
AA/.C.L (6)

**257**

However, the Learned President granted no relief to either Applicant as the
quantum of the Appellant's contribution to the Provident Fund was held by him
to be

".... Almost PHENOMENAL in comparison to what an average middle grade employee
could ever hope to get after a much longer period of service."

On and after 18/3/83 (the date of the certification of the Act) by Section 5
of the Payment of Gratuities Act, No. 12 of 1983 every employer in Industry
who employs more than 15 workmen, shall pay to a workman on termination of his
services fit he had worked for more than 5 years) a gratuity. The
parenthetical clause in this section makes the question as to whether the
termination had been due to an act of the employer or worker or whether it had
been on retirement or on death or by operation of law or otherwise, irrelevant
to the grant of gratuity.

The terms of the section itself precludes it from being treated as
retroactive. Indeed, Mr. Crossette-Thambiah, who appeared for the Employer not
only conceded that after the Act the resignation of a workman would be
irrelevant to the consideration as to whether he is entitled to claim gratuity
but he also did not seriously challenge the findings of the learned President
or of the Court of Appeal that these two Applicants were entitled to claim
gratuity notwithstanding the fact that they had resigned their posts. The mode
of computation of gratuity is spelled out in Section 6 of the Act. For monthly
rated workmen it is half a month's salary per year of service, provided that
besides other matters he is not entitled to a pension under a non-
contributable pension scheme. The Act does not disqualify a workman who is
involved in a contributable Provident Fund. By contrast, in the case of
workmen and labour on estates and agricultural lands that are specified in the
Act, Section 3, grants gratuity at the rates specified therein LESS the
employer's contribution to the Provident Fund if any.

An important question for decision in these appeals is the mode of evaluation
of the quantum of gratuity to which each of these applicants becomes entitled.
The basis will have to be in accordance with the law and practice which
obtained in 1981 - viz. prior to the Gratuities Act. Mr. Crossette-Thambiah
went even further and argued that, should it be found that the order of the
learned President accordance with the law as it stood, then, neither should
the Court of

**258**

Appeal have substituted, nor should this Court, substitute its discretion for
that of the President, in fixing the quantum of the gratuity payable, A
measure of support for this proposition could be found in the decision of
Rajaratnam J. in Wickremasekera v. Ganegoda (7)

The facts of that case are as follows:-

In the case of _Ran Banda v. R.V.D.B.(8)_ Weeramantry, J. had held that
Regulation 16 framed by the Minister under the Industrial Disputes Act was
ultra vires the Act and that a workman could file his application in the
Labour Tribunal even after the lapse of three months of the date of the
termination of his services. However, a Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court
in the case of _R.V.D.B. v. Sheriff (9)_ overruled that decision on 24/11/71.
That Divisional Bench decision itself was later overruled by the Court of
Appeal in _C.W.E. v. Superintendent, Beragala Estate_ (10). In respect of all
applications filed before the Labour Tribunals between 24/11/71 and 3/2/73 the
law was that the time bar of three months applied to all applications to the
Labour Tribunals, although the regulation was held to be ultra vires on the
latter date. During that 15 months period several cases had been disposed of
on the basis of the Divisional Bench ruling. The case that came up before
Rajaratnam J. Was (76 NLR 452(8)) for a writ to quash on order of dismissal
made on 14/9/72 based on the Divisional Bench ruling. The learned Judge
refused the writ on the ground that, that case had been correctly decided by
the Tribunal according to the law that prevailed at the time of its decision.

What then was the law or judicial consensus in 1981? How was the quantum of
gratuity, granted at the termination of services on  resignation, being
computed?

In some instances this gratuity was calculated at one month pay for every year
of service (Vide: 1 C.A.L.R - 1 - 92J.S.R. de Silva in his book "Some Concepts
of Labour Law" at page 43 made reference to the case of _U.P.W.U. v. Kaliappa_
(11) (the report is not available to us) published in Sri Lanka Labour Gazette
No. 52 of 23/3/73 wherein the same rate was granted for the period of service
not covered by Provident Fund contributions. However, in the case of _Mayen
(Ceylon) Tea & Rubber Co. Ltd. v. C.E.S.U. _ (12) the gratuity calculated at
the rate of one month per year of service was made

**259**

subject to the deduction from it of the amount contributed by the Employer to
the Provident Fund.

At page 44 of this same book there is reference to the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of _U.E.W.U. v. Kandiah_ Chetty (13) wherein one month per
year of service was granted for the period not covered by Provident Fund
benefits, while only HALF a month or year was the basis used for the period
during which the employer had made contributions to the Provident Fund. On
this same page there is reference to the decision of the learned President in
the case of _C.E.S.U. v. Ambalamana Tea Estate_ Ltd (14) as follows:-

....in deciding on the quantum of gratuity that has to be paid, one factor
that the Tribunal has to bear in mind is the Provident Fund contribution made
by the employer.... The generally accepted standard has been to pay a month's
salary for each year of service where there has been no such benefits and a
half month's salary where such contributions have been made at the minimum
statutory rates. Where contributions have been considerably higher it has not
been unusual for awards to be relatively less, the principle followed, no
doubt, being what was considered just and equitable."

A Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court endorsed the award of the Arbitrator.
(76 NLR 457). in _Peiris v, ACC & _/M/L/(15) (Vide: page 44 of De Silva's book
- supra) the Supreme Court held that the learned President of the Labour
Tribunal should have deducted the E.P.F. contributions made by the Employer.

A collation of these decisions leads to the conclusions that

(a) Receipt of Provident Fund benefits does not necessarily preclude the grant
of gratuity as well - _SeeiSwadeshi Industrial Works Ltd. v. De_ Silva (16)  
  
(b) Employer is entitled to credit of his contributions to Provident Funds.

After stating "....the true test being the adequacy of existing super
annuation benefits rather than its mere existence." Mr. S.R. de Silva sums up
at page 45 as follows:

**

"INDUSTRIAL SECTOR

**

(a) minimum qualifying period for gratuity....

(b) The scale of gratuity to be 1 month's gross terminal salary

**260**

for every year of service less the employer's contribution to the Provident
Fund."

It must be remembered that the award would have to be just and equitable, in
all the circumstances of the case.

Taking into account ail the material before him the learned President decided
in these two cases that neither of these Applicants should receive any further
payments as the employers 'Phenomenal' contribution exceeded the gratuity that
may be payable when calculated at the rate of one month's gross terminal
salary as at the time of the resignation from service.

The learned President however, failed to consider the possibility of granting
a gratuity payment in addition to any superannuation benefits derived from the
Provident Funds. The provision of such double benefits was considered with
favour in Meyen (Ceylon) Tea & Rubber Co. Ltd. v. C.E.S.U.(supra) wherein it
was held: (Vide: S.R. De Silva's book - supra - at page 43) that, an employee
who had rendered long and faithful service earns a moral right to a gratuity
in addition to the Provident Fund, and that it should be paid in the absence
of financial incapacity on the part of the employer to bear the double burden.
The burden of establishing his inability to bear this double burden is on the
employer. That would be a matter within his personal knowledge. There is no
evidence in these cases that the Appellant suffers any such incapacity. As
contemplated in the decision in the Ambalamana Case, (supra) it is not the
total Provident Fund contribution that would be relevant, in quantifying the
gratuity that would be payable, whenever a payment is found to be due, but
whether and in that event in what sum the employer had contributed in excess
of his statutory obligation. As rightly pointed out by the Court of Appeal
there was no evidence or proof before the Tribunal as to the minimum
contribution that had been due from the employer to the Provident Fund, and as
a result it was not possible to compute the excess so paid. There was no
denial by these workmen of the accuracy of the figures submitted by the
employer as to the total contribution made to each of their Provident Fund
accounts. The burden of proving such excess payments is on the employer. In
the absence of such proof, the learned Judges of the Court of Appeal have
ordered as gratuity payments sums calculated on the basis of half a month's
salary for each year of service. A perusal of their judgment reveals that the
reasoning of the President in the

**261**

Ambalamana Case (supra) had not been available to the judges in the Court of
Appeal. While the decision of Ranasinghe, J. (as he then was) in the case of
H. W. Amarasuriya v. C.F.S. (17) had been cited before the Court of Appeal in
the course of the argument in these two cases, the judgment of Colin-Thome, J.
in S.C. (Application) 29/83 -C.A. 405-406, 457-507, 695-739/1979, S.C.M.
30/3/84 in R.V.D.B. v. All Ceylon R.V.D.B. & State Corporation General
Employees Union et al(18) does not appear to have been made available to that
Court. After an exhaustive analysis of the law and the case law His Lordship
Justice Colin-Thome summarised the position with regard to payment of gratuity
as follows:-

A month's salary for each year of service when there has been no benefit of a
Provident Fund. Half a month's salary for each year of service as gratuity
when there has been a contribution to a Provident Fund at the minimum
statutory rate.

When employer has made contributions considerably higher than the statutory
rates, gratuity awards which are relatively less have been made. We are in
entire agreement with this statement of the law and practice regarding
gratuity payments as it then stood. Those were also cases filed prior to 1981.

In the circumstances the grant of half a month's salary, per year of service,
simplicitor, may not be 'just and equitable' in a situation where it is
admitted that the employer has contributed to the Provident Fund in excess of
the statutory minimum. The Provident Fund Act 15 of 1958 and its amendments by
Acts Nos, 8 of 1971 and 26 of 1981 indicate the percentages of the salary
which the employer is statutorily bound to contribute to the Fund. Yet,
without evidence of the salary particulars of these applicants over the years
we are unable to compute exactly what has been the statutory minimum
contributable from time to time. Consequently we cannot ascertain what part of
the admitted contribution in each of these cases is in excess of its statutory
minimum.

These two cases were filed in 1981 and it would be invidious to send them back
to the Labour Tribunal for further inquiry and for computation, 8 years after
they had been filed. In the circumstances we set aside the order for payment
of. gratuity at the rate of half month's salary, made by the Court of Appeal
in each of these cases,

**262**

and substitute therefore orders for payment at the rate of a quarter month's
salary for each year of service, namely, in a sum of Rs. 23,625/- to Mr.
Nandalochana and a sum-of Rs. 13,675/- to Mr. Wijesinghe. These monies should
be deposited with the Commissioner of Labour within four weeks of today. In
all the circumstances of this case each party will bear its own costs.

**

RANASINGHE. C.J. **\- I agree.

**G.P.S. DE SILVA** \- I **** agree.

_

_

**_Order for gratuity set aside._**

**_Amended gratuity ordered._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/15.html_  

