##  Associated Cables Ltd. v. Kalutarage - SLR - 314, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999]
LKSC 15; (1999) 2 Sri LR 314 (8 July 1999)

**314**

**ASSOCIATED CABLES LTD.  
v.  
KALUTARAGE**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
GUNASEKERA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 102/98  
H.C./A/L.T. NO. 1460/97  
LT. NO. 21114/87  
JUNE 3, 1999

Industrial Dispute - Termination of services - Ground for interfering with
the decision of a Labour Tribunal - Breach of natural justice \- Grant of
compensation in appeal - Duty of the appellate court to give the basis of
computing compensation._

The respondent-workman applied to the Labour Tribunal for relief on the ground
that his services had been constructively terminated by the appellant-employer
on 18. 3. 87 by being refused entry to his work place namely, the factory
owned by the appellant-employer. The workman said in evidence that he was also
humiliated on that occasion and that he promptly made a complaint to the
Piliyandala Police. The employer's position was that the workman had vacated
post by failing to report for work after the incident on 18. 3. 87,
notwithstanding written instructions to resume work. The workman explained
that he did not report for work as he feared being harassed if he resumes work
and that the employer's letters calling upon him to report for work were mala
fide.

After the inquiry into the workman's application at which both parties were
represented by counsel, the Labour Tribunal reserved its order for 25. 04. 97.
On that day the parties were not represented by counsel, but the workman
attended the Tribunal when the Labour Tribunal President called him up from
the well of the Tribunal and questioned him regarding the statement he had
made to the Police. The purpose of that questioning was to test the
credibility of his evidence. After such questioning the President of the
Tribunal decided that there was no unjust termination of services but that the
workman had vacated his post.

315

On an appeal by the workman the High Court reversed the decision of the Labour
Tribunal and held that the termination of services was not justified; and as
the workman did not claim reinstatement, the High Court awarded him
compensation in a sum of Rs. 150,000 on the basis that 10 years had elapsed
since the termination of services.

**Held :**

1\. The procedure adopted by the Labour Tribunal President in questioning the
workman who was unrepresented, on the day fixed for the delivery of the order,
was not lawful as it was in breach of the requirements of natural justice.
Consequently, the decision of the Tribunal was not supported by legal evidence
and the finding was perverse.

2\. The award of compensation to the workman in a sum of Rs.150,000 was bad
for the want of an adequate basis for computing that amount. Instead, the
payment of 3 years' salary would be a just and equitable award of
compensation.

**Cases referred to :**

1. _De Silva and others v. Seneviratne and others_ \- (1981) 2 Sri L.R. 7.  
  
2. _Hatton National Bank v. Perera_ \- (1996) 2 Sri L.R. 231.  
  
3. _Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation_ \- (1995) 2 Sri L.R. 379.

**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the High Court.

_Gomin Dayasiri_ with _Miss Manouri Jinadasa_ for the appellant.

_A. Sri Nammuni_ for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 8, 1999.  
  
**L. H. G. WEERASEKERA, J.**

The President of the Labour Tribunal had concluded that the services of the
applicant-respondent had not been unjustly terminated but that he had vacated
his post upon the basis of certain findings of fact

316

which the applicant-appellant before the High Court contended was so wholly
untenable inasmuch as the President who held judicial office was required to
give both parties a full and clear notice of the case against him, an
opportunity of being represented and stating their cases, sufficient time and
notice, without being taken by surprise when an order had to be made and that
having failed to do so the order was not legally tenable and was unreasonable
and perverse.

The learned High Court Judge by his order dated 26. 03. 98 though at the
beginning of his reasoning directed his mind to this most important aspect
appears to have thereafter examined various questions not relevant to the
matters in issue and regrettably expressed various conflicting views but
concluded finally that the dismissal of the applicant was unreasonable and
wrongful and that the order of the Labour Tribunal was not just and equitable.
Since the applicant-appellant-respondent did not claim reinstatement the High
Court Judge very justifiably proceeded to make order for compensation in
favour of the applicant though regrettably without giving a basis nor reasons
or method of computation.

From this order of the learned High Court Judge the respondent respondent-
petitioner invites intervention of Court, submitting that the reasoning of the
High Court Judge is conflicting and cannot be sustained -

(a) in respect of the question of termination of service.

(b) that no rational basis of computation of compensation has been used to
determine the amount of compensation at Rs. 150,000.

Special leave to appeal was allowed on one question namely,

" _Whether the High Court was justified in interfering with the finding of
fact reached by the Labour Tribunal._ "

The High Court acting as an Appellate Court is invited to review the findings
of the Labour Tribunal President acting as trial Judge on question of facts.

317

In my opinion where the findings on questions of facts are based on the
credibility of .a witness or witnesses on the perception of the trial Judge
though such findings are entitled to great weight and not be lightly dismissed
and deserving the utmost consideration, where the trial Judge has failed by
legal evidence and conduct to satisfy the basic requirements of natural
justice or that the finding is rationally not possible and therefore perverse
then in such a situation the Appellate Court is justified in reviewing such
findings.

In this view I am supported by the decision of Ranasinghe, J. in _De Silva &
others v. Seneviratne and others_(1) and the decision of G. P. S. de Silva,
Chief Justice in the case of _Hatton National Bank v. Perera_ (2).

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ. held :**

" _In order to set aside the determination of facts by the tribunal that this
termination was unjustified the appellant must satisfy that there was no legal
evidence to support the conclusion of fact or the finding is irrational or
perverse._ "

The applicant-appellant-respondent was a machine operator at respondent-
respondent-appellant Company situated at Nagoda, Kalutara. The respondent-
appellant decided to shift the factory to Piliyandala. Though numerous other
employees were granted compensation on termination of services by reason of
the shift as being redundant the applicant-respondent though he sought, was
not one of them. The respondent-appellant's position was that the applicant-
respondent was not pleased with the transfer to Piliyandala as a result of the
factory being shifted to Piliyandala. In fact this is not disputed as the
applicant had made a complaint to Commissioner of Labour regarding his
transfer to Piliyandala factory and of his being harassed and that the inquiry
in regard to which was fixed for 16. 03. 87. The applicant appellant went for
the inquiry before the Commissioner but that the respondent-respondent-
petitioner did not attend. In consequence appellant-respondent could not
report for work on 16. 03. 87. On

318

17\. 03. 87 the appellant-respondent did not report for work and informed the
respondent-appellant by telegram of being indisposed which is now admitted.

When the applicant reported for work on 18. 03. 87 he was refused entry at the
gate. This was when all the other workers were being granted entry into the
factory. He was humiliated. He proceeded to the Police station and made a
statement to the Piliyandala police at about 8.30 am on 18. 03. 87. On 19. 03.
87 the application for relief for constructive unjust termination of services
was made by the applicant-respondent.

By R1 of 24. 03. 87 the respondent-appellant informed the applicant-respondent
that though the records disclose that the appellant was absent as he was
indisposed, no medical certificate has been sent in support and requesting him
the applicant-respondent to report for work, failure to do so would be
considered as his having vacated post. This was followed by R2 dated 28. 03.
87 giving him 3 days to report for work in default of which his services would
be considered to have been vacated.

To this the applicant-respondent replied by R3 dated 03. 03. 87 setting out
his position and repudiating the respondent-petitioner's allegations in R1 and
R2 and stating that the invitation to report for work could not be complied
with as he apprehended that he would be put into trouble.

The respondent-petitioner by R4 persisted in inviting the applicant appellant-
respondent to report for work on 09. 04. 87 on pain of his having to be
considered to have vacated his post if he did not report for work.

The entire trial before the learned Labour Tribunal President proceeded on the
basis as to whether the applicant-respondent's alleged refusal of entry into
the factory on 18. 03. 87 amounted to constructive termination or whether by
reason of the applicant-

319

respondent not reporting for duty as requested in R1, R2 and R4, such conduct
amounted to his having vacated post.

It must be noted that during the entire trial before the learned President of
the Labour Tribunal the applicant-respondent and respondent-petitioner were
both represented by counsel and the cases for and against them were
transparent to them.

On 17. 01. 99 the case of both the applicant and respondent petitioner was
concluded. The case was to be called on 17. 03. 97 for written submissions
which was extended up to 25. 04. 97 on which date the order was to be
delivered.

On 25. 04. 97 the order was scheduled to be delivered. The learned Labour
Tribunal President before the order was delivered proceeded to question the
applicant-respondent on the statement made to the Piliyandala Police on 18.
03. 87 in order to test the credibility of the applicant-respondent's
evidence. The questions asked were in respect of A3 the statement to the
Piliyandala Police and the respondent's apprehension of bodily harm if he
returned to work.

What disturbs me in the procedure adopted by the learned President of the
Labour Tribunal is that -

(a) the 25th of April, 1997, was the day on which after the closure of the
cases of both parties and the filing of written submission was the designated
day on which the order was due to be delivered;

(b) on all other dates of hearing the applicant-respondent was represented by
counsel. So also the respondent-petitioner;

(c) it could not reasonably be expected for the applicant appellant to have
retained counsel on 25. 04. 97 as it was the day on which the order was due to
be delivered and there was no need for counsel to represent him;

320

(d) the applicant-appellant-respondent was called from the well of the Court
and examined on A3.

In my view unrepresented and unprepared for a trial on the day order was due
he must surely have been taken by surprise. The applicant-appellant would not
have had the benefit of the advice of counsel or even the benefit of having
time to consider what he was being questioned on.

Although the Labour Tribunal was required to make a just and equitable order
in my opinion it must not only be just and equitable but the procedure adopted
to that end must be legal and every judicial body exercising judicial powers
must so arrive at a order only on legal evidence. It is my perception that the
procedure adopted as 25\. 04. 97 was far from what is legal evidence and that
any consequential finding is perverse.

The question of fact sought to be clarified by the learned President on 24.
04. 97 was the time when the statement A4 was made to the Police and on this
question conclusions were drawn by the learned President of the Labour
Tribunal as well as to the applicant's credibility.

On the question of time and as to the applicant's credibility lies a mere
difference of 20 minutes. It may well have been that the chronometer at the
Police station did not record correct time or the person who wrote recorded
wrong time or even if the correct time was recorded to draw adverse
conclusions on a difference in time of so small a magnitude is in my view
irrational.

Though letters R1, R2 and R4 invited the applicant-respondent to resume work
the invitation was not accepted. The applicant respondent's position was that
he feared he could be put into further trouble if he resumed work and that the
invitation was made mala fide. Rather than an adverse inference being drawn
the cross-examination of that applicant-appellant-respondent had been on the
basis

321

that on previous occasions he had been assaulted, ie from or about 1985. Can
one not therefore reasonably assume that the applicant. feared the invitation
to resume work was for the same purpose and can he be faulted for not resuming
work. To draw an adverse inference against the applicant-appellant-respondent
is in my view no less irrational and perverse.  
  
There was strong ground for interference by the High Court Judge.

I am, therefore, for the reasons set out of the view that there was no legal
evidence to support the conclusion of the learned Labour Tribunal President
and that the conclusions so drawn were irrational and perverse and that the
order of the Labour Tribunal President cannot be sustained. Though the High
Court was justified in interfering with the findings of the Labour Tribunal, I
do not subscribe to some aspects of the reasoning in the judgment of the
learned High Court Judge in arriving at this conclusion that the termination
of the service was unjustified and for a composite sum of Rs. 150,000 be paid
as compensation.

I agree with the finding that the applicant-appellant-respondent's services
had been constructively terminated. The applicant-appellant respondent asked
for no reinstatement but sought only compensation. To my mind the consequence
of the finding that the dismissal is unlawful would warrant what in the
circumstances would be just and equitable compensation.

I prefer to follow the basis that was considered by Dr. Amerasinghe, J. in the
case of _Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation_ (3)

"For an order to be just and equitable it is not sufficient for such order
merely to contain a just and equitable verdict. The reasons for such verdict
should be set out to enable the parties to appreciate how just and equitable
the order is"

322

in order to illustrate what ought to be a just and equitable award of
compensation.

and at page 409 supra where Dr. Amerasinghe, J. concluded :

" _There ought to be at least an approximate computation of the immediate
loss, ie loss of wages and benefits from the date of dismissal up to the date
of the final Order or Judgment, and another with regard to prospective, future
loss, and a third with regard to the loss of retirement benefits, based as far
as possible on a foundation of solid facts given to the Tribunal by the
parties_."

Thus, what should be considered is actual financial loss not sentimental loss.
To which list I would add the last salary or wage earned by the worker as
being a relevant consideration in the computation of compensation.

Leave to appeal has not been granted in respect of the question of
compensation. Though strictly this question would not fall within the scope of
this appeal it would not be just and equitable in the peculiar circumstances
of this case, in the interests of justice that as invited by counsel, the
question of the award of compensation is not reviewed by me.

The essential question sans procedural restriction is the actual financial
loss caused by the unfair dismissal. The learned High Court Judge gives no
basis for awarding Rs. 150,000 except to state that the applicant-appellant-
respondent's services were terminated in 1987 and 10 years had elapsed by the
time of his order. Though in my view the basis of the computation was totally
inadequate to my mind he appears to have directed his mind to just and
equitable relief where the dismissal was not justified when he did award
compensation.

In those circumstances it would be justified to review the award of
compensation in the following manner.

323

The salary of the applicant at the time of termination of his service was Rs.
1,900 per month. Being a machine operator prospects of future employment would
not have been difficult. He has asked for no reinstatement and sought to be
voluntarily retired on the payment of a sum of Rs. 20,000 which had been
offered to other workers by the employer. The termination of his services
according to the applicant-respondent was on the 18th March, 1987. His
application to the Labour Tribunal in terms of section 31 (a) of the
Industrial Disputes Act was on the 19th of March, 87 and the order of the
President of the Labour Tribunal was on 19th of May, 1997. The applicant-
respondent would be entitled to Employees Provident Fund benefits and other
contributions made by him during his period of service. Taking these factors
into consideration I would consider 3 years' salary as a just and equitable
award of compensation.

The finding of the learned High Court Judge that the termination of the
services of the applicant-appellant-respondent was not justified is affirmed,
but I vary the order for the award of compensation to Rs. 68,200.

The applicant-appellant-respondent is entitled to Rs. 5,000 as costs of
appeal.

**DR. A. R. B. AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**D. P. S. GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

_Order for comprehension varied._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/15.html_  

