**

73

CEYLON WORKERS CONGRESS** **  
v.** **  
JANATHA ESTATES DEVELOPMENT BOARD AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., ATUKORALE, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 64/85.  
C.A. APPEAL No. 52/80.  
L.T. BADULLA CASE No. B/11328.  
FEBRUARY 6, 1987.

_

Industrial Disputes Act-Suspension of services-Constructive termination-
Domestic inquiry._

Where a workman continued in forcible occupation of a line room in defiance of
the orders of the Superintendent to get back to the line room earlier occupied
by him and the Superintendent thereupon suspended him from work until he
vacated the line. room being forcibly occupied by him

**

Held :

**

The suspension from work did not amount to constructive termination. In the
face of the clear manifestation of the workmen's intention not to vacate the
line room there was no purpose in holding a domestic inquiry. The application
under s.31 (B) (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act is not sustainable.

**74**

**

Case referred to:**

_

Ceylon Estate Staffs' Union v. The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate,
Watagoda-_ 73 NLR 297.

**

APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

K. N. Choksy, P.C_. with _S. Mahenthiran_ and _Miss M. Sivalingam_ for the
appellant.  

_

Mark Fernando, P. C._ with _S. L. Gunasekera_ and _Miss S. Wijayagunasekera_
for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 3, 1987.  
**ATUKORALE, J.**

The appellant, on behalf of its member (Sangapillai) made application to the
Labour Tribunal, Badulla, alleging that his services as a labourer were
terminated by the management of Unugolla Estate (the respondents) with effect
from 21.9.1978 without any valid reasons. Averring that this termination was
wrongful, the appellant asked for reinstatement of the workman with back
wages. The management denied termination and pleaded that the workman's
services were suspended from 21.9.1978 as he was in forcible occupation of the
fine room presently occupied by him and that he would be offered work once he
vacated that room and got back to his former fine room. The President, Labour
Tribunal, after inquiry, held that the conduct of the management in suspending
the services of the workman for an unlimited period of time amounted to a
constructive termination of his services and on that basis ordered his
reinstatement with back wages. On an appeal by the management the Court of
Appeal took the view that there was no constructive termination of services
for the reason that the management did not have sufficient time to hold a
domestic inquiry into the conduct of the workman before which the workman
filed this application in the Labour Tribunal and as such it could not, in the
circumstances of this case, be said that the suspension was tantamount to a
dismissal of the services of the workman. The Court of Appeal therefore held
that the application made on behalf of the workman could not be sustained
under s.31 (13)(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act and set aside the order of
the President, Labour Tribunal. The present appeal is from this judgment of
the Court of Appeal.

**75**

Mr. Choksy, P.C. for the appellant submitted that the Court of Appeal was in
error when it held that the management did not have a reasonable opportunity
for holding a domestic inquiry prior to the institution of the application for
relief. He pointed out that this was not the case of the, management as set
out in its answer. The answer stated specifically that the workman will be
given work only when he vacates the line room of which he was, according to
the management, in forcible occupation. He further submitted that up to this
date the management had taken no steps to hold a disciplinary inquiry against
the workman for his alleged misconduct. During this entire period the workman
had, it was urged, been given no work or pay. Nor did the management intend
doing so in the future. These circumstances, it was contended, unmistakably
pointed to the fact that the 'suspension' was tantamount to a constructive
termination and that the Court of Appeal had misdirected itself in concluding
that the management had been deprived of a reasonable opportunity of holding a
domestic inquiry. Mr. Mark Fernando, P.C. for the respondents (the
management), in turn, drew our attention to the fact that the application
filed by the appellant refers to an actual and not a constructive termination
of the workman's services on 21.9.1987. He stressed the fact that the workman
himself during the course of his evidence admitted that Hettiarachi, the
Assistant Superintendent of the estate, asked him on 21.9.1978 to vacate the
present line room which he was occupying and to go to his former line room and
that if he failed to do so he would not be given any work. This was a lawful
order which the workman failed to comply with. There was thus no necessity to
have a domestic inquiry into this refusal of the workman to carry out the
lawful order given by Hettiarachi. Under the circumstances the suspension of
the workman's services it was urged, was justified and cannot be construed to
be a constructive termination of services since the workman was informed that
he would be given work once he vacated the present line room and returned to
his former one. Learned President's Counsel relied on the decision in the
Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate,
Watagoda (1) in support of his submissions.

The sole question that arises for our consideration is whether, in the
circumstances of this case, the conduct of the management in refusing to give
the workman any work on the estate with effect from 21.9.1978 until such time
as he left the line room which he was occupying and went back to his old room
amounted to a mere

**76**

suspension of his services as maintained by the management or whether it
constituted a constructive termination of his services as maintained by the
appellant. Upon a close scrutiny of the facts and circumstances of this case I
am satisfied that there has been only a suspension and not a constructive
termination of the workman's services. At the inquiry before the President,
Labour Tribunal, too much importance seems to have been placed on the question
as to whether the workman's entry into occupation of the present line room was
or was not with the leave and licence of Hettiarachi, the Assistant
Superintendent. The President has found as a fact that such entry was with the
permission of the latter and that therefore the workman's occupation of the
room was not forcible. He has however failed to appreciate the significance of
the admitted evidence of both the workman as well as Hettiarachi that the day
after he came into occupation Hettiarachi asked the workman to vacate the room
and get back to his former room-a request which the workman failed to obey.
Hence the workman's continued occupation of the room on and after 21.9.1978
was in defiance of the order of Hettiarachi even though his entry may have
been lawful. The legality or propriety of this order was not put in issue
either at the inquiry before the President, Labour Tribunal or the Court of
Appeal. The workman himself stated that he entered with the permission of
Hettiarachi. He appears to have acknowledged that the allocation of line rooms
in the estate is one that appertains to the internal arrangement of the estate
and is a matter within the control and discretion of its management. Unless
the terms of employment provide otherwise there can be no legal foundation for
a workman's claim to remain in occupation of a particular line room in
defiance of an order of the management made in good faith. It is worthy of
note that in the instant case both line rooms were located in the same
division of the estate. The right of the management to transfer a workman from
one place of residence to another in the same estate and the corresponding
liability of the workman to be so transferred is incidental to and an implied
condition of the workman's service. In my view it is absolutely essential that
the management should be possessed of such a right and should have control
over the allocation of line rooms for the purposes of efficient and proper
administration of the estate with a view to achieving maximum productivity. In
Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. The Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate,
Watagoda (supra) this court recognised the legal right of an employer to
transfer his staff from one place of work to another within his service
subject to certain limitations which do not

**77**

arise for consideration in the instant case. If so it must necessarily follow
that an employer has the right to transfer his workman from one place of
residence to another within his service. No doubt it would be open to such a
workman to make representations to the appropriate authorities against the
transfer but he cannot, in my view, be permitted to set the employer at
defiance by blatantly refusing to comply with the order as in the instant
case. The failure or refusal of the workman to comply with such an order
amounts to a disobedience of the lawful order of his employer and constitutes
by itself misconduct on the part of the workman. There is no necessity in such
circumstances for the employer to go through the formal process of holding a
domestic inquiry for ascertaining whether there has been on the part of the
workman a refusal to carry out the employer's order of transfer. The conduct
of the workman in continuing to remain in occupation of the line room in
question from 21:9:1978 clearly manifested his intention not to obey the
transfer order. His refusal was so obvious that there was no purpose in
holding a domestic inquiry. The workman's position appears to be that since he
came into occupation of the present line room with the permission of
Hettiarachi, the Assistant Superintendent, he is entitled to remain there in
spite of Hettiarachi's orders to the contrary. I do not think such a status of
irremovability attaches to line rooms given out for the residence of workmen
at the discretion of the management. Viewed in this light I do not think that
the order of suspension made by Hettiarachi can be construed to amount to a
constructive termination of the workman's services. It is not in the nature of
an interdiction order pending a domestic inquiry into the alleged misconduct
of an employee. In such a case it may reasonably be inferred, by the failure
of the employer to hold the inquiry, that the order of interdiction is
tantamount to a constructive termination. The facts and circumstances of the
instant case are different. For the reasons set out by me there was no
necessity to hold a domestic inquiry in this case. I would accordingly make
order dismissing the appeal with costs fixed at Rs. 525.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.  

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/16.html_  

