##  Eksath Kamkaru Samithiya v. Ceylon Printers Limited and Others - SLR -
317, Vol 2 of 1996 [1993] LKSC 10; (1996) 2 Sri LR 317 (28 April 1993)

**317**

**EKSATH KAMKARU SAMITHIYA  
v.  
CEYLON PRINTERS LIMITED AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
RAMANATHAN, J. AND  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO.114/94.  
S.C. SPECIAL L.A. NO. 283/93.  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 369/93.  
17TH JUNE, AND 15TH JULY, 1996.

_Certiorari ‑Industrial Disputes Act‑Reference of dispute for
arbitration‑dispute regarding a clause in a collective agreement, selectively
extended to the employer‑sections 4(1) and 10 of the Act‑vires of the
reference‑Jurisdiction of the Arbitrator._

The Minister, acting under section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act,
referred to an Arbitrator a dispute between the Appellant union and the
Employers‑Respondents. The first matter referred for arbitration was in
respect of the payment of a Non‑recurring Cost of Living Gratuity, payable in
terms of a clause in a collective agreement which clause had been extended by
the Minister to the Employers‑Respondents in the purported exercise of his
power under section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act.

**Held:**

As the selective extension of the clause relating to the Non‑recurring cost of
Living Gratuity is invalid in law, the reference of the dispute is itself bad
in law. The said reference was an act which amounted to doing indirectly what
the Minister could not do directly; hence the Arbitrator had no jurisdiction
to embark upon the arbitration.

**Cases referred to:**

1 _._ _A. F Jones (Exports) Ceylon Ltd., v. Balasubramaniam_ (1982)2 Sri L.R.
793.

2\. _Frewin Co., Ltd. v. Atapattu_ (1993) 2 Sri L. R. 53

3\. _Kodakanpillai v. Mudanayake_ (1953)54 NLR 433.

4 _._ _Bandaranaike v. Weeraratne and Others_ (1981)1 Sri L.R. 10, 16.

5 _._ _Perera v. Commissioner of National Housing_ 77 NLR 361.

6\. _Thambimuttu v. Thambipillai_ 77 NLR 97.

**318**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_D. W Abeykoon, P.C._ with _W. D. _ _Deen_ _,_ _Miss._ _Priyadarshini
Premaratne_ and _Ms. Nuwanthi Dias_ for Appellant.

_Faisz Musthapha, P.C._ with _S. Mahenthiran_ for Petitioners‑Respondents.

_K.C. Kamalasabayson_ ASG __ for State.

_Cur._ _adv. vult._

4th October, 1996.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.**

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal issuing a Writ of
Certiorari quashing the order of the Arbitrator the 3rd Re­spondent‑
Respondent dated 28.04.1993.

The facts relevant to this appeal are briefly as follows :‑

The Appellant is a Trade Union. On 15.08.1983 the Minister of Labour under
section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act referred the dispute between the
Appellant and the Petitioners‑Respondents for settlement by arbitration to Mr.
H.C. Gunewardene who was appointed as the Arbitrator. The
Petitioners‑Respondents challenged the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator and the
reference made by the Minister in an Application for Writs of Certiorari and
Prohibition both in the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court. These
Applications were dismissed both by the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court
which held the references valid. After the application was finally dismissed
by the Supreme Court, the Arbitrator Mr. H.C. Gunewardene proceeded to record
evidence and hear the matter. The evidence had been concluded and written
submissions also had been filed. The Arbitrator Mr H.C. Gunewardene died in
September, 1992.Thereafter the then Minister of Labour Mr. D. B. Wijetunga
acting under section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act referred the dispute
to Mr. H. F Abeysekera the new Arbitrator who is a Respondent in this case.
When the inquiry commenced before Mr. Abeysekera, the new Arbitrator the
Petitioners‑Respondents challenged the jurisdiction of the Arbitrator to
proceed with the inquiry and the Minister's reference to Arbitration. The
Arbitrator Mr. Abeysekera ruled that the reference was in conformity with law
and that he had jurisdiction to act on the reference.

**319**

The Petitioners‑Respondents filed a writ application bearing No. C.A. 369/93
challenging his order on the ground that by the reference, the Minister was
trying to do indirectly what he could not do directly, namely to resuscitate
the Non Recurring Cost of Living Gratuity. At the hearing the State also
conceded this position and the Court of Appeal quashed the reference on this
basis. The present appeal is from that judgment.

The terms of reference to both Arbitrators were substantially the same but not
the same. Therefore the question of jurisdiction of the Arbitrators can be
challenged for the second time.

The first matter referred for Arbitration is in respect of the payment of Non
recurring Cost of Living Gratuity to the members of the Union. The payment of
such an allowance has been first promulgated in the collective agreement which
was the subject of litigation in the case of _A. F. Jones (Exports) Ceylon Ltd
v. Balasubramaiam._ (1) __ In the said case, the extension of selected clauses
from a collective agreement was held to be in‑valid in Law. In the case of
_Frewin Co. Ltd v. Atapattu_ (2) _,_ it was held that the order of the
reference made by the Minister regarding the dispute in respect of the payment
of the said Non Recurring Cost of Living Gratuity was an act which amounted to
doing indirectly what the Minister could not do directly. _(Vide Kodakan
Pillai v. Mudanayake_ (3)) __ and _Bandaranaike v Weeraratne and Others_ (4)
_._ Samarawickrema, J. delivering a judgment of a bench of three judges of the
Supreme Court observed as follows:‑

"There is a general rule in construction of statutes that what a Court or
person is prohibited from doing directly it may not do indirectly or in a
circuitous manner".

"On a consideration of the matters set out above the reference made by the
Minister cannot be upheld in law". Since the reference is bad in law, the
order of the 3rd Respondent‑Respondent dated 28.04.1993 upholding the said
reference is not tenable in law.

As the reference to the Arbitrator was bad in law and void the Arbitrator did
not have jurisdiction to embark upon the arbitration. This is a case of patent
lack of jurisdiction ‑ _Vide_ _Perera v. Commissioner of National Housing_ (5)
__ and _Thambimuttu v. Tambipillai._ (6) __

**320**

For these reasons we affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and dismiss
this appeal. No costs.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** ‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/10.html_  

