##  Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation v. Lanka Podu Seva Sangamaya - SLR
- 84, Vol 1 of 1990 [1989] LKSC 10; (1990) 1 Sri LR 84 (21 April 1989)

**

84

SRI LANKA STATE PLANTATION CORPORATION** **  
v.** **  
LANKA PODU SEVA SANGAMAYA  
(on behalf of 25 workmen)**

SUPREME COURT.  
TAMBIAH, J., H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. AND KULATUNGA, J.  
S. C APPEAL No. 29/87 - C.A. No. 302/79 -  
L.T. Nos. 191 - 203/78, 3/271 - 280/78, 3/333/78, 3/433/78.  
MARCH 7, 1989.

_

Industrial Dispute - Termination of employment - Reinstatement - Compensation
in lieu of reinstatement - Industrial Disputes Act, sections 33 (3), (5) and
(6).

_

(1) Where the termination of service is found to be unjustified, the workman
is, as a rule, entitled to reinstatement. An order for payment of compensation
is competent in situations referred to in sections (33) (3) (workman in
persona) service) and (33) (5) (workman requesting compensation instead of
reinstatement) or where such order would be otherwise just and equitable in
the circumstances as contemplated by section (33) (6) of the Act.

(2) An appeal lies against an order of a Labour Tribunal on a question of law.
Thus the Appeal Court may intervene it the Tribunal appears to have made a
finding for which there is no evidence - a finding which is both inconsistent
with the evidence and contradictory of it. If no such ground is made out the
Appellate Court is not competent to vary an order for reinstatement made by a
Tribunal on the ground of subsequent events, save in exceptional
circumstances.

**85**

(3) Thus an order for payment of compensation in lieu of reinstatement maybe
substituted in appeal if reinstatement has become demonstrably impracticable
due to changes in the employer's establishment or the closure of the business
or by reason of the workman having reached the age of retirement. However mere
lapse of time (8 years) since the dismissal of an order for reinstatement
would not warrant reversal of an order for reinstatement.

(4) Out of 25 workmen involved, 2 had died, 6 had reached the age of
retirement and 2 workmen had already been re-employed. Only 15 had to be
reinstated. Having regard to the positions held by these workmen (watcher,
store-keeper, tractor driver, clerk, assistant project managers, assistant
clerks, field officers, field supervisors) and the fact that the 1st
Respondent -Corporation appeared to have the monopoly of managing a very large
extent of estate lands there could be no difficulty in reinstating these
workmen.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

1\. Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe - 72 N.L.R. 76._  

_

2\. Vijaya Textiles Ltd. v. General Secretary, National Employees Union - 73
N.L.R. 405._  

_

3\. The Superintendent - We Oya Group, Yatiyantota and another v. The Ceylon
Estates Staff Union - 74 N.L.R. 189._  

_

4\. The Ceylon Transport Board v. Wijeratne - 77 N.L.R. 481._  

_

5\. The Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman 79 (1)
N.L.R. 421.

_**

APPEAL** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Faiz Mustapha, P.C. with Mahanama de Silva for Applicant - Respondent -
Petitioners._  

_

H.L. de Silva, P.C. with Shirley M. Fernando for the 1st Respondent -
Appellant - Respondents.

Cur adv. vult.

_

April 21, 1989.  
**KULATUNGA, J.

**

In early 1978 Lanka Podu Seva Sangamaya the Applicant -Respondent - Petitioner
made applications to the Labour Tribunal on behalf of 25 workmen complaining
that the services of the said workmen who were its members employed on estates
which had vested in the Land Reform Commission had been terminated without any
justifiable reason or cause. The respondents to the applications before the
Tribunal were the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation 1st Respondent -
Appellant - Respondent, the Liquidator Udarata Co - operative Development
Board and the Land Reform Commission.

**86**

The workmen consisted of one watcher, one store-keeper, one tractor driver,
one clerk, two assistant project managers, five assistant clerks, six field
officers, seven field supervisors and one workman in respect of whom no proof
of position held is available.

At the inquiry before the Tribunal, the Applicant Union called workmen. Sumana
Banda, Upali Disssanayake and S. H. Weeratunge whilst the 1st Respondent -
Corporation called M.B. Wanninayake its Personnel Manager.

The workman Weeratunge who testified before the Tribunal and who was 46 years
of age then, had been first appointed in 1966 whilst the other workmen appear
to have been employed from 1972 onwards. At the time of the alleged
termination they were in employment on lands which had vested in the Land
Reform Commission. These lands were subsequently placed under the management
of the Udarata Co - operative Development Board (USWASAMA) which went into
liquidation on 1st November, 1977 on which date the 1st Respondent -
Corporation took over the management of the estates.

It was alleged that the services of one of the workmen was terminated on 25th
August, 1977 whilst the services of the other workmen were terminated between
18th and 25th of November, 1977.

The position of the 1st Respondent -Corporation was that although the
management of the estates was taken over on 1st November. 1977 they were
physically taken over between 21st and 30th November, 1977 and that most of
the workmen had vacated employment by failing to report for work on their own
whilst others had been forcibly ousted from the estates by some outsiders
during the disturbances which followed the General Elections.

However, it is in evidence that the 1st Respondent - Corporation had in fact
assumed management of the estates as from 1st November, 1977\. This evidence
consists of orders for the transfer of workmen effected on 14th November, 1977
and the payment of their wages for November, 1977 by the 1st Respondent -
Corporation.

The Tribunal found that immediately after the General Elections in July, 1977
there existed a situation on the relevant estates where the

**87**

workmen were not permitted to continue in employment. That was from somewhere
about 30th August, 1977 from which time they had been attached to the office
of the USWASAMA up to its liquidation. Two of the persons who forcibly entered
the estates during this period namely, T. Abeysundera and R. E. Jayasinghe had
obtained appointments as Project Managers and were responsible for the
termination of the workmen concerned.

On the basis of the evidence led, the Tribunal reached the conclusion that the
1st Respondent - Corporation had taken on itself the responsibility to
continue the workmen in employment on the liquidation of the USWASAMA, the
services of the workmen were terminated and that such termination was wrongful
and unjustified. The Tribunal held that the 1st Respondent - Corporation
should bear the entire responsibility for the consequences following from such
termination and ordered their reinstatement and further ordered that each of
them be paid one year's salary by way of back wages.

The 1st Respondent - Corporation appealed to the Court of Appeal against the
order of the Tribunal alleging the following defaults by the Tribunal :

(a) Failure to assess the evidence and to give reasons for the. findings;

(b) failure to consider the fact that there was no contract of employment
between the workmen ant the 1st Respondent - Corporation;

(c) failure to consider the fact that the workmen had not worked even a single
day under the 1st Respondent - Corporation and that they had not been paid
wages at any time by the 1st Respondent - Corporation.

The 1st Respondent -Corporation prayed that the order of the Tribunal be set
aside and he be granted relief as prayed for in his answer to the Tribunal. In
his answer the 1st Respondent - Corporation had prayed for the dismissal of
the applications for relief made on behalf of the workmen.

I am of the opinion that there was no merit in the appeal of the 1st
Respondent - Corporation. In fact the Court of Appeal dismissed the

**88**

appeal except as regards the workmen P.S. Withanage and S. B. Dodanwela who
had, according to the evidence led before the Tribunal, been re - employed.

However, by its judgment dated 10th September, 1985 and the subsequent order
dated 28th July, 1986 the Court of Appeal proceeded to revise the order for
reinstatement on the ground that an order for reinstatement of the workmen
after the lapse of 8 years is impracticable and that an order to reinstate the
workmen whose ages are unknown is not a just and equitable order. The Court
also observed that many changes had taken place in the administration of the
estate during this period of time and substituted an order for compensation
being one month's salary for every year of service upto the date of that
order. It was also ordered that if the wage structure had been varied after
1977, compensation has to be made on that basis. The order of the Tribunal
awarding a sum equivalent to one year's salary to each of the workmen
concerned by way of back wages was affirmed.

The Union appealed to this Court alleging that the Court of Appeal misdirected
itself in holding that the employees cannot be reinstated because 8 years have
lapsed since the date of termination of the workmen and that in any event
compensation ordered in lieu of reinstatement is grossly inadequate. It is
also urged that the Court of Appeal was in error in taking into account events
which are said to have occurred subsequent to the order of the Labour
Tribunal.

At the hearing before us, Mr. Faiz Musthapa, P. C. learned Counsel for the
appellant union strenuously contended that the Court of Appeal was in error in
revising the order of reinstatement of the workmen concerned. He urged that
the matters taken into account by the Court of Appeal had not been pleaded by
the employer either before the Labour Tribunal or in the Petition of Appeal
against the order of the Tribunal. It was also submitted that in any event,
there is no evidence on the basis of which the Court of Appeal could have
reached the conclusion that the reinstatement of the workmen is impracticable
or that the order of the Tribunal is not just and equitable.

Learned Counsel also submitted that the workmen insist on the right to
reinstatement in employment. He drew our attention to the affidavit of
Jayaratne Maliyagoda dated 26th January, 1987 which, inter alia, avers

**89**

that the 1st Respondent-Corporation presently comprises of the Central Board
and six other Boards which together manage 157 estates throughout the Island
comprising 397,172 acres. This affidavit has not been contradicted. If so,
the. fact that according to the affidavit of M. J. Hemapala dated 25th
November, 1986 filed on behalf of the 1st Respondent-Corporation some of the
estates concerned have been handed over to the Land Reform Commission would
not make the order for reinstatement impracticable.

As regards the observation of the Court of Appeal that an order for the
reinstatement of the workmen whose ages are unknown, I am of the view that the
mere fact that there is no evidence of the ages of workmen would not vitiate
such order. In the instant case three workmen who testified before the
Tribunal stated their ages. As regards the others, their ages were not put in
issue at the inquiry or in the Petition of Appeal against the order of the
Tribunal. In the circumstances, the Court of Appeal was in error in revising
the order for reinstatement on the ground that the ages of the workmen were
unknown.

In terms of section 31 C (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, it is the duty of
a Labour Tribunal to hear all such evidence as the Tribunal may consider
necessary and to make such order as may appear to the Tribunal to be just and
equitable. Section 33 provides for the kinds of relief a Labour Tribunal may
order. These include reinstatement in service and compensation in lieu of
reinstatement. Section 33(6) empowers the making of an order for compensation
in lieu of reinstatement where the Tribunal thinks it fit to do so. Under
section 33(3) a Tribunal making an order for reinstatement in favour of a
workman engaged in personal service is also required to make an order for
compensation in lieu of reinstatement. Under section 33(5) a Tribunal making
an order for reinstatement is empowered to make an order for payment of
compensation in lieu of reinstatement if the workman so requests.

Having regard to the foregoing provisions, I am of the view that the question
whether the order of the Tribunal is just and equitable has to be determined
on the basis of the evidence led before it. Where the termination of service
is found to be unjustified, the workman is, as a rule, entitled to
reinstatement. An order for payment of compensation is competent in situations
referred to in section 33(3) and 33(5) or where

**90**

such order would be otherwise just and equitable in the circumstances as
contemplated by section 33(6) of the Act.

An appeal lies against an order of a Labour Tribunal on a question of law.
Thus the Appeal Court may intervene if the Tribunal appears to have made a
finding for which there in no evidence - a finding which is both inconsistent
with the evidence and contradictory of it. Ceylon Transport Board v.
Gunasinghe (1). It no such ground is made out the Appellate Court is not
competent to vary an order for reinstatement made by a Tribunal on the ground
of subsequent events save in exceptional circumstances.

Thus an order for payment of compensation in lieu of reinstatement may be
substituted in appeal if reinstatement has become demonstrably impracticable
due to changes in the employer's establishment or the closure of the business
or by reason of the workmen having reached the age of retirement. These are
circumstances which the Tribunal itself could have taken cognizance of had
such circumstances existed at the time of the inquiry. However, mere lapse of
time since the dismissal or hardships to the employer would not warrant a
revision of an order for reinstatement.

Mr. H. L. de Silva, P. C. learned Counsel for the 1st Respondent Corporation/
who supported the judgment of the Court of Appeal has not been able to draw
our attention to any evidence which would establish that the reinstatement of
the workmen would be impracticable. In his written submissions he contends
that this Court should not restore the order of reinstatement merely because
it is considered to be the conventional mode of granting relief. He adds that
in the particular circumstances of this case the employer has offered to
consider the employment of these workmen on other estates when appointments
for such employment do arise in the future.

Counsel have also informed us that since the order of the Tribunal some of the
workmen have died whilst others have reached their age of retirement.
According to the particulars furnished with the written submissions of Mr.
Musthapa, P. C. for the Appellant Union, 2 workmen have died whilst 6 have
reached the age of retirement. Two workmen have already been re-employed. If
so, only 15 workmen have to be reinstated. Having regard to the positions held
by these workmen and the

**91**

fact that the 1st Respondent-Corporation appears to have the monopoly of
managing a very large extent of estate lands there can be no difficulty in
reinstating these workmen whose number would not in any event exceed 23.

I am of the view that the available evidence would not warrant a reversal of
the order for the reinstatement of the workmen who are eligible for re-
employment, nor would the vague promise of re-employment contained in the
submissions for the 1st Respondent-Corporation provide a legal basis for such
reversal.

In view of the long period which has lapsed since the order of the Tribunal
the workmen have been deprived of the full benefit of the order of the
Tribunal. This is a problem which is as old as the industrial Disputes Act
itself. In view of this, the authorities may consider whether appropriate
legislative amendments may be enacted to enable the enforcement of an order
for reinstatement made under the Act pending a challenge to such order subject
however to further provision for an order by a Court to stay such enforcement
in an appropriate case.

In the absence of such legislation the Supreme Court has made appropriate
orders for adjustment of rights without remitting the case back to the
Tribunal whenever it has been possible to do so in the light of the available
evidence. (Vijaya Textiles Ltd. v. General Secretary, National Employees Union
(2) The Superintendent- We Oya Group, Yatiyantota and Another V. The Ceylon
Estates Staff Union (3) The Ceylon Transport Board Y. Wijeratne (4) The
Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman (5)).

These decisions have adjusted the rights of workmen till the time of the
judgment of the Supreme Court. In the instant case it would not be possible to
make such adjustment due to the lack of evidence on the record as regards the
relevant circumstances in respect of the workmen concerned.

For the above reasons, I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal except
as regards the workmen P. S. Withanage and S. B. Dodanwela who have been re-
employed. Accordingly, the workmen who have not reached the age of retirement
will be entitled to reinstatement with effect from 1st May, 1989 on terms not
less favourable than those enjoyed by

**92**

them before termination and taking into account their right to a scale of
salary which they would have been entitled to had they been reinstated as
ordered by the Tribunal. They will also be entitled to back wages already
ordered by the Tribunal.

The Labour Tribunal is directed to hold further inquiry into the cases of
workmen who have reached the age of retirement and to make an appropriate
order for compensation. This would be in addition to the back wages already
ordered by the Tribunal.

The appeal is allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 1,050/- in addition to the costs
in the Court below and the Labour Tribunal.

**

TAMBIAH, J. -** I agree.  

**

H. A. G., DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Reinstatement of workmen below age of retirement (except the two already
employed) ordered with back wages. Compensation to those who have retired
ordered to be fixed by L. T. with back wages._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/10.html_  

