##  Gamini Dolawatta v. Attorney General - SLR - 221, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988]
LKSC 13; (1988) 1 Sri LR 221 (30 March 1988)

**

221

GAMINI DOLAWATTA  
v.  
ATTORNEY-GENERAL

**

SUPREME COURT.  
RANASINGHE, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 16/86.  
H.C. AVISSAWELLA 19/81.  
FEBRUARY 01 AND 03,1988.

Criminal Law-Attempted murder. s. 300 Penal Code-Medical reports-Case
history recorded in medical reports-informant who gave case history not called
as a witness-Admissibility of such case history-Hearsay evidence-Section 32(2)
of the Evidence Ord. -Section 414(l) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

_

Acid was thrown on one Buddhadasa by one of three persons (who also attacked
him with hands) when he was on his way home accompanied by a 12-year old boy
called Udaya Kumara. Buddhadasa was blinded in both eyes and rendered
unconscious and in his statement first recorded by the Police 8 days after the
incident he mentioned the 1st accused Gamini Dolawatta as the person who threw
the acid. Dr. (Mrs.) Coomaraswamy examined Buddhadasa and in her Medico-legal
report P2 while mentioning that there was permanent loss of vision stated that
the victim had been admitted with a history of acid having been thrown on him
and assault with hands. Buddhadasa being unconscious at the time could not
have given this information. On the next morning Buddhadasa was examined by
Dr. P. R. Fernando, lecturer in Forensic Medicine of the Colombo University
and in his Medico-Legal report P1 the history was given as 'Acid was thrown by
Gamani at 6.30 p.m. on 20.03.78 at Ihala Bomiriya'. Dr. Fernando too said that
Buddhadasa had acid burns over his entire face caused by corrosive acid and
permanent loss of vision of both eyes.

Both Dr. (Mrs.) Coomaraswamy and Dr. P. R. Fernando had left the island and
were not available as witnesses but their medico-legal reports were admitted
under s. 414(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

The 3 accused persons where indicted in the High Court for committing the
offence of attempted murder under s. 300 of the Penal Code. The 1st accused
Gamini Dolawatta was unanimously found guilty under s. 317 of the Penal Code
and sentenced to 5 years R.I. and a fine of Rs. 250. The 2nd accused was
acquitted by a 5 to 2 verdict and the 3rd accused by a unanimous verdict.

The Judge in his summing up told the Jury that Dr. Fernando had recorded the
history that one Gamini threw acid at the injured but there was no evidence as
to who told this to the Doctor.

**

Held

**

(1) The summing up was grossly inadequate and amounts to a misdirection.

(2) While a medico-legal report is admissible in evidence under s. 414(1) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, hearsay evidence by way of case history
embodied in such a report is not admissible as such history is information not
ascertained by the Doctor from his own examination of the injured.

**222**

(3) The expression 'Government Officer' includes any officer of the Department
of Forensic Medicine of the Faculty of Medicine of the Universities.

(4) (Ranasinghe, C.J. dissenting):

Case histories in such reports treated as statements recorded by doctors in
the ordinary course of business and in particular as entries or memoranda made
in books kept in the ordinary course of business or in the discharge of
professional duty under s. 32(2) of the Evidence Ordinance are not admissible.

(5) Even if such a statement (case history) is technically admissible it
should have been ruled out by the Judge and not left to the jury as its
probative value is far outweighed by the prejudice it wilt cause the accused.

**

Cases referred to :

**_

  1. Korossa Rubber Co. v. Silva, 20 NLR 65, 72, 79.  


  2. R. v. Hanmanta, 1 I L R Bom. 610, 617.

_**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with Mrs. Manouri Muttetuwegama and Mrs. Chamantha
weerakoon for the 1st accused-appellant.

Asoka de Silva, SSC for the Attorney-General.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 30, 1988.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.

**

The 1st accused-appellant with two others were indicted with the attempted
murder of one Gamage Buddhadasa, by attacking and injuring him with some
corrosive liquid, an offence punishable under Section 300 of the Penal Code.
While the 2nd accused was acquitted of the charge by a 5 to 2 verdict of the
Jury, the 3rd accused's acquittal was unanimous, on a direction given by the
learned trial judge that there was no evidence against him. The 1st accused-
appellant alone was convicted following an unanimous verdict of guilt of
causing grievous hurt with a corrosive substance, under Section 317 of the
Penal Code and sentenced to 5 years R.I. and a fine of Rs. 250. The Court of
Appeal confirmed the conviction and hence this appeal with leave of that
Court.

The prosecution case was briefly as follows: on 20th March 1978 there had been
a funeral close to Buddhadasa's house at Ihala Bomiriya and he had supplied a
pot of tea, to the funeral house. At about 6.15 p.m. accompanied by one Udaya
Kumara, a 12 year old

**223**

boy, Buddhadasa had gone to the funeral house to bring back the pot and
thereafter he had gone a little further to a boutique and bought some sprats.
On his way back he observed 3 persons on the road, one of whom was the 1st
accused Gamini Dolawatte whom he knew, but was not aware of the identities of
the other two who were with the 1st accused. As Buddhadasa passed the house of
one Liyanage, and when he was about 5 feet from the 1st accused, the latter
flung some liquid at his face, some of which fell on his eyes and he
immediately started losing his eye-sight. He was also physically attacked
after the liquid was thrown. He was definite in his evidence in Court that he
had identified the 1st accused well. He shouted out that acid had been thrown
at him but to none of the persons who came there to his help on hearing his
shouts, did he disclose the identity of his assailant.

He was taken to the eye hospital and on admission to the ward he was examined
by Dr. (Mrs.) Coomaraswamy. Her medico-legal report has been produced marked
P2. From it one finds that there is permanent loss of vision and according to
it, Buddhadasa has been admitted with a history of acid having been thrown on
him and assaulted with hands at about 6.30 p.m. It is obvious that this
information could not have been given by Buddhadasa himself as he had lost
consciousness by that time. Next morning he was examined by one Dr. P. R.
Fernando, the lecturer in Forensic Medicine of the Colombo University and
according to the latter's Medico-legal report P1 the history is given as "Acid
was thrown by Gamini at 6.30 p.m. on 20.3.78 at Ihala Bomiriya." He reports
that there were acid burns over the entire face caused by corrosive acid and
the patient has suffered permanent loss of vision of both eyes.

Udaya Kumara who was the other eye-witness to this incident and had run away
from the scene had been unable to identify any of the assailants as the time
was about 6.30 p.m. and there was no sufficient light for him to do so. The
other two witnesses who were called by the prosecution, other than the
official witnesses were Missi Nona and her daughter Sirimawathie, two
inhabitants of that village, who stated that shortly prior to the incident,
the 1st accused had come to their house with two others and asked for some
water. He had been given the water in a glass, and Missi Nona had gone off to
the funeral house. Sirimawathie said that she saw the 1st accused going away
from their house with two others and the

**224**

1st accused was carrying a parcel in the shape of "a bottle. She had inquired
from the1st accused whether it contained arrack or medicine. The motive
alleged by the prosecution was a dispute between the 1st accused's father who
owned a field at Ihala Bomiriya, and Buddhadasa who was the and cultivator of
that field.

The Police evidence was that I. P. Tillekeratne had recorded the statement of
Buddhadasa eight days later and it was in this statement that Buddhadasa had
disclosed the name of the 1st accused as his assailant. It appears that this
was the first occasion he had done so. It was also the evidence of Inspector
Tillekeratne, who conducted the investigations into this case, that when he
was on his way to another inquiry, seeing a crowd chasing after the 3rd
accused he apprehended him and took him into custody and went to the place of
the incident which was about a quarter of a mile away. There he found a glass
and a bottle and a parcel of sprats on the road. Both the glass and the bottle
smelt of acid and the parcel of sprats was identified at the trial as the one
that was being carried by Buddhadasa at the time of the incident. The glass
and the bottle were sent to the Registrar of Finger Prints and the latter
detected one finger print on the glass and two on the bottle. The two finger
prints found on the bottle were found to be identical with those of the
acquitted 2nd accused while the finger print found on the glass did not match
the finger prints of any of the three accused in the case. As a result there
was no finger print evidence against the 1st accused.

Neither Dr. (Mrs.) Coomaraswamy nor Dr. P. R. Fernando both of whom had left
the country were available to give evidence at the trial. Their Medico-legal
reports P 1 and P2 were produced under Section 414(1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure and Prof. H. V. J. Fernando was called by the prosecution to give
expert evidence based on the findings of Drs. Coomaraswamy and Fernando as
stated in their Medico-legal reports P1 and P2.

The main contention of Dr. Colvin R. de Silva was that even though the Medico-
legal reports P1 and P2 were admissible under the said section 414(1), the
case histories as found in them were not admissible inasmuch as, the identity
of the persons who gave that information to the doctors, especially to Dr.
Fernando was not known and that the informant was not called as a witness.
Regarding the statement in the Medico-legal report that "Acid was thrown by
Gamini" it was his contention that other than the fact that the name

**225**

Gamini being disclosed, which did not necessarily refer to Gamini Dolawatte
the 1st accused, in that there may have been many more Gaminis in Ihala
Bomiriya; without adequate direction by the trial judge to the jury, that
Gamini could refer to some person other than the 1st accused, it was not made
clear to the jury that no credence could-be given to this statement as the
identity of the person who gave that information was not known and hence he
was not called to give evidence, thus making it hearsay evidence and of no
value at all, and should be ignored by them. All that the learned trial judge
has stated about this in his summing up is that Dr. P. R. Fernando has
recorded the history that one Gamini threw acid at the injured at Ihala
Bomiriya on 20.3.78 at 6.30 in the evening but there is no evidence before us
as to who told this fact to the doctor. In my view this direction is grossly
inadequate and amounts to a misdirection. The learned trial judge should have
been more specific and directed the jury in no uncertain terms on the true
import of these words:

Learned Senior State Counsel sought to justify the admission of the, evidence
provided by the case histories found in P 1 and P2 under Section 32(2) of the
Evidence Ordinance in that they were statements recorded by the doctors in the
ordinary course of business and in particular as it consists of an entry or
memorandum made by him in books kept in the ordinary course of business or in
the discharge of professional duty:.

There is also another provision which also has a specific bearing on this
matter, namely Section 414(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. It deals
with the question of admissibility of the statements in the Medico-legal
reports, made by the doctors, on the ground that they cannot be called without
undue expense and delay, and as they have been recorded by them in the
ordinary course of business or in the discharge of their professional duty. It
was Dr. Colvin R. de Silva's contention that what is made admissible by
Section 414(1) of the 'Code of Criminal Procedure Act is the report of the
doctor regarding the medical examination conducted by him and the
admissibility does not extend to matters such as case history in that such
information is not ascertained by him from his own examination of the injured.

Section 414(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code Act states

"Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of the Government
Medical Officer upon any person, matter or thing duly

**226**

submitted to him for examination.., and report ... may be used as evidence in
any inquiry,` trial or other proceeding under this Code, although such officer
is not called as a witness." '

Under the definition "Government Officer" includes any officer of the
Department of Forensic Medicine of the Faculty. of Medicine of the
Universities:

The relevant phrase in that Section is,

any document purporting to be a -report under the hand of the . . . . . .....
Government Medical Officer upon any person, matter or thing duly submitted to
him for examination.......

Though finding out the manner in which the person came by his injuries would
help him in the examination of the injured, it cannot surely be said that the
identity of- the assailant is necessary. I hold that Dr. be Silva's contention
must succeed and the ` case history contained in the report of a Government
Medical Officer who has examined the injured cannot be led in evidence under
Section 414(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. A doctor is not expected
to conduct an investigation into the commission of an offence. That is a
matter for the Police and the fact that a statement of that nature is
volunteered by a person shall not make it any more admissible. Probably the
same considerations may apply to its admissibility under Section 32(2) of the
Evidence Ordinance. In any event, even if such a statement is technically
admissible it should have been' ruled out by the Judge and not left to the
jury as its probative value is far outweighed by the prejudice it will cause
to the accused.

Taking into consideration the fact that out of the two witnesses who saw the
incident viz, Buddhadasa and Udaya Kumara, that it was only Buddhadasa Who
purported to identify his assailant and not his two companions, the other two
accused, while Udaya Kumara was unable to do so due to the state of the light
and the absence of any finger prints of the 1st accused on any of the articles
found at the scene, one cannot be certain to what extent the case history as
given in Dr. Fernando's Medico-legal report would have induced the jury to
believe and act on the evidence of Buddhadasa. Since there has not been
adequate direction given by the trial judge on how this evidence provided by
the purported case history should be considered and analysed" by them, it
would in my opinion be unsafe to allow the conviction of the 1st accused to
stand, I accordingly quash the, conviction and the sentence of the 1st
accused-appellant.

**227**

Learned Senior State Counsel has submitted that the fury could have acted
solely on the evidence of Buddhadasa an d convicted him on this charge. I
agree, that had the adequate directions been given regarding the manner in
which, and the weight to be given to the evidence of the case-histories in P1
and P2, a conviction of the 1st accused may have been upheld: It is therefore
my view that are-trial of the 1st accused on a charge under Section 317 of the
Penal Code viz: for causing grievous hurt to Buddhadasa with a corrosive
substance should be ordered. I accordingly do so:

**

WANASUNDERA, J**. - I agree.

**

RANASINGHE, C.J.

**

I have had the advantage of perusing; in draft, the judgment of H. A. 'G de
Silva, J.,' I agree with the Order proposed by him-that the appeal be allowed,
'and that the case be sent back for the 1st accused-appellant to be tried de
novo upon 'a charge; under -section 317 Penal Code; of causing grievous hurt
to the` said Buddhadasa. The grounds upon which I take the view that the'
appeal be allowed are, however, slightly different: I, therefore, now proceed
to set out my' reasons.

The facts and circumstances relevant for a consideration of the arguments
adduced at the hearing of the appeal by learned Counsel are all set out in the
judgment of (H:A.G.) de Silva, J., and l do not, therefore, propose to set
them out in detail.

I agree that, in view of the provisions of section 414(1) Criminal Procedure
Code of 1979, only such part of either P1 or P2 as refers to the results of
the examination of the injured person, G. Buddhadasa, by each of the doctors
would be admissible, as neither of the two doctors, who examined the said
Buddhadasa and issued-the reports P1 and P2 respectively, has been called to
testify at the trial. Any other matter contained in P1 and/or P2 could be led
in evidence only if it is relevant and admissible under any other provision of
law.

The statement contained in P1 that "Acid was` thrown by Gamini at 6.30 p.m. on
20.3.78 at lhala Bomiriya" is not, therefore,, admissible under the provisions
of section 414(1) Criminal Procedure Code of 1979. It would, however, be, in
my opinion, admissible under the provisions of section 32 (2) Evidence
Ordinance, even though it was not

**228**

a matter within the personal knowledge of the doctor himself; and the source
of such information is not specifically stated therein; but, being "double
hearsay", the weight to be attached to it, as an item of evidence to be
considered, is entirely a matter for the jury, where the trial is held before
a Judge and Jury-vide : Korossa Rubber Co., v. Silva et al, (1) Monir, Law of
Evidence (4th Ed) Vol. 1, p. 230; Woodrofe and Amir Ali, Law of Evidence (14th
Ed) pg. 988 ; R. v. Hanmanta, (2).

A consideration of the learned trial Judge's charge to the Jury reveals that,
although this item of evidence was placed before the Jury, yet far from giving
adequate directions to the Jury as to its evidentiary value and how it should
be assessed, the Jury was in fact misdirected by the learned trial Judge; for,
in directing the Jury on this matter, the Jury was told that the name referred
to in the report P1 was- "Gamini Dolawatta". The name "Gamini Dolawatta" could
be a reference to the accused-appellant; but the name contained in P1, in
truth and in fact, is only "Gamini." This was indeed a serious misdirection:
How far this misdirection weighed with the jury in considering the identity of
the offender is extremely difficult to assess to what extent the ;knowledge
that the doctor bad been informed, by a person other than the accused, the day
after this incident, that the person responsible for the attack on the injured
man, was a person by the name of "Gamini Dolawatta", persuaded the majority of
the .gentlemen of the Jury to conclude that the offender was the accused-
appellant himself, is a matter for conjecture: This is indeed such a
misdirection as would, in my opinion, operate to vitiate the verdict of the
Jury.

Quite apart from the said item of evidence contained in P1 there was Also the
direct evidence of the injured person, G. Buddhadasa, that it was the accused-
appellant himself, who flung the acid at him. Although the said Buddhadasa had
made his statements to the Police for the first time only several days after
the said incident, yet, it is open to a Jury, properly directed, to accept the
said item of evidence given by the said Buddhadasa at the trial.

For these reasons, I agree with the Order proposed by. (H.A.G.) de Silva, J. _  
  
Appeal allowed_.

_Conviction quashed. Case sent back for re-trial or, a  
charge under s. 317 of the Penal Code._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/13.html_  

