##  Lakshman De Silva v. Hon.H.W.Senanayake and Another - SLR - 119, Vol 1 of
1990 [1989] LKSC 1; (1990) 1 Sri LR 119 (13 December 1989)

**

119

LAKSHMAN DE SILVA  
v.  
HON. H. W. SENANAYAKE AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J. DHEERARATNE, J. AND RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. (SLA) APPLICATION NO.51 OF 1989.  
DECEMBER, 4,1989.

_

Criminal Procedure -Accused conducting his own defence -Provision of
facilities like table and chair for accused to defend himself \- Commencement
of trial - Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, sections 195 and
196.

_

The indictment against the accused petitioner was received in the High Court
on 15.9.88 and the Court directed the accused to be noticed to appear on
16.9.88. The accused appeared on 16.9.88. The indictment was served on him on
16.9.88 and he was fingerprinted (s. 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure)
and trial was fixed for 29.11.88. The accused petitioner was not called upon
to plead on 16.9.88. He was absent on 29.11.88 but from the subsequent dates
undertook his own defence. He sought facilities of a chair and table to make
his defence and on being refused moved for a writ of mandamus in the Court of
Appeal. Notice was refused and the accused petitioner sought leave to appeal
in the Supreme Court eventually the matter was settled by counsel for the
State undertaking that the petitioner would be provided with a chair and a
table during the course of the trial in the High Court. On a complaint of a
breach of this undertaking

**

Held;**

The commencement of the trial is upon the indictment being read to the accused
and accused being required to plead (s. 196 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act). The trial had not commenced and therefore there has been no violation of
the undertaking given on 5.10.89.

**120**

**Per Fernando, J.**

" We did not then, and do not now, express any opinion as to whether the
petitioner had a legal right, or a Constitutional right, to be provided with a
table inside or outside the dock, although it seems to us very desirable that
an undefended accused should have all such facilities as are reasonably
necessary for the purpose of conducting his defence.".

"In view of the settlement it has also became unnecessary to come to any
finding upon the allegations as to the events of 11.5.89 including the manner
in which the petitioner was addressed ; these allegations, are not borne out
by the record. (The allegations were refusal by the High Court to accept a
motion tendered by the petitioner seeking facilities like a chair and a table
to take down notes and place documents, books etc. during the entirety of the
trial and the High Court Judge addressing the petitioner humiliatingly as
"prisoner'.) '

**

Case referred to

**_

Mohan v. Carson Cumberbatch & Co - [1988] 2 Sri L.R. 75.

_**

APPLICATION** for special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court from an order
of the Court of Appeal.

_

Petitioner in person.

_

_Upawansa Yapa, Deputy Solicitor - General, with Mrs. Kumudini Wickremasinghe,
SC., for the 2nd respondent (Attorney - General)._

_

Cur. adv. volt._

13th December 1989  
**FERNANDO, J.

**

High Court Colombo case No. 3576/88 has been pending against the accused
petitioner ("the petitioner") since August 1988. The petitioner tendered, at
the hearing of this application on 4.12.89, a certified copy of the journal
entries for the period 15.8.88 to 30.10.89. According to these journal
entries, the indictment was received in the High Court on 15.8.88, and the
Court directed that the petitioner be noticed to appear on 16.9/ 88; On
16.9.88 bail was granted, order was made that the petitioner be finger
printed, and the trial was fixed for 29.11.88. These were steps in compliance
with the provisions of section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, and
there was no attempt to comply with section 196 that day. The learned Deputy
Solicitor - General tendered a certified copy of the proceedings of 16.9.88,
which confirms that the indictment was handed over to the Petitioner, but he
was not called upon to plead on 16.9.88. It is common ground that on 16.9.88
and 29.11.89 the petitioner was represented by Counsel; that on 29.11.88 the
petitioner was absent

**121**

and a medical certificate was tendered on his behalf by Counsel, who informed
the Court that he would not be appearing on the next date, namely 1.3.89 ;
that the Court ordered that notice be issued on the petitioner informing him
of that trial date. On 16.9.88 the Court had ordered the issue of summons on
the prosecution witnesses, and on 29.11.88 most of them, including witness No.
3, were present, and were warned to appear on the next date. On and after
1.3.89 the petitioner appeared in person in the proceedings in the High Court,
as well as in the Court of Appeal and in this Court. On 1.3.89 the case was
not taken up, and was postponed for 11.5.89 ; witness No. 3 was not present
and summons was ordered. On 11.5.89, that witness was again absent although
summons had been served. On account of the Ceremonial Sitting of the Superior
Courts on 11.5.89, the Court sat only in the afternoon. The petitioner states
that he attempted to tender a written motion that, _inter alia_ \-

"Equal opportunity and facilities afforded to the learned Counsel for the
Prosecution be afforded to [him]."

"Facilities to sit (provided with a chair) and to be able to take down notes
and to place books, documents (provided with a table) during the entirety of
this trial, which may be placed in front of the Dock."

The petitioner says that the learned High Court Judge, the 1st Respondent,
refused to accept this motion, whereupon he made an oral application for these
facilities, which was refused. The case was postponed for 14.8.89, but the
reason for the postponement is not stated in the journal entries or in the
proceedings. The petitioner then applied to the Court of Appeal for Mandamus,
averring that he could not conduct his defence from the dock, as there were no
facilities to keep his books and papers, and to take down notes, and "as the
wooden bars of the ..... caged dock not only denies petitioner's visibility
partially and also partially denies the hearing, due to partial reflection of
sound waves, thereby not being able to hear properly the words spoken by
witnesses ......." ; he further alleged that the 1st respondent had addressed
him as " Prisoner". Claiming that these were violations of his fundamental
rights under Articles 12 (1) and 13 (3) of the Constitution, he prayed for a
Reference to this Court under Article 126 (3) ; for a Reference under Article
125 (1), as to the meaning of a "fair trial" ; and for Mandamus on the 1st
respondent to accept his motion, to grant the several requests therein, and to
treat him in accor

**122**

dance with Articles 12 (1) and 13 (3) during the course of the entire trial.
The Court of Appeal refused leave to issue notice of this application, and on
20.7.89 refused leave to appeal to this Court ; the petitioner then applied to
this Court on 27.7.89 for special leave to appeal, amplifying his allegations,
for instance, that he had been addressed as "prisoner" by the 1st respondent "
in a degrading form in an effort to lower [his] status .... with the
additional effect of shaming and humiliating /him]". It is relevant to mention
that had the petitioner succeeded in obtaining leave, he would have had to
succeed in several other proceedings before obtaining any part of the relief
which he sought : first an appeal in this Court, which if successful would
have resulted in a direction to the Court of Appeal to issue notice in the
Mandamus application ; if the respondents to that application disputed his
interpretation of the Constitution, References to this Court would have been
required ; the Court of Appeal would then have had to decide the Mandamus
application in accordance with the determinations of this Court upon such
References ; and from that decision a further appeal to this Court was
possible. At some stage, the question might also have arisen whether the 1st
respondent's action was " administrative action" (within the meaning of
Article 126(1) of the Constitution ) , and if so whether the only remedy was
by way of an application under Article 126.

It was thus manifestly to the petitioner's advantage that the following
settlement was reached on 5.10.89 in the course of the hearing of the
application for special leave to appeal

"..... in answer to a question from the Court, Mr. Yapa who appears for the
2nd respondent, gives an undertaking that the petitioner will be provided with
a table and a chair for the purpose of keeping his books and documents during
the course of the trial in the High Court. If this table and chair cannot be
accommodated within the dock, these facilities will be provided for the
petitioner outside the dock. In view of this undertaking the petitioner moves
to withdraw this application.".

We did not then, and do not now, express any opinion as to whether the
petitioner had a legal right, or a Constitutional right, to be provided with a
table, inside or outside the dock, although it seems to us very desirable that
an undefended accused should have all such facilities as-are reasonably
necessary for the purpose of conducting his defence. In view of

**123**

the settlement, it also became unnecessary to come to any finding upon the
allegations as to the events of 11.5.89, including the manner in which the
petitioner was addressed ; these allegations are not borne out by the record.

On 14.8:89 the case was postponed for 30.10.89, as there were three partly -
heard cases; witness No. 3 was again absent, and a third order for summons was
made. On 30.10.89, the petitioner tendered a certified copy of the settlement
to be filed of record in the High Court. On the very next day, the petitioner
made this application to this Court complaining of a deliberate breach of the
undertaking given on 5.10.89.

In his affidavit dated 31.10.89, the petitioner does not state that before the
proceedings commenced State Counsel assured him that a table and chair would
be provided in terms of the settlement ; however, in his oral submissions to
us on 13.11.89, (a summary of which was contemporaneously recorded and
confirmed by him to be accurate), he admitted that " prior to the case being
called ...... State Counsel had agreed that a table and a chair would be
provided in terms of the order of ..... 5th October, 1989, When the trial
commences"; in a further affidavit dated 20.11.89, he states that he was
assured that" at the commencement of the hearing of the case, [he] would be
provided a table and chair. " Having regard to the reasons urged on 5.10.89 as
to why the table and chair were required, and the phrase emphasized above, it
is clear that both State Counsel and the petitioner had in mind a future point
of time \- the commencement of the trial, or of the actual hearing. The
petitioner however vehemently contended at the hearing of this application
that the settlement contemplated the provision of these facilities throughout
the entire proceedings, including dates on which the case was merely called or
mentioned ; that " trial date" (and the Sinhala equivalent used in the journal
entries) referred to any date on which proceedings took place ; that 11.5.89,
14.8.89 and 30.10.89 were fixed as " trial dates" and were so described in the
journal entries ; and accordingly, the proceedings that took place on 30.10.89
were " during the course of the trial", and that the failure to provide a
table constituted a breach of undertaking.

Before considering that submission, it is necessary to refer to the events of
that day in some detail. In his first affidavit, the petitioner alleges that
"the Hon. Trial Judge [before he came on the bench] also heard the State
Counsel with the case brief in his Chambers, in my absence" ; on

**124**

13.11.89 his position was that " before this case was called, the State
Counsel conferred with the Judge in Chambers, but that he does not know what
was discussed"; there was no suggestion of any impropriety, and quite
understandably no counter affidavit was filed in reply.

When the present High Court Judge, who had succeeded the 1st Respondent, came
on the bench, according to the petitioner, even before he could comply with
the Mudaliyar's direction to go into the dock, State Counsel made an
application for a postponement on the ground that summons had not been served
on witness No. 3, who was absent; it was submitted that the case could not be
commenced without that witness, and if the evidence of that witness was not
available, the prosecution might have to be withdrawn. This is borne out by
the record, and confirmed by the petitioner's submission to us on 13.11.89
that" when the case was taken up, State Counsel informed the High Court Judge
that witness No. 3 was not in Court and that without that witness the State
cannot begin the proceedings, and State Counsel applied for a postponement on
this basis although other witnesses were present". For the fourth time, order
was made for summons on witness No. 3, and the other witnesses were released,
being warned to appear when noticed; no date was mentioned at this stage. In
view of the petitioner's categorical submission to us on 13.11.89 it is quite
clear that he was then not alleging any impropriety against State Counsel, and
that the latter's submissions were heard and understood by him. He further
submitted that State Counsel had misled the Court by stating that summons had
not been served on witness No. 3, for, he said, summons had previously been
served ; this is an unwarranted accusation, for what was then relevant was
that summons had not been served, despite the order made on 14.8.89, requiring
attendance on 30.10.89 (and not whether summons had earlier been served).
Another contention, advanced on 4.12.89, was that he did not hear all that was
said by State Counsel when applying for the postponement, and that some of the
submissions referred to in the proceedings may have been made in Chambers;
this conflicts with the position taken up on 13.11.89, and must be rejected.

Although the petitioner stated in his first affidavit that "the case was
.postponed for trial on 14.12.89", it is clear from the proceedings that this
was not a trial date, but only a calling date. According to the petitioner he
then sought to make submissions, in English, in regard to the provision of a
table, as well as certain legal objections to the indictment; although

**125**

State Counsel had been permitted to make submissions in English (which were
translated for the record by the learned Judge), the petitioner complains that
he was asked to make his submissions in Sinhala ; although in his first
affidavit it was suggested that there was a Sinhala - English interpreter
available. It later transpired that in fact there was no interpreter, and
(according to the petitioner) "the Mudaliyar's Sinhala was not very good". The
application for the postponement obviously would not have occasioned any great
difficulty in translation, but it is understandable that the learned High
Court Judge felt that legal submissions involving the validity of the
indictment should be precisely recorded: if the petitioner could not make
those submissions in Sinhala, then, in the absence of a competent interpreter,
it was desirable that this be done on a subsequent date.

He informed the petitioner that since the case was being postponed,
arrangements would be made for his submissions to be made and recorded in
English on the next date. Admittedly, the petitioner was so informed.
Considering the petitioner's repeated allegations of inaccuracies in the High
Court record, these arrangements cannot be faulted. It would have been
apparent to the petitioner that no proceedings of any consequence were likely
to take place on 30.10.89 after the application for a postponement was
allowed.

The petitioner repeatedly stressed that he was the victim of a fabricated
case, and that the trial was being unduly delayed on various pretexts ; he was
clearly labouring under a tremendous sense of grievance. However, 11.5.89 was
the third date ; and one of the two previous postponements had been due to his
absence. It would seem from the facts set out above, that the petitioner was
too quick to see an injury or a slight, where none existed or was intended ;
that his recollection was faulty, and that he was somewhat inclined towards
exaggeration and speculation. It is clear that there was no intention on the
part of Judge or Counsel to deprive the petitioner of the benefits of the
settlement of 5.10.89.

I now turn to the petitioner's contention that the proceedings that took place
on 30.10.89 were "during the course of the trial" and that the failure to
provide a table constituted a breach of the undertaking. The petitioner relied
strongly on the judgment of Seneviratne, J., in Mohan v. Carson Cumber batch &
Co , [1988] 2 Sri L.R. 75, who held that there 1is no discrepency between the
English and Sinhala texts of Article 106 (1) of

**126**

the Constitution, so that " sittings of Court" in the former is identical to "
nadu vibhaga" in the latter. Therefore, he concluded, " trial" as used in the
settlement, and " nadu vibhagaya" or "Vibhagaya" as used in the journal
entries, referred to any proceedings whatsoever. We are not here concerned
with the interpretation or application of Article 106 (1), and I have no
difficulty in assuming that the relevant proceedings in the High Court should
have taken place at public sittings of the Court. Article 106 (1) does not
help in determining whether those proceedings were "during the course of the
trial", and that question has to be decided in the context of Article 13 (3),
as the settlement was reached (in proceedings involving the question whether
the petitioner's right to "a fair trial", under Article 13 (3), required that
he be provided) with certain facilities; the " trial" contemplated by the
parties was a trial under the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The undertaking
was given in that context, and was clearly understood by both parties to refer
to the stage of the " hearing" even on 30.10.89, the petitioner's discussion
with State Counsel proceeded on the basis that the " trial" or " hearing" had
not yet commenced. Apart from the intention of the parties, section 196 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act indicates that the "commencement of the trial"
is upon the indictment being read to the accused and the accused being
required to plead ; that has not yet happened in this case, and therefore the
trial has not commenced. Faced with this difficulty, the petitioner tried to
make out that he had pleaded on 16.9.88, and that the record was faulty, but
his description of the events of that day indicates only that after the
indictment was served either his Counsel or he had remarked that it was a
fabricated case and that he was not guilty.

I hold that there has been neither a violation of the undertaking given on
5.10.89, nor any intention of doing so, and I am confident that when the trial
commences, in terms of section 196, that undertaking will be honoured . If
there are proceedings prior to that stage at which the petitioner requires
such facilities, it will be open to him to make an application to the
presiding Judge - but that would be a matter not covered by the undertaking
already given.

That finding renders it unnecessary to consider the question whether in these
proceedings an order could have been made to compel compliance with that
undertaking, by way of proceedings for contempt or otherwise ; or whether the
amended petition, tendered by the petitioner, ( seeking to add the present
High Court Judge and the Deputy Solicitor

**127**

General as respondents) should be accepted. The petitioner's application is
dismissed, without costs.

**

DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree.

**RAMANATHAN, J. -** I agree.

_**Application dismissed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/1.html_  

