##  Sheela Sinharage v. The Attorney General - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 1985 [1984]
LKSC 14; (1985) 1 Sri LR 1 (31 October 1984)

**

1

SHEELA SINHARAGE  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY- GENERAL

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WIMALARATNE, J., RANASINGHE, J. AND RODRIGO, J.  
S.C. 2/84 - H.C. COLOMBO 692/79.  
OCTOBER 3, 1984.

_

Abortion - Death caused by septic abortion - S. 305 of the Penal Code - Dying
deposition - Perusal and use of it by Judge when not produced before him in
evidence - S. 110(4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act - Witness
refreshing memory from notes - Conflicting accounts of statement of deceased -
Sections 32 and 33 of the Evidence Ordinance - Need for corroboration -
Corroboration coming circuitously from deceased herself and not from
independent quarter - Use of false denial by accused as corroboration -
Miscarriage of justice- Code of Criminal Procedure Act, sections 334 and 335
and Article 138(1) of the Constitution_.

The accused-appellant, a lady Ayurvedic physician was indicted before the High
Court with having caused the death of one Merlin Ranasinghe a woman with child
by inserting two pieces of stickinto her vagina on. 22.4.1973 with intent to
cause a miscarriage and thereby with committing an offence punishable under s.
305 of the Penal Code. She was tried by the Judge without a jury, found guilty
and sentenced to two years' imprisonment.

The prosecution version was that on 22.4.1973 the deceased had attended the
appellant's dispensary and wanted treatment to abort the child she was
carrying. The appellant had inserted two pieces of stick into her vagina and
also put in some medicine. She had later taken ill and she went to the
appellant's dispensary again on 23.4.1973 and wanted the sticks removed. But
the appellant's treatment not availing the deceased had entered the Castle
Street Hospital where she died on 26.4.1973.

The main contention of the appellant was that the prosecution had failed to
discharge its burden of proving beyond reasonable doubt that the appellant was
the person who inserted the two pieces of stick into the deceased's vagina. On
this point the prosecution relied mainly on the evidence of Dr. (Mrs.) Was. A
copy of the statement of the deceased as recorded by Dr. Waas had been
produced as P 1 in the Magistrate's Court but not in the High Court. This
statement P 1 though not produced in evidence before him, was perused by the
High Court Judge during the trial before him. The appellant while admitting
the visit of the deceased to her dispensary on 23.4.1973 denied any such visit
on 22.4.1973.

**

Held -

**

(1) Section 110 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979
empowers the High Court Judge to use a statement made at a non-summary
proceeding to aid him at the trial but it cannot be used as evidence in the
case. Under section 33 of the

**2**

Evidence Ordinance, evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding can
be proved at the later stage of the trial in accordance with the provisions of
the laws of evidence and criminal procedure. But here the High, Court Judge
perused the evidence given at the non-summary inquiry of the deceased's
statement to Dr. Waas and used material contained in it for the purpose of his
judgment without having taken any steps to have such material placed before.
him in evidence. This procedure is illegal and cannot be justified.

(2) The deceased had made conflicting statements about how she fell ill: There
were - conflicting versions of the deceased's statement. It would not have
been therefore safe to act on the evidence of Dr. Was without corroboration.
Such corroboration must come from an independent source and not circuitously,
as here, from the deceased herself.

A false denial can amount to corroboration in certain circumstances. For a
false denial to amount to corroboration of a witness' evidence such false
denial must relate to a vital issue which is in dispute in the case. The
denial of the appellant that the deceased visited her in her dispensary on
22.4.1973 cannot be regarded as corroboration.

The statement of the deceased to Dr; (Mrs.) Waas stands, in law, alone and
uncorroborated' in regard to the identity of the offender. It must not be
acted on because of the conflicting versions

(3) The question of no "substantial miscarriage of justice" under section
334(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and Article 138(1) of the
Constitution does not aris for consideration. Section 334 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act applies only to trials before a judge and jury. Appeals
from a verdict of the High Court at a trial without a jury must be determined
according to section 335 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1) _The King v. Asirvadan Nadar_ (1950) ,51 NLR 322, 325.

(2) _Mendis v. Paramaswami_ (1958) 62 NLR 302, 305.

(3) _B. F. Lewis Fernando v. The Queen_ (1952) 54 NLR 274, 277, 278.

(4) _The Queen v. Anthonypillai (1965) 69 NLR 34, 38._

(5) _The King v. Atukorale_ (1948) 50 NLR 256 _.

_

(6) _The Queen v. Julis_ (1963) 65 NLR 505, 526

(7) _Karunaratne v. The Queen_ (1966) 68 NLR 257, 259.

(8) _Dole v. Romanis Appu_ (1939) 40 NLR 449 _.

_

(9) _Tennekoon v. Tennekoon_ 78 NLR 13.

(10) _Warawita v. Jane Nona (1954) 58 NLR 111.

_

(11) _Dharmadasa v. Gunawathy_ (1957) 59 NLR 501.

(12) _Somasena v. Kusumawathie_ (1958) 60 NLR 355.

(13) _Indrawathie Kumarihamy v. Purijjala_ (1970) 74 NLR 430 _.

_

(14) _J. F. Throne and Others_ (1978) 66 Cr. Ap. R60.6.

(15) _The King v. Fernando_ (1930) 32 NLR 250, 253.

(16) _Martin Fernando v. The Inspector of Police,_ Minuwangode (1945) 46 NLR
210.

(17) _The King v. Guneratne_ 14 C.L.Rec. 144.

(18) _Sangarakkita Thero et al v. Buddharakkita Thero_ (1949) 39 CLW 86.

(19) _Perera v. Naganathan_ (1964) 66 NLR 438.

(20) _Hamid v. Karthan_ (1917) 4 CWR 363.

**3**

_

 _(21) _The King v. Soysa_ (1924) 26 NLR 324.

(22) _R. v. Cooray_ (1926) 28 NLR 74.

(23) _Inspector of Police, Gampaha v. Perera_ (1931) 33 NLR 69.

(24) _Paulis Appu v. Don Davith_ (1930) 32 NLR 335.

(25) _Bartholomeusz v. Velu_ (1931) 33 NLR 161.

(26) _S.I.P. v. Thalagahagoda_ 13 CLRec 211.

(27) _Kitnapulle v. Christoffelz_ (1948) 49 NLR 401.

(28) _Reg v. Arthur Perera_ (1956) 57 NLR 313, 326.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with Miss. Saumya de Silva for accused-appellant.

D. P. Kumarasinghe, S.S.C. for respondent.

Cur. adv. Vult

__

October 31, 1984.

_**

RANASINGHE, J.

**

On 23.4:73 at 4.05 p.m. Merlin Ranasinghe, the deceased, was admitted to the
N.O.H. Ward of the Castle Street Hospital, Colombo. Upon admission Dr. (Miss)
Panchchalingam who was in charge of the said ward, had, with the assistance of
Dr. Neela Ranjithraja and Dr. (Mrs.) Waas, examined the deceased, at about
4.30 p.m., and had found the deceased to be pregnant and suffering from septic
abortion. Parts of a foetus had also been removed from the deceased by Dr.
(Miss) Panchchalingam. Dr. Ranjithraja had then questioned the deceased. The
deceased had, in answer to Dr. Ranjithraja, told Dr. Ranjithraja that she had
started to bleed as a result of a fall near the well. No reference had been
made in that reply to an abortion.

Thereafter on the following day, 24.4.73, as the deceased's condition had
taken a turn to the worse, Dr. Ranjithraja had. about 10 p.m., directed Dr.
(Mrs.) Waas to record the deceased's statement. Dr. (Mrs.) Waas had then
proceeded to question the deceased in the presence of Dr. Ranjithraja; and the
deceased had made an oral statement to this doctor. The statement so made is,
briefly : that, on 22.4.73, she had gone to the accused "in order to get an
abortion done" : that the accused had'" introduced 2 sticks into her vagina",
and had also given her some medicine to be taken orally : that she was also
advised to see the accused on the following day :. that the same evening she
started to bleed and also developed a temperature : that, on the morning of
the following day the 23rd, as she was feeling faintish and also found her
vision blurred, she went

**4**

back to the accused and requested her to pull-out the "two sticks" which had
been inserted the previous day.: that she is not sure whether they were pulled
out that although the accused asked her not to go to the Castle Street
Hospital, she decided to seek treatment from the Hospital.

After Dr. (Mrs.) Waas had recorded the said statement from the deceased, the
hospital authorities had contacted the' Borella Police Station. P.C. 5256
Abeyratne, who was then attached to the said Police Station, had then
proceeded to the said Castle Street Hospital, and he too had, later that same-
night, recorded a statement (a copy of which was marked P2 at the trial) from
the deceased. Briefly, the deceased had, in the said statement, stated : that
she went to see the accused on 22.4.73 with her five year old son : that, when
she told the accused of her intention, the accused had "inserted some
medicine" into her vagina : that, after she went home, she began to bleed from
her vagina : that on the following day 23.4.73, she went again to see the
accused .- that she went on that occasion with her husband : that, although
the accused assured her that she would be cured, she nevertheless proceeded to
the Castle Street Hospital and had herself admitted to the said hospital the
same evening.

The deceased's condition had thereafter deteriorated and she passed away in
the early hours of the 26th April 1973. A post- mortem examination on the body
of the deceased had been held by Dr. Sarveswaran. A copy of the post-mortem
report was produced at the trial marked P1. The cause of death has been set
out as "septicaemia following septic abortion".

The accused appellant - a registered ayurvedic-practitioner of eleven years
standing and practising at. Etul-Kotte, along with her husband, himself a
registered Ayurvedic-Practitioner - was thereupon indicted before the High
Court, Colombo with having caused the death of the deceased : that she did on
22.4.73, with intent to cause a miscarriage, insert into the vagina of Merlin
Ranasinghe, a woman with child,` and thereby caused her death, an offence
punishable under sec. 305 of the Penal Code.

The learned judge of the High Court, after trial without a jury, convicted
the. accused-appellant of the said charge, and imposed a sentence of 2 years'
imprisonment - which said imprisonment, the , Court of Appeal has construed to
be simple in character.

**5**

The accused-appellant's appeal to the Court of Appeal having failed, the
accused-appellant has now come before this Court.

The principal submission made to this Court by learned Counsel appearing for
the accused-appellant is: that the prosecution has failed to discharge the
burden resting on it to prove that it was the accused-appellant who committed
the said offence on the deceased that the prosecution has failed to prove
beyond reasonable doubt that it was the accused-appellant who inserted the
"two sticks" (whether they be "" what is alleged to have been used by the
accused-appellant has been variously described in the indictment and in the
proceedings) into the deceased's vagina and caused the septic abortion which
brought about the death of the deceased.

The principal item of evidence relied on by the prosecution to prove the
identity of the offender who committed the said offence is the aforesaid oral
statement said to have been made by the deceased to Dr. (Mrs.) Waas at the
Castle Street Hospital shortly after 10 p.m. on the night of the 24th April
1973. The said statement was relied on as a dying deposition which is
admissible under sec. 32 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

The statement of the deceased, which is said to have been so made to Dr.
(Mrs.) Waas, would appear, according to the evidence, to have been
contemporaneously recorded by Dr. Waas. The judgment of the Court of Appeal
also refers to such statement having been "recorded" by Dr. Waas. The record
said to have been so made by Dr. (Mrs.) Waas of the oral statement which she
says, was made to her by the deceased, has itself not been produced in
evidence at the trial before the High Court. The evidence, which is available
in the record of the proceedings before the High Court, is only the oral
evidence of Dr. (Mrs.) Waas of what, according to her, the deceased told her
that night in the hospital. The judgment of the Court of Appeal discloses
that, before the Court of Appeal, learned Counsel for the accused-.appellant
had "severely criticised" the manner in which the said statement had been
proved at the trial. The Court of Appeal had taken the view that Dr. (Mrs.)
Waas had, at the time she gave evidence, been making use of some notes which
were in her possession, and that, in view of the provisions of sec. 159 (1)
and (3) of the Evidence Ordinance, this witness could have refreshed her
memory from a copy of the statement so recorded by her, and that the

**6**

fact that this witness was so permitted by the trial judge to use a copy of
the statement recorded by her, leads the court to assume that such permission
had been granted because the trial court had been satisfied that there was
sufficient reason for the non-production of the original record,.: This, as
already stated was only an assumption by the Court of Appeal. There is no
express order made by the learned trial judge in regard to this matter ; and
there is nothing in the proceedings= themselves of the trial Court to indicate
that the learned trial judge had expressly addressed his mind in regard to the
requirements of the' provisions of Sec. 159 of the Evidence Ordinance before
Dr. (Mrs.) Waas was permitted to refresh her memory from the document, which
she had, in order to give oral evidence of what she says the deceased told her
on the night in question. It however, seems to me, in view of the submissions
made to us at the hearing before us of the procedure adopted by the learned
trial judge - and which said. procedure has been found acceptable by the Court
of Appeal as well (to which reference. will be made later on in this judgment)
-of perusing on his own; the evidence given by this witness in the course of
the non-summary inquiry held before the Magistrate's Court, that the learned
trial judge, who so perused her evidence given before the learned Magistrate,
would have become aware of the existence of the document which had, at that
inquiry, been produced as P 1. P 1 has been described as a "certified copy of
the patient's statement". In her evidence at the trial Dr. (Mrs.) Waas has
stated that :„ "at the Magistrate's Court, before I gave evidence I examined
the Bed-head Ticket" : that she "got this report after examining the Bed-head
Ticket". The "report" , so referred to could be the document from which she
was refreshing her memory when she gave evidence at the trial. The document
produced by Dr. (Mrs.) Waas as P 1 in her evidence- which as stated' earlier
has been perused by the learned trial judge - in the Magistrate's Court has
not been marked in evidence by the prosecution at the trial, even though its
contents have been sought to be led in evidence through Dr. (Mrs.) Waas as
part of the prosecution case. No explanation seems to have been given at the
trial by the prosecution for the non-production of either the said document,
or of the Bed-head Ticket referred to. by Dr. (Mrs.) Waas. Whatever be the
document which Dr. (Mrs.) Waas had in her possession and from which she
refreshed her memory when she was in the witness-box at the trial, there seems
to be considerable room for doubt, as submitted by learned Counsel for the
accused-appellant, whether that document was the record itself or even a copy
of the

**7**

record, she says, she made on the night in question itself contemporaneously
with: what the deceased is said to have told her, in view of a very
significant difference in regard to a matter which the prosecution itself has
thought to be of such importance as to require a reference to it in the
indictment itself, namely the means adopted by the accused-appellant to cause
the alleged abortion. Dr. (Mrs.) Waas, in her evidence - given after referring
to the document she had - refers to what the deceased told' her was used as
This reference-was made by the witness four times in the course of her
evidence. In the document P 1 produced by this witness in her evidence -
perused by the learned trial judge - in the Magistrate's Court, what is said
to have been inserted has been referred to as Be that as it may the resulting
position is that the document which came into existence contemporaneously with
the oral statement made by the deceased, has not: been produced at the trial..
The said document would be the best evidence of the words used by the deceased
herself. There were no good grounds urged for the non-production of the' said
original document. On the contrary, all the facts and circumstances, which
emerged at the trial, point unmistakably to the' said document having been
available for production in evidence at the trial. The necessity for the
ipsissima verba used by a deceased in a dying declaration has been emphasised
by the then Supreme Court of this island in several decisions : _The King v.
Asirvadan Nadar_ (1), _Mendis v. Paramaswami_ (2).

Apart from the aforementioned statement made-to Dr. (Mrs.) Waas the deceased,
as set our earlier, had also made two other statements -one before and the
other after the' said statement - in which too' she had purported to, describe
the circumstances which resulted in her death. The earlier one, also made to a
doctor - though a male - who attended on her after admission' to the same
hospital, is embodied in the document D 1 produced by the defence. The later
one is in the document, which; according to the proceedings of the trial, was
marked P 2 by `learned-" State `Counsel in his cross-examination of the
police-constable who had recorded it and who was called to testify at' the
trial not by the prosecution but by the defence.

**8**

Both D 1 on the one hand and P 2 on the other hand come into conflict not only
inter se, but also separately with the statement that the deceased is stated
to have made to Dr. (Mrs.) Waas in regard to how exactly the abortion in
question was caused. The conflict between P 1 and 'D 2 with the statement to
Dr. (Mrs.) Waas, which alone has been relied on by the prosecution, is in
regard to the manner in which the offence has, according to the prosecution as
set out in the indictment, been committed. The Court of Appeal was of opinion
that the manner of the commission of the offence as put forward by the
prosecution is of considerable importance : that it was the duty of the trial
judge to find whether the offence has been committed by the accused in the
manner set out in the indictment : that the trial judge has seriously
misdirected himself on this particular matter. Although the Court of Appeal
took the view that the evidentiary value of Dr. Ranjithraja's deposition,
embodied in D1, is weakened due to certain circumstances specified by the
Court of Appeal, - namely because it stands alone and is not supported by Dr.
(Mrs.) Waas, and because the defence has failed to put to Professor Fernando,
the chief medical witness for the prosecution at the trial, a view expressed
by Dr. Ranjithraja, the Court of Appeal, however, was also of the view that
the contradiction, as between D 2 and the deceased's statement to Dr. (Mrs.)
Waas "remains". Although Dr. Ranjithraja was not called by the prosecution at
the trial, he was nevertheless put forward at the non-summary inquiry by the
prosecution as a witness for the prosecution and tendered to the defence for
cross-examination and . thereafter re-examined on behalf of the prosecution.
At no stage had his evidence been challenged in the Magistrate's Court by the
prosecution as being unreliable or unacceptable. He was then put forward as a
witness of truth ; and the defence is entitled to have his deposition,
contained in D 1, which is legally admissible and has been properly proved,
considered as truthful evidence. The matter, on which there was a conflict
between the deceased's statement to Dr. (Mrs.) Waas and each of the other
statements D 1 and P2, was thus a matter of importance. However "human and
understandable" be the explanations preferred by learned: Counsel for the
prosecution in respect of the aforesaid variations `in the respective
statements made by the deceased, yet, as the Court of Appeal stated "the
contradiction remains". It must also be noted-that even the-trial judge seems.
to have acted upon Dr. (Mrs.) Waas's evidence given at the trial, in regard to
the contents of the deceased's statement to her, only after -

**9**

whatever be the validity of such a procedure- a perusal of the evidence given
by her at' the earlier stage of these proceedings in the Magistrate's Court.

It must also be noted that, in answer to a question from the prosecution
witness Pearle Perera, who had accompanied the deceased to the accused-
appellant's dispensary on 23.4.73 at the request of the deceased herself, as
to what her ailment was the deceased had told Pearle Perera only that she, the
deceased, "had shivered and developed a temperature". No reference had been
made to the accused-appellant having being in any way responsible for her
condition.

In the result the statement said to have been made by the deceased to Dr.
(Mrs.) Waas and relied on by the prosecution was such that special care was
needed in considering whether the said statement should be accepted as true
and accurate. The, said statement was such that it was not safe to act upon it
unless it was corroborated - vide : The King v. Asirvadan Nadar (supra) ; 8.
F. Lewis _Fernando v. The Queen_ (3); _The Queen v. Anthonypillai_ (4).

A consideration of the judgments of the Court of Appeal and the High Court
reveals that both courts did also think it necessary to consider the question
of how far there was corroboration of the said statement of the deceased.

The Court of Appeal has proceeded on the basis that, whilst the said statement
made to Dr. (Mrs.) Waas supplies the only direct' evidence to connect the
accused-appellant with the commission of the said offence, corroboration of
the deceased's allegation against the accused-appellant herself is provided by
the evidence of the prosecution witness Pearle Perera, and by a false denial
made by the accused-appellant herself of the deceased's allegation that she
met the accused-appellant for the first time in this connection on 22.4.73 at
the accused-appellant's dispensary in Etul-kotte.

The item of evidence in the testimony of the witness Pearle Perera, which is'
relied on as corroborating the deceased's evidence incriminating the accused-
appellant, is Pearle Perera's statement of a discussion between the deceased
and her husband after they had set out from the deceased's home, on the
afternoon of the 23rd of April 1973; to go to hospital. Pearle Perera did in
her evidence say that on

**10**

their way to hospital, a discussion took place between the deceased and her
husband as to where the deceased should go and that in the course of such
discussion, the deceased told her husband " and that there upon they first
proceed to the accused- appellant's dispensary, and that in was only there
after that the deceased enter the castle street hospital on 23.4.73. The court
of Appeal has taken the view that this particular item of evidences admissible
under the second limb of sec. 32(1) of the evidence Ordinance as it relates to
the to the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in her [the
deceased's] death, and that it also corroborates not only the deceased's
evidence of her first visit to the accused-appellant's dispensary on the
previous day, 22.4.73, but also of what the accused-appellant did on that
occasion. In my opinion, however, this item of evidence in the testimony of
pearle Perera does not, in law, amount to such corroboration, for although
this item of evidence is placed before court through the witness pearle Perera
it is in truth and in fact only a statement made by the deceased who is
herself the witness who requires to be corroborated. It is not an item of
evidence extraneous to the deceased herself . It does not relate to an
independent circumstances which a person other than the deceased herself is in
a position directly to testify to. It is not independent testimony ; and " it
lacks the essential quality of coming from an independent quarter". It is
evidence which has "proceeded circuitously" from the deceased herself.
Although the said item of evidence may be taken to show the consistency of the
deceased's evidence given at the trial, yet, it "cannot be regarded as
corroboration in the proper sense in which that world is understood in cases
of this kind and it is a misdirection to refer it as such" \- vide : _The king
v. Atukorale_ (5) ; _The Queen v. Julis_ (6) ; _Karunaratne v. The Queen_ (7)
; _Dole v. Romanis Appu_ (8). In this connection reference has to be made to
the decision of the then Supreme Court in the case _Tennekoon v .Tennekoon_
(9) where (Malcolm) Perera, J. has taken the view that in an application for
maintenance a statement made by the applicant-mother herself, in regard to the
paternity of the child, would be admissible to corroborate the applicant-
mother's evidence, it such statement satisfied the requirements of sec. 157
Evidence Ordinance. It has, however, to be observed that, although Perera, J.
did take the view that a previous statement made by the applicant herself,
whose evidence had to be corroborated, could be regarded as corroborative
evidence (and so also a false statement of the defendant), yet Perera, J.
Proceeded to conclude at page 24, that "quite apart from the

**11**

statement of the applicant to her mother . . . . ., I think the unimpeachable
evidence of Dingiri Banda to which I have already referred, more than am ply
corroborates' the applicant's evidence on material particulars". What was
decisive -seems to have been the "unimpeachable" evidence from an independent
quarter. Furthermore, the earlier decisions of the; earlier Supreme Court '"
_The King v. Atukorale_ (5). _Queen v. Julis_ (6) and _Karunaratne v. The
Queen_ ' (7) - referred to by me above, do not seem to have' been cited to the
Bench of two judges which heard the Tennekoon's case (supra;. It seem to me
that- the said view taken by Perera, J.-in regard to a previous statement by
the very witness, who needs to be corroborated, being accepted as
corroboration -must give Way to the other authoritative decisions referred to
by me.

The evidence of Pearle Perera that the deceased did in fact go to the accused-
appellant's dispensary on 23.4.73 does not amount to corroboration of the
deceased's evidence of her ('deceased's) visit to the accused-appellant on the
previous day, 22.433` and of what happened inside that dispensary on that
first visit. Pearle Perera had not gone into the dispensary and cannot, and'
does not, testify to what took place inside the room in which there were only
the deceased, her husband and the ''accused-appellant. 'Furthermore, the
accused-appellant admits, 'that the deceased came to her dispensary on the
23rd April, and that she treated the deceased on that occasion. If, however,
the accused-appellant had denied the deceased's visit on the 23rd April as
well, then' an acceptance of Pearle Perera's evidence on `that point, and a
finding that the` accused-appellant's denial is deliberately false, would have
produced certain consequences. Such a situation does not, as stated earlier,
however arise in this case.

The evidence of the deceased and of the two prosecution witnesses, Pearle Per
era, referred to above, and Japin Nona do, however, disclose the existence of
a person who was in position to testify to what happened inside the accused-
appellant's consulting room when she examined the deceased on the afternoon of
the 23rd April 73 and thereby. furnish evidence of the deceased's evidence in
regard to what the deceased says took place on the previous. day, 22.4.73, as
between her and the, accused-appellant. The person so disclosed is none other
than the deceased's husband who was on the list of witnesses for the
prosecution set `out in the indictment. He, however; -has not testified for
the prosecution at the 'trial. Our attention has not been drawn to any' ground
or explanation submitted

**12**

to the trial court, or even to the Court of Appeal, in regard to the failure
to call the deceased's husband at the trial for the prosecution. Although,
when this was referred to by learned Counsel for the accused-appellant in the
course of .his submissions to this court, learned .Senior State- Counsel
appearing for, the Respondent stated from the Bar that learned State Counsel,
who had appeared at the trial for the State, has informed him that this
witness was dead at'-the time the trial commenced; no evidence, in a form such
as is usually tendered to satisfy the Court in regard to such a matter and
thereby silence any possible comment by the defence, has been tendered on
behalf of the prosecution to the trial Court or to the Court of, Appeal, or,
even row, to this Court. Although there is this defect in. the case for the
prosecution, it is not necessary to discuss it further in view of the opinion.
I take upon the principal submission, referred to earlier, made to this Court
on behalf of the accused-appellant.

That a false denial deliberately made in Court by a person, against whom an
allegation is made in proceedings instituted against him, of a matter of
vital; importance could, under certain circumstances be taken as.
corroborating the allegation so made by the complainant whose evidence is, in
law, required to be corroborated, is a principle which has been laid down by
the Supreme Court, of this Island -vide : _Warawita v. Jane. Nona_ (10) ;
_Dharmadasa v. Gunawathy_ (11) ; _Somasena v. Kusumawathie_ (12),;
_Indrawathie Kumarihamy v. Purijjala_ (13) ;, _Tennekoon v. Tennekoon_
(supra).

The aforesaid decisions all dealt with cases in. which claims for maintenance
or seduction were made. Our attention has not been drawn to any, decision made
in this Island in proceedings instituted under the criminal laws of the
Island. The Court of Appeal has, in its judgment, referred to the decision of
the Court of Appeal in England in the case of J. P. Throne and Others (14),
where the Court of Appeal considered this` principle in relation to the
evidence of an accomplice in which criminal charges of conspiracy and robbery
were levelled against the accused. In considering the question whether the
conduct of the accused putting forward alibis which the prosecution alleged
were fabricated' to deceive the jury was evidence capable of corroborating the
evidence of an accomplice; who testified for the prosecution against the
accused, the Court stated at p. 18.

"The prosecution alleged that all these alibis -had been fabricated to deceive
the jury and that if this was so the very act of fabrication was evidence
capable of being corroboration of O' Mahoney's

**13**

evidence against them. Counsel did not suggest that alibis fabricated with
such intent, could not be corroboration. In our judgment they can be, provided
that. the jury is satisfied that the falsity has not arisen from mistake and
that the fabrication has not come about through panic or stupidity";

and in-regard to the defence submission that there was not enough evidence to
justify the jury finding that there has been the relevant kind of fabrication,
the Court held that there was evidence from which the relevant kind of
fabrication could be inferred.

A consideration of this principle, as elucidated in the judgments referred to
above, makes it quite Blear that the statement so sought to be relied on must
relate to a vital issue which is in dispute in the case that it must not only
be false, but must also be deliberately false : that its falsity must be
established by evidence aliunde, that is by evidence which is in of and
extraneous to the witness who stands in need of corroboration. Before this
principle could be invoked, it is absolutely important that the falsity of the
statement made by the defendant, or the accused as the case may be, must be
clearly established. The statement so sought to be relied upon must first be
proved to be deliberately false. Such falsity must be proved by other
independent facts and circumstances. The mere fact that such statement comes
into conflict with the assertion made by the witness sought to be corroborated
is not sufficient. Otherwise, it would amount to using statement 'A' to
condemn statement 'B' and then proceeding to use statement 'B' to support
statement W. In other words it would amount to the statement, which requires
to be strengthened, itself being used to provide the material to be used to so
strengthen it. Thus in this case the falsity of the accused-appellant's
statement, that the deceased did not consult her at her dispensary on 22.4.73,
must first be established by other independent evidence which does not issue.
forth from the deceased herself. That the-said denial of the accused-appellant
was deliberately false must be evidenced by facts: and circumstances which are
testified to by a witness or witnesses other than the, witness who needs to be
corroborated. That such denial is in conflict with an assertion made by the
deceased herself is by itself insufficient to establish the falsity which it
is contended corroborates the deceased's allegation against the accused-
appellant. A consideration of the judgment of the Court of Appeal, in my
opinion, makes it clear that this is precisely the approach adopted by the
Court of Appeal. There was

**14**

no evidence - direct or circumstantial - before the' trial court, other than
the assertion made by' the deceased in her dying declaration to Dr. (Mrs. )
Waas, to `justify a finding that the accused-appellant was unmistakably
speaking an untruth : when she stated under oath that the deceased did not see
her at her dispensary on the 22nd April 1973. There was on-this point- whether
the-deceased consulted the accused-appellant at the accused-appellant's
dispensary in Etul Kotte on 22.4.73 - only the statement-made by the deceased
in the said dying deposition made to Dr. (Mrs.) Wass on 24.4.73 on the one
hand, and, on the other, a statement made in court under oath by the accused-
appellant repudiating the. deceased's said assertion. The conclusion that the
accused-appellant's such denial was false based only on the fact that the
trial court was of the opinion that the deceased's assertion in the dying
declaration is true. The assertion so made by the deceased stands alone
unsupported by any other independent fact or circumstance (as what emerges
from Pearle Perera's evidence of the discussion between the. deceased and her
husband is also only material furnished- by the deceased herself) to support
what she says. Similarly there is no independent fact or circumstance to show
that the accused-appellant's assertion is not true. That being so, such
falsity of the accused-appellant's denial, as is required as a condition
precedent to the application of the said principle, has not in this case been
proved:

The duty of an appellate court in a criminal case has been considered in
several cases : The King v. Fernando (15); Martin Fernando v. The Inspector of
Police, Minuwangoda (16); The King v. Guneratne et al. (17); Sangarakkita
Thero et al. v. Buddharakkita Thero (18); Perera v. Naganathan (19). It must
also be observed that the, findings of the trial court in this case in regard
to the culpability of the accused-appellant herself, is not based upon the
perception of the evidence placed before the trial judge but rather upon an
evaluation of such evidence. The existence of concurrent findings by the High
Court and by the Court of 'Appeal in regard to the guilt of the accused-
appellant does riot, therefore, stand in the way of this Court too testing the
evidence led at the trial "extrinsically as well as intrinsically"`

For the foregoing reasons I am of opinion that the aforesaid statement of the
deceased made to Dr. (Mrs.) Waas stands, in law, alone and uncorroborated, in
regard to the identity of the offender.

**15**

The Court of Appeal was of opinion that although the Iearned trial Judge has
'seriously misdirected himself in a: conclusion he had arrived at yet, there
was ample evidence to provender alia, that it was the accused-appellant who'
did the offending act, and that; as the deceased's statement to Dr. (Mrs.)
Waas has been -"rightly believed" by the learned trial Judge, no "substantial,
miscarriage of justice has actually occurred", and that this. is an instance
wherein the provisions of the proviso to sec. 334(1) .of. the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 and the proviso to Article 1,38 (1) of the
Constitution should prevail: ' "

The only item of evidence available to the prosecution to affix responsibility
to the accused-appellant in this case is the :said statement of the deceased
to Dr. (Mrs.) Waas. I have, however, set out earlier why the said statement
cannot and must not be acted upon as being true and accurate. That being so,
the provisos referred to by the Court of, Appeal - the proviso to sec.,
334(1)., of, the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, and the.
proviso, to, Article 138(1) of the Constitution. - do not arise for
consideration. In any event the provisions of sec. 334 of the said Act No: 15
of 1979 have no application to this case, as the provisions of that section
apply only to appeals in cases where the trial is held before a judge and
jury. Appeals to the Court of Appeal from a verdict of the High Court at a
trial without a jury are determined according to the provisions of sec. 335 of
the said Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

There is just one other matter I have to 'refer to before concluding this
judgment.. Although it is not a matter upon which the decision of this case by
this Court has been made to rest yet, it is a matter upon which, in my
opinion, the observations of this Court should be recorded lest what has been
done in the trial court - and has received the sanction of the Court of
Appeal- be drawn as a precedent for the future.

The trial judge has, as indicated earlier, in considering the evidence given
before him by the principal witness for the prosecution looked into -
evidently after the conclusion of the trial - the record of the non-summary
inquiry held in this case before- the Magistrate and perused the evidence
given by the said witness at such non-summary inquiry in the course of which
the witness had also produced a document, which though it had then been marked
P1, has not been produced in evidence by the witness when the witness gave
evidence

**16**

at the trial. The learned trial judge, faced with the situation that, whilst
the indictment set out a particular description of the way in which the
accused-appellant is alleged to have carried out the abortion, the principal
prosecution witness's evidence of the deceased's description to her of how the
accused-appellant had effected the abortion differed from it, had then
proceeded to look into the record of the non-summary inquiry and peruse the
witness's evidence, given before the Magistrate, which contained the document,
referred to earlier as having been marked as P1 before the Magistrate. Having
so perused the said evidence; the learned trial judge sets out, in his
judgment; the description contained in the said evidence, and then concluded
that "there cannot be even an iota of a doubt" that the deceased made' "a
statement like this" to the said witness. The learned trial judge's ultimate
finding, against the accused-appellant in regard to the manner of the
commission of the offence, however, is not that it was committed in the manner
set out in the indictment ; nor in the manner set out in the said witness's
evidence at the trial ; but that, as set out by the Court of Appeal, "some
action or means was adopted to effect an abortion." Although the learned trial
judge did so peruse the evidence given at the non-summary inquiry and did
.also proceed to make se of, for the purposes of his judgment, material
contained in such evidence, yet, he took no steps to have such material placed
before him in the way that the other material, placed at the trial for his
consideration both by the prosecution and by the defence, had been placed.
Neither the prosecution nor the defence. seem to have been made aware of what
has been done. The defence, which had taken the trouble to place before the
learned trial judge. according to law a deposition made in the non-summary
inquiry by a witness who could not be called to testify at the trial; was
completely ignorant that another deposition, though not properly placed before
him; was being considered by the learned trial judge. There is no benefit of a
record by the learned trial judge as to why he did what he did. In the absence
of any such express record made by the learned trial judge it is reasonable to
infer that he did so because the evidence given at the trial by the said
witness did give rise: to doubts in his mind and. he desired to resolve such
doubts. It is undoubtedly the right and indeed the duty of a trial judge and
an inquiring Magistrate to take certain steps, as set out by the Court of
Appeal "in :the interests of

**17**

justice and-to serve the purpose of justice: to acquit the innocent and-
convict the guilty". Such steps; however, must be taken strictly: in
accordance with the relevant provisions of law relating to procedure and.
evidence, and not solely "in. the spirit" -of -such provisions. The Court of
Appeal, in sanctioning the procedure adopted by the learned trial judge, has
referred to the provisions set out, in sec. 110 (4) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act No:-15 of 1979 (which correspond to the provisions of sec. 122
(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code - Chap 20 - which was repealed by the,.
said Act: No., 15 of 1979) and has expressed itself as follows :

"if the law permits statements made to the- police which are often urged to be
(sometimes very justifiably) doctored or forced statements to be perused to
aid Court in a inquiry or trial an accused-appellant cannot be heard: to say
that for the same purpose, and in the spirit of that section, the Court should
not make use of evidence of higher value and sanctity to aid Court at a
trial".,

The said section 110 (4) undoubtedly empowers any criminal court to send for
the statements recorded in a case under inquiry or trial in such court" and to
use such "statements or information" for the purpose set, out therein, namely,
"to aid it in such 'inquiry or trial"; but it also expressly provides that
such "statements and information" are not to be used "as evidence in the
case". The nature and the extent of the powers vested in a criminal court by
the provisions of sec. 122 (3) of the now repealed Criminal Procedure Code
(the relevant provisions of which and those in the corresponding sec. 110 (4)
of Act No. 15 of 1979 are identical) and manner in which such powers should be
exercised have been clearly laid down by the then Supreme Court in s - long
line of cases : Hamid v. Karthan (20); The King v. Soysa (21); R. v. Cooray
(22); Inspector of Police, Gampaha v. Perera (23); Paulis Appu v. Don Davith
(24); Bartholomeusz v. Velu (25); S.I.P. v. Thalagahagoda (26); Kitnapulle v.
Christoffelz (27), and the unreported cases : S. C. 128-129 M. C. Kalmunai
7003, S. C. M. 15. 10. 63 ; S. C. 475/58 M. C., Kegalle 22209 S. C. M. 20.
10.59: Thus if what was perused and made use of by the learned trial judge in
this case in the way he did had been a "statement or information" as
contemplated by sub-sec. 4 of sec 110 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
No. 15 of 79, then the procedure so adopted by the learned trial judge could
not have been justified.

**18**

What now remains to be examined is whether the fact that what was so perused
and used was evidence given at the non-summary inquiry held in this case
before the Magistrate would clothe such procedure with legality. There is no
express provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 79 (nor was
there in the earlier Code) authorising the use of evidence given at a non-
summary inquiry at a later stage of the same proceedings in the way
"'statements and information", referred to in the said section 110 (4), could
be used as set out in the said section. There is, however, express provision
in the Evidence Ordinance (Chap. 14), in sec 33, making evidence given by a
witness in a judicial proceeding relevant in a later stage of the same
judicial proceeding.. Once such evidence becomes relevant at the stage of the
trial, then such evidence would have also to be proved before the trial judge
in the same way the other items of relevant and admissible evidence are placed
before the trial judge in accordance with the' express provisions of the laws
of evidence or of criminal procedure. Facts which. are relevant can be
considered by the trial judge only if and when they are led in evidence before
him at the trial in accordance with the relevant express provisions of law. A
deposition made at a non-summary inquiry must, of relevant- at the subsequent
trial, be adduced in evidence in open court at the trial in the presence of
both parties, just as much as the other relevant facts have to be led in
evidence and proved at the trial in-open court in the presence of the parties.
This is what the,- law requires,- and it has also been the inveterate
practice. ,That is so is also borne out by the ;case of Reg. v. Arthur Perera
(28). The procedure adopted in regard to this particular matter by the learned
trial judge cannot, in my opinion, be justified upon any ,basis :- whether of
precedent or of any express provision of law. '

For these reasons, I" make order allowing the appeal of the accused-appellant:
"The conviction of and' the` sentence imposed on the accused-appellant are set
aside and the accused-appellant is acquitted

**

WIMALARATNE, J.** -I agree.

**

RODRlGO, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed and accused acquitted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/14.html_  

