##  Ilangatilaka and Others v. The Republic of Sri Lanka - SLR - 38, Vol 2 of
1984 [1984] LKSC 1; (1984) 2 Sri LR 38 (5 April 1984)

##  38





# ILANGATILAKA AND OTHERS

**v.**

**THE REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA**



SUPREME COURT.

COLIN‑THOME, J., ABDUL CADER, J. AND RODRIGO, J.

S.C. APPEALS 59/82 AND 62/82 ‑ H.C. COLOMBO 3169.

MARCH 21, 1984.



Criminal law ‑ Evidence Ordinance, sections 114 (b) and 133 ‑ Accomplice
evidence ‑ Corroboration ‑ Failure of accused to explain his conduct  When
may adverse inference be drawn ?



The 2nd and 3rd accused‑appellants along with the 1st accused were indicted
before the High Court on two counts of housebreaking and theft punishable
under sections 443 and 369 respectively of the Penal Code. All three accused
were convicted on both counts and sentenced to imprisonment. The only
independent evidence for the prosecution was given by one Abdeen. The other
two witnesses for the prosecution were accomplices. The Court of Appeal
dismissed the appeals of the 2nd and 3rd accused‑appellants but granted them
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court on following grounds‑,



_(a)_ Whether those items of evidence of witness A. Abdeen relating to the 2nd
and 3rd  accused‑appellants amount to corroboration ;



_(b)_ if so, whether such corroboration is of such a high probative value as
to justify the conviction of the 2nd and 3rd accused‑appellants upon the
charges framed against them.



**Held** ‑



(1)  While it is legal to convict upon the uncorroborated evidence of an
accomplice it is a rule of practice which has become virtually equivalent to a
rule of law to regard it as dangerous to so convict. What is required is some
additional evidence rendering it probable that the story of the accomplice is
true and that it is reasonably safe to act upon it.



(2) The corroboration must proceed from an independent source and it must be
weighed as to its probative value. It must confirm in some material
particular not only that the crime has been committed but also that the
accused committed it.  The corroboration need not extend to the whole story
nor need it be by direct evidence that  the accused committed the crime ; it
is sufficient if the evidence is merely  circumstantial.



(3)  The evidence of Abdeen coupled with the circumstances in which the crime
was committed and the failure of the 2nd and 3rd accused to give an
explanation constitute independent corroboration on material particulars both
as to the identity of the accused and  their connection with the crime.

##  39



(4)        Where a strong prima facie case has been made out against an
accused and when it is in his own power to offer evidence, if such exists, in
explanation of such suspicious circumstances which would show them to be
fallacious and explicable consistently with his innocence it would justify the
conclusion that he refrains from doing so only from the conviction that the
evidence so suppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his interests



**Cases referred to** :



(1)        _R v. Atwood and Robbins,_ (1787) 1 Leach 464 , 168 ER 334.  


(2)        _R v. Stubbs,_ (1855) Dears 555. _  
 _

(3)        _In Re Meunier,_ (1894) 2 QB 415, _  
  
_(4)        _P. Saravanamuttu v. R. A. de Mel,_ (1948) 49 N.L.R, 529, 560.  


(5)        _Rex v. Baskerville_ , [1916] 2 KB 658: [1916  17] All E.R. 38  


(6)        _The Queen v. Liyanage,_ (1965) 67 N.L.R. 193, 212, 213.  


(7)        _The Queen v. Jayasinghe,_ (1965) 69 N. L. R. 314, 325. _  
 _

(8)        _R v Lord Cochrane and others,_ (1814) Gurney's Reports 479 _.  
 _

**APPEAL** from an Order of the Court of Appeal.



_Ranitth Abeysuriya_ with _V. C. Ratnayake_ and _P. Abeykoon_ for the 2nd
accused‑appellant.



_J. C. Boange_ for the 3rd accused‑appellant.  


_Rohan Jayatilake_ , D. S. G., for the Attorney‑General.

_Cur. adv. vult._





April 5, 1984.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.**



The 2nd  and 3rd accused‑appellants along with the 1st accused were indicted
before the High Court on two counts :-



(1) That between the 5th of March and 31st March, 1975, they did commit
housebreaking by night by entering the Wekande Stores of the Sri Lanka State
Trading (General) Corporation, an offence punishable under section 443 of the
Penal Code.



(2) That in the course of the same transaction, they did commit theft of
pistons and piston rings valued at Rs, 62,500 which were in the possession of
the Head Store Keeper S.L.D.E. Samarasekera of the Sri Lanka State Trading
(General) Corporation, an offence punishable under section 369 of the Penal
Code.

##  40



After the trial without a Jury the learned High Court Judge convicted all
three accused on both counts and imposed sentences of one year on each count
on the 1st accused, 2 years on each count on the 2nd  accused and 3 years on
each count on the 3rd accused , all sentences were to run concurrently.



All three accused appealed to the Court of Appeal. During the course of the
argument in the Court of Appeal learned State Counsel submitted that he was
restricting the case to the events of 31.3.75 and hence he had no objection to
the appeal of the 1st appellant being allowed, as there was no corroboration
of the evidence of the two accomplices in the case against him regarding the
housebreaking and theft on 5.3.75. Furthermore, Samarasekera, Head Store
Keeper, had stated at the trial that the goods were imported from India on
10th  March, 1975, so that they could not have been stolen on the 5th March.
Samarasekera, however, gave this evidence from memory without reference to
documents. The accomplices did not implicate the 1st accused‑appellant in the
second housebreaking and theft 31.3.75. The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal
of the 1st accused appellant, quashed his conviction and acquitted him. The
Court Appeal dismissed the appeals of the 2nd and 3rd accused‑appellants and
thereafter ex mero metu granted the 2nd and 3rd accused‑appellants leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court on the following grounds :‑



_(a)_ Whether those items of evidence of witness A. Abdeen relating to the 2nd
and 3rd accused‑appellants amount corroboration ;



_(b)_  If so, whether such corroboration is of such a high probative value as
to justify the conviction of the 2nd and 3rd accused appellants upon the
charges framed against them.



At the time of the alleged offence the 1st and 2nd accused‑appellants were
security officers and the 3rd accused‑appellant was a security guard attached
to the Wekande Stores belonging to the State Trading Corporation. According to
the witness Bernard, a security guard attached to the Wekande Stores on 5.3.75
the 3rd accused‑appellant suggested that they steal pistons from the store at
Wekande by detaching a locked sliding door from its groove and causing an
opening. The other accused‑appellants and Bernard agreed to this suggestion
and they abetted the 3rd

##  41



accused‑appellant in removing 10 boxes containing pistons from the store. They
also helped to put the door back in position. The 3rd accused‑appellant then
took these boxes to Mahatun outside the gate and Mahatun removed them in a
taxi to his house in Kelaniya Subsequently, the 3rd accused‑appellant gave
Bernard a sum of Rs. 2,000. According to Mahatun he sold the 10 boxes of
pistons for Rs 15,000 and gave Rs. 12,000 to the 3rd accused‑appellant.
Similarly,  on 31.3.75, sometime after 10 p.m., Bernard together with the 2nd
and 3rd accused‑appellants once again broke into the store at Wekande in the
same manner as they had done previously and removed 15 boxes of pistons and 18
or 19 boxes of piston rings from the Store. Mahatun removed these boxes by
taxi to his house at Kelaniya.



On 1.4.75 the Store Keeper Samarasekera discovered the theft of the pistons
and piston rings which had been imported from India. The State Trading
Corporation was the sole importer of this brand of pistons and piston rings
valued at Rs. 62,500. Subsequently, on 8.4.75 Sub‑Inspector Oorloff of the
Slave Island Police recovered the 15 boxes of pistons and 18 boxes of piston
rings from Mahatun's house at Kelaniya.



The learned Trial Judge had correctly regarded both Mahatun and Bernard as
accomplices and looked for corroboration from the witness Abdeen and other
circumstances in the case. Abdeen, a driver attached to the State Trading
Corporation, was regarded as an independent witness. According to him he
knocked off duty at 12.30 a.m. on the night of 31st  March ‑ 1st April, 1975.
The 2nd accused‑appellant was on duty at the Stores on the 31st night along
with Bernard from 10 p.m. to 6 a.m. Abdeen saw Bernard that night going
towards the store. He saw the 2nd accused appellant also go in that direction.
The 3rd accused‑appellant was on the premises that same night, although the
3rd accused‑appellant was not on duty until the following morning.
Furthermore, the 3rd accused‑appellant made his presence felt by ordering
Abdeen to go to the canteen and threatened Abdeen if he did not obey this
direction.



Learned Counsel for the accused‑appellants submitted that as both Mahatun and
Bernard were self‑confessed accomplices they could not corroborate each other.
Corroboration had to proceed from an independent source. Abdeen was the only
independent witness for the prosecution ; the totality of his evidence was of
negligible probative value.

##  42



Under section 133 of the Evidence Ordinance :



"An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person, and a
conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated
testimony of an accomplice."



This is read with section 114 _(b)_ of the Evidence Ordinance :



"The Court may presume that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is
corroborated in material particulars : "



These statutory provisions have adopted the common law of England relating to
accomplices. There is no doubt that the uncorroborated evidence of an
accomplice is admissible in law : _See_ _R_. _Atwood and Robbins_ (1) _._ But
it has long been a rule of practice at common law for a judge to warn a jury
that it is extremely dangerous to convict a prisoner on the uncorroborated
testimony of an accomplice or accomplices, and, in the discretion of the
judge, to advise them not to convict upon such evidence ; the judge should
point out to the jury that it is within their legal province to convict upon
such unconfirmed evidence _: Reg. v. Stubbs_ (2), _In re Meunier_ (3) __ This
rule of practice has become virtually equivalent to a rule of law.



The rule of practice as to corroborative evidence has arisen in consequence of
the danger of convicting a person upon the unconfirmed testimony of one who is
admittedly a criminal who has cast his erstwhile associates and friends to the
wolves in order to save his own skin. What is required is some additional
evidence rendering it probable that the story of the accomplice is true and
that it reasonably safe to act upon it.



There is also a rule of common sense that one accomplice cannot corroborate
another accomplice. Tainted evidence is not made better by being double in
quantity. Corroborative evidence against some the accused cannot be used to
accept the evidence of the accomplice as regards the other accused. It will
suffice if the accomplice is corroborated on one or more material particulars
as regards each of the accused persons he implicates. The corroboration need
not extend to the whole story : See _P._ _Saravanamuttu v. R. A. de Mel_ (4)

##  43



The best exposition of the nature and extent of corroboration yet to be found
is in _Rex v. Baskerville_ (5). Lord Reading, C.J. giving the judgment of a
very strong Court of Criminal Appeal, said :



"We hold that evidence in corroboration must be independent testimony which
affects the accused by connecting or tending to connect him with the crime. In
other words, it must be evidence which implicates him, that is which confirms
in some material particular not only the evidence that the crime has been
committed but also that the prisoner committed it .... The nature of the
corroboration will necessarily vary according to the particular circumstances
of the offence charged. It would be in high degree dangerous to attempt to
formulate the kind of evidence which would be regarded as corroboration,
except to say that corroborative evidence is evidence which shows or tends to
show that the story of the accomplice that the accused committed the crime is
true, not merely that the crime has been committed, but that it was committed
by the accused.



The corroboration need not be by direct evidence that the accused committed
the crime ; it is sufficient if it is merely circumstancial evidence of his
connection with the crime."



This decision of the Court of Criminal Appeal in England has been followed in
several decisions in India and Sri Lanka See _R. v. Liyanage_ (6) and _R. v.
Jayasinghe_ (7) where Sansoni, C.J. observed that :



"Corroboration like all evidence had to be weighed. It may be legally
admissible for the purpose of corroboration, but its probative value as
corroboration may be very slight or even nil."



It now remains to examine the facts against each appellant separately in the
light of the above dicta. The 2nd accused‑appellant was a security officer
attached to the State Trading Corporation. He was on duty on 31.3.1975 from 10
p.m. to 6 a.m. at Wekande, when a store on the premises he was guarding was
broken into and a large quantity of motor spare parts in boxes were removed
from the store and taken out of the premises, and subsequently traced to the
house of Mahatun at Kelaniya. In order to break into the store several persons
had to lift a heavy sliding door, derail it, and move it to a side to effect
an opening. One of the conspirators then entered the store and removed as many
as thirty three boxes containing motor spare parts (18 boxes of pistons and 15
boxes of piston rings). Thereafter,

##  44



the sliding door had to be replaced in its original position. According to
Mahatun the motor spare parts were then taken in a taxi to his house in
Kelaniya. All these events which would have taken some time took place while
the 2nd accused‑appellant was on guard duty on the premises. It is
inconceivable that this large quantity of motor spares could have been stolen,
undetected by the 2nd accused‑appellant, while he was on duty on the premises.
According to Abdeen his duty period on 31.3.7 5 ended at 12.30 a.m. when he
handed over the vehicle in his charge to the Corporation. The persons on duty
at that time were the 2nd  accused‑appellant and Bernard. He saw Bernard going
towards the store. The 2nd accused‑appellant also went that way. Abdeen also
noticed a taxi halted by the gate when he was leaving the premises.



Abdeen saw the 3rd accused‑appellant on the premises late at night, although
the 3rd  accused‑appellant was not on duty until the following morning. The
unauthorised presence of the 3rd accused‑appellant on the premises would have
been observed by the 2nd  accused‑appellant. The 3rd accused‑appellant acted
in a strange manner. He ordered Abdeen to remain in the kitchen of the canteen
without leaving the premises and threatened him if he did not do There was no
one else in the canteen at the time.



The 2nd and 3rd accused‑appellants did not give evidence at the trial. The 2nd
accused‑appellant did not offer any explanation how store was broken into and
33 boxes of spare parts removed from the premises when he was on security
guard duty. Similarly, the 3rd  accused‑appellant offered no explanation to
his unauthorised presence on the premises late at night on the 31st and why he
directed Abdeen to go to the canteen when no one was there.



The irresistible evidence in this case justifies the application of the dictum
of Lord Ellenborough in _R. v. Lord Cochrane and Others_ (8) :



"No person accused of crime is bound to offer any explanation of his conduct
or of circumstances of suspicion which attach to him ; but, nevertheless, if
he refuses to do so, where a strong prima facie case has been made out, and
when it is in his own power to offer evidence, if such exist, in explanation
of such suspicious circumstances which would show them to be fallacious and
explicable consistently with his innocence, it is a reasonable and justifiable
conclusion that he refrains from doing so only from the conviction that the
evidence so suppressed or not adduced would operate adversely to his
interest."

##  45

  
In the circumstances of this case I hold that there was independent
corroboration on material particulars both as to the identity of the accused
and their connection with the crime.



The appeals of the 2nd and 3rd accused‑appellants are dismissed. Their
convictions and sentences are affirmed.



**ABDUL CADER, J.** ‑ I agree.  


**RODRIGO, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeals dismissed.  
 _

_Convictions of 2nd and 3rd accused affirmed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/1.html_  

