
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

DR. SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 104/95.

D.C. KANDY NO. H.C. 15683

JANUARY 13, MARCH 03, 17 AND APRIL 01, 1997.



_Criminal Law ‑ Charge Sheet ‑ Magistrate's duty ‑ Sections 182(1) and (2) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure Act._



Compliance with sections 182(1) and (2) of Code of Criminal Procedure Act is
imperative. When an amended plaint is filed, a fresh charge sheet should be
framed and read out to the accused. Failure to do so vitiates the conviction.

_  _

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court (Central Province)



**Case referred to:**



1. _Abdul Sameem v. The Bribery Commissioner,_ (1991) 1 Sri __ L.R. 76.



_Mohan Peiris_ with _Ananda Panagoda_ and _Susil Panagoda_ _for appellant_ _._



_C. R. de Silva, A.S.G._ with _Kapila Waidyaratne, S.S.C._ and _S.
Samaranayake, S.C_. for respondents _._



_Cur. adv. vult._

April 04, 1997  


**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.**



The appellant was charged on three counts before the Magistrate's Court. The
first charge was under the Offences against Public Property Act, No. 12 of
1982. The other two charges were falsification of accounts which are offences
under the Penal Code. After trial, the appellant was convicted of all three
charges. He appealed against his conviction and sentence to the High Court
(Central Province) and his appeal was dismissed. He has now appealed to this
court, with leave obtained from the High Court.



391



Counsel for the appellant, Mr. Mohan Peiris, raised a preliminary issue of
law, which in his submission, vitiates the conviction. The proceedings were
instituted by the Officer‑in‑Charge. Special Crimes Investigation Branch of
Kandy on 20.1.93 by filing a report in terms of section 136(1) (b) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act. On the same day a single charge was framed by the
Magistrate and the plea of "not guilty" was recorded. Thereafter the
prosecution moved to amend "the plaint" and a document described as the
"amended plaint" was filed on 12.5.93. This document appears at page 4 of the
record. It is to be noted that the original report to court filed on 20.1.93
contained only one charge, while the "amended plaint" filed on 02.5.93
contained three charges. The additional charges in the "amended plaint" were
under Section 467 of the Penal Code.



On a perusal of the record it would appear that the Magistrate has failed to
frame the charges, as he was required to do in terms of section 182(1) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The Magistrate appears to have adopted the
"amended plaint" filed on 12.5.93 as the "charge". Thus he has failed to
comply with the provisions of section 182(1) and (2) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act. The fact that there is no separate charge sheet apart from the
"amended plaint" at page 4 of the record tends to support the contention that
the appellant was "charged" from the amended plaint.



It was the submission of Mr. C. R de Silva, Additional Solicitor General, that
the document which is described as the "amended plaint" at page 4 of the
record, is in truth the "charge sheet", and that the label ("amended plaint")
given to the document should be disregarded. I find myself unable to accept
this submission. The journal entries show that after the original report to
court was filed in terms of section 136(1) (b) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act on 20.1.93, the prosecution moved to "amend the plaint" and it
is pursuant to that application that the document described as the "amended
plaint" at page 4 of the record was filed. I find it difficult to resist the
conclusion that what the Magistrate has in fact done is to

392



read the charges to the appellant from the "amended plaint", a procedure which
is not permitted by law. The Magistrate has failed to comply with the
imperative provisions of section 182(1) and (2) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act and this vitiates the conviction. _(Abdul Sameem v. The Bribery
Commissioner_ (1)) _._



There remains the question whether a re‑trial should be ordered. Although the
alleged offences were committed almost 7 years ago, yet on a consideration of
the evidence on record, I am of the view that this is a fit and proper case in
which a re‑trial should be ordered. While setting aside the conviction and
sentence imposed on the appellant, I make order directing a fresh trial. The
Magistrate is further directed to hear and conclude this case very early.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



**DR.** **SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Conviction set a side_

_Case sent back for re ‑trial._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/16.html_  

