##  De Saram v. The Republic of Sri Lanka - SLR - 288, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002]
LKSC 1; (2002) 1 Sri LR 288 (5 April 2002)

**288**

**DE SARAM  
v.  
THE REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA**

SUPREME COURT  
S, N. SILVA, CJ.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,  
EDUSSURIYA, J.,  
YAPA, J. AND  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 1/2001  
HC COLOMBO TRIAL-AT-BAR  
NO. 120/2000  
FEBRUARY 26 AND MARCH 01  AND 05, 2002  
  
_Penal Code- Murder - Section 296 - Accomplice - Corroboration of accomplice's
evidence - Section 114 (b) of Evidence Ordinance - Statement under section 27
(1) of Evidence Ordinance - "Fact" discovered in consequence of information
received form the accused - Section 3 of Evidence Ordinance.  
_  
The appellant and another person (who was acquitted at the trial) were
indicted with murder at a trial by a High Court at Bar. The appellant was
convicted of murder of a woman called Sewwandi on or about 02. 09. 1999. The
appellant had developed a relationship with a married woman with a small
child. The deceased turned down an offer of marriage with another and the
accused showed no inclination to get married to her. Notwithstanding such
situation, the accused used to follow the deceased who had in the meantime
joined the Army. The accused visited Anuradhapura Army Camp where the deceased
was posted and on a false representation that her father was hospitalized
brought her to a house in Batuwatta and confined her there for a month. During
that period there had been quarrels between the accused and the deceased.
Witness Sajani Ratnayake said that even in her presence the accused assaulted
the deceased so badly that she (the witness) fainted.  
  
On the day of the murder the deceased was alone at her house in Ragama when
her mother left the house. On her return the mother (Piyaseeli) found her
missing and informed the Police. The same day at about 2 or 3 p.m., the
accused had met witness Sanjeewa and said he had killed a person. The accused
also fetched witness Piyalal and threatened to kill them with a pistol if they
did not help to bury the body. Later that night the accused took the witnesses
to a house in Ganemulla where the body of the deceased lay; and there told
witness Sanjeewa that he (the accused) had killed "Sewwandi akka" (which was
how that witness had referred to the deceased).

**289**

They removed the deceased's body which was under a bed. The deceased had been
strangled with a strap of a sling. Thereafter, the body was taken in a van to
the land of the accused's father which was surrounded by a high protective
wall. The accused made the witness to dig a grave, covered the body with a
bedsheet and buried it having trampled down an arm which was protruding with
his foot. About a week later in the presence of witness Sanjeewa the accused
held a shramadana and cleared the land, put the shrubs on the grave with some
tyres and burnt the same. The graphic description by the witnesses of the
concealment of the body was fully supported by the medical evidence and the
findings of the Police.  
  
The body was recovered by the Police on statements made by the witnesses and
the accused.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Witnesses Sanjeewa and Piyal were not accomplices. They were not guilty
associates in the offence of murder or helpers in the commission of criminal
acts constituting the offence charged or lesser or kindred offence of which
the accused could be found guilty on the same indictment. All that they did
was to participate in removing the body and concealing it. The accused said in
his dock statement that one Bandara had killed the deceased and had her buried
in his father's land to implicate him (the accused); and the witnesses had
helped Bandara. The High Court rejected this defence in its entirety. In view
of the fact that the witnesses were not accomplices in the circumstances of
the case, the question of corroboration required by section 114 of the
Evidence Ordinance did not arise.  
  
(2) The fact that the police learnt from the two witnesses Sanjeewa and
Piyalal where the body was buried did not take the same information given by
the accused out of the purview of section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance;
for the basis of admissibility of the accused statement was not that the
accused confessed to the crime but the fact that he knew where the deceased's
body was buried. Evidence of the accused's information was therefore
admissible under section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.  
  
(3) As regards the criticism that the prosecution had failed to exclude the
inference that the 2nd accused was responsible for the murder, the High Court
held that the evidence only established her presence at the scene and not
participation in the crime; on the contrary the evidence against the accused
included a confession to witness Sanjeewa that he had killed the deceased.
Hence, the point urged was devoid of any basis.  
  
(4) The evidence as to the quarrels the accused had with the deceased and the
fact that the accused had assaulted the deceased during the period

**290**

she was detained at Batuwatte did not amount to leading evidence coming within
the purview of section 32 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance as contended by the
defence counsel. Such evidence amounted to direct evidence of quarrels and
assaults.  
  
Hence, the statements made by the deceased to witnesses on such occasions did
not vitiate the conviction of the accused whether they were admissible or not
under section 32 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _King vv Peiris, Appuhmay -_ 43 NLR 412.  
  
2\. _Queen v. Ariyawanthe -_ 59 NLR 241.  
  
3\. _Attorney-General v. Seneviratne -_ (1982) 1 Sri LR 303.  
  
4\. _Karuppiah Servai v. The King -_ 52 NLR 227.  
  
5\. _Pulukuri Kottaya v. Emperor -_ (1947) AIR PC 67 at 70.  
  
6. _Piyadasa v. Queen -_ 72 NLR 434.  
  
7. _Bin Singho v. Queen -_ 65 NLR 353.  
  
8\. _' Queen v. Kularatne -_ 71 NLR 529.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court Trial-at-Bar.  
  
_Ranjit Abeysuriya, PC_ with _Mrs. Dinusha Mirihana, Miss Lanka de Silva_ and
_Leo Perera_ for accused-appellant.  
  
_Priyasath Dep, PC Additional Solicitor-General_ with _Achala Wengappuli,
Mohan   Seneviratne _and _Haripriya Jayasundera,_ State Counsel for Attorney-
General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 05, 2002  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, CJ.  
**  
This is an appeal filed in terms of section 451 (3) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act as amended by Act No. 21 of 1988, from the conviction and
sentence imposed on the accused-appellant by the High Court, after a Trial-at-
Bar. The Trial-at-Bar commenced on information exhibited to the High Court by
the Attorney-General. The charge that was made against the accused-appellant
and the other

**291**

accused (who was acquitted at the end of the trial) was that on or about 02.
09. 1999 at Kendaliyaddapaluwa, Ganemulla, they commitÂ­ted the murder of
Ranasinghe Aratchige Don Enoka Sewwandi an offence punishable under section
296 of the Penal Code.  
  
The deceased was 24 years old at the time of her death and had served a brief
period as a soldier in the Sri Lanka Army at Anuradhapura. She was last seen
alive in her parental home at Pahala Karagahmuna on the Ragama-Kadawatha Road.
Her mother, Lalitha Piyaseeli, stated in evidence that when she left the house
at about 9.00 am on 02. 09. 1999 the deceased was asleep in her room and there
was no one else in the house. When she returned from her place of work, the
front door was locked and the key was near the door mat. The deceased was
missing. Later, a complaint was made to the Police.  
  
The accused-appellant was arrested by Inspector of Police Samudrajeewa of the
Western Province Special Investigations Unit at Peliyagoda, who was in charge
of the investigations, on 01. 03. 2000. He made a statement to the Inspector
that he could point out the place where the body of the deceased was buried in
the compound of his father's house at Kurukulawa, Ragama. On 03. 03. 2000
pursuant to an order made by the Magistrate, the place was excavated, in the
presence of the Magistrate and the Judicial Medical Officer (JMO), Colombo
South, Dr. Ananda Samarasekera, and the putrified body of the deceased was
found. According to the JMO death could have been caused approximately 6
months before. The cause of death was determined as a fracture of the left
hyoid bone caused by manual strangulation. The JMO found marks on the neck
which could have been caused by pressure being applied by tightening a strap
of a sling bag. The compound of the premises in which the body was buried, was
protected by an eight-foot wall and a person had to pass through more than one
gate to reach the place of burial. All the houses in the compund were owned by
the father of the accused and some of them were tenanted. These are the basic
facts of the case for the prosecution.

**292**

The prosecution relied on the evidence of the mother of the deceased, Lalitha
Piyaseeli, to reveal certain matters regarding the relationship the accused
had with the deceased culminating in the deceased returning home one day in
late June, 1999 at about 7.00 pm, saying that she escaped from a place where
the accused-appellant had kept her in concealment. There is direct evidence
regarding the accused-appellant taking the deceased away from the Army camp at
Anuradhapura in late May, 1999, on the pretext that her father was in hospital
after meeting with an accident and her being kept in concealment for about a
month in the house of one Kalumalli, at Batuwatta, which emanates from witness
Sajani Ratnayake, a so colleague of the deceased in the Army.  
  
The deceased had been associated with the accused from about 1996 having got
to know him when she went to work at the Singer Sales outlet at Kadawatha. It
appears that this relationship had been fraught with quarrels between the two
and the accused had assaulted the deceased on certain occasions. The deceased
turned down an offer of marriage from another and the accused showed no
inclination to get married to her. It was in this context that her parents
encouraged her to join the Army and she commenced her period of training of 2
months at Diyatalawa on 01. 02. 1999. The passing  out parade was on 11. 04\.
1999, at which she won several special awards on merit. Her mother attended
the event with her brother and an aunt. The deceased and two witnesses
referred to hereafter, also came there, separately, which shows that the
accused maintained contact with her during that period as well. After she was
posted to the Army camp at Anuradhapura, she came home for a few days and when
she was returning, the accused got her to stay with him for one more day.
Thereafter, the accused took her away from the Army camp under a false
pretext, as noted above, before she was posted on active duty. During the
period of about one month when she was kept in concealment at Kalumallie's
house as stated above,

**293**

there had been quarrels between the two and on one occasion she inflicted an
injury on herself with a knife. Witness Sajani Ratnayake, the colleague from
the Army, contacted the accused by phone and with difficulty managed to meet
the deceased on one occasion during this period. She stated that even in her
presence the accused asÂ­saulted the deceased so badly that she (the witness)
fainted.  
  
In the period of two months that lapsed after her returning to the parental
home, the evidence reveals two occasions on which they met. Once, when she
sought his assistance to open a new account at the Bank. On the other occasion
he had visited the house and quarrelled with her regarding an affair her
brother was having with a girl said to be a relative of the accused. The
accused-appellant had in the meanwhile developed a relationship with the 2nd
accused, a married woman with a small child and he was living with them in a
house at Genemulla, being the place where the body of the deceased was seen by
the two main witnesses for the prosecution, Sanjeewa and Sumith Piyalal.  
  
These two witnesses, the former being a driver of a three-wheeler and the
latter, a mason, had been known to the accused for some time. They accompanied
the accused to Diyatalawa to attend the passing out parade of the deceased and
later to Anuradhapura, firstly to drop her at the Army camp and to bring her
back. On this occasion the deceased was kept one day at Sumith Piyalal's
house, before being taken to Kalumallie's house, as stated above. From that
point the narrative of events is picked up by these two witnesses when they
say that the accused sought their assistance to bury the body of the deceased.
The contention of the prosecution is that this took place on 2nd September,
being the day on which the deceased disappeared from her parental home.  
  
According to Sanjeewa, the accused-appellant met him at about 2 or 3 pm, at
the place where his three-wheeler was parked for hire

**294**

and stated that he had killed a person. He sought assistance of the witness to
dump the body into a grave in the cemetery by raising a concrete slab of a
grave. The witness lives close to a cemetery. When the witness refused to help
the accused, he had gone in search of the other witness, Sumith Piyalal, but
apparently failed to make contact. Later, Sanjeewa himself went in search of
Sumith Piyalal and met him on the way. When Sanjeewa informed Sumith Piyalal
about the request made by the accused, the latter had looked at him wide-no
eyed, with fear. At that stage, the accused-appellant came to the place where
they were, in a van and walked upto them armed with a pistol. He accused
Sanjeewa of having conveyed the information to Sumith Piyalal and said that if
he could have done that so fast, before the night was out, the whole village
would know of it. He said that both should come to bury the body that night
itself, if not he would kill them. He said that he would pick them (being
neighbours) at 8.00 pm. At the given time the accused-appellant came in a van
fitted with fully tinted glass, first to Sanjeewa's house and when the latter
came out dressed in a shirt he was asked to change into a shirt of another
colour. Sumith Piyalal who was wearing a sarong was also to change his clothes
and he changed into a trouser and a banian. Thereafter, the accused picked up
some other friends of his including one Bandara (to whom reference will be
made later) and went to a funeral house of a relative. The accused and the
others got down at the funeral house leaving the two witnesses in the van. At
about 11.30 pm., the accused came to the van saying that he was going to bring
some cigarettes and drove to the house at Ganemulia where the body of the
deceased lay. According to Sanjeewa, before entering the house the accused
said that he had killed "Sewwandi Akka". The witness has referred to the
deceased at all stages as "Sewwandi Akka". Both witnesses have stated that
only the 2nd accused was in the house at that time. The accused had taken them
to a room where there was a bed in the center and when the bed was removed,
they saw the body of the deceased which lay face downwards, clad

**295**

in a black tight skirt and a blouse with a strap of a sling bag tightened
round the neck. The accused-appellant removed the strap which was round the
neck and gave it to the 2nd accused. The two witnesses and the accused-
appellant carried the body to the van. The accused carried the head and the
upper part of the body and the witnesses held on to the trunk and the legs.
They found that the deceased had passed urine and faecal matter. They went in
the van to the accused's father's premises entering the compound enclosed by
the eight-foot wall through three gates and the accused selected a spot where
there were some cinnamon bushes to dig a grave. He carried a penlight torch
and was armed with a pistol when he walked upto the spot. He brought 2
mammoties, a pickaxe, a shovel and other implements from the garage of his
father's house and dug a grave 2 1/2 to 3 feet deep. The two witnesses and the
accused had taken turns in digging and removing the soil. A mammoth had broken
in the process.  The van was taken as near as possible to the grave. They
carried the body and the accused dumped the body into the grave. A bed sheet
was put over the body and they covered it with soil. At this point the right
hand of the deceased was protruding and the accused having failed to push the
hand down with the mammoty, stamped on it with his foot and covered it with
soil. About two weeks later, the accused arranged a shramadana with several of
his friends, including witness Sanjeewa, to clear the compound. The shrub that
was cleared was put over the area of the grave and the accused put some tyres
as well and set fire to it. The Police and the JMO found traces of this
burning of the site when the body was exhumed six months later.  
  
The graphic account given by the two witnesses as to the state of the body,
the ligature round the neck, the clothes, the depth of the grave, the bedsheet
being used to cover the body, the protruding right hand and as noted above,
the burning of the site, is fully supported by the findings testified to by
the JMO and the Police. There is no doubt that they did in fact participate in
the removal and burial

**296**

of the body. This part of their evidence is not even challenged by the
defence. The suggestions made to these witnesses and the dock statement of the
accused, is on the basis that they did these acts at the behest of Bandara
referred to above, who killed the deceased and buried her body in the compound
to implicate the accused due to enmity arising from an undisclosed reason. The
High Court has for reasons stated rejected this defence in its entirety.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the accused-appellant raised four points which
he contended vitiates the trial and moved for a trial de novo.  
  
The four points urged by counsel are -  
  
(i) that witnesses Sanjeewa and Sumith Piyalal who gave evidence on
conditional pardons, were accomplices and there is no corroboration of their
evidence as required by law. The High Court erred in treating the witnesses as
not being accomplices and alternatively in acting on evidence that did not
constitute corroboration as being adequate corroboration of the evidence of
these witnesses;  
  
(ii) that the High Court erred in admitting in evidence a portion of the
statement of the accused, made to the Police regarding the place of burial of
the body, in terms of section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance, when the same
information was available to the Police from the two witnesses, Sanjeewa and
Sumith Piyalal;  
  
(iii) that the case being based on circumstantial evidence, the prosecution
failed to exclude that the other person present at the scene, viz the 2nd
accused could have committed the murder.

**297**

(iv) that several witnesses have testified to statements made by the deceased
to them which are not relevant in terms of section 32 (1) of the Evidence
Ordinance.  
  
Regarding the first point set out above, as to the evidence of the witnesses
described by learned Counsel as accomplices, I note the relevant provisions of
the Evidence Ordinance are contained in sections 133 and 114 (b). Section 133
states that an accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused
person and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the
uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.  
  
Section 114 sets out instances in which a court may presume the existence of
certain facts. These instances are generally described as rebuttable
presumptions. In terms of illustration (b) to section 114, the court may
presume that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in
material particulars.  
  
Therefore, the first matter to be considered is whether the two witnesses,
Sanjeewa and Sumith Piyalal should be considered as accomplices.  
  
Coomaraswamy in his book titled "The Law of Evidence" Vol. II, Book I at page
364, states as follows :  
  
"For the purposes of section 114 (Â£>), it may be said that an accomplice is
one concerned with another or others in the commission of crime."  
  
He cites with approval the following passage from Wharton on Criminal Evidence
11th Ed. Vol. II at page 1229 -  
  
"An accomplice is a person who knowingly, voluntarily and with common intent
with the principal offender unites in the commission

**298**

of a crime. The term cannot be used in a loose or popular sense so as to
embrace one who has guilty knowledge or is morally delinquent or who was an
admitted participant in a related but distinct offence. To constitute one an
accomplice, he must perform some act or take some part in the commission of
the crime, or owe some duty to the person in danger that makes it incumbent on
him to prevent its commission."  
  
The Additional Solicitor-General submitted that a person who has merely
assisted in the disposal of the body of a deceased in respect of whom a charge
of murder is made, cannot be considered as an accomplice within the meaning of
section 114 (b) of the Evidence Ordinance. He relied on the judgments of the
Court of Criminal Appeal in the cases of King v. Peiris Appuhamy (1) and Queen
v. Ariyawanthe (2)  
  
On the other hand, learned President's Counsel for the appellant, submitted
that the category of persons who may be considered as accomplices has been
widened in the decision in Attorney-General v. Seneviratne.(3)  
  
I note that the cases relied on by the learned Additional Solicitor-230
General are directly in point.  
  
In the case of King v. Peiris Appuhamy (supra) at page 418, Howard, CJ.,
observed as follows :  
  
"Even assuming that after the murder had been committed the witness had
assisted in removing the body to the pit and that he could have been charged
with concealment of the body under section 198 of the Penal Code that was an
offence perfectly independent of the murder and the witness could not rightly
be held to be either a guilty associate with the accused in the crime of
murder or liable to be indicted with him jointly. The witness was

**299**

therefore not an accomplice and the rule of practice as to corroboration had
no application to the case."  
  
In the case of Queen v. Ariyawanthe (supra) at page 243 Basnayake, CJ.,
obeserved as follows :  
  
"Now the burden of proving a witness to be an accomplice, for the purpose of
inducing the jury to presume that he is unworthy of credit unless corroborated
in material particulars, is upon the party alleging it."  
  
He went on to hold that a person who had participated in the event after the
murder had been committed is not a guilty associate in the crime of murder
with which the accused was charged.  
  
In the case of Attorney-General v. Seneviratne (supra), relied on by learned
President's Counsel for the accused-appellant, Soza, J. has made the following
observation (at page 329) :  
  
"There may be occasions when an accomplice though a particeps criminis cannot
be charged with the same offence. His guilty particiÂ­pation may not go far
enough for this. Further, it does often occur that an accused person though
charged with a particular offence is found guilty only of a lesser or kindred
offence. More properly, therefore, an accomplice is a guilty associate whether
as perpetrator or inciter or helper in the commission of the criminal acts
constituting the offence charged or a lesser or kindred offence of which the
accused could be found guilty on the same indictment."  
  
It was submitted that an accused who is indicted for a charge of murder could
be convicted of an offence under section 198 of the Penal Code in connection
with the disposal of the body. Counsel relied on the judgment in the case of
Karuppiah Servai v. The King.(4)

**300**

in support of this proposition. It was submitted that the combined effect of
the judgment of Soza, J. in Seneviratne's case and the judgment in Servai's
case, is that an offence of disposal of the body should be taken as "lesser or
kindred offence" to one of murder and that a person who could be convicted of
the offence of disposal of a body in terms of section 198 of the Penal Code
should be considered as an accomplice in a case where the accused is charged
with murder.  
  
I have to note at the outset that in Seneviratne's case, relied on by learned
President's Counsel, Soza, J. had not dealt with the two judgments referred to
above, where it was specifically held that a person who has merely assisted in
the disposal of the body is not an accomplice. Soza, J. referred to a
perpetrator, inciter or helper, in the commission of the criminal acts
constituting the offence charged or lesser or kindred offence, which the
accused could be found guilty on the same indictment. The category of persons
referred to by Soza, J. are those involved in the commission of the criminal
acts constituting the offence. The reference to "lesser or kindred offence"
cannot encompass an offence under section 198 of the Penal'Code, which relates
to causing the disappearance of evidence of the offence that has been
committed. This is an entirely different species of offence, where the mens
rea is "the intention of screening the offender from legal punishment". The
words used by Soza, J. should be restricted to offences of the same kind or
which may be lesser in gravity. The mens rea of an offence under section 198
referred to above shows that it is not a lesser of kindred offence in relation
to the offence of murder. Servai's case is authority for the proposition that
a person indicted with murder, could be convicted for the offence of causing
the disappearance of the body under section 198 of the Penal Code by applying
section 182 of the Criminal Procedure Code (section 177 of the present Code of
Criminal Procedure Act). It would be far fetched and an artificiality to
import that reasoning to expand the category of persons who should be
considered as accomplices.

**301**

In this case the clear evidence is that the two witnesses, Sanjeewa and Sumith
Piyalal, were not in any way perpetrators, inciters of helpers in the
commission of the offence of murder. There is no question of any lesser of
kindred offence which could arise for consideration on the facts of this case.
Certainly, the accused cannot be convicted of an offence under section 198 of
the Penal Code which relates to causing the disappearance of evidence to
screen an offender. The assistance of the two witnesses was sought by the
accused, according to the evidence, after murder had been committed. They
arrived at the house at Ganemulla late that night, several hours after the
deceased had been done to death. Therefore, I am of the view that the
decisions in the cases of Peiris Appuhamy and Ariyawanthe (supra) will apply
and the two witnesses should not be considered as being accomplices. This
conclusion is consistent with the definition of an accomplice as contained in
the passage from Wharton on Criminal Evidence cited above.  
  
In the light of the foregoing finding, it is not necessary to consider the
further submission of learned President's Counsel as to the need to look for
corroboration in material particulars as required by section 114 (b) of the
Evidence Ordinance.  
  
The next point urged by the learned President's Counsel relates to the
application of section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance, in terms of which a
portion of the statement made by the accused to Inspector Samudrajeewa was led
in evidence.  
  
Section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance reads as follows :  
  
"Provided that, when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of
information received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a
police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered may be
proved."

**302**

The submission of learned President's Counsel is that the inforÂ­mation
regarding the place of the burial of the body of the deceased had been
disclosed to the Inspector by the two witnesses referred to above, before the
accused was questioned regarding the murder. On that basis it was submitted
that the "fact" regarding the place of burial was known to the Police and it
could not be contended that this was discovered in consequence of information
received from the accused.  
  
It appears that the submission is based on a misconception of the provisions
of section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance. This section has to be read in
the light of section 25 (1) which mandates that no confession made to a police
officer shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence.  
  
The rationale of the proviso in section 27 (1) is that even a confessional
statement to a police officer, which is outside the pail of evidence, could be
proved where it contains information that is confirmed by the discovery of a
fact. The word "fact" appearing in the section should be construed in the
light of the definition in section 3 which states, : " 'Fact' means and
includes -  
  
(a) any thing, state of things, or relation of things capable of being
perceived by the senses;  
  
(b) any mental condition of which any person is concious".  
  
It is seen that a fact is not mere object or article but something that is
capable of being perceived by the senses or a mental condition of which a
person is conscious.  
  
Coomaraswamy in his Law of Evidence Vol. I, page 446, has made particular
reference to the distinction that should be drawn between a fact that is
discovered and an object that may found. He has stated :

**303**

"thus, the fact referred to in this section, may be any fact as36o defined in
section 3 of the Ordinance as opposed to "fact". The object discovered may be
the body of the injured person, the property stolen, bloody clothes, the
weapon with which injury was inflicted or some other material evidence of the
offence".  
  
This distinction between the discovery of a fact and the finding of some
object is clearly brought out by the Privy Council in the decision in the case
of Pulukuri Kottaya v. Emperor (5) where it was observed as follows :  
  
"It is fallacious to treat the "fact discovered" within the section as
equivalent to the object produced. The fact discovered embraces the place from
which the object is produced and the knowledge of the accused as to this, and
the information given must relate distinctly to this fact. Information as to
past user, or the past history of the object produced is not related to its
discovery in the setting in which it is discovered. Information supplied by a
person in custody that : 'I will produce a knife concealed in the& roof of my
house' does not lead to the discovery of a knife; knives were discovered many
years ago. It leads to the discovery of the fact that a knife is concealed in
the house of the informant to his knowledge, and if the knife is proved to
have been used in the commission of the offence, the fact discovered is very
relevant. But, if to the statement, the words be added, "with which I stabbed
A", these words are inadmissible since they do not relate to discovery of the
knife in the house of the informant".  
  
This reasoning of the Privy Counsel was followed in the cases of Piyadasa v.
Queer (6) and Etin Singho v. Queen (7)  
  
When the aforesaid reasoning and the definition of the word "fact" in section
3 of the Evidence Ordinance, is applied to the evidence

**304**

of this case, it is seen that the fact discovered by the Inspector from the
statement of the accused was that the accused knew the place where the body of
the deceased was buried. This information is confirmed by the finding of the
body itself, in that place. The inforÂ­mation given by the two witnesses to the
Inspector regarding the place of burial is, of something that has been
perceived by each of them, which is a fact as to their knowledge of the
matter. The finding of the body, is a fact perceived by the Inspector and the
JMO. What was perceived by each witness should be viewed as a distinct fact,
in this manner in keeping with the definition in section 3. This would avoid
the confusion which would arise if the matter is considered without reference
to the definition in section 3. On this basis it cannot be contended that the
information given by the witnesses to the Inspector regarding the place of
burial, operates as a bar to the relevant portion of the statement being
admitted in evidence, in terms of section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.  
  
The third point raised by learned President's Counsel for the accused-
appellant, is that the case being based on circumstantial  
  
evidence, the prosecution failed to exclude the other person present at the
scene, viz 2nd accused could have committed the murder. Learned counsel cited
a passage from Coomaraswamy in The Law of Evidence, Vol. I, at page 20 which
reads as follows :  
  
When in a case of circumstantial evidence, the evidence led for the
prosecution lends itself to reasonable inference that either of the two
persons could have committed an act, the burden is on the prosecution to
exclude one person effectively if it seeks to attach responsibility for that
act to the other person."  
  
The passage cited is based on the reasoning in the case of Queen v. Kularatne
(6) In that case the Supreme Court held that the best way - often the only way
- in which this can be achieved, is by the

**305**

prosecution calling as a witness, the person sought to be excluded. Thus, it
is clear that the statement relied on by learned counsel does not apply to a
situation where the prosecution has alleged that two persons have jointly
committed and offence. In that situation, the question that arises for
consideration, is the degree of participation of each of the accused and
whether there is joint responsibility arising on the alleged basis of
liability. The prosecution cannot be expected to adduce evidence excluding the
2nd accused from liability when the case was presented on the basis that both
are liable for the comÂ­mission of the offence of murder.  
  
The High Court in its judgment has acquitted the 2nd accused on the basis that
there is no evidence of her participation in the commission of the offence and
that no inference could be drawn from the circumstantial evidence which led to
the irresistible inference of guilt on her part. The finding of the Court is
that the evidence only establishes her presence at the scene and not of
participation in the commission of the offence, necessary to bring home
liability to her. On the other hand, the evidence against the accused-
appellant includes a confession made to witness Sanjeewa that he killed the
deceased. Therefore, the point urged is devoid of any basis.  
  
The final point raised by learned President's Counsel is that certain
statements made by the deceased to witnesses have been deposed  to by those
witnesses, whereas such statements do not come within the purview of section
32 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance. These statements relate to the quarrels the
accused had had with the deceased and in particular the reference to an
instance where she had caused injury to herself pursuant to one such quarrel.
Although these statements had been referred to in evidence, without any
objection by the defence, it is seen that .there is direct evidence of such
quarrels and instances, in which the accused had assaulted the deceased. In
particular the evidence of Sajani Ratnayake referred to

**306**

above reveals that at the time the deceased was kept in concelament at
Kalumalli's house the accused assaulted the deceased so badly that she (the
witness) fainted. Therefore, it is unnecessary to go into the question whether
other statements of less probative value were admissible or not in terms of
section 32 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.  
  
For the reasons stated above, I am of the view that there is no merit in any
of the points urged by learned President's Counsel for the accused-appellant.
The evidence referred to above establishes beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused-appellant is guilty of the offence with which he has been convicted.  
  
Accordingly, I affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed and dismiss this
appeal.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**YAPA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/1.html_  

