##  Chuin Pong Shiek v. The Attorney General - SLR - 277, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999]
LKSC 10; (1999) 2 Sri LR 277 (28 May 1999)

**277**

**CHUIN PONG SHIEK  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. SLA NO. 100/98  
C.A. NO. 171-172/95  
H.C. COLOMBO NO. 6768/94  
AUGUST 20 AND DECEMBER 11, 1998  
JANUARY 25 AND MARCH 8, 1999

_Criminal Law - Conviction for murder - Common intention - Circumstantial
evidence._

Two accused were convicted of the murder of the deceased. The deceased was
killed at about 2.30 am on 16.5.86.The entry into the one-bedroom annexe, in
which he lived alone, had been effected by removing the screws by which an
iron grill had been fixed to a window. A very serious injury had been
inflicted on the deceased's head with a hammer. There were eighty-seven other
injuries inflicted with sharp cutting and blunt instruments. The evidence
against the 1st accused consisted of, inter alia, a blood-stained palm print
on one of the walls of the annexe; and the expert evidence was that this was
the palm print of the 1st accused. The evidence against the petitioner (the
2nd accused) who alone sought special leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was
circumstantial.

**Held :**

1\. The circumstantial evidence led irresistibly to the conclusion that the
murder was committed by the petitioner and the 1st accused acting in
furtherance of a common intention.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"The medical evidence as to the petitioner's injuries, the blood stains in his
car, and his knowledge of the location of the plastic bag in which were found
the six screws from the window grill, are consistent only with his

278

presence and participation in the murder. That conclusion is confirmed by his
conduct immediately before the murder (being in the company of the accused
just four hours before the murder) and during the ten days thereafter. While
further confirmation is hardly necessary, one cannot ignore his deliberate
false statement in material respects : as to how he sustained those injuries;
and as to who wanted a trip to Kegalle to be arranged."

2\. Whatever infirmity there might have been in the admission or assessment of
evidence, the substantial rights of the petitioner have not been prejudiced
and there has been no failure of justice.

**Cases referred to :**

1\. _Narapane Swami v. King-Emperor_ (1939) - 1 AER 396.  
_  
_ 2. _Somasiri v. The Queen_ (1969) - 75 NLR 172.  
  
3. _Perera v. The Queen_ (1970) - 76 NLR 217.  
  
4. _R. v. Marshal Appuhamy_ (1950) - 51 NLR 272.  
_  
_ 5. _R. v. Krishnapillai_ (1968) - 74 NLR 438.  
  
6. _Etin Singho v. The Queen_ (1965) - 69 NLR 353.

**APPLICATION** for Special Leave to Appeal from the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.

_Ranjith Abeysuriya,_ PC With _Miss Priyadarshani Dias_ for the petitioner.

_C. R. de Silva,_ PC, ASG with _S. Jayamanna,_ SC for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 28, 1999.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

Two persons were charged with and convicted of the murder of one Tony Martin,
by the High Court of the Western Province, sitting without a jury. The Court
of Appeal dismissed the appeals of both accused. The 2nd accused-appellant-
petitioner (the petitioner) alone seeks special leave to appeal against that
order.

279

At the commencement, Mr. Abeysuriya, on behalf of the petitioner, handed to us
a statement of the alleged errors of law on which special leave was sought:

1\. Has it been affirmatively established as alleged in the indictment that
this murder was committed by these two accused alone?

2\. Has the prosecution evidence conclusively established in this case, based
entirely on circumstantial evidence, that the petitioner had been present at
and participated in this killing?

3\. Have statements attributed to the deceased well before he was attacked
been improperly admitted and acted upon under section 32 (1) Evidence
Ordinance, as falling within the meaning of "circumstances of the transaction
which resulted in death"?

4\. Was it permissible to hold that the presence of relatively trivial
injuries on the fingers and arms of the petitioner leads to the inescapable
inference that he had participated in the attack on the deceased?

5\. Does the alleged discovery of a sarong (P32), cap (P33) and 6 screw nails
(P36) said to have been found on the statement of the petitioner implicate him
in this killing?

6\. Did the failure of the Court of Appeal to examine the sustained attack
made on the manner in which the Trial Judge dealt with the testimony of the
principal witness, H. Jayasena, deprive the petitioner of a fair hearing and
adjudication?

7\. Has the Court of Appeal made wrong inferences to the detriment of the
petitioner from items of the subsequent conduct of the petitioner?

8\. Did the Court of Appeal wrongly fail to take into consideration other
relevant evidence relating to these very items which transpired at the trial
proceeding?

280

The facts are stated in detail in the judgment of the Court of Appeal. I set
out below the relevant facts - undisputed, except as otherwise indicated - on
the basis of which this application for special leave was argued.

Tony Martin, a bachelor, was killed at about 2.30 am on 16.5.86. Entry into
the one-bedroom annexe, in which he lived alone, had been effected by removing
the screws by which an iron grill had been fixed to a window.

There was a blood-stained palm print on one of the walls of the annexe, and
the -expert evidence was that this was the palm print of the 1 st accused. A
very serious injury had been inflicted on the deceased's head with a hammer;
the hammer head with part of the handle was found at the scene. Eighty-seven
other injuries had been inflicted with sharp cutting instruments and blunt
instruments.

The JMO was of the opinion that there had been more than one assailant.

In consequence of a statement made by the 1st accused to the Police, after his
arrest, a bag was found which contained the remaining part of the handle of
the hammer used for the killing.

The evidence thus established that the 1st accused was present at and
participated in the killing.

The evidence against the petitioner (the 2nd accused) was circumstantial. The
petitioner and the deceased had known each other A or a considerable period;
they were members of the same sports club; and there had admittedly been some
financial transaction between them, although its nature was hotly disputed.
The Registration Book relating to the petitioner's car and two cheques drawn
by the petitioner for a total of Rs. 125,000 were found in the deceased's
safe. In a dock statement the petitioner explained that he had won a million
rupees gambling at the casino, and had given a sum of Rs. 450,000 to the
deceased (without documentary evidence or security) for investment, yielding a
monthly interest income of Rs. 25,000; he also claimed that the deceased was
endeavouring

281

to invest a further sum in the purchase of US$ 10,000 in foreign currency, and
that the Registration Book and cheques had been haned over as security for
that transaction. The prosecution contended, on the other hand, that if the
deceased actually had Rs. 450,000 belonging to the petitioner, there was no
need for him to provide any further security for the alleged purchase of
foreign exchange; and that in fact the Registration Book and cheques had been
given as security for a loan by the deceased to the petitioner.

On 14.5.86 the petitioner and the 1st accused came to the deceased's annexe at
about 9.30 pm; they came on a motor cycle, which they parked some distance
away, on a side road, in such a way that it was not visible from the annexe;
and to enter the premises, they jumped over the gate - which was about six
feet high. The deceased had a part-time employee named Jayasena. Jayasena had
full-time employment elsewhere during the day, and did household chores for
the deceased in the evenings; and he then spent the night at another house
(owned by the deceased) at Nugegoda, of which he was the caretaker. Jayasena
testified to this visit; he said that while the petitioner spoke to the
deceased inside the bedroom, the 1st accused remained outside; he did not know
what they talked about.

The two visitors left after ten or fifteen minutes. The petitioner neither
denied nor explained that visit in his dock statement.

Then, said Jayasena, the deceased made a statement about the petitioner -
which Mr. Abeysuriya submitted was improperly admitted under section 32 (1) of
the Evidence Ordinance - to the effect that he had lent money to the
petitioner, and had scolded the petitioner that evening at the dub for failing
to repay the loan. Apart from that point of law, Mr. Abeysuriya also argued
that Jayasena's evidence was not worthy of credit.

The petitioner and the 1st accused spent the next evening (15.5.86) together,
with another friend Imran. Having visited the casino, the petitioner gave his
two friends a lift in his car. Imran said the petitioner dropped him at his
residence at about 10.30 pm. The killing took place, just four hours
thereafter, at 2.30 am on 16.5.86.

282

On 16.5.86 at about 9.30 am Imran came to the petitioner's house. Imran
testified that he noticed that the petitioner had some minor injuries on his
hands and wrists. The petitioner explained that these had occurred the
previous night when he reached home: as he tried to get out of his car, he
said, his pet dog had greeted him, overeagerly; he got scratched by its nails;
and when he was pushing it out of the car, his finger was accidentally bitten.
The truth of that version was contested by the prosecution, which contended
that those injuries, eleven in all, had been caused in the course of an attack
on the deceased. The Police could not trace the petitioner, and he was
arrested only on 26.5.86. He was produced before the JMO on 27.5.86,
specifically in order to ascertain the circumstances in which he had sustained
those injuries. The JMO's evidence was that one of those injuries - an incised
wound, 1/2" long and 1/5" deep - on the left index finger had been caused by a
sharp cutting instrument; the other ten could have been caused by a sharp
cutting instrument or by human fingernails, or in some other way, in the
course of a struggle - but it was not suggested to him that a dog was
responsible. It was suggested in cross-examination that the first injury might
have been caused by a bite, but that was rejected by the JMO. Further,
although the JMO testified that the petitioner had given a history - which he
said he did not record in his report as it might have been inadmissible, as
the petitioner was then in police custody - it was not suggested to him in
cross-examination either that the petitioner had attributed any of his
injuries to his pet dog, or even that the injuries might have been caused by a
dog. Mr. Abeysuriya was not able to suggest any valid reason for not accepting
the JMO's evidence.

There was also evidence of blood-stains in a number of places in the car; in
particular, to the left of the driver's seat (near the hand brake, and on the
seat belt clip attachment). These were more consistent with the petitioner
having received injuries (particularly the incised wound on his left index
finger) before getting into the car, rather than with the petitioner's dog
injuring him as he was trying to get out the car.

283

On the medical evidence, therefore, the conclusion was that the petitioner had
suffered minor injuries after 10.30 pm on 15.5.86 and before 9.30 am on
16.5.86; that one of those was caused by a sharp cutting instrument; and that
while the other ten could have been caused by a sharp cutting instrument or
human fingernails, or otherwise, the petitioner did not take up the position
that the injuries had been caused by his pet dog, either when examined by the
JMO, or even in the cross-examination of the JMO.

The prosecution case was that - as a result of the deceased vigorously trying
to defend himself - a weapon in the hands of the petitioner would have caused
those injuries. Mr. Abeysuriya contended that it was most unlikely that a
strong athletic person like the deceased would have caused his assailant only
such trivial injuries while defending himself. Mr. de Silva countered that the
attack had commenced when the deceased was asleep, and that the hammer blow on
the deceased's head would have greatly reduced his capacity to defend himself.

Imran testified that when he met the petitioner at 9.30 am on 16.5.86 the
petitioner asked him to arrange a trip to Kegalle to his aunt's place - which
he did the next day. However, in his dock statement the petitioner claimed
that Imran's aunt had previously extended an invitation: but that position was
never put to Imran. The petitioner, his wife and Imran left for Kegalle at
2.30 pm the next day, in the petitioner's car. Before they left, Imran drew
the petitioner's attention to a newspper item about the murder, but the
petitioner expressed no interest - despite his friendship with the deceased.
That lack of interest continued even at Kegalle. Further, he neither visited
the funeral house, nor attended the funeral. Apart from friendship, although
the petitioner's position was that he had given the deceased Rs. 450,000 for
investment, and had kept some security in connection with another transaction,
nevertheless he took no steps even to protect his financial interests.

284

The prosection contended that the petitioner was taking steps to distance
himself from the killing. He returned from Kegalle on 18.5.86. For some days,
the Police could not find him, although they looked for him (and left
messages) at his home as well as the homes of his parents and his in-laws.
Ultimately, he was traced and arrested only on 26.5.86.

In consequence of a statement made to the Police by the petitioner to the
effect that he could point out the location of a bag containing clothing, a
bag was found which contained a jacket, in one of the pockets of which were
found six screws. These were identified - by reason of length and
circumference, the colour of the paint on the head of the screws and the iron
grill, the depth of the cavities in the wooden window frame, etc. - as being
those removed from the grill of the window through which access had been
gained to the deceased's annexe. Mr. Abeysuriya submitted that the evidence in
regard to finding the screws inside the bag was not admissible under section
27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance.

I must refer first to Mr. Abeysuriya's submissions regarding section 32 (1).
He relied on _Narayana Swami v. King-Emperor_ (1) _Somasiri v. The Queen_ (2)
and _Perera v. The Queen_ (3). In the first of these decisions the Privy
Council held that the "circumstances of the transaction" which resulted in
death are circumstances that have some proximate relation to the death of the
declarant. As pointed out in _R v. Marshall Appuhamy_ (4). whether there is a
proximate relation between the commencement of the transaction and the ending
thereof is a matter to be determined on the facts of each case. Somasiri's
case is of little assistance, because evidence of a statement made by the
deceased was excluded not on the ground that it did not relate to the
"circumstances of the transaction" but because hearsay evidence was tendered.
In Perera's case, the statement had been made almost a fortnight before the
death of the deceased; further, the State conceded that it had been wrongly
admitted. The statement in this case is much closer, in point of time, to the
death.

285

The undisputed evidence in this case is that there was some financial
transaction between the petitioner and the deceased. The statement relied on
by the prosecution was intended to establish that there was displeasure
arising out of that transaction, followed by a visit, somewhat late in the
evening on 14.5.86, just 28 hours before the killing. The circumstances thus
have some similarity to Narayana Swami's case.

However, in view of Mr. Abeysuriya's submission that the infirmities in
Jayasena's evidence were not adequately considered, we decided to consider
whether it would be safe to allow the conviction to stand if this statement
was excluded.

Mr. Abeysuriya's second submission was that leave should be granted on the
question whether evidence of the contents of the plastic bag, namely of the
discovery of six screws in the pocket of the jacket, had been improperly
admitted, contrary to section 27 (1) of the Evidence Ordinance, because that
part of the petitioner's statement which led to the discovery of the plastic
bag did not refer to the contents of the bag. The Court of Appeal rejected
that submission, and 1 would venture to summarise its reasoning as follows.
The bag was the "fact" discovered; it was deposed to as having been discovered
in consequence of the petitioner's statement; so much of that statement as
related distinctly to the bag - the "fact" discovered - could therefore be
proved. The "fact" discovered was the bag including its contents - and not
just the bag, without its contents. Accordingly, as held in _R v.
Krishnapillai_ (5) and _Etin Singho v. The Queen_ (6), the petitioner's
statement established that he had knowledge of the place at which was found
the bag containing the jacket and the screws. The petitioner failed to explain
how he had acquired that knowledge. In my view, no question of law arises in
relation to the interpretation or application of section 27 (1).

Even without the statement made under section 32 (1), the circumstantial
evidence led irresistibly to the conclusion that the murder was committed by
the petitioner and the 1st accused acting in

286

furtherance of a common intenion. The medical evidence as to the petitioner's
injuries, the blood-stains in his car, and his knowledge of the location of
the plastic bag in which were found the six screws from the window grill, are
consistent only with his presence at and participation in the murder. That
conclusion is confirmed by his conduct immediately before the murder (being in
the company of the 1st accused just four hours before the murder) and during
the ten days thereafter. While further confirmation is hardly necessary, one
cannot ignore his deliberate false statements in material respects: as to how
he sustained those injuries, and as to who wanted a trip to Kegalle to be
arranged.

Whatever infirmity there might have been in the admission or assessment of
evidence, the substantial rights of the petitioner have not been prejudiced,
and there has been no failure of justice.

Special leave to appeal is therefore refused without costs.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

_Special leave to appeal refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/10.html_  

