##  Tunnaya Alias Gunapala v. Officer In Charge, Police Station, Galewela -
SLR - 61, Vol 1 of 1993 [1990] LKSC 11; (1993) 1 Sri LR 61 (23 October 1990)

**61**

**TUNNAYA ALIAS GUNAPALA** **  
v.** **  
OFFICER IN CHARGE, POLICE STATION, GALEWELA**

SUPREME COURT.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J., FERNANDO, J., AND KULATUNGA, J.  
S.C.APPEAL NO. 22/90.  
OCTOBER 23 1990.

_     Criminal Procedure - Investigation \- the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
Section 115 (3), 116, 120 and 136._

Section 116(1) requires that a suspect be sent in custody to a magistrate's
court with jurisdiction when the information is well founded in the case of a
non-bailable offence i.e. when the Police Officer or inquirer comes to a
conclusion that there is sufficient evidence in the sense that a substantial
case is made out at an early stage of an investigation which can properly be
sent before a Magistrate. Thereafter it is necessary for the Magistrate to
make an order for the detention of the suspect. On the other hand, if the
offence is bailable, the section even permits the Police Officer or inquirer
to take security from the suspect for his appearance before Court. The section
also provides for productions to be sent to the Court immediately without
being kept at the Police Station for., further investigations if necessary,
and for witnesses to be bound over to appear and testify at the trial. The
fact that the Police can take bail and release the suspect if the offence is
bailable under sub-section (1) and the fact that investigations can continue
under sub-section (3) and the use of the word "suspect" and not "accused" in
the language of sub-section (1) used to refer to this person clearly point to
the fact that no proceeding has yet been instituted against that person as an
accused. Producing a suspect before a Magistrate's Court in custody in terms
of Section 116 (1) has nothing to do with the institution of proceeding under
Section 136 (1) (d) of Chapter XIV or any other clause of that section. The
purpose of producing a suspect before a Court for a non-bailable offence under
Section 116 (1) is both for the purpose of detaining such a person as well as
enabling the Court to take cognisance of the matter enabling it to make
further orders under the Section, as a Court order is necessary for experts to
examine productions and express opinions. The provisions of Section 116 (1)
usually denote the completion of a Policeman's investigative endeavours.

When a suspect is produced before a Magistrate under Section 116 (1) of the
Code in respect of a non-bailable offence it is necessary for the Magistrate
to make an order for the detention of the suspect until the final report under
Section 120 of the Code is filed. This he can do under the provisions of
Section 120 (1) and the investigation can continue.

62

A final report made under Section 120 will be filed upon conclusion of the
investigation. It is to be noted that Section 115 (3) does not permit a
Magistrate to release on bail in the first instance a person arrested for the
offence of murder. This means he must make a consequential order of detention
when a suspect is produced in custody in connection with an alleged murder
under Section 116 (1). The point is that one is still at the investigative
stage when a suspect is forwarded under custody to the Court in terms of
Section 116 (1). It is wrong to treat it as an automatic institution of
proceedings.

When proceedings are instituted under Chapter XIV on the other hand the
Magistrate takes cognisance of the accusation contained in the Police report
or in a written complaint or upon the taking of evidence as the case may be in
terms of Section 136 (1).

Section 136 (1) is read with the provisions of Section 135 when appropriate.
It is to be noted that the language of all the clauses in Section 136 (1)
contemplates a person accused of an offence and not a mere suspect.

Equating a report under Section 116 (1) to an institution of proceedings is
wrong.

Where no proceedings are in fact instituted upon the report under Section 116
(1) the Magistrate had jurisdiction to release the suspect on bail subject to
the terms of the" proviso to Section 115 (1) of the Code if a period of three
month's since the suspect's arrest has expired. The provisions of Section 115
(3) speak of a suspect being entitled to bail if proceedings are not
instituted within 3 months of the date of his arrest.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Attorney-General v. Punchi Banda (1986) 1 Sri LR 40 (C. A.)  
_  
_2\. Regina v. Perera alias Madawatte 57 NLR 35  
_  
_3\. Lamanatissa de Silva v. Sub-Inspector of Police Matara 62 NLR 92  
_  
_4\. Perera v. Sub-Inspector of Police, Kirulapone 67 NLR 125  
_  
_5\. Muttiah v. Regina 74 NLR 313  
_  
_6\. Ceylon Insurance Company v Perera 74 NLR 553  
_  
_7\. Romulus Fernando v. O.I.C. Marawila (1982) 1 Sri LR 400_

**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Jayampathy Wickremaratne with Kapila Elikewela, H. Vithanachchi and A
Panditharatne for Appellant._

  
_Upawansa Yaps, Deputy Solicitor-General with D. de Livera State Counsel of
Attorney-General._

_Cur. adv. vult_

63

February 01, 1991.  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

This appeal involves the interpretation of certain provisions of the Criminal
Procedure Code. I.G. Ananda, the 2nd suspect was arrested by the Galewela
Police for having committed or being concerned in committing the murder of one
E.J. Jasinghe. There is no indication of the date of arrest. Ananda was
produced before the Dambulla Megistrate on 1.9.89 and remanded to prison
custody. The first suspect, I.G. Weerasinghe has not been arrested. On
20.12.89 i.e after the expiration of a period of three months from the date on
which he was first produced before the Magistrate, an application for bail was
made on behalf of Ananda to the Magistrate. This application was refused by
the Magistrate on the footing that there was a report before the Magistrate
setting out facts clearly showing that the suspect committed an offence and
proceedings had therefore been instituted against him. The Magistrate went on
to hold that as there was a "definite allegation" that Ananda had committed an
offence, proceedings had been instituted and therefore the Court was without
jurisdiction to grant bail under the proviso to s. 115 (3) of the Code. The
Magistrate stated he was following the dicta of a decision of the Court of
Appeal in Attorney-General v. Punchi Banda and Others (1).

An application was next made on behalf of Ananda to the Court of Appeal to
revise the aforesaid order of the Magistrate and grant bail. The Court of
Appeal held that "the filing of a report making a definite allegation that a
suspect committed the offence complained of is sufficient to constitute an
institution of proceedings within the meaning of s. 115 of the Criminal
Procedure Code" and dismissed the application for bail. The correctness of
that decision is presently impugned before us. Leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court was granted by the Court of Appeal on an application made that certain
questions contained in Paragraph 7 of the application filed before the Court
of Appeal be treated as substantial questions of law to be determined by the
Supreme Court which the Court of Appeal upheld. The contents of the said
Paragraph 7 of the petition filed before the Court of Appeal were as follows:

64

(i) Did the Court of Appeal err in holding that the filing of a report of the
progress of investigations which made a definite allegation that the suspect h
an offence was sufficient to constitute an institution of proceedings within
the meaning of s. 115 (3) read with s. 136 (1)(d) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure?.

(ii) Did the Court of Appeal err in not holding that nothing but the filing of
the "plaint" at the conclusion of investigations amounts to an institution of
proceedings within the meaning of s. 115 (3)?.

(iii) Did the Court of Appeal err in holding that the Magistrate may proceed
to hold a preliminary inquiry under s. 145 of the said Act even when
investigations have not admittedly been concluded?.

(iv) Did the Court of Appeal err in holding that the application for bail on
behalf of the 2nd suspect should be made under s. 403 of the Act?.

Before answering these questions I must say that it was not sufficient for the
Court of Appeal to merely refer to averments in an application before it and
state they are fit for adjudication by the Supreme Court when granting leave
to appeal to the Supreme Court under Article 128 of the Constitution. The
Court of Appeal must apply its mind to the questions that arise and formulate
what the Court thinks are substantial questions of law in a proper manner.
What has been done is far from satisfactory as the formulation of the
questions set out in paragraph 7 of the said petition are themselves vague and
confusing. However, having regard to the issue as presented by the Magistrate
in his order and the reasoning in the judgment of the Court of Appeal I am of
the view that the grounds on which bail has been refused raise substantial
questions of law to found an appeal in this Court.

To get back to the order of the Magistrate, it reads as follows: Quoting from
the order the relevant portion translates as....." Punchi Banda's case
(Attorney-General v. Punchi Banda) aforesaid clearly lays down how proceedings
may be lawfully instituted. What it says is that where there is a report
setting out facts clearly showing that he (the suspect) committed the offence,
then, proceedings

65

 are deemed to have been instituted against him.....". Next, the Court of
Appeal held that - quote . ....." The ways in which proceedings shall be
instituted in a Magistrate's Court are given in s. 136 of the Code. Section
136 (1)(d) provides that when any person is brought before a Magistrate in
custody without process accused of having committed an offence which such
Court has jurisdiction to hear or inquire into, proceedings are instituted.
There must therefore be a definite allegation that the suspect has committed
the offence complained of for this condition to be satisfied..... In the
circumstances I hold that the filing of a report making a definite allegation
that the suspect committed the offence complained of is sufficient to
constitute an institution of proceedings within the meaning of s. 115 of the
Code. I therefore dismiss the petitioner's application to revise the order of
the Magistrate dated 20.12.89".

That then is the issue before us; as to whether the filing of a report before
a Magistrate's Court making a definite allegation that the suspect committed
the offence complained of is by itself sufficient to constitute an institution
of criminal proceedings in a Court and which consequently may affect the grant
of bail under s. 115 (3). Such a definite allegation could be made when the
investigation is completed and a report is made in terms of s. 120(3) or when
an officer in charge of a Police Station thinks that an information is well
founded and reports in terms of s. 116 (1) of the Code. It is apparent from
the judgment in Attorney-General v. Punchi Banda (supra) and the Magistrate's
order and the judgment of the Court of Appeal that all those Courts were
dealing with a report under s. 116 (1) of the Code. Counsel for the State
confirmed that that is what the State is .contending for.

Learned Counsel for the State supporting the grounds on which the decisions of
the Courts below were founded submitted

(i) The commencement of non-summary proceedings is not a bar to the
continuation of investigations by the Police - cited. _Regina v. Perera alias
Medawatte_.(2)

(ii) It is the content of the report that matters in considering whether
proceedings have been instituted ; and not any particular provision under
which it purports to have been filed;

66

(iii) If the report is in accordance with s. 116, the Magistrate cannot act
under s. 115 (3).

(iv) The requirement of s. 136 (1)(d) is bringing a person accused of having
committed an offence which such Court has jurisdiction to inquire into or try
before the Court ; A condition of s. 136 (1)(d) is that there should be an
accusation ; that condition is satisfied when there is a definite allegation.

(v) When there is a definite allegation the condition contained in s. 136
(1)(d) is satisfied i.e there is then an accusation.

(vi) No formal plaint need be filed. Plaint is a convenient term. A Magistrate
can commence an inquiry at the scene of an offence.

(vii) As the Magistrate has held that the s. 115 stage had passed he should
have commenced non-summary proceedings which he has failed to do.

(viii) In any event the suspect is not without remedy as the Court of Appeal
could admit a person to bail under the provisions of s. 404 of the Code.

A consideration of the meaning and scope of s. 116 and of s. 136 (1) (d) of
the Code thus becomes necessary. Section 116 is a section contained in that
part of the Code dealing with the investigation of offences and the powers of
Police Officers and inquirers to investigate. It is a step in the process of
investigation. It is the counterpart of s. 114 which permits the release of an
accused if evidence is deficient. Section 116 (1) requires that a suspect be
sent in custody to a Magistrate's Court with jurisdiction when the information
is well founded in the case of a non-bailable offence. That is to say that the
suspect should be so forwarded when the Police Officer or inquirer comes to a
conclusion that there is sufficient evidence in the sense that a substantial
case is made out at an early stage of an investigation which can properly be
sent before a Magistrate. Thereafter it is necessary for the Magistrate to
make an order for the detention of the suspect. On the other hand, if the
offence is bailable the

67

section even permits the Police Officer or inquirer to take security from the
suspect for his appearance before Court. The section also provides for
productions to be sent to the Court immediately without being kept at the
Police Station for further investigations if necessary, and for witnesses to
be bound over to appear and testify at a trial. The fact that the Police can
take bail and release the suspect if the offence is bailable under sub-section
(1) and the fact that investigations can continue under sub-section (3) and
the use of the word "suspect" and not "accused" in the language of sub-section
(1) used to refer to this person clearly point to the fact that no proceeding
has yet been instituted against that person as an accused. Producing a suspect
before a Magistrate's Court in custody in terms of s. 116 (1) has nothing to
do with the institution of proceedings under s. 136 (1)(d) of Chapter XIV or
any other clause of that section. The purpose of producing a suspect before a
Court for a non-bailable offence under s. 116(1) is both for the purpose of
detaining such a person as well as enabling the Court to take cognisance of
the matter enabling it to make further orders under the section as a Court
order is necessary for expert witnesses to examine productions and express
opinions. The provisions of s. 116 (1) usually denote the completion of a
Policeman's investigative endeavours. The Magistrate once seized of the matter
may then require further probing by forensic experts of evidence already
gathered; the findings and opinions of such specially skilled persons may tend
to confirm the State's case against the prisoner.

Now, when a suspect is produced before a Magistrate under s. 116 (1) of the
Code in respect of a non-bailable offence it is necessary for the Magistrate
to make an order for the detention of the suspect-until the final report under
s. 120 of the Code is filed. This he can do under the provisions of s. 120 (1)
and the investigation can continue. For instance, the Police may have been
making inquiries over a period of time upon a complaint. Having gathered
evidence which justifies an arrest a suspect is taken into custody and
incriminating evidence such as a weapon of offence or a document connecting
the suspect to the crime is found and it is necessary to take blood or saliva
samples or specimens of nails or hair for comparison. In such a case it may be
said that the Police have sufficient grounds to believe the information is
well founded and before the expiry of 24 hours in compliance with the
provisions of s. 37 transmit the suspect in custody to the Magistrate. Further
investigations regarding the productions will continue under s. 116. A final
report made under s. 120 will be filed upon conclusion of

68

the investigation. It is to be noted that S. 115 (3) does not permit a
Magistrate to release on bail in the first instance a person arrested for the
offence of murder. This means he must make a consequential order of detention
when a suspect is produced in custody in connection with an alleged murder
under s. 116 (1). The point is that one is still at the investigative stage
when a suspect is forwarded under custody to the Court in terms of s. 116 (1).
It is wrong to treat it as an automatic institution of proceedings.

When proceedings are instituted under Chapter XIV on the other hand the
Magistrate takes cognisance of the accusation contained in the Police report
or in a written complaint or upon the taking of evidence as the case may be in
terms of s. 136 (1). Section 136 (1) is read with the provisions of s. 135
when appropriate. It is to be noted at this stage that the language of all the
clauses in s. 136 (1) contemplates a person accused of an offence and not a
mere suspect. The next step is for the Magistrate to take cognisance of the
offence complained of and decide whether there is sufficient ground to issue
process if the person is not in custody or take a necessary step if already
detained ; or conduct the examination required by s. 139 (2) wherever
necessary when an accused person is brought before the Magistrate in terms of
s. 136 (1)(d) of the Code and make other consequential orders pending inquiry
or trial. The bringing of a person before the Court without process accused of
having committed an offence in terms of s. 136 (1)(d) can happen for example,
when a drunken person is arrested for misconduct in public causing annoyance
to any person, an offence punishable under s. 488 of the Penal Code and
produced in custody before a Magistrate who then may act under s. 139 (2).
This provision in clause (d) should not be confused with the other situation
of a suspect being taken before a Magistrate in custody during an
investigation in terms of s. 116 (1) when the investigating authority is of
the opinion that the information in his possession that the suspect has
committed a non-bailable offence is well founded. In such a situation that
suspect is detained pending further investigation and the Magistrate is
obliged to assist the further investigation by making appropriate judicial
orders. That is all s. 116 (1) contemplates. It is a step prior to the
institution of criminal proceedings. Equating a report under s. 116 (1) to an
institution of proceedings is wrong. The submissions of counsel for the State
in the Court of Appeal in the case of Attorney-General v. Punchi Banda
aforesaid appearing at pages 42, 43, 44 & 45 of that report as to whether
proceedings

69

have been instituted or not with reference to s. 116 (1) and s. 136 (1)(d) of
the Code are unwarranted. The statements on the law (obiter) in the case
appearing at page 44 of the report to wit:-...." If after investigations the
officer in charge of a Police Station finds that a definite allegation could
be made against the suspect then the Police would produce the suspect before
the Magistrate with that allegation..... proceedings are automatically
instituted under the provisions of s. 136 (1)(d)", and at page 45 of the
report......" once a suspect is taken before the Magistrate...... on the basis
that information is well founded then by virtue of s. 136 (1)(d) proceedings
are instituted and the Magistrate is directed to start an inquiry under s.
145", are wrong in law and should not be followed. These statements of that
Court are obiter dicta as the issue that had to be decided in that appeal was
whether the Magistrate could have granted bail under s. 403 (2) of that Code
in the context of the facts of that case. It would appear that the Court has
failed to examine the provisions of s. 116 as a whole, but looked only at that
part of sub-section (1) dealing with non-bailable cases. The Magistrate in the
instant case has followed that judgment.

Learned Counsel for the appellant relied on the following cases in support of
his submission that in a case of murder investigated by the Police it is only
when the Police have completed investigation and submitted a report to Court
alleging that the suspect has committed or been concerned in committing the
offence of murder could it be said that proceedings have been instituted
against such person. Such a report is often referred to as a plaint. Counsel
relied on the following cases in support of this submission: Lamanatissa de
Silva v. Sub-Inspector of Police, Matara (3), Perera v. Sub-Inspector of
Police, Kirulapone (4), Muttiah v. Regina (5), Ceylon Insurance Company v.
Perera (6), Romulus Fernando v. O.I.C Marawila (7).

In this view of the law it is seen that the appellant has been kept in custody
for over a period of three months without proceedings being instituted against
him. It is to be noted that the application for bail has been made after three
months from the date on which he was produced before the Court and remanded.
No material is available before us as to the date on which the suspect was
arrested. The provisions of s. 115 (3) speak of a suspect being entitled to
bail if proceedings are not instituted within three months of the date of his
arrest. As this is a relevant matter in the context of the

70

issue before us it is regrettable that the State was unable to inform this
Court of the date of arrest of the suspect. In fact no proceedings have been
properly instituted before the Magistrate on the material before this Court.
The State has been content to take the position that the suspect has his
remedies if he wants to be released from custody on bail under other
provisions of law, to wit: s. 403 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Counsel for
the State resting upon his proposition that proceedings have begun contends
that the Magistrate should have proceeded under s. 145 of the Code. The matter
seems to rest at that.

This Court is unable to accept the submissions of the Deputy Solicitor-General
as they are patently wrong in law.

As no proceedings were in fact instituted upon the report under s. 116 (1) the
Magistrate had jurisdiction to release the petitioner on bail on 20.12.89
subject to the terms of the proviso to s. 115 (1) of the Code as a period of
three months since the suspect's arrest had expired. No reasons as to why bail
should not be granted have been urged before us. No steps as far as this Court
is aware have been taken so far as to institute proceedings against the
petitioner.

The appeal is allowed. The order of the Magistrate dated 20.12.89 and the
judgment of the Court of Appeal are set aside. The petitioner is admitted to
bail upon his entering into a bond in a sum of Rs. 2000/- with one surety to
attend Court as directed. Magistrate to take necessary steps accordingly.

**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

  
**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/11.html_  

