##  Mendis and Another v. The Republic of Sri Lanka - SLR - 124, Vol 1 of 1992
[1985] LKSC 11; (1992) 1 Sri LR 124 (5 December 1985)

**124**

**MENDIS AND ANOTHER  
v.** **  
THE REPUBLIC OF SRI LANKA**

SUPREME COURT  
COLIN -THOME, J.  
RANASINGHE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 33/84  
HC GALLE NO. 517  
01 AND 02 OCTOBER 1985

_     Criminal Procedure - Section 334(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act No. 15 of 1979 - Right of Court of Appeal to quash conviction if the Court
holds that the verdict of the jury is unreasonable or cannot be supported
having regard to the evidence._

**Held:**

An appeal against a conviction based on the verdict of the jury will be
allowed if the Court thinks that the verdict of the jury should be set aside
on the ground that under all the circumstances of the case it is unsafe and
unsatisfactory. The verdict of the jury should be set aside in such a case
even though all the material was before the jury and the summing-up was
impeccable. The verdict of the jury is unreasonable where it is not sound or
sensible or not governed by good sense.

In a case where the material evidence on identification was contradictory and
based on inherent inconsistencies and improbabilities the verdict of guilty
cannot be allowed to stand as it would be unsafe and unsatisfactory.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Gardiris Appu v. The King 52 NLR 344, 348.  
_  
_2\. Sinniah Palaniyandy v. The State 76 NLR 145.  
_  
_3\. The King v Andris Silva et al. 41 NLR 433.  
_  
_4\. The King v. Wegodapola 42 NLR 459, 469.  
_  
_5\. Rex v. Don Andrayas & Attapattu 21 CLW 93, 97.  
_  
_6\. The King v Mustapha Lebbe 44 NLR 505, 507.  
_  
_7\. Bradley (1910) 4 Cr. App. R 224, 228._

125

  
_8\. Parker (1911) 6 Cr. App. R 285, 286.  
_  
_9\. Schrager (1911) 6 Cr. App. R 253,'254.  
_  
_10\. Chadwick (1917) 12 Cr. App. R 247, 250.  
_  
_11\. Hall (1919) 14 Cr. App. R 58, 64.  
_  
_12\. Scranton (1920) 15 Cr. App. R 104, 110.  
_  
_13\. Armstrong (1922) 16 Cr. App. R 104, 110.  
_  
_14\. Margulas (1922) 17 Cr. App. R 3, 5.  
_  
_15\. Shefsky(1922) 17 Cr. App. R 28, 29.  
_  
_16\. Wallace (1931) 23 Cr. App. R 32, 35.  
_  
_17\. Dent (1943) 29 Cr. App. R 120, 125.  
_  
_18\. Sean Cooper (1969) 53 Cr. App. R 82, 85.  
_  
_19\. Stafford v. D. P. P. (1973) 3 WLR 719._

**APPEAL** from Judgment of the High Court of Galle.  


_Dr. Colvin R. De Silva with Mrs. Manourie Muttetuwegama, N. V De Silva and
Miss Saumya De Silva for 2nd and 3rd accused-appellants.  
_  
_Rohan Jayatilleke, SSC for Attorney-General._

_Cur adv vult._

5th December, 1985.  
**COLIN-THOME, J.**

The accused-appellants who were the second and third accused in H.C. Galle
Case No. 517 were indicted along with three others under seven counts. The
first count was a charge of unlawful assembly the common object of which was
to cause injuries to Geesin Perera. The second to the fourth counts were based
on the liability of the accused for the acts of one or more members of the
unlawful assembly in furtherance of the common object in causing the death of
Geesin Perera and in the attempted murder of Sendrick Perera and Sunil Perera.
Counts 5, 6 and 7 charged the accused with

126

the murder of Geesin Perera and the attempted murder of Sendrick Perera and
Sunil Perera on the basis of a common intention.

At the close of the trial the jury by a divided verdict of 6 - 1 found all the
accused not guilty on counts 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7. The jury found the second
and third accused guilty of the murder of Geesin Perera under count 5. They
were sentenced to death.

The appeal of the accused-appellants to the Court of Appeal was dismissed. The
appeal is from the judgment of the Court of Appeal. The main submission of
learned Counsel for the accused-appellants is that the Court of Appeal has
misconceived the scope and applicability of section 334 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, in refusing to interfere with the
conviction of the appellants as the verdict of the jury was "unreasonable or
cannot be supported having regard to the evidence".

The alleged offences were committed on or about the 31st October 1976 at
Balapitiya. Count 5 states:

5\. At the same time and place aforesaid and in the course of the same
transaction you did commit murder by causing the death of M. Geesin Perera,
and that you have thereby committed an offence punishable under section 296
read with section 32 of the Penal Code.

The main witnesses for the prosecution were Sendrick Perera and Sunil Perera,
who received gunshot injuries during the incident, and Chandra Somawathie, the
daughter of the deceased Geesin Perera. As this was a case of night shooting
the identification of the suspects was a crucial issue.

According to Dr. G. T. Dalpathadu the deceased had 14 gunshot injuries
consisting of 9 entrance wounds and 5 exit wounds. There was a gunshot injury
near the left nipple which had lacerated the left lung and fractured the 4th
rib. This injury was necessarily fatal. There was an injury on the left side
of the abdomen which lacerated the small intestines. This injury was fatal in
the ordinary course of nature. There were 5 injuries on the left thigh and 3
injuries on the right thigh.

127

He also had 4 injuries close to the left knee. The spread of the injuries from
chest to knee was 20 inches. This fact together with the absence of blackening
and singeing on the wounds indicated that the shooting was at a range of about
15 to 30 yards or more though, of course, the doctor admitted that he was no
ballistics expert. The direction of the shooting was from front and a little
to the right. The doctor was unable to say whether the injuries were caused by
one shot or more than one shot. He recovered a pellet from the abdomen of the
deceased.

The doctor examined Sendrick Perera on 31.10.76 at 10 p.m. Sendrick had a
gunshot injury 3 inches below the left knee and an exit wound on the outer
side of the left leg. This injury had caused a fracture of the leg. The
shooting was not at close range. Sendrick told him that "Sirisena (5A),
Siriwardene (3A), Upasena (2A) and Wijesiri (4A) shot at about 8.15 p.m. at
Weliwatte". Sendrick told him that these persons fired four shots.

The doctor examined Sunil Perera on 31.10.76 at 11 p.m. Sunil told him that
"Siriwardene (3A), Upasena (2A) and Wijesiri (4A) shot at Weliwatte at 8.15
p.m." Sunil had a gunshot injury on his right thigh and another injury close
to that injury from which he removed a pellet. This injury was non-grievous.

Sendrick Perera, aged 68 years, brother of the deceased Geesin, lived about 80
feet from the deceased's house. On the day of the incident at about 8 p.m., he
heard shouts "being killed". He ran towards the deceased's house. Geesin said
"have come to shoot" and pointed out the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th accused. They
were the only accused present. The 1st accused was not there. Geesin was on
the foundation in front of his house and about 22 feet away were the four
accused inside Geesin's land about 2 or 3 feet from the fence. Beyond the
fence was a breadfruit tree in a garden belonging to a villager, Upasena, the
2nd accused, and Siriwardene, the 3rd accused, had guns. Wijesiri, the 4th
accused, bad a sword and Sirisena, the 5th accused, had a iron rod or a club.
In his statement to the doctor and to the Police Sendrick did not mention that
the 4th accused had a sword and that the 5th accused had an iron rod or club.

128

Sendrick stated that just as he warned Geesin to take cover the second and
third accused fired their guns at about the same time. Both the deceased and
he received injuries. Under cross-examination he said "Upasena (2A) fired the
first shot and my brother received it. The second shot was fired by
Siriwardene, (3A). I did not hear any shots when I was at home." In his
statement to the police he stated. "Last night when I was at home I heard a
report of a gun from the direction of the railway." This contradiction was
marked D2.

He stated that there was no enmity with the accused. He denied making the
statement to the police: "Then, as there was a tense situation for the last
two or three days I went to my brother's house crossing the garden." This
contradiction was marked D3.

He stated that he told the doctor that only the 2nd and 3rd accused fired
their guns. According to the doctor Sendrick informed him that all four
accused fired four shots.

Sendrick said that he did not see Somawathie at any stage. He said: "They were
inside the house having closed the doors at the time of shooting."

At the time of the shooting he was 17 feet from the deceased and 35 feet from
Sunil. He was between the deceased and Sunil at the time.

Sendrick stated that he identified the accused with the aid of the light from
three bulbs in the Weaving Centre and by moonlight. The light from the Weaving
Centre did not fall at the foundation where Geesin was and where he was.
According to Police Sergeant Jayakody there was bright light at the foundation
from two bulbs at the Weaving Centre.

Sunil Perera, nephew of the deceased, lived in a house about 80 feet from the
deceased's house. Their houses faced opposite directions. On the day of the
incident at about 8 p.m. he heard a report of a gun from the railroad. He saw
the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th accused together by the edge of the road. The 1st
accused was not with them. He did not see the 1st accused anywhere that night.

129

He was able to see the accused as there was moonlight and light from the
Weaving Centre. They had weapons like clubs. He saw them from near a billin
tree behind his house. He did not see any of the accused with a sword. He did
not see the 2nd, 3rd and 4th accused having a gun. He admitted that if he told
the doctor that the 2nd, 3rd and 4th accused fired guns at 8.15 p.m., it would
be incorrect.

Sunil stated in cross-examination that he did not see anyone take cover behind
the breadfruit tree. He admitted he stated to the police: "Then when was on
the road I saw Upasena Mendis, Siriwardene Mendis, Wijesiri and Corporal
Sirisena by the side of the road in front of Alison Zoysa's land taking cover
behind a breadfruit tree."(D5)

He stated that two shots were fired one after another. A pellet struck his
right thigh. He ran to the Weaving Centre where there were two policemen. He
did not tell them who shot.

Sunil stated at first that there was no enmity with the accused. Later he
stated: "There was a row. They cut Alison's hand. I do not know who cut."

He stated that the distance from the foundation to where the accused were was
60 feet contradicting Sendrick. He heard three gunshots while Sendrick heard
only two. The foundation could not be seen because of darkness.

Chandra Somawathie, daughter of the deceased, was about 15 years of age at the
time of the incident. She said at about 8 p.m. she heard a shot from the
railroad. The deceased and she went to the verandah of Alison's house which
was only about 6 feet away. Then she saw Peiris Mendis, the 1st accused, going
along the road with a torchlight. When he got near the breadfruit tree he said
to the other accused: "Why do you wait further, Thiyapiyaw." Then the deceased
got on the foundation as if to make himself an easy target for his assailants.
The 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th accused who were taking cover behind the breadfruit
tree came to the road. Under cross-examination she stated that she did not see
the accused take cover behind the breadfruit tree.

130

The 2nd and 3rd accused who had guns levelled their weapons at the deceased
and fired. The deceased ran some distance on the foundation and fell. She did
not see any accused with an iron rod.

She could not say whether the foundation was well lit. She identified the
accused by the light from the Weaving Centre which was about 50 feet from the
foundation.

Soon after the shooting a crowd of about 20 or 25 persons gathered at the
scene. She did not tell anyone who shot her father.

Somawathie was the only witness who stated that the 1st accused was at the
scene inciting the other accused with guns to shoot. She did not see Sendrick
and Sunil at the place where the shooting took place. Learned Senior State
Counsel jettisoned her evidence in the Court of Appeal presumably because the
jury had rejected her evidence at the trial.

Romalyn Alwis, wife of Alison Zoysa, stated that on the day of the incident
the deceased and Somawathie came to the verandah of her house. From the
verandah she saw 2 or 3 persons taking cover behind the breadfruit tree. She
could not identify them as it was a dark night and as there were trees
obstructing her view. It was dark under the breadfruit tree. After the
deceased and Somawathie left her verandah she heard two shots.

J. A. S. Jayakody, Police Sergeant 2181, who visited the scene on the night of
the incident found stains like blood on the right side of the foundation
trailing towards the deceased's house. The light from two bulbs in the Weaving
Centre fell near the breadfruit tree as well as on the foundation. There was a
fence between the foundation and the breadfruit tree. It was a live fence
about 4 to 5 feet high. There were shrubs and coconut trees as well. The fence
was about 20 feet from the foundation. The girth of the breadfruit tree was
about 4 feet.

Inspector K. T Jacob who visited the scene at 9 a.m. the following day found
two under waddings (P7) near the breadfruit tree and a top wadding (P6) on the
foundation. He found pellet marks on the leaves of the breadfruit tree at a
height of about 4 feet.

131

Section 334 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, which
is based on section 5(1) of the Court of Criminal Appeal Ordinance, No. 23 of
1938, indicates the circumstances under which the Court of Appeal can quash a
conviction if the Court holds that the verdict of the jury, inter alia, is
"unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence." It
states:

334\. (1) The Court of Appeal on any appeal against conviction on a verdict of
jury shall allow the appeal if it thinks that such verdict should be set aside
on the ground that it is unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to
the evidence, or that the judgment of the court before which the appellant was
convicted should be set aside on the ground of a wrong decision of any
question of any law or that on any ground there was a miscarriage of justice,
and in any other case shall dismiss the appeal:

Provided that the court may, notwithstanding that it is of opinion that the
point raised in the appeal might be decided in favour of the appellant,
dismiss the appeal if it considers that no substantial miscarriage of justice
has actually occurred.

In _Gardiris Appu v. The King_ (1) the Court of Criminal Appeal held (per
Dias, S.P.J.) that: "The powers of this Court to quash the verdict of a jury
in a proper case being undoubted, the difficulty is to know when such powers
should be invoked and in what cases the verdict of the jury in an apparent
case of hardship should be allowed to stand . . . These (the general
principles) may be summarised thus: Questions of fact are for the jury. The
Court of Criminal Appeal does not sit to retry cases, thereby usurping the
functions of the jury : This Court sits as a Court of Appeal, and if there has
been no misdirection, no mistake in law, and no misreception of evidence,
cannot upset the verdict of the jury even though the Court feels that had the
members of the Court been on the jury, they would have come to a different
conclusion from the-one which the jury reached. This, however, is not an
inflexible or hard and fast rule to be applied rigorously and indiscriminately
to every case. Each case must be decided on its peculiar facts and
circumstances. The Ordinance which defines our powers has enacted that there
may be cases where this Court will interfere, and should interfere, on the
ground that the

132

verdict of the jury is unreasonable, that is to say, not sound or sensible, or
not governed by good sense. The question is whether this is such a case."

Dias, S.P.J. has interpreted the expression "unreasonable" in Section 5(i) of
the Court of Appeal Ordinance, No. 23 of 1938, as "not sound or sensible or
not governed by good sense," following the definition of the word in the
Shorter Oxford Dictionary as "not acting in accordance with reason or good
sense." ;

In _Sinniah Palaniyandy v. The State_ (2) Alles, J. seems to give a more
restrictive interpretation to the expression "unreasonable". At page 156 he
states: "The unreasonableness of a jury verdict does not mean and cannot mean
that the Court is entitled to substitute its view of the facts for that found
by the jury. Numerous decisions of this Court have laid down the principle in
unmistakable terms in _Andris Silva_ (3), _Wegodapola_ (4) _Don Andrayas and
Attapattu_ (5), _Mustapha Lebbe_ (6). These are early decisions of this Court
which have hitherto been consistently followed, but this is a principle that
does not appeal to be sufficiently appreciated today. When, for instance there
has been an unanimous verdict of a jury who have accepted the evidence of
direct eye-witnesses, even if there are criticisms that can be made about that
evidence, these are matters that must necessarily have been brought to the
notice of the jury by competent Counsel and it the jury, in spite of these
infirmities, have chosen to accept the evidence of the eye-witnesses, it would
be a usurpation of the functions of the jury, for this Court to substitute its
verdict for the verdict of the jury. The only exception to this rule would be
if the misdirections or non-directions are of such a substantial nature which
might have affected the jury's verdict resulting in a miscarriage of justice
or it can be demonstrated that the verdict of the jury is perverse, and not
merely because the members of this Court feel some doubt about the correctness
of the verdict."

Dr. Colvin R. De Silva submitted that the Court of Appeal has been influenced
by the misinterpretation of the word "unreasonable" as "perverse" in the
judgment in Palaniyandy's case (supra) and that a wrong stress has been
incorrectly focussed in interpreting the word "unreasonable"..

133

In _The King v. Andris Silva et al_ (3) the Court of Criminal Appeal held that
in an appeal involving questions of fact only it is not the function of the
Court of Criminal Appeal to retry a case, which has already been decided by a
jury. The Court in such a case is only required to say whether the verdict of
the jury is unreasonable or whether it cannot be supported having regard to
the evidence. The Court of Criminal _Appeal in The King v. Wegodapola_ (4)and
in _Rex v. Don Andrayas & Attapattu _(5) followed the dicta in Andris Silva's
case (supra) without a clarification of the interpretation to be given to the
phrase "unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence."

In _The King v. Mustapha Lebbe_ (6) the Court of Criminal Appeal in
interpreting the phrase "unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to
the evidence" followed the dicta in English cases and held (per Moseley,
S.P.J.) that the Court of Criminal Appeal will not interfere with the verdict
of a jury unless it has a real doubt as to the guilt of the accused or is of
opinion that on the whole it is safer that the conviction should not be
allowed to stand.

Section 5(1) of the Court of Criminal Appeal Ordinance No. 23 of 1938,
followed precisely section 4(1) of the Criminal Appeal Act, 1907, of England.
It will be convenient now to examine the interpretation given to the phrase
"unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence" by the
Court of Criminal Appeal in England.

In _Bradley_ (7) the appellant was charged with rape. The Court held (at 228)
that "On the whole we think it safer that the conviction should not be allowed
to stand. There was not sufficient evidence before the jury to justify them in
concluding that the girl did not consent."

In _Parker_ (8) the Court held that "There is, therefore, a sufficient doubt
as to the accuracy of the verdict for us to give the appellant the benefit of
it."

The Court of Criminal Appeal held in _Schrager_ (9) that "On the evidence of
the prosecution the case against him was very doubtful, and in all the
circumstances it did seem to the Court that there was a

134

reasonable and substantial amount of doubt as to the guilt of the appellant."

In _Chadwick_ (10) the Court held that "1n view of all the facts, this Court
has come to the conclusion that the verdict of the jury should be set aside on
the ground that it cannot be supported by the evidence, and that the
convictions are unsatisfactory and must be quashed."

The Court of Criminal Appeal held in _Hall_ (11) (per Reading, L.C.J.) that
"With this evidence before us we think that on the whole it would not be safe
to allow the verdict of the jury to stand. We are prepared to exercise our
powers under s. 4 of the Criminal Appeal Act, 1907, and say that the verdict
should be set aside. The appeal will therefore be allowed and the conviction
quashed. We may add that, in our opinion, the summing-up of the Learned Judge
was quite complete, and that his direction to the jury was most careful."

In _Scranton_ (12) the Court held that "the conclusion which they had come to
in this case was that the evidence was not satisfactory to support
conviction." In _Armstrong_ (13) the Court had to decide "whether it was safe
to convict the appellant in this state of the evidence."

The Court held in _Margulas_ (14) that the "evidence cannot be considered
sufficient.* The conviction was quashed. The Court observed that "No complaint
can be made of the summing-up." In _Shefsky_ (15) it was held that "in these
circumstances it appears to the Court that the evidence is insufficient, and
the conviction unsafe and unsatisfactory."

In _Wallace_ (16) it was held that the case against the appellant "was not
proved with that certainty which is necessary in order to justify a verdict of
guilty, and, therefore, it is our duty to take the course indicated by the
section of the statute to which I have referred (s. 4, Criminal Appeal Act,
1907)." In Dent an it was held that "this is a conviction which cannot be
safely allowed to stand."

135

A long line of English cases has interpreted the phrase "unreasonable or
cannot be supported having regard to the evidence" as "unsafe" or
"unsatisfactory". This interpretation was adopted by Moseley, S.P.J. in _The
King v. Mustapha Lebbe_ (6).

In England this interpretation has now become incorporated in a statute. The
relevant portion of section 2 of the Criminal Appeal Act 1968 (U.K.) reads:

2\. (1) Except as provided by this Act, the Court of Appeal shall allow an
appeal against a conviction if they think -

(a) (as amended by section 44 of the Criminal Law Act 1977) that the
conviction should be set aside on the ground that under all circumstances of
the case it is unsafe or unsatisfactory.

In Sean _Cooper_ (18) the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division) observed (per
Widgery, L.J.) that "The important thing about this case is that all the
material to which I have referred was put before the jury. No one criticises
the summing-up, and, indeed, Mr. Frisby for the appellant has gone to some
lengths to indicate that the summingup was entirely fair and that everything
which could possibly have been said in order to alert the jury to the
difficulties of the case was clearly said by the presiding judge. It is,
therefore, a case in which every issue was before the jury and in which the
jury was properly instructed, and, accordingly, a case in which this Court
will be very reluctant indeed to intervene. It has been said over and over
again throughout the years that this Court must recognize the advantage which
a jury has in seeing and hearing the witnesses, and if all the material was
before the jury and the summing-up was impeccable, this Court should not
lightly interfere. Indeed, until the passing of the Criminal Appeal Act 1966 -
provisions which are now to be found in section 2 of the Criminal Appeal Act
1968 - it was almost unheard of for this Court to interfere in such a case.
However, now our powers are somewhat different, and we are indeed charged to
allow an appeal against conviction if we think that

136

 the verdict of the jury should be set aside on the ground that under all the
circumstances of the case it is unsafe or unsatisfactory. That means that in
cases of this kind the Court must in the end ask itself a subjective question,
whether we are content to let the matter stand as it is, or whether there is
not some lurking doubt in our minds which makes us wonder whether an injustice
has been done. This is a reaction which may not be based strictly on the
evidence as such; it is a reaction which can be produced by the general feel
of the case as the Court experiences it."

In view of the decisions in several English authorities referred to in this
judgment we are unable to agree with the observation in Cooper (supra) which
states: "Indeed, until the passing of the Criminal Appeal Act 1966 -
provisions which are not to be found in section 2 of the Criminal Appeal Act
1968 - it was almost unheard of for this Court' to interfere in such a case."
However, we agree with the rest of the dicta in Cooper (supra) quoted in this
judgment.

In _Stafford v. D. P. P._ (19) the House of Lords approved the judgment of
Lord Widgery in Cooper, ante, as correctly stating the effect of section
2(1)(a).

We agree with the interpretation given to the phrase "unreasonable or cannot
be supported having regard to the evidence" by Moseley, S.P.J. in The King v.
Mustapha Lebbe (supra) and in the English cases as unsafe or unsatisfactory.
The verdict of the jury should be set aside on the ground that it is unsafe or
unsatisfactory even though all the material was before the jury and the
summing-up was impeccable. We hold that the expression "perverse" which
according to the Shorter Oxford Dictionary means being "obstinate or
persistent in what is wrong" is too restrictive an interpretation of the
phrase "unreasonable or cannot be supported having regard to the evidence."

In the instant case learned State Counsel in the Court of Appeal jettisoned
the evidence of Chandra Somawathie. The presence of under-waddings near the
breadfruit tree outside the fence and pellet marks on the leaves of this tree
demolish the testimony of Sendrick Perera that the shooting took place inside
the fence in the compound

137

of the deceased. We are also mindful of the fact that Sendrick Perera told the
doctor on the night of the incident that four shots were fired by four
accused. At the trial he stated that only two shots were fired by the 2nd and
3rd accused. Both Sendrick Perera and the remaining eye-witness Sunil Perera
did not see the 1st accused at the scene contradicting the evidence of Chandra
Somawathie. Sunil Perera, contradicted Sendrick Perera on a vital matter when
he placed the 2nd to the 5th accused at the time of the shooting on the edge
of the road outside the fence. He did not see the 2nd, 3rd and 4th accused
with guns. He admitted that his statement to the doctor on the night of the
incident that the 2nd, 3rd and 4th accused fired shots was incorrect.

After due consideration of all the circumstances in this case we have decided
that we regard the verdict of the jury as unsafe or unsatisfactory and
accordingly we allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. The convictions of the 2nd and 3rd accused-appellants are quashed.

**RANASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed.  
_  
_Convictions quashed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/11.html_  

