##  Inoka Gallage v. Kamal Addararachchi and Another - SLR - 307, Vol 1 of
2002 [2002] LKSC 11; (2002) 1 Sri LR 307 (30 May 2002)

**307**

**INOKA GALLAGE  
v.  
KAMAL ADDARARACHCHI AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
SC LEAVE TO APPEAL NO. 30/2001  
CA CASE NO. 90/97  
HC COLOMBO NO. 7710/96  
OCTOBER 23 AND NOVEMBER 09, 2001 AND  
FEBRUARY 08, MARCH 13 AND MAY 08, 2002  
  
_Penal Code - Abduction and rape - Sections 357 and 364 of the Code -Consent -
Rule regarding corroboration - Whether weakness of the defence would improve a
weak case for the prosecution.  
_  
The accused was indicted in the High Court on two counts (i) abduction of
Inoka Gallage on 25. 08. 1993 in order that she may be forced or reduced to
illicit intercourse, punishable under section 357 of the Penal Code and (ii)
committing rape on her on the same date, punishable under section 364 of the
Penal Code. The trial of the case was by the High Court, without a jury.  
  
The prosecutrix said that she offered vigorous resistance to the alleged rape.
But, she had no injuries. The doctor's evidence was that she was still a
virgin. Subashini, a friend of the prosecutrix said that on 26th Inoka came to
her place around 11 am and whilst talking she said that the previous day she
went to the accused's house. The accused was not there but his aunt was there
and treated her well. The accused arrived around 9.30 pm and after having
dinner all three of them spent the entire night by having a "cosy chat" in
that house. The impression created was that she was under the watchful eye of
the old lady. She did not mention the incident of rape which she later alleged
had taken place a few hours earlier.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Consent to sexual intercourse is a defence to a charge of rape. Consent
requires voluntary participation as against passive giving in. A mere act of
submission does not involve consent. Consent may be expressed or implied.

**308**

(2) Corroboration is not a sine qua non for a conviction in a rape case. It is
only a rule of prudence. If the evidence of the victim does not suffer from
basic infirmity and the probability factor does not render it unworthy of
credence, as a general rule there is no reason to insist on corroboration.
But, in a trial without a jury there must be an indication in the judgment
that the judge had this rule in mind.  
  
(3) In the circumstances of the case the prosecutrix was an unreliable witness
and it was unsafe to act on her sole testimony.  
  
(4) The prosecutrix had testified during the non-summary inquiry in a crowded
court but the trial in the High Court where the accused was convicted was held
in camera. Thus, she had been treated by the trial Judge in a special way,
which was unwarranted.  
  
(5) In the case of rape the onus is on the prosecutix to prove affirmatively,
beyond reasonable doubt each ingredient of the offence beyond reasonable doubt
and such onus never shifts. The weakness of the defence case can never bolster
up a weak case for the prosecution.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Regina v. Lucas -_ (1981) QDB 720.  
  
2\. _Rao Hamarian v. State -_ AIR 1958 Panjab 123.  
  
3\. _AIR 1948 Oudh 1 -_ Cr. LJ. 542.  
  
**LEAVE** to appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Ranjith Abeysuriya, PC_ with _Miss Lanka de Silva_ and _Miss Shamini
Gunaratne_ for prosecutrix-petitioner.  
  
_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC_ with _Priyantha Jayawardena_ and _Miss Chandrika Silva_
for accused-respondent.  
  
_Yasantha Kodagoda, Senior State Counsel_ for Attorney-General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**309**

May 30, 2002  
  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
  
**This is a Special Leave to Appeal application filed by one Inoka Gallage,
the prosecutrix in a rape case, against the decision of the Court of Appeal
acquitting the accused-appellant, respondent (hereinafter referred to as the
accused).  
  
The accused was indicted in the High Court of Colombo on two counts. In the
first count he was indicted with the abduction of Inoka Gallage on 25. 08.
1983 in order that she may be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse, an
offence punishable under section 357 of the Penal Code, in the second count
the accused was indicted with having committed rape on the petitioner on the
said date, an offence punishable under section 364 of the Penal Code.  
  
After trial the learned High Court Judge, sitting without a Jury convicted the
accused on both counts. The accused was sentenced to a term of two years'
rigorous imprisonment on the first count and to a term of 10 years' rigorous
imprisonment on the second count, both sentences to run concurrently. In
addition the accused was ordered to pay a fine of rupees one million with a
default term of two years' rigorous imprisonment. It was further ordered that
out of the said fine of rupees one million a sum of Rs. 9,000,000 to be paid
to the prosecutrix as compensation.  
  
The accused appealed against the said conviction and sentence. The appeal was
fully argued for nearly 18 days in the year 2000 and on the 15th of December,
2000, the Court of Appeal allowed the appeal and set aside the said conviction
and sentence and acquitted the accused.  
  
The Attorney-General who appeared for the State did not challenge the judgment
of the Court of Appeal. However, the prosecutrix filed

**310**

a petition and affidavit seeking leave from this court against the said
acquittal. It is relevant at this stage to mention that before filing the
indictment in the High Court there was a non-summary inquiry in the
Magistrate's Court of Colombo. In that case, after recording the evidence of
the prosecutrix, the learned Magistrate discharged the accused as he did not
place any reliance on the testimony of the prosecutrix. Thereafter, the
Attorney-General having considered the material available, indicted the
accused in the High Court, Mr. Abeysuriya, President's Counsel, on behalf of
the prosecutrix urged the following grounds in support of this application :  
  
(1) That the Court of Appeal has wrongly interpreted the true meaning of the
phrase 'without her consent' and in particular that there could be tacit and
implied consent.  
  
(2) That Court of Appeal has erroneously ruled that the absence of injuries on
the body of the prosecutix strongly suggested consensual sexual intercourse.  
  
(3) That the Court of Appeal has wrongly ruled that the law of Sri Lanka has a
legal requirement for corroboration of the testimony of the prosecutrix.  
  
(4) That the Court of Appeal has misdirected itself in holding that the trial
Judge was wrong in ordering that the trial be held in camera.  
  
(5) That the Court of Appeal has failed to consider the contention so on
behalf of the prosecutix that the proved lies uttered by the accused would
amount to corroboration of the version of the prosecutrix on the authority in
the decision of Regina v. Lucas (1)  
  
The first and second grounds urged by the learned counsel for the petitioner
are considered together for convenience. Consent to

**311**

sexual intercourse on the part of the woman is a good defence to a charge of
rape unless the woman is unable to consent or dissent by reason of (a) extreme
youth (b) unconciousness (c) idiocy or imbecility or (d) consent obtained by
force. Consent on the part of  the woman as a defence to an allegation of rape
requires voluntary participation. A woman is said to consent when she freely
agrees to submit herself. It is always a voluntary and concious acceptance of
what is proposed to be done by another and concurred in by the former. There
is a difference between consent and submission to sexual intercourse. Every
consent involves submission but the converse does not follow and a mere act of
submission does not involve consent. It will be, therefore, proper to have a
correct concept of what should be treated as consent on the part of the
prosecutrix. In the case of Rao Harnarian v. State,(1) Justice Tek Chand
referred to the distinction between 'passive submission' and 'consent' in the
following words :  
  
"a mere act of helpless resignation in the face of inevitable compulsion,
quiesence, non-resistance or passive giving in, when volitional faculty is
either clouded by fear or vitiated by duress cannot be deemed to be consent as
understood in law. Consent on the part of a woman as a defence to an
allegation of rape requires voluntary participation, not only after the
exercise of intelligence based on the knowledge of the significance and moral
quality of choice between resistance and assent. Submission of her body under
the influence of fear or terror is no consent."  
  
So When the court is confronted with a situation where the victim says that
the act was done without her consent and the accused takes up the position
that it was done with her consent, then consent becomes a matter of inference
to be made from evidence of previous or contemporaneous acts and conduct and
other attendant circumÂ­stances. In considering the question of 'consent' it
will also be useful to refer to some observations made by Dr. Gour's Penal Law
(Seventh Edition, page 1845).

**312**

"The question of consent is by far the most important in the case. Of course,
such consent may be express or implied. If it is an express consent a case
will be seldom taken to court. If it is taken to court, it will have to
consider it such consent was likely to have been given by the prosecutrix.
Excepting, of course, the case of prostitutes and other mercenaries, women are
seldom prone to translate their thoughts in these matters into words. They
usually leave the matter of consent to tacit understanding. In such cases
consent becomes a matter of inference to be made from evidence of previous or
contemporaneous acts and conduct and other surrounding circumstances."  
  
In a decided case of alleged rape of a girl, evidence showed that the girl
left home without compulsion, that she journeyed with the accused from place
to place, she never complained of any ill treatment by the accused to any of
the people she met and there was only her evidence that alleged sexual
intercourse was without her consent, it was held that the circumstances
indicated that if there was any sexual act it was with her consent.'  
  
In the instant case too the Court of Appeal has taken into conÂ­sideration the
previous and subsequent conduct of the prosecutrix. The court also has
considered the absence of injuries on the prosecutrix despite the fact of her
saying that she offered vigorous resistance, no The doctor's evidence was that
she is still a virgin. In this backdrop the Court of Appeal had come to the
conclusion that if any sexual act had taken place it had been with her
consent.  
  
The 3rd ground raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner was that the
Court of Appeal wrongly ruled that the law of Sri Lanka has a legal
requirement for corroboration of the testimony of the prosecutrix.  
  
It is to be noted that corroboration is not a sine qua non for a conviction in
a rape case. In the Asian set up refusal to act on the

**313**

evidence of a victim of sexual assault in the absence of corroboration as a
rule is adding insult to injury. If the evidence of the victim does not suffer
from basic infirmity and the probability factor does not render it unworthy of
credence, as a general rule there is no reason to insist on corroboration. The
principles that have to be borne in mind when considering the evidence of the
prosecutrix have been clearly laid down in several decisions of the Supreme
Court. It has been held that the prosecutrix cannot be considered to be an
accomplice. As a rule of prudence, however, it has been emphasized that courts
should normally look for some corroboration of her testimony in order to
satisfy itself that the prosecutrix is telling the truth and the person
accused of abduction or rape has not been falsely implicated. The view that no
conviction without corroboration was possible has not been accepted. The only
rule of law is the rule of prudence, namely the advisability of corroboration
should be present in the mind of the Judge. Where the case is tried with the
aid of a jury it is necessary that the Judge should draw the attention of the
jury to the advisability of looking for corroboration, wherever corroboration
is needed. But, where the case is tried by a Judge alone as it is now being
done in our country there must be an indication in the course of the judgment
that the trial Judge had this rule in mind when he or she prepared the
judgment. In a given case if the Judge thinks that there is no need of
corroboration he should give reasons for dispensing with the necessity of such
corroboration. But, if a conviction is based on the evidence of the
prosecutrix without any corroboration it will not be illegal on the sole
ground of absence of corroboration. However, it is always safe to look for
corroboration.  
  
Generally, a conviction for rape almost entirely depends on the credibility of
the woman so far as the essential ingredients are conÂ­cerned, the other
evidence being merely corroborative. There may be many factors in a case
tending to show that the testimony of the prosecutrix suffers from infirmities
or defects in a manner so as to make it either unsafe or impossible to base a
conviction on her evidence.

**314**

In the instant case the Court of Appeal has clearly stated that the
prosecutrix is unworthy of credit and her evidence cannot be relied upon.
Apart from the reasons adduced by the Court of Appeal the following items of
evidence demonstrates this fact beyond any doubt. Devika Subaashini, the
friend of the prosecutrix has stated that on the 26th Inoka came to her place
around 11. am and whilst talking she had said that the previous day she went
to the accused's house and the accused was not there but his aunt who was
there treated her well. The accused came to the house around 9.30 pm and after
having dinner all three of them spent the entire night by having a "cosy chat"
in that house. The impression she has created is that she was under the
watchful eye of the old lady the whole night. She has not uttered anything
about the incident of rape which she later alleged had taken place a few hours
earlier. Furthermore, according to Devika she had been told that the accused
suggested to Inoka to stay at Devika's place and continue her studies.
According to the evidence it is the prosecutrix who had suggested that she
would  stay at Devika's place and continue her studies, when the accused told
her to go back home and study. It thus appears that the prosecutrix is a
person who changes her version of the events when it suits her. In these
circumstance one cannot disagree with the findings of the Court of Appeal that
she is an unreliable witness and it is unsafe to act on her sole testimony.  
  
The next point raised by the learned President's Counsel was that the Court of
Appeal misdirected itself in holding that the trial Judge was wrong in
ordering that the trial be held in camera.  
  
On a careful consideration of the judgment of the Court of Appeal  we find
that what the Court of Appeal has stated is that the prosecutrix has given the
same evidence in a crowded court house on an earlier occasion and therefore in
those circumstances the prosecutrix need not be given special treatment in the
High Court. The High Court record bares ample testimony to the fact that this
witness has been treated by the trial Judge in a special way. The observation
by the Court

**315**

of Appeal that the witness had been mollycoddled by the Judge therefore is
warranted.  
  
The final ground urged by the learned Counsel was that the Court of Appeal has
failed to consider that the lies uttered by the accused would amount to
corroboration of the version of the prosecutrix. In this matter the learned
counsel drew the attention of Court to the decision in R. v. Lucas (supra).  
  
In a case of rape the onus is always on the prosecution to prove
affirmatively, beyond reasonable doubt each ingredient of the offence and such
onus never shifts. Since the Court of Appeal had considered the prosecutrix as
an unreliable witness not worthy of credit, there was no duty cast on the
Court of Appeal to consider the evidence of the accused. The weaknesses in the
defence case can never bolster up a weak case for the prosecution. Therefore,
on a consideration of all these matters we see no merit in this application.
Special leave is refused. We order no cost.  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, CJ. -** I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Special leave to appeal refused.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/11.html_  

