##  Ekanayake v. Attorney General - SLR - 46, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 12;
(1988) 1 Sri LR 46 (14 January 1988)

**

46

EKANAYAKE  
V.  
ATTORNEY-GENERAL

**

SUPREME COURT:  
WANASUNDERA, J.,' L. H. DE ALWIS, J. AND O. S. M. SENEVIRATNE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 68/86.  
C.A. No. 132/84.  
H.C. COLOMBO 1203/83  
DECEMBER 7, 8 AND 9, 1987.

_

Criminal Law-Offences Against Aircraft Act No 24 of 1982 ss. 17(1), 19(1) and
19 (3) (d)-Dishonest retention of stolen property-Penal Code s, 394-Meaning of
`in relation to' in s. 19 (3) (d) of Act .No: 2.4 of 1982-,conventions as an
aid to . interpretation-Jurisdiction-Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 ss. 9 (1)
(f), 39-Extortion committed outside Sri Lanka - Can extortionist himself be
tried for retention in Sri Lanka? - Misjoinder.

_

The appellant a Sri Lankan citizen married an Italian lady and had a son by
her but was unable to secure permission to live and work in Italy. As part of
his plan to reunite with his family and reimburse himself his expenses he
boarded an Alitalia plane at Delhi and when the aircraft was in flight headed
for Bangkok threatened the captain that he would blow up the plane and forced
him to communicate with the Italian Government to bring down his Italian wife
and son with 300,000 U.S. dollars he released the plane. Thereafter he flew to
Sri Lanka with his wife and son and deposited 280,000 U.S. dollars in his
account in the bank of Ceylon. Later he was indicted in the High Court
sections 19(1) and 19(3) (d) of the offences Against Aircraft Act No.24 of
1982 and retention of stolen property under of Appeal the sentence on the
first count was varied. He then appealed of the Supreme Court where the
jurisdiction of the High Court to try the case was challenged. A plea of
misjoinder and whether a charge of retention can be leveled against the
extortionist himself were also raised.

__**

Held:

**

(1) Section 19(3)(d) of Act No. 24 of 1982 vests jurisdiction in respect of
the acts referred to in is s. 17(1)(a) to (e) in relation to a foreign
aircraft. The words 'in relation to' include acts committed on board the
aircraft also. The words in relation to, as used in s. 19(2)(d) mean ''in
respect of'' although in other parts s o the words used are "on board or in
relation to". This interpretation must 156 given in order to give the words a
rational sense which is consonant with the Hague Convention for the
Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft of December 16, 1970 (Articles 1,
2 and 4).

**47**

(2) Section 9(1) (f) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 confers jurisdiction
on the High I Court to try Sri Lankans for offences committed outside Sri
Lanka or on board or in relation, to any ship or aircraft of whatever
category. Moreover section 39 of the Judicature Act bars objection to
jurisdication by an accused person who has already pleaded and taken part in
the trial.

(3) Where theft. (or extortion) has been committed in a foreign country t is
possible to. Charge the thief or (the ;extortionist): \- himself in, Sri
Lankan courts with dishonest retention of the property so stolen or extorted.

(4) The acts for which the accused was charged under the Offences Against
Aircraft Act No. 24 of 1982 and retention of stolen property were connected so
as to form the same transaction. The main test is continuity of action.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

1\. Burns Philip & Co., v. 'Nelson & Robertson (1958)-1 Lloyd' Reports 342.

2\. Salomon v. - Customs.& Excise Commissioners (,1967] 2 QB 116:

3\. Cramas Properties Ltd:, v. Connought Fur Trimmings L td (965) 1 WLR 892,
897(H.L.)

4\. Gartside v. Inland Revenue Commissioner [1968] AC 553, 612.

5\. Emperor. v. Baldowa (1906)  .1 LR 28 Alt 372.

6\. King Emperor v. Johri [1906] 1LR 23 All 266.

7\. Queen Empress v. Abdul Latiff (1885) LLR 10 Bom. 186.

8\. Empress v. Sunker Gope [ 1881] 1LR 6 Cal 307

9\. Emperor v. Shorufalli Allibhoy ILR 27 Bom. 135, 138

10\. Krushnamurthy v. Abdul Subbani AIR 1965 Mysore 128.

_ **

APPEAL** f rom Judgment of the Court of Appeal

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with Ran; Banda Seneviratne, Dhammika yapa, Miss
Chamantha Weerakoon and M. L: 3. Jayawardena _for appellant.

_

Upawansa Yapa, Deputy' Solicitor-General Solicitor-General with N. A.
Amaratunga SSC _for Attorney- General.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

January 14, 1988,

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.

**

The appellant was indicted in the High court of Colombo on the following two
charges:

1\. That between 29th June 1982 and 1st July 1982 on board; a foreign aircraft
namely; Alitalia Boeing 747 No. AZ 1790 whilst in flight: between; New Delhi
and: Bangkok, he did unlawfully -by threats intimidate the pilot of the said
aircraft that if his demands

**48**

were not met he would blow up the aircraft with all on board by he use, of
explosives and that' he did take control of the aircraft unlawfully by force
or threat and thereby committed an offence punishable under section 17 (1)
(a), read with sections 19 (1) &

19(3)(4) of the Offences Against Aircraft Act No. 24 of 1982.

2\. That between the 1st of July 1982 and 3rd July 1982 in Colombo within the
jurisdiction of this Court and in the course of the same transaction as in
count (1) he did retain 297,700 U.S. dollars dishonestly knowing the same to
be stolen property and thereby committed an offence punishable under Section
394 of the Penal Code.

The appellant was tried in the High Court of Colombo without a jury and was
found' guilty and- convicted on both counts. He was sentenced to a term of
simple imprisonment for life on the first count - and to a term of three
years' rigorous imprisonment on, the second count, both sentences to' run
concurrently.

The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal which affirmed his conviction
but varied his sentence to a term of five years'. rigorous imprisonment on the
first count and to a term of two years rigorous imprisonment on the second
count both sentences to run concurrently.

The appellant having obtained leave, now appeals to this court from the
conviction and sentence imposed by the Court of Appeal.

'The facts relevant to the appeal are briefly as follows:-"'-'

The appellant is a Sri Lankan citizen married to an Italian lady with whom he
lived in Italy with their son. The appellant was required to obtain permission
to continue to live and work in Italy and for this purpose had to come to Sri
Lanka to interview the Ambassador for Italy in Sri Lanka. After numerous
visits to the Embassy he was finally refused re-entry to Italy where his wife
and-son continued to, live. In . this plight the appellant, as the evidence
discloses, devised a plan- in order to be re-united with his family and to
recover the expenses he had been Out to. He boarded Alitalia Boeing AZ 1790
plane belonging to the Italian Government on 29.6.1982 at Delhi. The plane was
on a scheduled -flight from Rome- to Tokyo. After the plane took off for its
next stop at Bangkok, the appellant both in writing and orally ordered the'
Captain of. the plane to communicate with the Italian Government to make
arrangements to fly his wife and son to meet him at Bangkok

**49**

and also to pay him 300,000: U.S. dollars. He threatened the Captain of the
aircraft that if this was not done, he would blow up the, plane with
explosives which he pretended to have with him: He had hung round his neck a
couple of torch batteries connected with wires to give the impression that it
was some explosive device. The Captain of the plane under, fear of this
threat, which was likely to endanger the safety of the passengers in his
plane, took the necessary steps to meat these demands. From that point onwards
the appellant issued directions to the Captain regarding the movements of the
: plane and exercised control over it. The captain was' compelled to- land the
plane, at Bangkok- although he had received official instructions to proceed
to another airport.

The plane landed in' Bangkok at about 4:30 a.m. on 30:6.82 'but nobody was
allowed to disembark on the instructions of the appellant, until he received a
message that his wife, and son had arrived from Rome.

On 1.7.82 at about 7 or 8 a.m. a message was received that the appellant's
wife. had arrived and that 300,000 U.S. dollars had been brought. At about 9
a.m. on 1.7.82 the appellant's wife boarded the plane and the appellant agreed
that if his wife and child were' handed over to him along with the' money and
a pass, he would release all the passengers were his wife got off the plane'
and obtained the money from the General Manager of Alitalia for the Far East
and signalled to the, appellant that it was all, right. The passengers were
then permitted, to disembark. The appellant himself then gave up control over
the aircraft and disembarked followed. by the, Captain of the plane.

The appellant with his wife and child set off for Colombo on an Air. Lanka
flight and arrived in Colombo at 10.30 p. m. the same day. At Colombo h'6 was
allowed to go through the customs with the money. On 3 7:82 the appellant
deposited 280,000 U.S 'dollars in his account at the Bank' of Ceylon'. He and
his family stayed 'in Colombo at the Hotel: Inter Continental from 1 .7.82
till 3.7.82 and then left for his home in Ahangama by car. On the way home he
,,was arrested and detained at the Galle Police Station.

Dr: de Silva's first contention. was that-the High Court at Colombo had no
jurisdiction to try the appellant on count (1) of the indictment because
section 19 (3) (d) of the Offences Against Aircraft Act No. 24

**50**

of 82 vests the High Court with jurisdiction only where the act constituting
the offence is committed 'in relation to' a foreign aircraft. 17 (1) (a) read
with section 19 (1).Was the seizing or, exercising of control of the aircraft,
and the words: in relation to, it wars submitted, meant that the act must be
committed from outside the aircraft: and. not on board' which means inside the
aircraft. In the present case the act of seizing control of the aircraft on
its flight from Delhi to Bangkok was admittedly committed inside the aircraft
or on board it; and not in 'relation to' the aircraft of from outside: it, and
therefore he High Court at -Colombo was deprived of jurisdiction to try that
act which constituted an offence under section 19 (3) (d).

It is necessary to reproduce , the, relevant parts of sections 17, and 19 of
the Act.

The marginal note to section 17 reads-as follows:

"Offences on board or against aircraft".

Section 17(1) states that:

(a) On board a Sri Lanka aircraft in flight, unlawfully by force or threat
thereof or any other form of intimidation, seizes or exercises control of that
aircraft:

(b) Unlawfully and intentionally performs any such act of violence against a
person on board a Sri Lanka aircraft on flight as is likely to endanger the
safety of that aircraft; or

(c) unlawfully and intentionally destroys a Sri Lanka aircraft in service: or

(d) unlawfully and intentionally causes such damage to a Sri Lanka aircraft in
service as renders it incapable of flight; or as is likely to endanger the
safety in flight; or

(e) Unlawfully and intentionally places to be damage to a Sri Lanka aircraft
in service by any means whatsoever, any device or substance which is likely
to-

(i) destroy that aircraft; or

(ii) cause such damage to it as to render it incapable of flight or as is
likely to endanger its safety in flight :or

**51**

(f) unlawfully and intentionally causes such damage or destruction to, or
makes such interference with the operation air navigation as is likely to
endanger the safety of a Sri -Lanka aircraft in flight: or

(g) unlawfully an communicates information which. he knows to be false
endangering the safety of a Sri Lanka, aircraft in ;flight,

shall be guilty of an offence under this ' Part of this Act and shall be
liable, on conviction after. Val. before `the High Court holden at Colombo, to
imprisonment for life.

(2) _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

(3) An offence under this Part of this Act shall be before the High Court
holden in the judicial zone of Colombo.

Section 9 (1) states that:

"Any person whether he is a citizen of Sri Lanka or not who commits, on board,
or in relation to, a foreign aircraft, outside Sri Lanka, any act referred to
in paragraph -(a) or, paragraph. (b) or paragraph (c) or, paragraph (d) or
paragraph (e) or paragraph (f) or paragraph (g) of subsection (1) of section
17 shall be guilty of an offence under this , Part of this Act and shall be
liable, on conviction after trial before-the High Court, to imprisonment for,
life.

(3) No Court, in Sri Lanka shall jurisdiction to try an offence under Oil
section except in the following  cases, that is to say

(a) Where the act constituting the offence is committed in Sri Lanka; or

(b) Where the foreign aircraft on board which, or in relation to I 'which, the
act constituting the offence is committed lands in Sri Lanka with the alleged
offender on board,

(c) 'Where the foreign aircraft on board which, or in relation to which; the
act constituting such offence is committed, has ;been leased without crew, to
a lessee who has his principal place of business in Sri Lanka, or (if he has
no such place of business); has his permanent residence in Sri Lanka; or

**52**

(d) Where the act constituting such offence is an act referred to in paragraph
(a) or paragraph (b) or paragraph (c): or paragraph (d) or, paragraph (e) of
subsection (1) of section 17 committed in relation to a foreign aircraft, or
the attempt to commit or the abetment of the commission of any such act, if
the person committing such act is present in Sri Lanka. The marginal note to
section. 19 reads as follows:

"Acts, committed on board, or in relation to, a foreign aircraft deemed to be
offences. (The underscoring in sections 17 and 19 is mine).

A comparison of section 17 with section 19 clearly indicates that section 17
relates to acts committed in respect of Sri Lanka aircraft by any person or,
anywhere, whether 'on board' or 'against it, and the High Court at Colombo has
jurisdiction to try the acts constituting the - offences, inasmuch as the
aircraft is a Sri Lanka aircraft:

Section 19 on the other hand, relates to foreign aircraft and makes the same
acts referred to in section 17 offences, whether committed. by a citizen of
Sri Lanka or any other national and whether 'on board'. or 'in relation to'
the aircraft, although committed outside Sri Lanka.

Dr. de Silva's argument is that section which vests jurisdiction in our
courts, relates only 2o acts referred to in section 17(1)(a) to (e) if
committed 'in relation to the foreign aircraft and not on board it'. According
to learned Counsel the phrase 'in relation to' means from outside the aircraft
and not 'on board it'. Since the alleged act in this case, is the seizing of
control of. the aircraft and was admittedly, committed ‘on board' the foreign
aircraft on flight from Delhi to Bangkok, the High Court of Colombo lacked
jurisdiction to try the offence:

I regret, I cannot agree with learned Counsel.

It will be noted that paragraphs (b) and (c) of section 19(3), both commence
with the words, "where the foreign aircraft on board which \- or in relation
to which the act constituting the offence is committed ............ But
paragraph (d) is couched in different language: It begins with the. words
'where the act constituting such offence is an act referred to in paragraph
(a) or paragraph (b) or.-Paragraph (c) or paragraph (d) or paragraph (e) of
subsection (1) of section 17, committed in relation to "a foreign aircraft'.
(The emphasis is mine).

**53**

The words 'such offence' in the jurisdictional. section 19(3)(d) relate back
to the. acts mentioned in section. .1:9(1) which fall within paragraphs (a) to
(e); of . section 17(1),- the 'commission, of. which constitutes an offence.
The, acts referred to in section 19() relate to acts committed both 'on board'
or 'in relation to' a foreign aircraft. In my view there for;. the phrase 'in
relation to' occurring in section 19(3)(d) . bears a different meaning to that
used in sections 19(1), 19(3)(b) and 19(3)(c):

In the context of section 19(3)(d) the words "in relation to'' a foreign
aircraft mean in my view, nothing more than, in respect of'. a foreign
aircraft and include acts committed both "on board" or `in relation to" the
aircraft in terms of section 19(1) read with section 17(1).

Where a particular enactment -is ambiguous it was held by the High Court of
Australia, to be permissible to refer to an international convention. Burns
Philip Co., v, Nelson & Robertson (1) reported in Craies on Statute Law 7th
Ed: Page 132. In Salomon v. Customs and Excise Commissioners (2) the Court of
Appeal held that where there is clear evidence of an enactment being the
indirect offspring of a Convention; the Convention might be resorted to in the
interpretation of the enactment even where the Convention is not specifically
mentioned in the enactment.

In the present case; the Conventions which are implemented by the Offences.
Against Aircraft Act No. 24 of 1982 are specifically mentioned in the Preamble
to the Act. It states "An Act to give effect to certain Conventions relating
to the safety of Aircraft to which Sri Lanka. has become a party, namely

(a) The Convention on offences and certain other acts committed on Board
Aircraft, signed at Tokyo on September 14, 1963.

(b) The Convention for the suppression of unlawful seizure of Aircraft, signed
at the Hague on December 16, 1970 and

(c) The Convention for the 'suppression of unlawful acts against safety of,
Civil Aviation signed: at Montreal on September 23, 1971."

**54**

Section 1(3) of the Act declares that the provisions of Part ll of he Act
(which contains sections 17 and 19) shall be deemed for all purposes to have
come into operation on July 3, 1978 being the date on which the Hague- and
Montreal Conventions entered into force in respect of Sri Lanka. The
provisions of Part ll of the Offences Against Aircraft Act No. 24 of, 1982
containing sections 17 and 19, thus came into operation with retrospective
effect from July 3, 1978 and were deemed to be in .force at the. time the
offence was alleged to have been committed by the appellant between 29.6.82
and 1..7.82.

The Convention relevant to this case is the Hague Convention which by Article
1 defined an aircraft offence as follows

"Any person who on board an Aircraft in flight:

(a) unlawfully by force or threat thereof, or by an I other form of ion,
seizes,' or exercises control of that aircraft intimidation, seizes, or
exercises control of that aircraft ' or attempts to perform any such act; or

(b) ..........

Article 2 states that, "Each contracting' State undertakes td make the offence
punishable 'by severe penalties."

Article 4(2) states that "Each contracting State- shall take such measures;
`as -may be necessary to establish its Jurisdiction over the offence in the
case where the offender is present in its territory and it does not extradite
him :"

In compliance with this country's- obligation, under Article 2 of the Hague
Convention, section 19 (1) was enacted to make the act referred-to in section.
17 (1) (a) an offence when committed "on board" a foreign aircraft, outside
Sri Lanka; and by Article 4(2); ,section 19(3)(d) was introduced to vest the
High Court with jurisdiction to try the offence, where the alleged offender,
is present in Sri; Lanka.

As Diplock LJ said in Saloman v. Commissioners of Customs and Excise (Supra)
"But if the terms of the legislation are not clear-but are reasonably capable
of more than one meaning the treaty (convention) . itself becomes relevant;
for there is a prima facie resumption that Parliament does not intend to act
in breach of international law,

**55**

including therein specific treaty obligations; and if one of the meanings
which can reasonably be ascribed to the legislation is consonant with the
treaty obligation and another or theirs not, meaning which is consonant is to
be preferred.

Applying this presumption to the facts aircraft; that is, seizing or
exercising control of the foreign aircraft in .appear that the legislature was
implementing the country's obligations under Article 4(2) - of the Hague
Convention in vesting the High Court with jurisdiction over the act
constituting the offence, as referred to in paragraph (a) of section 17(1)
committed 'in relation to'- a foreign location of the commission of the act
but it is an ingredient of the act which constitutes the offence. `

It is no doubt an ordinary of interpretation. that a word keeps ' word is used
in the same context in the sections- of the same enactment it is reasonable to
suppose that it is used in the same se ' in both. Bindra-Interpretation page
258. '

Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes 12th Ed. page 278, says:

It is, at all events reasonable to presume that the same meaning is implied by
the same expression in every part of the Act." But he cautions that this
presumption as to. identical, meaning is not of much weight "The same, word
may be used - in different senses in the same statute and even in the same
section.''

" The proper rule of construction", according to Bindra, "is look at the
section itself and find out the meaning of -a word in question from the
context in which it is used. It is clear that the same word might carry
different parts of the statutes depending upon the context in which it is
used. The meaning is actually controlled by the context. Words in a status
must not be read in isolation but structurally and in their context, for their
significance may vary with their contextual setting. The context and object
intended to be achieved by the used in the sane sense throughout the statute,"
Bindra Page 254.

**56**

In _Cramas Properties Ltd., V. Connought Fur Trimmings Ltd. (3),_ Lord Reid __
said:

"There is undoubtedly a presumption that Parliament (or the draftsman) will
use the same or similar language throughout an Act when meaning the same
thing. But this, presumption is only a presumption -and one must always
remember that the object; in construing any statutory provision is to discover
the intention of Parliament and that there is an even stronger, presumption
that Parliament does not intend an unreasonable or irrational result."

In Gartside v. -inland Revenue Commissioner, (4) Lord Reid again said:

"It is always proper to construe an ambiguous word or phrase in the light of
the mischief which the provision is obviously designed to prevent and in the
light of the reasonableness of the consequences which follow from giving it a
particular construction.- 'If the language",- he said elsewhere, "is capable
of more, than one interpretation, we ought to discard the more natural meaning
if it leads to an unreasonable result and adopt the interpretation which leads
to a reasonable practical result."

In the present case the phrase 'in relation to' in section 19 (3) (d), read in
the-context of that section, bears, in' my view; a different meaning to the
same phrase, when juxtaposed with the words "on board", in section 19(1) or
19(3)(b) and `(c). The intention of the legislature was to give effect to
Article 4(2) of the Hague Convention by establishing the jurisdiction- of our
Courts; over the offence, Interpreting the phrase "in relation to" in this
context to mean 'in respect of a foreign aircraft leads to reasonable 'and
rational consequences,. namely, vesting our courts with jurisdiction over
offences` described in section 19(1). whether committed 'on board' or in
relation to' a foreign aircraft, where the offender is in Sri Lanka. There
appears to be no rational basis for the legislature to have restricted the
jurisdiction, of our courts only to those acts committed in relation to' a
foreign aircraft, in the 'Sense contended-for, to the exclusion of acts
committed 'onboard' it.

Be that as it may, section 9 (1)(f) of the Judicature. Act No. 2 of 1978 vests
the High Courts` of this country with jurisdiction to try any offence whether
committed 'onboard' or 'in relation to' arty aircraft by a citizen of Sri
Lanka.

**57**

Section 9(1)(f) reads as follows:

"The High Court shall .ordinarily have the power and authority and is hereby
required. to hear, try and determine in the manner provided for by written law
all prosecutions on indictment instituted against any person in respect of-

(f) any offence wherever committed by any person, who is a citizen of Sri
Lanka, in any place outside the territory of Sri Lanka or on board or in
relation to any' ship or aircraft of whatever category.''

The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka and the offence was committed, between
29th of June and the 1st July 1982. The Judicature Act came into operation on
2.7.79 and was in .force at the time of, the commission of the offence. The
Offences Against Aircraft Act No. 24 of 1982 was certified on 26.7.1982, but
the provisions of Part II within which sections 17 and 19 fall, were by
section 1(3) deemed for all purposes to have come into operation on July 3;
1978. Even if -the interpretation 'as contended for by learned Counsel for the
Appellant is given to the' phrase 'in relation to' in section 19 (3) (d), the
Judicature Act being the later statute in respect of the relevant provisions,
will prevail over sections 17 and 19 of the Offences Against Aircraft Act and.
the High Court will have jurisdiction to try the offence committed by the
appellant, 'on board' the foreign aircraft on flight to Bangkok.

Learned Counsel contended that section 9 (1) (f) cannot be used to negate
section 19(3) of the Offences Against Aircraft Act because the "written law"
referred to in section 9(1) of the Judicature Act is that found in the
Offences Against Aircraft Act. I do not agree. The ‘written law' referred to
in section 9(1) of the Judicature Act is the law setting out the procedure or
manner -for trying such prosecutions on indictment and is untouched by section
19 of the Offences Against Aircraft Act.

It was further argued that under the Judicature Act the jurisdiction of the
High Court is subject to section `9(2)(b) which requires the President of the
Court of Appeal to nominate in writing under his hand, the High Court which
should try the offence referred to in paragraph 9(1)(f) and as this had not
been done, the High Court holden in Colombo had' no jurisdiction to try count
(1): -There is no doubt that the High Court has jurisdiction to try the
offence. But no objection was raised by the appellant at the trial to the
failure of the President of the

**58**

Court of Appeal to nominate the High Court holden at Colombo to. try the
offence. Instead, the appellant pleaded to the charge, and participated
throughout the entire trial. Section 39 provides that ''whenever any defendant
-or accused party shall have pleaded in any action, proceeding or matter
brought in any court of first' instance, neither party shall-afterwards be
entitled to object to the jurisdiction of such court, but such court shall be
taken and held to have jurisdiction over ;such action, proceeding or- matter."
In the present case the appellant, submitted to the jurisdiction of the High
Court of Colombo by pleading to the indictment and participating in the trial
without objection. It is now not open to him to object to the jurisdiction of
the High Court of Colombo to try the offence.

Learned Counsel's submission in regard to the lack of jurisdiction of the High
Court of Colombo to try count (1) must fail.

Learned Counsel's next contention was that the appellant could not have been
convicted on count (2), with retention of part of the stolen property viz:
297,700 U.S. dollars because on his own admission he was himself the thief: or
extortionist. As such he submitted, count 2 must fail. Stolen , property is
defined in section 393 of the Penal Code as follows:

"Property, the possession whereof has been transferred by theft. or by
extortion, or by robbery, or by forgery or by cheating -and property which has
been criminally misappropriated or in respect of which criminal breach of
trust has been committed, is designated as "stolen `property" whether the
transfer has been made, or the misappropriation or breach of trust has been
committed, within or without this Island. But if such property subsequently`
comes into the possession of a person legally entitled -to the possession`
thereof, it then ceases to be stolen property.

Dishonestly receiving stolen property is defined in section 394 of the Penal
Code as follows:

"Whoever dishonestly receives or retains: any stolen property, knowing or
:having reason to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three
years, or with fine, or with both."

**59**

Gour, Penal Law of India, 1 0th Ed. Vol. IV at Page 3597 says:

"The collation of 'receipt and retention' are obviously intended to do away
with the necessity of proving the presence of dishonesty at the time' of its
first possession: It has been said that dishonest retention is contra-
distinguished from dishonest receipt and that in the former case dishonesty
supervenes after the act of acquisition.  -Every person who -retains
possession of property dishonestly possesses and continues :to possess it
dishonestly., so long as he retains it dishonestly, but every person who
possesses and continues to possess it dishonestly does not- retain dishonestly
within-the meaning of section 411 (our section 393). Neither the thief nor the
receiver of stolen property commits the offence of retaining such property
dishonestly merely by continuing to keep possession of it: to constitute
dishonest retention there must have been a change in the menial element of
possession.

"The question where the principal offence was committed is now immaterial for
the present purpose. The result :of this clause is that if a thief commits an
offence, say in Nepal,: he might be tried for the act in India as the receiver
of stolen: property, though he could not be tried here' for theft without
extradition: In such :a case it is no defence for the accused that he is a
foreign subject and that the property was stolen by himself, and that he was
not, therefore liable to be tried, convicted and punished by the' Indian court
for theft in short that he could not be convicted for an act indirectly for
which he could not -have been -legally tried directly. The reply is that the
'offence of stolen property is a continuing one; and it is therefore,
justiciable anywhere the offender maybe found."

In Emperor v. Baldowa, (5) two persons, Baldowa, who was not a British subject
and Radhua, who was, were committed to of sessions at Jhansi, (which was
within British territory) it being alleged against them that they had
committed a robbery in an adjoining Native State and `had brought the stolen
property into British territory. It was held that, though neither could be
tried by the Sessions Judge of Jhansi for robbery, Baldowa because he was not
a British subject and Radhua because the certificate required' by section 188
of the Code of Criminal Procedure was wanting,. yet both might be "tried' for
the

**60**

offence of retaining stolen property under section 411 of the Indian Penal
Code. King Emperor v. Johri(6) was distinguished and Queen Empress v. Abdul
Latif (7) was followed.

In Johri's case (supra) the facts pointed clearly to John being himself the
thief and he was found in possession of the stolen bullock within the
jurisdiction of the same State. It was held that section 411 of the Indian
Penal Code does not apply to the person who is the actual thief. In
distinguishing Johri's case, both Banerji and Richards JJ in Baldowa's case,
took the view that Baldowa first committed an offence under the law of India,
when he retained the stolen property in British India. If the theft had been
committed in British India, there would have been no "retention" of stolen
property within the meaning of the section...

In Abdul Latif's case (supra) the accused was a subject of a Native State
(Janjira) and committed theft at Rajkot Civil Station which was not part of
British India. He was found in possession of. stolen property at Thana.

It was held that as the offence was not committed in British India, and as the
accused was the subject of Janjira State, the sessions \- court at Than a had
no jurisdiction to. try him for theft under section 381 of- the Indian Penal
Code, but: it was competent to try him: for dishonest retention of stolen
property...

In the Empress v. Sunker Gope (8) a Nepalese subject, having stolen cattle in
Nepal, brought them into British territory, where he was arrested and
sentenced to one year's rigorous imprisonment. It was held that he could not
be charged for theft, but might be convicted of dishonestly retaining stolen
property.

In the present case, the appellant extorted the 300,000 U.S. dollars at
Bangkok which was outside the jurisdiction of the High Court of Colombo and
this court had no jurisdiction to try him for extortion. But he first
committed an offence under our law when he retained part of -the stolen
property, namely the money,:: in this country.. Hence following the
authorities cited. above, l am of the view that the appellant was, rightly
charged in the High, Court at `Colombo. with; the retention of 297, 700 U.S.
dollars being part of the proceeds of-the stolen property.

**61**

Finally it was contended by learned Counsel for the appellant that there was a
misjoinder of charges in indicting the-appellant with two different offences
on counts 1 and 2, since they were not committed in the course of the same
transaction:

Learned Counsel argued that the second transaction of retaining stolen
property occurred after the first transaction of seizing control of the
aircraft was completed.. The object of taking control of the aircraft, it was
submitted, was for the purpose of only getting down his family, to Bangkok and
to be reunited with them. This was completed in Bangkok when his family
arrived there.'

The extortion of the money, it was submitted; constituted a different
transaction.

Section 175(1) of. the Code of Criminal Procedure Act states that:

if in one series of acts so connected together as to form the same transaction
more offences than one are committed by the. same person he may be charged
with and tried for ` every such offence, and in trials before the High Court
such charges. may be' included in one and the same indictment."

Whether the series of acts are so connected' as to form the same transaction
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case.... It may be
proximity of time and place, or continuity of action, or community: of purpose
and design or relation of cause and effect; or that of principal and
subsidiary. Sohani The Code of Criminal Procedure (India) 16 Ed. Vol. Il page
1525:

In Emperor v. Sherufalli Allibhoy (9) it was held that "The real and
substantial test for determining whether several offences are connected
together so as` to form the same transaction, depends upon whether they are so
related to one another in point of purpose or as to cause and effect or as
principal and subsidiary acts, as to constitute one continuous action."

The consensus of judicial opinion is that the expression 'same
transaction"-implies a community of purpose and a continuity of action.

**62**

In Krishnamurthy v Abdul Subbani and another (10) it was held that in order
that a series of acts be regarded as the same transaction; they must be
connected together in some way as for instance- by proximity of time, unity of
place, unity or community of purpose or design am continuity of action....:.
The main test must really be continuity of action by which is meant the
following up of some initial act through all its consequences and incidents
until the series of acts or group of connected acts come o an end-either by
attainment of the objector by being put to an end or abandoned.'

In the present case the appellant's own position is that he had been put to
great expense and inconvenience in having to come back to Sri Lanka and visit
the Italian Embassy on innumerable-:occasions to obtain a visa to re-enter
Italy where his wife and child were living. Even after all his efforts, he was
refused a visa. He then acted about a plan to seize control of an aircraft
belonging to the Italian Government with a view to achieving -the: objects he.
had in mind. According to is, Petition of Appeal to this court he boarded
Alitalia Boeing AE 17 90 plane. on 29.6..1982 at Delhi when the plane-stopped
over, on its flight from Rome to Tokyo. After the plane took off for its next
stop at Bangkok, the appellant both in writing and orally ordered the captain
of. the plane to communicate with the Italian Government to get down not only
his wife' and son to, Bangkok, but to pay, him 300,000 U.S. dollars, He
threatened that if- this was not done he would; blow up the plane with
explosives which. he induced the captain to believe he was carrying. Under the
influence of. this. threat the Captain ;took steps to have the appellant's
demands met. When the: plane landed in Bangkok, he was informed that his wife
and son had .arrived there and that .300,000 U.S. dollars had also been
brought. At about 9 a.m. on 1.7.82, the appellant's wife boarded the plane and
the appellant agreed that if he was given the money and allowed to go with his
wife and son on a pass, he would release all the passengers' in the plane. His
wife got off the - plane and was handed the money by the General Manager of
Alitalia for the Far East. She, checked the money and signalled to the
appellant: It was only after. he vv as satisfied that the money had been
obtained that he released the passengers and; got off, the plane himself..

It is therefore quite clear that the extortion of the money was one of the
objects of his seizing control of the aircraft and is so connected together
with the other acts by community of purpose and continuity

**63**

of action as to form the same transaction which came to an end by the
attainment of the object. The objection of misjoinder of these two charges
must therefore fail.

For the reasons given, the judgment of the Court of. Appeal affirming the
convictions of the appellant by the High Court and varying the sentence
imposed on him by the High Court is affirmed.

The Appeal is dismissed.

**

WANASUNDERA, J. -** I agree.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J**.-I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/12.html_  

