[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1982](./) >> **[1982] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1982+12 or 1982+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1982+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Sarath Muttetuwegama v. Lionel Gunasekara and Others - SLR - 286, Vol 1 of
1982 [1982] LKSC 12; (1982) 1 Sri LR 286 (22 March 1982)

# 286



**  SUPREME COURT  
**  
**Sarath Muttetuwegama**

**v**

**Lionel Gunasekera and Others**



##### S. C. Election Petition Appeal No. 4/81 ‑ CA Election Petition No. 1/81

_ _

Section 58(l)(d), 77, (a) (c) Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in
Council ‑Adequacy of Security ‑ Rule 12(2) Election Petition Rules ‑ Section
80B of Amending Act No. 9 of 1970 ‑Corrupt Practice ‑ General intimidation.



Sarath Muttetuwegama the Appellant was elected Member of Parliament on
12.1.81. Lionel Gunasekera the Respondent was one of the unsuccessful
candidates at the election.



The Respondent challenged the election of the Appellant on grounds of corrupt
practice and general intimidation. At the trial the Appellant raised a
preliminary objection that the amount deposited as security was inadequate.



It was argued that each separate false statement or allegation was a separate
charge and as such each such additional false statement necessitated a deposit
of Rs.2,500/‑.



_Held      _that after the Amending Act No.9 of 1970 an election petition had
to contain a concise statement of material facts and had to set forth full
particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice that the petitioner alleged and
thus if the several statements are in respect of the personal character or the
personal conduct of a candidate there is only one charge of corrupt practice
as all such statements constitute the particulars of the corrupt practice
alleged.



(2) It is not possible to separate intimidation of voters from intimidation of
persons other than voters for the purpose of determining the amount to be
deposited as security. The term general intimidation covered both categories:



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Election Judge on preliminary objection.



**Before:          **Samarakoon, Q.C., C.J.

                    Wanasundera, J. 

                    Wimalaratne, J. 

                    Ratwatte, J. 

                    Victor Perera, J.



# 287



**Counsel** : **       **_H. L. de Silva Sr. A ‑AL_ with _K. Shanmugalingam_ ,

> > _Sidat Sri Nandalochana_ and _S. H. M . Reeza_
>>

>> for Respondent‑Appellant.

>>

>> _George Candappa_ with _S.C. Crossette Tambiah,_

>>

>> _Varuna Basnayake_ and _Henry Jayamaha_ for the

>>

>> Petitioner‑Respondent.

>>

>> _K. Shanmugalingam_ with _D. S. Wijesinghe_ and

>>

>> _S. H. M. Reeza_ for the 2nd & 3rd Respondents.

Argued on: **        **22nd March, 1982.

_Cur. adv. vult._



Decided on: **       **6.4.82

**  **

**WIMALARATNE, J:**



The 1st   respondent‑appellant Sarathchandra Muttetuwegama was elected the
Member of Parliament for Kalawana at a bye election held on 12.1.81. The
petitioner Lionel de Silva Gunasekera, who is the 1st respondent to this
appeal, and who was one of the unsuccessful candidates, challenged the
election of the 1st respondent on two grounds, namely,



(1) that the corrupt practice of making false statements of fact in relation
to his personal character, within the meaning of section 58(l)(d) read with
section 77(c) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order‑in‑Council, 1946,
as amended, was committed by the 2nd and 3rd respondents, as agents of the 1st
respondent‑appellant, or with his knowledge and/or consent (which false
statements are set out in paragraphs 4, 5 & 6 of the Petition);



(2) that by reason of general intimidation committed by supporters of the 1st
respondent‑appellant the majority of electors were or may have been prevented
from electing the candidate whom they preferred, within the meaning of section
77(a) (the material fact of such intimidation being set out in paragraph 7)



_In para 4_ the petitioner alleged that the 2nd respondent Mahinda Rajapakse,
at a public meeting in support of the 1st respondent held on 31.12.80 made the
following false statement of fact:‑ (the English translation of the Sinhala
statement is produced as there is no controversy about its accuracy).



# 288



"When I was a student in 1960, I lived in Sravasthi with my father. Lionel
Gunasekera was also there in the upstairs. One morning I saw him bringing a
woman to his room. I thought it was his wife. In the evening another woman was
brought in. In the morning it was yet another woman who went out of the room.
Then I knew what type of person he was. If he comes to your home you will have
to protect your young woman. I wonder what will happen to your young girls and
young mothers if this man goes to Parliament"



_In para 5_ the petitioner alleged that the 2nd respondent, at another public
meeting held on 2.1.81 also in support of the lst respondent made the
following false statement of fact:‑



"As though it were today I could remember the Sixties, when I was residing
with my father at Sravasthi and attending School, Lionel Gunasekera lived
upstairs. One morning I saw Lionel taking a woman into his room. I thought she
was his wife. In the evening I saw him bring another woman  into his room. In
the morning it was a different woman that came out of the room. Then I knew
who the man was and this happened to be his daily routine.



Is this the type of man you intend sending to the Parliament? The one advice I
could give the Voters of Kalawana is, if ever this cad happens to come
canvassing for votes to your home protect your innocent wife and daughters. It
is even difficult for an elderly woman to escape him. If this cad is sent to
the Parliament and your wife or daughter happens to go to him for a favour
what will be the outcome? I am warning you in advance".



_In para 6_ the petitioner alleged that the 3rd respondent Piyadasa
Harischandra, at a public meeting held in support of the 1st respondent on
8.1.81 made a false statement imputing that the petitioner had on several
occasions in the 1960's been convicted of offences, that he was a lunatic or
madman, that he was a person of low moral character who used the toilets of
Parliament for immoral purposes. (The entirety of the statement as alleged by
the petitioner is not set out as there appeared to be no controversy about the
number of charges contained in the statement in this paragraph).



**289**



_In Para 7_ the petitioner alleged general intimidation, and set out in six
subparagraphs the material facts on which he relied. In subpara (a) there is
an allegation  of intimidation of his supporters and of voters _and even
polling agents_ , exercised by supporters of the 1st respondent.



The 1st respondent‑appellant raised a preliminary objection that the security
of Rs.25,000/‑ deposited by the petitioner was inadequate. The Election Judge
held that all that was required was a sum of Rs.15,000/‑ as security and
overruled the preliminary objection. Hence this Appeal.



The provisions relating to security which a petitioner is required to furnish
is contained in Rule 12(2) of the Parliamentary Election Petition Rules of
1946, as amended by Act No.9 of 1970. It reads as follows:‑



"The security shall be an amount of not less than five thousand rupees in
respect of the first charge constituting a distinct ground on which the
petitioner relies, and a further amount of not less than two thousand five
hundred rupees in respect of each additional charge constituting any such
ground. The security required by this rule shall be given by deposit of
money."



Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent‑appellant contended before us that,



_Para 4_ contains a first charge constituting the distinct ground of the
corrupt practice of uttering a false statement, attracting as security a sum
of Rs.5000/‑; and that it also contains two additional charges on the same
ground attracting Rs.5000/‑.



_Para 5_ also contains three additional charges on the same ground attracting
Rs.7500/‑.



_Para 6_ too contains four additional charges also on the same ground
attracting Rs.10,000/‑.



_Para 7_ contains one charge on the distinct ground of general intimidation
attracting Rs.5000/‑. According to his computation the total amount of
security should be Rs.32,500/‑.



# 290



Learned Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd respondents, whilst supporting ­the
argument on behalf of the appellant in respect of the charges in paras 4, 5 &
6 went one step further in respect of the ground alleged in para 7 and
contended that that paragraph contained not one, but two charges, one being
intimidation of voters and the other being intimidation of polling agents,
which second category of intimidation he categorised as "other misconduct"
within the meaning of section 77(a). According to his computation the security
should be in a sum of Rs. 35,000/‑.



There is no controversy that the four paragraphs contain two "distinct
grounds" of avoidance of an election, namely (i) the commission of corrupt
practices within the meaning of section 77(c), and (ii) "the prevention of
free voting", which is a convenient phrase adopted to mean that "the majority
of the electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate
whom they preferred", within the meaning of section 77(a). The controversy is
as regards the number of "charges" contained within these two grounds.



Both Mr. H.L. de Silva for the appellant and Mr. Shanmugalingam for the 2nd
and 3rd respondents argued that there were at least three statements of fact
in relation to the personal character of the petitioner in each of paras 4. &
5; and they are: ‑



(1) that the petitioner took a woman one morning to his room at Sravasti, whom
the 2nd respondent thought was his wife;



(2) that in the evening another woman was brought in; and



(3) that in the morning it was yet another woman who went out of the room.



These, they say, constitute three allegations, and therefore three charges,
which the appellant has to meet. Once the petitioner proves that the 2nd
respondent, as agent of the appellant made these three statements, then the
burden shifts to the appellant to prove the truth of _all three statements_.
The proof of the truth of one or two of these statements would not suffice.
The only way out is for the appellant to prove the truth of all three. If he
fails to discharge that burden, then he would be guilty of a corrupt practice
of making a false statement relating to the character of the petitioner.



# 291



Mr. Candappa for the petitioner‑respondent contended that in paragraph 4, as
well as in paragraph 5, there is only statement of fact relating to the
character of the petitioner; and that is that the petitioner is a man of
immoral character as far as women are concerned. The three statements of fact
referred to only formed the basis for his conclusion regarding the
petitioner's lack of morality.



In interpreting Rule 12(2) one has to have regard to certain other amendments
to our Election Laws introduced by the amending Act No.9 of 1970. I refer in
particular to the new section 80B, which is in these terms:‑



"80B. An election petition‑



(a)  ...........................



(b)  ...........................



(c)  shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the
petitioner relies;



(d)  shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice that
the petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the names
of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt or illegal practice and
the date and the place of the commission of such practice, and shall also be
accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the
allegation of such corrupt or illegal practice and the date and place of the
commission of such practice;



(e)        ..................;"



There could be little doubt that as a result of these amendments of 1970
material changes in the scope of our law relating to elections and election
petitions have been effected. The history of the changes in the election laws
have been recorded in the judgments of the five Judges of the former Supreme
Court in Election Petition Appeals Nos. 1 and 2 of 1977 and No.3 of 1978 (S.C.
minutes of 7.8.78). It is unnecessary to repeat them, except to emphasise that
no longer is it possible to allege general grounds of avoidance, or charges of
a general nature. A concise statement of the material facts has to be given,
_with full particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice alleged,_



# 292



under verification by affidavit. What has been achieved by these amendments is
that immediately on a petition being filed, a respondent would know the
particulars of the, charges or allegations he is required to meet.



Let us examine section 58(l)(d) in the light of the new amendments. The
subsection reads thus:‑



"Every person who makes or publishes, before or during any election, for the
purpose of affecting the return of any candidate, any false statement of fact
in relation to the personal character or conduct of such candidate; "
.................

shall be guilty of a corrupt practice ................."



In the Divisional Bench Judgment referred to earlier, Samarawickrema J. was of
the opinion that the words "in relation to the personal character or conduct
of such candidate" are inserted merely to define the nature of the false
statement of fact which is struck at by the provision. Accordingly, whether an
allegation is made that a false statement of fact is in relation to the
personal character or in relation  to the conduct of the candidate, or in
relation to both, there is only one corrupt practice alleged. Likewise, to
make several false statement of fact on one occasion, the combined effect of
which is to cast a  reflection on one facet of a person's character would, in
my view amount to the commission of but one corrupt practice of making a
false statement relating to the personal character of that person. For
example, to say of a man that he is a drunkard because he was seen consuming
liquor in the morning, then again at lunch time and later in the evening,
would be to make one statement of fact in relation to his personal character,
namely that he is a drunkard. The statements that he was seen consuming liquor
at three different times of the day only constitutes the reasons for drawing
the conclusion that he is a drunkard. Supposing an election petition contains
an  averment that a speaker at an election meeting made a statement that a
candidate was a drunkard because he was seen taking liquor at different times
of the day and on all seven days of the week, it  would be quite absurd to say
that the number of false statement of fact, if they be false, contained in
that speech, would be equivalent to the number of times per day the candidate
was seen consuming liquor multiplied by seven. It is difficult to believe that
the legislature



#  293



ever intended Rule 12(2) to be interpreted in manner so as to read into
statements of this kind more than one charge. Likewise, there is only one
charge in each of paragraphs 4 and 5 of the present petition. The allegation
that women were seen either going into or coming out of the candidate's room
on three different occasions constitute only the reasons for making the
statement that the candidate is a man of immoral character. They constitute
the particulars of the corrupt practice alleged, which petitioner is obliged
to give by reasons of section 80B(d). Paragraph 6, however, contains three
statements relating to three facets of the candidate's personal character,
namely, that he is a convict, that he is a lunatic and that he is a man of low
morals. Although the appellant sought to show a fourth statement of fact, we
are unable to see more than three such statements.



The ground of avoidence contained in para 7 is the "prevention of free voting"
within the meaning of section 77(a). The charge as alleged in the petition is
"general intimidation". In giving the material facts on which he relied to
establish this charge the petitioner alleged that even polling agents were
threatened and intimidated. Learned Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd respondents
invited us to treat "intimidation of polling agents" as distinct from "general
intimidation of electors;" and as constituting a separate charge under the
heading "other misconduct" in section 77(a). I am unable to agree. It is not
possible to construe section 77(a) so as to separate intimidation of electors
from intimidation of persons other than electors. The term "general
intimidation" is wide enough to include both categories. I am therefore of the
view that paragraph 7 contains only one charge constituting a distinct ground
of avoidance.



On the above basis the security required is as follows: ‑



_Para 4_ contains one first charge on a distinct ground of avoidance
attracting.........Rs. 5,000/‑



_Para 5_ contains one additional charge on the same ground attracting
..................Rs.2,500/‑



_Para 6_ contains three additional charges on the same ground attracting
...............Rs.7,500/‑



_Para 7_ contains one charge on another distinct ground of avoidance
attracting.......Rs.5,000/‑



# 294



The total amount of security that the Petitioner was obliged to deposit as
security under Rule 12(2) was therefore Rs.20,000/‑. He has deposited
Rs.25,000/‑. The Court of Appeal has rightly overruled the objection to
security. This appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs payable by the 1st
Respondent‑Appellant to Petitioner‑Respondent.



**SAMARAKOON C.J.** ‑ I agree.



**WANASUNDERA J.** ‑ I agree.



**RATWATTE J.** ‑ I agree.



**VICTOR PERERA J.** ‑ I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/12.html_  

