[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1981](./) >> **[1981] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1981+12 or 1981+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1981+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Chulalankara Thero v. Lavendris and Others - SLR - 226, Vol 1 of 1981
[1981] LKSC 12; (1981) 1 Sri LR 226 (28 October 1981)

**226**

**CHULALANKARA THERO  
v.  
LAVENDRIS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
WEERARATNE, J., WIMALARATNE, J,  
AND VICTOR PERERA,  J.  
OCTOBER 06, 1981.  
  
Buddhist ecclesiastical law - Res judicata - S 406 of the Civil Procedure
Code - is trustee privy or successor in title of Viharadhipathy? Section 20 of
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance.  
_  
Where two earlier plaints on the same subject matter filed by a former
Viharadhipathy had been dismissed for formal defects in the plaint and not
after adjudication the plea of res judicata cannot succeed.  
  
A trustee appointed by the Public Trustee under the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance is not the privy or successor in title of the Viharadhipathy for the
application of S. 406 of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_1\. Kanapathipillai v. Kandiah_ (1942) 44 N L R 42  
  
_2\. Dias v. Ratnapala Terunnanse_ (1938) 40 N L R 41  
  
**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal--  
  
_A. A. de Silva with S. Dassanayake and U. S. Dharmaratne_ for plaintiff -
appellant.  
  
_Walter Wimalachandra with C. B. Walgampaya_ for defendant - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 28, 1981.  
  
**VICTOR PERERA, J.  
**  
The plaintiff-appellant as the duly appointed Trustee of Raja Maha Viharaya,
Hittatiya Matara, filed this action on the 16th September 1976 against the
defendant-respondents seeking a declaration of title to the premises described
in the Schedule to the plaint alleging the same belonged to the temple and for
ejectment of the defendant-respondents. The defendant-respondents filed answer
and several

**227**

issues were framed at the trial. On the application of the parties it was
agreed that the following issue be taken up as a preliminary issue:  
  
"Do the decrees in cases Nos. 3224 an 3721 operate as estoppel by res judicata
against the plaintiff?"  
  
The learned District judge after hearing submissions by the parties held that
the said decrees in the two earlier cases were not res judicata and directed
that the trial do proceed on the other issues.  
  
The defendant -respondents appealed from the said judgment to the Court of
Appeal. The Court of Appeal reversed the finding of the learned District Judge
and held that the said two earlier decrees were res judicata and directed that
the plaintiff-appellant's action be dismissed with costs.  
  
The plaintiff-appellant has with leave obtained from the Court of Appeal,
appealed to this Court. The admitted facts in the present case are that the
Raja Maha Vihara of Hittatiya is not exempted from the provisions of Section 4
(1) of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance (Chap. 318) and that the present
plaintiff-appellant had been duly appointed the Trustee for the said temple by
the Public Trustee by virtue of the letter of Appointment dated 20.12.1973,
filed of record with the plaint in this case. The letter of appointment given
in pursuance of the powers vested in the Public Trustee under Section 11 (2)
of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance sets out that by reason of the
nomination dated 10th September 1973 made by Kirthi Sri Ariyajothi Thero, the
Viharadhipathi of the said temple, Godagama Chulalankara Isthavira , the
plaintiff appellant, was appointed the Trustee. It is clear from this letter
of appointment, that the Viharadhipathi and the Trustee for the temple are two
separate persons.  
  
By virtue of the provisions of section 20 of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance, ail property movable, belonging or in anywise appertaining to or
appropriated to the use of any temple vests in the Trustee who may sue for the
recovery of any such property. Thus the plaintiff-appellant, as trustee, alone
had the legal right to institute this action on behalf of the temple for the
recovery of the property alleged to belong to the temple after his appointment
as Trustee.  
  
The defendants-respondents relied on two decrees in cases 3224/L and 3721/L as
res judicata. The case No. 3224/L was filed

**228**

in September 1970 by Kirthi Sri Ariyajothi Thera as Viharadhipathi of the
temple against K. A. Lavendris, the 1st defendant respondent in the present
case, for a declaration of title as property of the temple and for ejectment
on the basis that the 1st defendant had taken a lease of the premises from him
on Deed No. 4868 dated 31st March 1941 for 10 years and had continued in
occupation with his leave and licence thereafter, till June 1970 when the 1st
defendant-respondent started disputing the title of the temple to the said
land. In the plaint the said Ariyajothi Thera as Viharadhipathi averring that
the temple was exempted from the provisions of Section 3 of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance sued, simpliciter, as the Viharadhipathi. The learned
District Judge in his judgment. in that case held that as the plaintiff in
that case had not pleaded that the temple was exempted from the operation of
Section 4(1) of the, Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, he could not maintain
the action as Viharadhipathi. The action was dismissed and decree dismissing
the action was entered on 30th November 1972.  
  
 The second case No. 3721 was filed on 30th October 1973 by the same
Ariyajothi Thera as Viharadhipathi against the same 1st defendant and also
against his son the 2nd defendant in respect of the said premises. In the
plaint he averred that the temple had not been exempted from the operation of
Section 4(9) of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance and he sued as the
Controlling Viharadhipathi. However, when the case came up for trial the
plaintiff while conceding that the temple had not been exempted from the
operation of Section 4(1), admitted that a Trustee for the temple had- been
appointed by the Public Trustee. On 4th April 1975, the action was withdrawn
and a formal decree dismissing the action was entered. In point of fact the
present plaintiff appellant had been appointed on 20th December, 1973.  
  
The first question that comes up for consideration is whether the plea of res
judicata arises under the circumstances. The dismissal of the two earlier
actions were merely for the reason that there were formal defects, in the
first case, the failure to plead exemption from the provisions of Section 4(1)
of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance and in the second case the fact that
the temple had not been exempted from the ,provisions of Section 4(1) and that
a Trustee had been appointed after the action was filed.  
  
The plaintiff in the first case failed to make out a legal status to maintain
the action and in the second case he renounced his alleged claim to sue on the
discovery that he had no legal status to file or maintain the action.. It is
significant that when he filed case No

**229**

.3721/L on 31st October 1973, the plaintiff Ariyajothi thero had already in
September 1973 nominated the present plaintiff-appellant for appointment as
Trustee by the Public Trustee. Thus he was fully aware that the temple had
been brought within the operation of 'Section 4(1) of the Ordinance though no
Trustee had been appointed at the date of the plaint  
  
The term 'res Judicata' by its very words mean a matter upon which the Court
has exercised its judicial mind and pronounced a decision in regard to the
claim of the plaintiff or the defendant. In these cases there was no
adjudication in regard to the subject matter of the actions. The title of the
temple if any, to the land remained intact, but the identical plaintiff in
both cases was found not entitled to maintain those actions: There was a
termination of the two actions as such but there was no termination of the
actual controversy by a judgment one way or the other. Therefore the plea of
res judicata did not strictly arise for determination in the present action  
  
But it could have been urged that the decrees of dismissal in both actions
operated as statute bars in terms of Section 406 of the Civil Procedure Code.
This section creates a statutory bar which precludes a plaintiff from bringing
another action when an earlier action brought by him in respect of the same
subject matter has been withdrawn or dismissed unless liberty to file afresh
action has been granted at the time of withdrawal or dismissal. In regard to
Ariyajothi Thera the plaintiff in the earlier actions, the plaintiffs and the
subject matter in the two cases were the same. In this case the plaintiff is,
a different person. No doubt, a statutory bar even though not operative as res
judicata would operate against a plaintiff if he could be regarded as privy or
successor in -title to the plaintiff in the earlier actions.  
  
The question therefore to be considered in this case is whether the plaintiff-
appellant a Trustee duly appointed for the temple is a successor in title to
Ariyajothi Thero, the Viharadhipathi-of the temple, the plaintiff in the
earlier action. In determining this question one must examine in this light
the relationship of a Viharadhipathi of a temple over which he presides and
his rights to the property belonging to the temple. If the- temple is not
brought within the operation of Section 4 (1) of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance, the Viharadhipathi's rights in regard to the property belonging to
the temple are unaffected and he is regarded as the controlling
Viharadhipathi. On his death, his pupillary successor in title is vested with
all the rights his tutor was entitled to and

**230**

he would be his privy or successor in title. When a temple is brought within
the operation of this Section 4(1), the Viharadhipathi's rights to preside
over the temple are unaffected. His rights to the temple property are not
lost: But when a Trustee is appointed for the temple, the management of the
temple property alone vests in the Trustee in: terms of Section 20 of the
Ordinance and it is he who could sue for the recovery of property of the
temple in terms of Section 18 of the Ordinance. On the death of the
Viharadhipathi, his pupillary successor becomes his successor in title
notwithstanding the appointment of a Trustee. The rights of the Trustee in
regard to management and the right to sue come into being by the. Fact of his
being duly appointed a Trustee for the temple. The present plaintiff-appellant
is therefore in no way a privy or successor in title of Ariyajothi Thera, the
Viharadhipathi The title to the temple or to the property did not vest in the
plaintiff-appellant as Trustee and the plaintiff-appellant did not derive any
title from the Viharadhipathi. In this case the plaintiff is different and
therefore the reliefs claimed as Trustee are different. The plaintiff in the
earlier cases had no right to sue in the manner he did. The plaintiff-
appellant has been clothed with the right to' sue and therefore his
appointment as Trustee has given rise to the relief he claims. The earlier
actions and the present action are therefore not in respect of the same
subject matter. A situation such as this was considered in the case of
Kanapathipillai v. Kandiah.(1) and the Supreme Court held that the identical
plaintiff who had subsequent to the dismissal of a mortgage action in respect
of the same bond, taken the necessary steps entitling him to sue, was entitled
to maintain the second action on the same bond and that the action was not
barred by section 406 of the Civil Procedure Code. Ariyajothi Thera, the
plaintiff in the earlier actions, could himself have filed this action, if he
had subsequently. Clothed himself with the right to maintain this action by
having himself appointed the Trustee for the temple. This is clear from the
judgement of the Supreme Court in the case of Dias v. Ratnapala Terunnanse.
(2) Soertsz, J. held in that case that an incumbent of a Buddhist temple which
is not exempted from the provisions of Section 4(1) of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance was not entitled to vindicate title to land belonging
to a temple. The action. filed by him as Viharadhipathi as such was dismissed.
The Supreme Court, however, held that there were liberal provisions in the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance to meet such contingencies as delay or the
non-appointment of. a trustee, for instance in sections 9,10 &11 of the
Ordinance and that"' it is still open to the temple to avail itself of these
provisions and bring a properly constituted action." In this case instead of
Ariyajothi Thero getting himself appointed Trustee and himself filing a
properly constituted action,

**231**

the plaintiff-appellant as the duly appointed trustee .has filed this action
and that was precisely what he had to do in order to recover the property
claimed by him as belonging to the temple under these circumstances.  
  
The Court of Appeal appears to have misdirected itself by starting with the
premise that the present plaint was filed on the basis that the plaintiff had
been "duly appointed by the Public Trustee as Viharadhipathi by the Letter of
Appointment dated 20.12.73", and that the case 3224/L and 3721/L we're filed
by the plaintiff in these cases "` in his capacity of Trustee of the Vihare".
The Court of Appeal held that the present plaint has also been filled by the
plaintiff claiming to be the Trustee, and that hence the present plaintiff is
privy "in his capacity as Trustee to the plaintiff who filed case No.. 3721/L
also in the capacity of Trustee of the same Vihara." Factually the position
was different. It is this confusion that resulted in its. setting aside the
order of the District Judge on his finding on issue (15). This appeal is
accordingly allowed. The learned District Judge is directed to proceed to
trial on the other issues raised at the trial.  
  
The plaintiff-appellant is entitled to the costs in the District Court, Court
of Appeal and in this Court.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J**. I agree  
  
**WIMALARATNE, J**. l agree  
  
**_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/12.html_  

