[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1997](./) >> **[1997] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1997+12 or 1997+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1997+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Waas Gunawardena v. Perera and Another - SLR - 222, Vol 2 of 1997 [1997]
LKSC 12; (1997) 2 Sri LR 222 (31 March 1997)

222



WAAS GUNAWARDENA  

**v. **

**PERERA AND ANOTHER  **

** **

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.

ANANDACOOMARASWAMY .J. AND

DR. SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 88/96.

C.A. NO. 931/93.

MARCH 06, 1997.

_ _

Certiorari - Appointment outside cadre of Bank - Absence of Rules regulating
procedure for appointment - Legitimate expectation._

_ _

When the appointment made was one outside the normal cadre of the Bank and
there are no rules regulating the procedure for such appointments, the
petitioner challenging the appointment and claiming it as being more qualified
and experienced cannot be said to have a legitimate expectation of being
appointed to the post. There was no evidence that the Board of Directors
abused its powers.

Certiorari cannot issue.



**Cases referred to:**

** **

1 _.Vidyodaya University v Linus Silva_ 66 NLR 505.

_ _

2 _.Malloch v. Aberdeen Corporation_ (1971) 1 W.L.R. 1578, 1596.

** **

**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



_E. D. Wikramanayake_ with _Anandi Cooray_ and _U. Abdul Kajeem_ for 2nd
respondent-appellant.

_ _

_Ms. Marino Fernando_ for 1st petitioner-respondent.

_ _

_K. C. Kamalasabayson, A.S.G._ with _U. Egalahewa, S.C._ for respondent-
respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._



March 31, 1997. **  
 **

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.**



The 1st petitioner who was at that time the Assistant General Manager
(Domestic Credit) of the 1st respondent (National Savings Bank) moved the
Court of Appeal by way of an application for a writ of certiorari to quash the
appointment of the 2nd respondent made by the 1st and 3rd to 6th and 8th to
10th respondents; and for a writ

**223**



of mandamus directing the respondents to make a fair and impartial appointment
after due and sufficient inquiry. (The 2nd petitioner had earlier withdrawn
from the proceedings). The 3rd respondent was the Chairman of the 1st
respondent bank: the other respondents were members of the Board of Directors
of the 1st respondent bank.



The 3rd respondent had recommended to the Board of Directors that the 2nd
respondent be recruited to the 1st respondent bank in terms of section 77 of
the National Savings Bank Act to a post designated "Deputy General Manager"
outside the normal cadre of the bank. The recommendation was accepted by the
Board of Directors and the 2nd respondent was appointed as Deputy General
Manager with effect from 1st August,1993. Prior to the impugned appointment,
the 2nd respondent was a public officer and she had been seconded from the
Ministry of Agriculture, Lands and Forestry to the 1st respondent bank as a
consultant (Janasaviya Division) in August, 1992.



The 1st petitioner averred in his petition that the appointment of the 2nd
respondent was "irregular and wrongful" inasmuch as the Board of Directors:
(a) failed to advertise the post; (b) failed to notify the petitioner and
other employees of the 1st respondent bank of the vacancy; (c) overlooked the
fact that the 2nd respondent has absolutely no experience in banking. It was
further averred that the petitioner was more qualified than the 2nd respondent
both academically and by way of experience in banking, and the impugned
appointment deprived him of his legitimate expectation of promotion in the
bank where he had served since 1978.



The Court of Appeal took the view that in appointing the 2nd respondent to the
post of Deputy General Manager, the Board "had not followed the normal
practice of advertising the post and or applications from persons having the
required qualifications ... There has prima facie been a procedural
irregularity which makes the appointment of the 2nd respondent open to
challenge before this court in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. The
procedural irregularity or procedural vires goes to the root of the
appointment of the 2nd respondent to the relevant post. The Board has abused
its powers in making the said appointment by not following the normal
procedure and it has to be quashed." The Court of Appeal allowed the
application for writ of Certiorari and Mandamus.

**224**



Against the judgment of the Court of Appeal, the 2nd respondent has now
appealed to this Court. The gravamen of the 1st petitioner's complaint as set
out in his petition (and referred to above) savours of a denial of equal
protection, violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. The pith and
substance of the petitioner's complaint is that the impugned appointment was
arbitrary and discriminatory inasmuch as the normal practice of advertisement
and calling for applications was not followed; the petitioner and other
employees were not aware of the vacancy, and were deprived of the opportunity
of applying for the post. It was further alleged that the required experience
in banking was overlooked. On a scrutiny of the averments in the petition it
appears to me that it does not articulate a ground for the issue of
certiorari. Admittedly, the appointment made was one outside the normal cadre
of the bank. We were not referred to any rule framed under the National
Savings Bank Act which regulates the procedure for the appointment. The
impugned appointment was not specifically created nor designated by the
Statute, the post being one outside the normal cadre. It is very doubtful
whether the petitioner could have had a "legitimate expectation" of being
appointed to the post. There is no evidence to support the finding of the
Court of Appeal that the Board of Directors has "abused its powers". I
accordingly hold that there was no ground upon which the Court of Appeal could
have issued a writ of certiorari to quash the appointment of the 2nd
respondent-appellant.



In this view of the matter, it is unnecessary for me to consider in this
appeal the submission of Mr. E. D. Wikremanayake counsel for the 2nd
respondent-appellant, that this was a case of an ordinary contract between
master and servant and therefore the Court of Appeal was not competent to
grant certiorari to quash the appointment. (University Council of the
Vidyodaya University v Linus Silva(1), See also Malloch v. Aberdeen
Corporation (2)),



In the result, the appeal is allowed, and the judgment of the Court of Appeal
is set aside. I make no order as to costs.



**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J**. - I agree.

** **

**DR. SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J**.- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/12.html_  

