[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1994](./) >> **[1994] LKSC 13**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1994+13 or 1994+LKSC+13) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1994+LKSC+13) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Rev. Polhene Pannaloka v. Rev. Pandita Midigama Pemananda - SLR - 372, Vol
2 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 13; (1994) 2 Sri LR 372 (5 December 1994)

**  372**

**REV. POLHENE PANNALOKA**

**v.**

**REV. PANDITA MIDIGAMA PEMANANDA**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 76/94.

C.A. NO. 703/94 (F).

OCTOBER 31, NOVEMBER 7 AND 25, 1994.



_Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law ‑Appurtenant temple ‑ Dedication._



The Aswaththaramaya was on the basis of the documents, a temple appurtenant to
Boderagane Maha Viharaya of which the plaintiff was admittedly the
Viharadhipathi. The claim that the Aswaththaramaya was a separate and distinct
temple was not borne out by the dedication or the other documents as the
priest from whom title by pupillary succession was claimed was by all proofs
only placed in charge of it and not described as Viharadhipathi.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal



_A. C. Gooneratne Q. C._ with _R. Sureshchandra_ for 1st defendant‑appellant.
_P. A. D. Samarasekera P.C._ with _Keerthi Sri Gunawardena_ for
plaintiff‑respondent.

_Cur. adv vult._

 December 05, 1994.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, CA.**



The plaintiff instituted these proceedings against the 1st and 2nd defendants
seeking a declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple known
as Aswaththaramaya at Hiyare in the Galle district and for the ejectment of
the 1st defendant from the temple. The 2nd defendant died before the trial and
no substitution was made as substitution was not necessary. The 1st defendant
in his answer denied the claim of the plaintiff and prayed for the dismissal
of the action. After trial, the District Court, dismissed the plaintiff's
action. The plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeal which reversed the
judgment of the District Court and held with the plaintiff. The 1st defendant
has now preferred an appeal to this court.

**  373**



The plaintiff's case was that Aswaththaramaya was a temple appurtenant to the
temple known as Boderagane Maha Vihara at Habaraduwa (hereinafter referred to
as the Boderagane temple) and that the Viharadhipathi of the Boderagane temple
placed a monk in charge of Aswaththaramaya to look after it for and on behalf
of Boderagane temple. At the hearing before us, it was not disputed that the
plaintiff is the Viharadhipathi of the Boderagane temple and that the
Viharadhipathiship devolved on the plaintiff in the manner set out in the
plaint.



The main issue arising on this appeal is whether Aswaththaramaya is a temple
appurtenant to the Boderagane temple as contended for on behalf of the
plaintiff respondent or is a separate and distinct temple founded by Welihinda
Ratnapala about the year **1916.** While the case for the 1st defendant was
that Welihinda Ratnapala was the first Viharadhipathi of Aswaththaramaya and
that he (the 1st defendant) was a pupil of Welihinda Ratnapala, the
plaintiff's position was that Welihinda Ratnapala was not the Viharadhipathi
of Aswaththaramaya but was appointed to be in charge of and administer
Aswaththaramaya in **1903** by Heenatigala Dhammatilake who was admittedly the
Viharadhipathi of the Boderagane temple from 1897 to 1962. Moreover it was a
part of the case for the plaintiff that besides Aswaththaramaya there were 5
other temples which were appurtenant to Boderagane temple and amongst those
appurtenant temples was **Kalawitigoda Purane Viharaya** (also known as
Piyadassyaramaya).



At the hearing before us, Mr. A. C. Gooneratne, Counsel for the 1st defendant
appellant submitted that his case (to use his own words) "stands or fails by
the document D1." Counsel urged that it was,the crucial document in the case
and it completely "destroyed" the plaintiff's case. Mr. Gooneratne thus rested
his case entirely on D1.



D1 is a "Pooja Pathraya" bearing No. 654 dated 2nd November 1925. It is a
formal dedication of a land by five persons of the village of Hiyare to
"Aswaththaramaya" as a sanghika gift. These five persons were the owners of
the land which was known as Godewatte. Mr. Gooneratne submitted that Welihinda
Ratnapala is named as the recipient of the gift. Further, Mr. Gooneratne
relied very strongly on a

**  374**

recital in the deed which states that the sanction of the then Governor of
Ceylon was obtained on **18th October 1916** for the purpose of dedicating the
land to the temple as required by the provisions of section 41 of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance No. 8 of 1905. Having regard to the fact that
permission was obtained by the owners of the land in October 1916 from the
Governor, Mr. Gooneratne strenuously contended that the construction of the
temple itself commenced only in 1916 and that Welihinda Ratnapala was the
first Viharadhipathi of Aswaththaramaya. The formal dedication was no doubt in
November 1925 but it was the submission of Counsel that, that was the point of
time at which the building of the temple was completed. Counsel invited us to
draw the inference that the construction of the temple went on from 1916 to
1925.



Moreover, Mr. Gooneratne stressed the fact that there was no reference
whatsoever to the Boderagane temple in the entirety of D1. This, Counsel
contended, negatived the claim of the plaintiff that Aswaththaramaya was
appurtenant to Boderagane temple. On the contrary, he argued, it strongly
supported the position of the 1st defendant that D1 conferred a right on
Welihinda Ratnapala which is a right totally independent of Boderagane temple
or indeed of any other temple. The contention was that the title conveyed by
D1 was the title of the admitted owners of the land (Godewatta).



On the other hand, Mr. Samarasekera for the plaintiff respondent rightly
pointed out that section 41 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No. 8 of
1905 does not require the licence of the Governor to construct a temple; the
licence was required "for any temple, or any person in trust for, or on
behalf, or for the benefit of any temple to **acquire any land ...** ".
Counsel submitted that the language in D1 rather suggests a gift to the temple
which was already in existence. I am inclined to agree with this submission.
More importantly, paragraph 3 of D1 (as translated reads thus) " ... under and
by virtue of the sanction so granted the land is dedicated to the
Aswaththaramaya for the benefit of the monks of the Siamese sect from the four
corners and the gift or dedication is made **in the name of the priest in
charge of the affairs of the said temple, namely, Welihinda Ratnapala** who
was the Viharadhipathi of the **Meepe temple " **(The emphasis is mine). These
words in D1 are of the utmost _             _

**  375 **

significance for here there is the clear recognition of the status of
Welihinda Ratnapala as being no more than that of the monk in charge of
Aswaththaramaya. This strongly corroborates the case for the plaintiff and
considerably weakens the position of the 1st defendant, that Welihinda
Ratnapala was the first Viharadhipathi of Aswaththaramaya. It is to be noted
that in D1 Welihinda Ratnapala is not described as the Viharadhipathi of
Aswaththaramaya which is the crux of the case for the 1st defendant. If in
truth Welihinda Ratnapala was the Viharadhipathi of Aswaththaramaya, it is
very strange that he was not so described in a formal document such as D1. On
the contrary, he is referred to as the Viharadhipathi of another temple (the
Meepe temple).



Furthermore, Mr. Samarasekera made a cogent submission in regard to the
purpose for which the five owners of the land obtained the "licence" from the
Governor as set out in D1. It was Counsel's contention that the permission of
the Governor was sought and obtained in order to comply with the requirements
of the law, namely the provisions of section 41 of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance No. 8 of 1905. The purpose was to regularise the _de facto_
construction of a temple on private property and was not to construct or
establish a new temple. With this submission, I agree.



It is also not without significance that in paragraph 5 of the Answer the 1st
defendant specifically avers that "Aswaththaramaya at Hiyare was founded in or
about **1903 ". **This position is inconsistent with the plea based on D1 that
the commencement of the construction of the temple was in 1916 when the
Governor granted the licence in terms of the prevailing law. And, be it noted,
the 1st defendant failed to give evidence at the trial.



This apart, there is cogent documentary evidence which shows that
Aswaththaramaya was in existence long before 1916. I refer to P36, P37 and
P38. P36 relates to a donation of a paddy field and 2 coconut trees to the
temple at Hiyare in 1907. P37 is similar gift of a paddy field to the temple
at Hiyare in 1906. P38 is an endorsement on a deed indicating that the
property dealt with was dedicated to the Hiyare temple on 29th August 1912.
The evidence of witness Meepe Sirisumana shows that Aswaththaramaya is the
only temple in Hiyare.

**  376**

I now turn to the answer of the 1st defendant. He claimed in his answer that
Welihinda Ratnapala was the original Viharadhipathi of Aswaththaramaya (and of
Piyadassaramaya) and that Welihinda Ratnapala had several pupils who in order
of seniority were Meepe Medhankara, Meepe Pannasara, Denepitiye Pannatissa,
Denepitiya Saddhananda (the deceased 2nd defendant) and the 1st defendant
himself. There are 2 important documents which proved that the claim of the
1st defendant is untenable. The first document is P22 which is the minutes
book of the Dayaka Sabha maintained at Aswaththaramaya. The minutes clearly
show that the 1st defendant was placed **in charge of Aswaththaramaya** by the
deceased 2nd defendant. He had no independent right but was in the position of
a licencee under the 2nd defendant. The next document is P26, the Upasampada
Declaration of the 1st defendant which clearly proves that he was certainly
not a pupil of Welihinda Ratnapala.



The judgment of the District Court is unsatisfactory. The several documents
produced by the parties have not been considered. No findings have been
reached even in regard to the oral evidence. It is right to add that the
record contains very helpful written submissions filed in the District Court
but unfortunately the trial Judge has failed to consider these submissions.



On the other hand, the Court of Appeal in a comprehensive and well‑considered
judgment has concluded that the plaintiff is entitled to the relief prayed for
in the plaint (except the claim for damages). The judgment of the Court of
Appeal is accordingly affirmed and the appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at
Rs. 750/.



**KULATUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/13.html_  

