[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1989](./) >> **[1989] LKSC 13**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1989+13 or 1989+LKSC+13) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1989+LKSC+13) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Undugodage v. Rasanathan - SLR - 161, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 13; (1989)
2 Sri LR 161 (23 March 1989)

**

161

UNDUGODAGE  
v.  
RASANATHAN

**

SUPREME COURT  
ATUKORALE, J.  
H. A. G. DE SILVA J. AND JAMEEL, J.  
S. C- RULE NO. 1 OF 1987.  
JANUARY 16, 17 AND FEBRUARY 3, 1989

_

Attorney-at-law - Rule to show cause against suspension or removal \-
Judicature Act, Section 42(2) - Misappropriation of money paid by a co-
mortgagor in a mortgage suit - Finding of Disciplinary Committee of Bar
Association and District Judge.

_

It was alleged that the respondent attorney-at-law had:  
  
Received a sum of Rs. 30,000/- in settlement of the balance principal sum on
the decree but not paid it to the complainant.

Borrowed Rs. 12,000/- on a promissory note from the complainant while she was
his client and improperly appropriated the same to his use.

The Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Association inquired into the first
allegation. The District Judge too made findings on the question of payments
in satisfaction of the decree. The findings were adverse to the respondent
attorney-at-law. The Disciplinary Committee did not inquire into the second
allegation.

**

Held:

**

1. **** The court is under a duty to examine and determine the issue untrammeled by the finding of the learned District Judge.

**162**

2. __ The significance of a letter by the respondent informing the co-mortgagor that interest amounting to Rs. 10,000/- was due which refutes his claim to have paid Rs. 30,000/- on a receipt earlier in date to this letter was not considered by the Disciplinary Committee.

The District Judge misdirected himself in regard to this letter. This letter
proves there was no misappropriation.

3\. The second allegation had not been inquired into by the Disciplinary
Committee and the respondent had no opportunity of establishing that he
appropriated the loan as fees with the consent of the complainant in which
event it would be very doubtful whether his conduct could be deemed to be
improper.

_

Per _Atukorale, J.

"We .... were, very regretfully, denied on this occasion that assistance from
the Bar Association o! Sri Lanka which we would normally expect in a
proceeding of this nature initiated at its own instance and which has, in the
past, unerringly been extended to us and which we have always appreciated and
valued so much. It is indeed unfortunate that the Bar Association was. except
at one sitting, unrepresented before us and we were thereby deprived of the
benefit of its views and submissions."

"Upon those facts as they stand, it would doubtless appear to be most improper
for an attorney-at-law who has obtained from his client a sum of money as a
loan to appropriate the same unilaterally as against lees alleged to be due to
him for rendering professional services. Such conduct on the part of an
attorney-at-law would, to say the least, constitute the clearest instance of a
malpractice within the meaning of S. 42 (2) of the Judicature Act. It may
suffice to warrant his removal from office altogether".

**RULE** against attorney-at-law under S. 42(2) of the Judicature Act, No. 2
of 1978.

_

Rohan Jayatilleke, _Deputy Solicitor-General with _Ananda Kasturiaratchi,_
State Counsel in support of the Rule

_

M. Kanagaratnam _-with _G. Kumaralingam, R. Kadiravelpillai_ and _Miss. N.A.
Jayawickrema_ for the respondent.

_

Desmond Fernando _for the Bar Association.

_Cur adv. vult.

_March 23, 1989.

**

ATUKORALE, J.

**

A Rule has been issued on the respondent under s. 42(3) of the Judicature Act,
No. 2 of 1978, to show cause why he should not be suspended from practice or
removed from the office of an attorney-at-law of the Supreme Court in terms of
S.42(2) thereof. It has originated in consequence of a written complaint by
way of an affidavit made on 21.8.1984 by Mrs. Genevieve Clotilda Undugodage
nee de Silva (hereinafter referred to as the complainant) to the Chief

**163**

Justice containing solely an allegation of misappropriation of monies
totalling 'around Rs. 70,000/L to Rs. 80,000/- or more' said to have been
received by the respondent from the defendants in action No. 10884/MB of the
District Court of Colombo and 'proved to have been misappropriated' by the
respondent. On the directions of the Chief Justice a preliminary inquiry into
this complaint was held in terms of S.43(1) of the aforesaid Act by a
disciplinary committee (hereinafter referred to as the committee) of the Bar
Association of Sri Lanka. After inquiry the committee in its report of
12.11.1986 held, inter alia, that the respondent had, on stamped receipts C7,
C8 and C10 (not C9 as mistakenly stated in the report) signed by him,
acknowledged receipt of 3 sums of Rs. 20,000/-, Rs. 20,000/- plus one year's
interest (Rs. 3600/-) and Rs. 20,000/- respectively, out of which he had
failed to reimburse the last two sums to his client, the complainant. Hence
the committee recommended that appropriate action be taken against the
respondent under s. 42 of the said Act. Upon a consideration of this report
this court directed the Rule to be issued on the respondent.

Admittedly the complainant was the plaintiff in the aforesaid action which was
tiled on her behalf by the respondent against the defendants (the co-
mortgagors) on 10.8.1967 putting the mortgage bond C1 dated 27.9.1964 in suit
for the recovery of the principal sum of Rs. 50,000/- and arrears of interest
in a sum of Rs. 4500/-; decree was entered in favour of the complainant on
16.6.1969 ordering the defendants to pay her the principal sum with interest
thereon at 9% per annum from 1.6.1969 till payment in full; the order to sell
was, in terms of the decree, not to issue for a period of 3 years unless there
was default in payment of interest for 2 months in which event the complainant
was entitled to obtain order to sell without notice; another bond (C2 dated
11.6.1969 _-_ a few days prior to the entering of the decree) was executed by
the defendants for a sum of Rs. 11,000/- being the arrears of interest then
due on the original bond Cl; according to receipt C7 dated 11.9.1973 stamped
and signed by the respondent the amount then due in, the said action was Rs.
30,000/- with interest payable from 12.9.1973 at 12% and the respondent had
received' and paid to the complainant's attorney (Mendis) a sum of Rs.
20,000/- out of the capital sum decreed in the said action.

In its report the committee points out. quite rightly, that the crux of the
complaint against the respondent is that although the balance

**164**

capital sum of Rs. 30,000/- with interest thereon had been paid to the
respondent by Asoka Madanayake, the son of the co-mortgagors, the same had not
been paid over by him to the complainant. The committee found as a fact that
upon document C8 (which it held was a receipt) the respondent has acknowledged
payment to him by Asoka Madanayake of a sum of Rs. 20,000/- and interest for a
period of one year. It rejected the respondent's version that C8 was a letter
issued by him at the request of Asoka Madanayake to enable him to Obtain a
loan from the State Mortgage Bank or other institution and held that it was
issued by him because he received payment of the amounts specified therein.
The committee in the penultimate paragraph of its report concludes:

"In the result, we are more than convinced that C7, C8 and C9 were receipts
for payments made to the respondent and which the respondent had not
reimbursed the complainant. It is regretted that the respondent should have
resorted to this conduct at this stage of his career,"

The written complaint made to the Chief Justice by the complainant was
referred to the respondent for his observations. In his observations he states
that in or about the year 1976 a sum of Rs. 30,000/- and interest from 1976
were due to the complainant. He applied for an order to sell, notice of which
was ordered to issue on the defendants. They filed no objections but got the
matter fixed for inquiry. At the inquiry Asoka Madanayake, the son of the
defendants, appeared and produced 4 letters before the learned District Judge.
The respondent proceeds to state that he gave evidence that no money was paid
to him and that the full sum of Rs. 30,000/- and interest was due from the
defendants. The learned District Judge, however, disbelieved his evidence. He
states that he then appealed against this order but by some misfortune he had
overlooked to file a petition of appeal within 60 days as a result of which
the appeal was dismissed. He reiterates that he never received the said Rs.
30,000/-from the defendants or from Asoka Madanayake. In the affidavit filed
in response to the Rule issued on him he states that Asoka Madanayake, taking
advantage of an erroneous finding of the learned District Judge and a
technical defect in the processing of the appeal resulting in its rejection as
well as the view expressed obiter by the Court of Appeal that it is not
disposed to interfere with the finding of the learned District Judge, has
deceived the complainant into believing that he _.

_

**165**

The respondent referring to the findings of the disciplinary committee states
inter alia, that it had signally failed to consider his defence and to study
or analyse the accounting relevant to the matter in issue.

A perusal of the order of the learned District Judge shows that the defendants
in support of their claim that the full amount due on the decree was paid to
the respondent, whilst not adducing any evidence, produced 4 documents, namely
C7, C8, C9 and C10, all of which were admittedly signed by the respondent - C7
and C10 being so signed on a stamp and C8 bearing an additional signature of
his on a stamp on a side. In his order the learned Judge states that the
respondent in his evidence admitted that C7 was issued by him correctly and
that as stated therein a sum of Rs. 30,000/- being the balance amount (or
rather, as conceded before us, the balance principal) due on the decree
together with interest at 12% per annum from 11.9.1973 was outstanding as on
the date of C7, i.e. as on 11.9.1973. Referring to C8 the learned District
Judge rejects the evidence of the respondent that it is not a receipt for the
payment of money but is only a letter issued to Asoka Madanayake at his
request to be submitted to the State Mortgage Bank confirming the payment
already made (as evidenced by C7) of a sum of Rs. 20,000/- and interest for
one year. Referring to C9 dated 24.4.1976 signed by the respondent in which he
states that the arrears of interest amount to Rs. 10,000/- and requests Asoka
Madanayake to settle the same early, the learned Judge observes that it cannot
be treated as a document relating to payment or non-payment of money.
Referring to C10 dated 8.5.1976 in which the respondent states that the
capital paid is only Rs. 20,000/- and requests Asoka Madanayake to make note
of the same, the learned Judge again rejects the evidence of the respondent
that it is a letter given to Asoka Madanayake for the purpose of making an
application to the State Mortgage Bank. He holds that at the time that C10 was
issued the balance (capital and interest) outstanding was not more than Rs.
20,000/- and that since it has been signed on a stamp by the respondent it
must be accepted as a receipt for the entire sum then due. Hence the learned
Judge concludes that on C7, C8 and C10 the defendants have paid the respondent
the full amount due on the decree and directed that, satisfaction of decree be
entered. It seems to me that this conclusion is based primarily upon the view
formed by the learned Judge that C7, C8 and C10 are all stamped documents
signed by the respondent and as such they cannot but be construe

**166**

as receipts for payments made to him. The Court of Appeal, upholding a
preliminary objection to the maintainability of the appeal, ruled that the
appellant should have first obtained leave to appeal from that Court and that
as no such leave had been obtained the appeal must be dismissed. By way of a
reference to the merits of the appeal the Court observed that it is not
disposed to interfere with the finding of the learned District Judge.
Accordingly the appeal was dismissed.

At the hearing before us we had the advantage of the submissions of learned
Deputy Solicitor-General who appeared in support of the Rule as well as of
learned Counsel appearing for the respondent but were, very regretfully,
denied on this occasion that assistance from the Bar Association of Sri Lanka
which we would normally expect in a proceeding of this nature initiated at its
own instance and which has, in the past, unerringly been extended to us and
which we have always appreciated and valued so much. It is indeed unfortunate
that the Bar Association was, except at one sitting, unrepresented before us
and we were thereby deprived of the benefit of its views and submissions.

In pursuance of an indication given by this court to counsel on an earlier
date that it proposes, in the instant case, to follow the normal practice and
procedure pertaining to Rule inquiries of a similar nature to which learned
counsel agreed, the hearing before us proceeded on and was confined to the
evidence (both oral and documentary) recorded before the disciplinary
committee. The crucial issue that arises for our determination is whether, as
maintained by Asoka Madanayake and held both by the District Court and the
committee, the respondent did receive from Asoka Madanayake the sum of Rs.
30,000/- referred to in C7, being the balance principal sum due on the decree.
A matter which caused us some concern at the hearing and upon which we desired
very much a full and complete argument related to the question as to the
nature and effect of and/or the weight to be attached to the finding of the
learned District Judge (which stands unreversed) that full payment has been
made to the respondent in satisfaction of the decree as evidenced by C7, C8
and C10. Learned Deputy Solicitor-General submitted that the finding of the
learned Judge is only of some evidentiary value and is not binding or
conclusive on the issue arising for our determination. Learned counsel for the
respondent seemed to take the view that the

**167**

question of payment or non-payment to the respondent is one that would arise
for determination afresh in these proceedings independent of the finding of
the learned Judge and that it is open to the respondent on the material before
us to re-agitate the question and to show that the finding of the District
Court (though final in respect of proceedings before it) is erroneous and
untenable.

Considering the submissions made to us on this point by both counsel and the
fact that the proceedings in the District Court are different in nature, scope
and purpose from those pending before us as well as the circumstance that the
Rule issued by this court has been based solely on the evidence before the
committee and not upon the material placed before the learned District Judge,
I am of the view that we are free and. indeed, under a duty to examine and
determine this vital issue untrammelled by the finding of the learned District
Judge.

Upon a careful assessment of all the material before us and a consideration of
the submissions of learned counsel I have reached the conclusion that it is
unsafe to hold that C8 and CIO are receipts issued by the respondent in
acknowledgment of the payments alleged to have been made to him by Asoka
Madanayake. C7 which .is signed by the respondent on a stamp is in two parts.
In the first part it acknowledges the payment by Asoka Madanayake of all
amounts due on two bonds in full settlement. In the second part it states that
the amount now due on case No. 10884/MB of the District Court of Colombo is
Rs. 30,000/- with interest at 12% from 12.9.1973. By contrast C8 and C10,
though bearing the respondent's signature on stamps, are on their face in the
form of letters addressed to Asoka Madanayake informing Asoka Madanayake
primarily of the capital sum paid by him. Whilst C8 informs him that he has
paid Rs. 20,000/- out of the capital, C10 informs him that the capital he has
paid is Rs. 20,000/- **only** which he is requested to note. Both refer to
case No. 10844/MB aforesaid. Thus the contents of documents C7, C8 and C10
read together as a whole tend to support the respondent's position that out of
the capital of Rs. 50,000/- due on the decree only a sum of Rs. 20,000/- has
been paid.

The construction placed by the learned District Judge on C10, namely, that the
sum of Rs. 20,000/- mentioned therein denotes the balance capital and interest
due i.e., the entire balance outstanding

**168**

on the decree, appears to me to be in the teeth of what is stated therein and
therefore unacceptable. Quite apart from the fact that on the face of the
document C7, C8 and C10 there is nothing to suggest that they are separate
receipts, each for a capital sum of Rs. 20,0007-in which event the capital
paid would exceed the capital decreed, even on the construction placed by the
learned District Judge on C10 that the sum of Rs. 20,000/- specified therein
constitutes the entire balance by way of capital and interest, there would
have been an overpayment by Asoka Madanayake of either a sum of Rs. 4664/- as
shown in the statement X1 or a sum of Rs. 5000/- as shown in the statement X2
or a sum of Rs. 4032.59 cts. as shown in the statement X3, depending on the
mode the alleged payment of Rs. 20,000/- on C10 is set off. It is hardly
likely that Asoka Madanayake would have paid any sum in excess of what was due
on the decree. Moreover there has been no evidence placed either before the
learned District Judge or the committee of the means or capacity of Asoka
Madanayake to have effected the alleged payments on C8 and C10. It became very
necessary to adduce such evidence particularly in view of the suggestion made
to Asoka Madanayake in the course of his evidence before the committee that he
was uttering a falsehood when he stated that he paid the balance capital of
Rs. 30,000/-. But the most vital document in this regard is, in my view,
document C9 dated 24.4.1976 written by the respondent just two weeks before
C10. It is, as stated earlier, a letter sent by the respondent to Asoka
Madanayake informing him that the arrears of interest in case No. 10884/MB is
Rs. 10,000/- and requesting him to settle the same early. When questioned on
this document Asoka Madanayake, in his evidence before the committee, admitted
that the respondent calculated and showed him and that he was satisfied that
the interest outstanding was about Rs. 10,000/-. This admission of Asoka
Madanayake is irreconcilable with his position of having made any payments on
C8 and C10. It effectively refutes his allegation of having made any payment
either by way of capital or interest after 11.9.1973, the date of C7 and
discredits his case altogether. Unfortunately the learned District Judge does
not appear to have appreciated its significance or impact on the issue before
him whilst the committee, apart from a mistaken reference to C9, has totally
failed to pay any attention or regard to its contents. Whilst the learned
Judge has misdirected himself in regard to C9 the disciplinary committee has
not even addressed its mind to it. I therefore hold that the respondent has
not received any money on

**169**

documents C8 and C10. Accordingly I find that there has been no
misappropriation of monies as alleged in the Rule.

The only other matter that remains for our consideration upon the submissions
made to us by the learned Deputy Solicitor-General relates to the charge that
the respondent having borrowed a sum of Rs. 12,000/- on promissory note C23
from the complainant whilst she was his client 'improperly appropriated' the
same to his use. In her affidavit of complaint sent to the Chief Justice the
complainant makes no complaint or mention of such improper conduct on the part
of the respondent. Nor does she in her evidence before the committee make any
reference thereto. Nor is there a consideration of the matter or a finding
thereon by the committee in its report. The charge appears to have been
formulated upon certain answers given by the respondent under cross-
examination during the final stages of the inquiry before the committee
wherein he stated that the sum was an interest-free loan obtained by him from
the complainant; that for successfully reducing the assessment of the
complainant's deceased husband's estate from Rs. 217,000/- to Rs. 17,000/- the
complainant offered him a certain sum as fees which, except for a sum of Rs.
5,000/-, he did not receive and that the amount of the loan was set off by way
of fees. Upon these facts as they stand, it would doubtless appear to be most
improper for an attorney-at-law who has obtained from his client a sum of
money as a loan to appropriate the same unilaterally as against fees alleged
to be due to him for rendering professional services. Such conduct on the part
of an attorney-at-law would, to say the least, constitute the clearest
instance of a malpractice within the meaning of S.42(2) of the Judicature Act.
It may suffice to warrant his removal from office altogether. It was, however,
tenaciously urged by learned Counsel for the respondent that as this alleged
act of misconduct on the part of the respondent did not form the subject
matter of inquiry before the disciplinary committee, that as the complainant
herself did not at any time make complaint to any one of such misconduct and
that as the committee itself did not think it necessary to pursue this matter
although it transpired during the course of its inquiry, the respondent has
been gravely prejudiced with regard to this matter since he has been deprived
of the opportunity of establishing that the complainant had, expressly or
impliedly, consented to the arrangement of setting off the loan as part of his
fees. Urging further that the material placed before us is very meagre and
insufficient to substantiate this charge,

**170**

learned Counsel submitted that in the context of the special circumstances
pertaining thereto no finding adverse to his client be made by us. I am in
entire agreement with the submissions of learned Counsel. Until the present
rule was issued on him the respondent had no intimation whatsoever that the
propriety of his conduct in this regard was going to be challenged. He has,
thus, had no opportunity of establishing before the committee his defence that
he appropriated the loan as fees with the consent of the complainant, in which
event it would be very doubtful whether his conduct could be deemed to be
improper. The silence and inaction of the complainant in this respect suggest
that she at least acquiesced in, if not consented to, the arrangement alleged
by the respondent. As such I do not think it is proper or possible for us to
reach a finding adverse to the respondent on this charge.

For the above reasons the Rule issued on the respondent is discharged.

**

H. A. G. de SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

**

JAMEEL, J.** \- I agree.

_

**Rule**_ **** _**discharged.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/13.html_  

