[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1987](./) >> **[1987] LKSC 13**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1987+13 or 1987+LKSC+13) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1987+LKSC+13) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  In Re the Thirteenth Amendment To the Constitution and the Provincial
Councils Bill - SLR - 312, Vol 2 of 1987 [1987] LKSC 13; (1987) 2 Sri LR 312
(6 November 1987)

**

312

IN RE THE THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION  
AND THE PROVINCIAL COUNCILS BILL**

SUPREME COURT.  
S. SHARVANANDA, C.J., R. S. WANASUNDERA, J.,  
P. COLIN-THOME, J., K. A. P. RANASINGHE, J.,  
E. A. D. ATUKORALE, J, H. D. TAMBIAH, J.,  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J., O. S. M. SENEVIRATNE, J.,  
AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.,  
S. C. 7/87 (Spl) TO S.C. 48/87 (Spl). S.D. No. 1/87 & S.D. No. 2/87  
OCTOBER 22, 23, 26, 27, 28, 29 AND 30, 1987.

_

Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution-Provincial Councils Bill-Presidential
Reference-Articles 18, 76, 83, 120, 121, and 138 of the Constitution-
Referendum-Chapter XVIIA, Articles 154A to T._

The President referred two Bills entitled "Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution A Bill to amend the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka" and Provincial Councils Bill" to the Supreme Court
under Article 121 of the Constitution.

The Thirteenth Amendment sought to amend the provisions in the Constitution
relating to language (Article 18), jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal by
addition of jurisdiction to review orders of the High Court made in its new
appellate jurisdiction (Article 138 (1) and by the addition of a new Chapter
XVIIA and Articles 154A to 154T relating to the executive, administrative and
legislative powers of Provincial .Councils and the power of amendment,
overriding or repealing them vested in Parliament.

Determination: (Per Sharvananda, C.J., Colin-Thome". J., Atukorale, J. and
Tambiah, J.)

Neither the Provincial Councils Bill nor any provisions of the Thirteenth
Amendment to the Constitution requires approval by the People at a Referendum
by virtue of the provisions of Article 83. Once the Bill is passed by a 2/3
majority and the Constitution amended accordingly the Provincial Councils Bill
will not be inconsistent with the so amended Constitution.

The Unitary character of the State of which the characteristics are the
supremacy of the central Parliament and the absence of subsidiary sovereign
bodies remains unaffected. The Provincial Councils do not exercise sovereign
legislative power and are only subsidiary bodies exercising limited
legislative power subordinate to that of Parliament. Parliament has not there
by abdicated or in any manner alienated its legislative power. Delegated
legislation is legal and permitted and does not involve any abandonment or
abdication of legislative power in favour of any newly created legislative
authority.

The concept of devolution is used to mean the delegation of Central Government
power without the relinquishment of supremacy. Devolution may be legislative
or administrative or both and should be distinguished from decentralisation.
The scheme of devolution set out in the Bills does not erode the sovereigity
of the People and does not require the approval of the People at a Referendum.

**313**

Ranasinghe, J. agreed with the above determination but held that the
provisions of clauses 154 (2) (b and (3) (b) of the Bill to amend the
Constitution (Thirteenth Amendment) require approval by the People at a
Referendum.

**

Wanasundera, J., L. H. de Alwis, J., Seneviratne, J. and H. A. G. de Silva,
J.,** dissented and determined that both Bills in their totality required the.
approval of the people at a Referendum.

REFERENCE by H: E. the President to the Supreme Court for its determination.
Petitions filed under Article 121 of the Constitution.

_

R. K. W Goonesekera with Somasara Dassanayake, Gomin Dayasiri and Nimal S. de
Silva for petitioner in S.C.7/87 (Spl) and S.C. 8/87 (spl)._  

_

H. Bandula Kariyawasam petitioner in person in S.C. 9/87 (Spl) and S. C. 10/87
(Spl)._  

_

Prins Gunasekera with K. Abeypala and W. Kulatunga for petitioner in S.C. 11/8
7 (Spl) and S.C. 12/87 (Spl)._  

_

P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C. with G. L. Geethananda A. L. M. de Silva for
petitioner in S.C. 13/87 (Spl)._  

_

A. C. Gooneratne, Q. C., with A. K. Premadasa, P. C., Nevil Jacolyn
Seneviratne, S. Semasinghe, D. S. Wijesinghe, N. S. A. Goonatilleke, D. P.
Mendis, K. Jayasekera, K. S. Tillekeratne, J. Salvatura, Mrs. S. Jayalath, C.
Ladduwahetty instructed by S. D. S. Somaratne for petitioner in S.C. 14/87
(Spl)._  

_

Eric Amerasinghe, P. C., with N. S. A. Goonatilleke, D. P. Mendis, M. B.
Peramune and Miss D. Guniyangoda for petitioner in S.C. 15/87 (Spl)._  

_

A. C. Gooneratne Q.C., with R. K. W. Goonesekera, Pani Ilangakon and Chandrani
Jayawardena for petitioner in S.C. 16/87 (Spl).



Gamini Iriyagolle with N. S. A. Goonetileke, C. Amerasinghe, D. P. Mendis, M.
W.  Amarasinghe, P. E. W. Gunadasa, V. S. Goonewardena, W. Dayaratne, W. B.
Ekanayake, W. N. Abeyratne, Mrs. Sunitha Gunaratne, Miss. R. Jayalath Shantha
Senadheera and Raja Madanayake for petitioner in S.C. 17/87 (Spl),

S.C. 18/87 (Spl). S.C. 19/87 (Spl) and S.C. 20/87 (Spl). _  

_

Dharmapala Seneviratne petitioner in person in S.C. 21/87 (Spl)._  

_

A. A. de Silva with G. A. Fonseka, K. Ratnapala Pens, Raja Mudannayake,
Jeyaraj Fernando pulle, S. Medahinna, Mahinda Wickremaratne instructed by
Charita Lankapura for petitioners in S.C.-22/87 (Spl) and S.C. 23/87 (Spl)._  

_

Gamini Iriyagolle with C. Amerasinghe, W. Dayaratne, C. Padmasekera, K. K. R.
Peiris,   Janaka de Silva, Raja Mudannayake, D. Galappathi and Wilfred Perera
for petitioners in S.C. 24/87 (Spl) and S.C. 25/87 (Spl)._

**314**

_

Anil Silva with N. R Ranamukarachchi, Shanta Senadhaera, Janaka de Silva,
Charita   Lankapura, Bernard Hettiarachchi, and D. Galappathi for petitioner
in S.C 26/87 (spl) and S. C 27/87 (spl). _  

_

Sarath Wijesinghe with D. K Rupasinghhe and U. A, Premasundara instructed by
Wijesinghe Associates for petitioners in S.C. 28187 (SO). S.C. 29/87 (Spl),
45/87. 46/87 (Spl). _  

_

E D. Wickramanayake With Obeysekera, Gomin Dayasin M. W Amarasinghe, Freddie
Abeyratne, Nimal Siripala de silva ,A. A. M. Marleen, U. L. M. Farook Amir
Sheiff and Javid Yusuf for petitioners in S.C. 30/87 (SO) and S. C. 31/87
(Spl)._  

_

Eric Amerasinghe PC with N.S.A Gunatilleke, D. P Mendis, P.E.V. Gunadasa, M B.
Peramuna and Miss D Guniyangoda for petitioner in S.C. 32A37 (SPl)_  

_

Mark Fernando P C with Abdul Rahuman and Miss D. Goonetilleke for petitioner
(under Rule 63 (iii) of S.C. Rules 1978) in S .C. 33/87 (Spl). and S.C. 34/87
(Spl)._  

_

S. J. Kadingamar Q.C. with S .C Crossette Tambiah, Desmond Fernando, Suriya
Wickremasinghe, S.H.M Reeza, Suren Peiris and N. Murugesu for petitioner
(under Rule 63 (i) of S.C. Rules 1978) in S. C. 35/87 (Spl)._  

_

G. F Sethukavaler, P.C. with Desmond Fernando, Suriya Wickremasinghe, K. Kanag
lswaran, K, Neelakandan, S. Mahenthiran, Suren Peiris and A. A. M. Illiyas for
petitioner (under Rule 63 (W) of S.C. Rules 1978) in S. C. 36/87 (Spl). _  

_

L. O. H. Wanigasekera petitioner in person in S.C. 37/87 (Spl).  
  
S. K. Sangakkara petitioner in person S.C. 38/87 (Spl). _  

_

R. B. Seneviratne for petitioner S.C. 39/87 (Spl)._  

_

K.M.P Rajaratne with Kacohana Abeypala and P Dissanayake for petitioners in
S.C. 40/8.7 (Spl) and S.C. 41/87 (Spl)._  

_

Gamini lrriyagolle with C.S. Hettihewa, Nihal Senaratne, M W Seneviratne
instructed by Ranjith Panamulla for petitioner in S.C. 42/87 (spl).

_

  
_Nimal Sennayake PC with Sarath Wijesinghe, Miss S. M Senaratne, Mrs. A.B.
Dissanayake, Saliya Mathew, Miss Lalitha Senaratne, L. M. Samarasinghe and
D.S.Rupasinghe for petitioner in S.C. 43/87 (Spl)._  

_

Nimal Senanayake P. C with Kithsiri Gunaratne Sanath Jayailleke, Sarath
Wijesinghe, Arunatilleke ale Silva, Miss A. D. Thelespha and D. S. Re pasinghe
for petitioner in S. C.44/87 (Spl)._  

_

M. M Aponso petitioner in person in S.C. 4T/87 (Spl.) and S.C.48/87 (Spl)._

**315**

_

Dr. H. W Jayewardena Q.C. with L. C. Seneviratne. P.C. Faisz Mustapha and Miss
T. Keenawinna for H. E. the President in S.C. No. 1/87._  

_

K. N, Choksy P.C. with Faisz Mustapha for H. E. the President in S.C. No.
2/87._  

_

Shiva Pesupathi P.C., Attorney-General with K.M.M.B. Kulatunge P.C.,
Solicitor-General, M. S. Aziz, D. S. G. and Ananda Kasturiarachchi S.C. as
amicus curiae.

Cur. adv. vult._

November 6, 1987.

Determination per

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J., P. COLIN-THOME, J., ATUKORALE, J.

AND TAMBIAH, J.**

Two Bills entitled "Thirteenth Amendment to the: Constitution-A Bill to amend
the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka" and
"Provincial Councils Bill" respectively were placed on the order paper of
Parliament and presented to Parliament by the Honourable Minister of Public
Administration and Minister of Plantation Industries on 9th October, 1987. The
Constitutional jurisdiction vested in this Court by Article 120 of the
Constitution to determine the question whether the Bills or any provision
thereof are inconsistent with the Constitution has been invoked by the several
petitioners in the above applications and by His Excellency the President by a
written reference under Article 121.

Clause 2 of the Bill to amend the Constitution states that Article 18 of the
Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is hereby
amended inter alia as follows

(b) by the addition immediately after paragraph 1 of that Article of the
following paragraphs

(2) Tamil shall also be an official language;

(3) English shall also be the link language;

(4) Parliament shall by law provide for the implementation of the provisions
of this Chapter."

**316**

Clause 3 of the Bill to amend the Constitution further states that Article 138
of the said Constitution is hereby amended in paragraph (1) of that Article as
follows:

"(a) by the substitution, for the words 'committed by any court of First
Instance' of the words 'committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its
appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of First Instance', and

(b) by the substitution, for the words 'of which such Court of First Instance'
of the words 'of which such High Court, Court of First Instance'."

Clause 4 of the Bill to amend the Constitution adds a new Chapter and Articles
and inserts same after Article 154 and states that the same shall have effect
as Chapter XVIIA and Articles 154A to 154T of the Constitution.

The Provincial Councils Bill seeks to provide for the procedure to be followed
in Provincial Councils, a few matters relating to Provincial Public Service
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

As the questions involved in the Reference and Petitions Were in the opinion
of the Chief Justice of general and public importance, the Chief Justice in
the exercise of his powers under Article 132 (3) of the Constitution, directed
that the Reference and Petitions be heard by a Full Bench consisting of all
the Judges of the Supreme Court.

We took up all the References and the Petitions in connection with the two
Bills together for hearing. The Attorney-General and other Counsel mentioned
above appeared and assisted us in the consideration of the above Reference and
Petitions.

The Petitioners in Applications 7/87-32/87 and 37/87-47/87 contended that the
Proposed Bills are inconsistent with

(a) The Constitution as a whole,

(b) The Sovereignty of the People as guaranteed by Articles 3 and 4 of the
Constitution, and

(c) The Unitary State postulated by Article 2 of the Constitution; and

**317**

(d) that the Bills were inconsistent with Article 9 of the Constitution and
hence required the approval by the People at a Referendum.

(e) that the Bill to amend the Constitution-the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution, seeks to amend Article 83 of the Constitution, by adding the
provisions of Article 153G (2)(b) and Article. 153G (3)(b) to the entrenched
provisions specified in Article 83 of the Constitution

That the said Bills contain provisions that cannot be enacted except by
following the procedure laid down in Article 83 of the Constitution, that is
to say, by 2/3 of the Members of Parliament voting in favour of them and the
approval of the People being given at a Referendum, while other provisions
relate to the basic structure or framework of the Constitution and are not
amendable.

The determination of four Judges of this court viz: Chief Justice, Justice P.
Colin Thome, Justice E. A. D. Atukorale and Justice H. D. Tambiah, is that for
the reasons set out below neither the Bill nor any provision of the Thirteenth
Amendment to the Constitution-a Bill to amend the Constitution of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, requires approval by the People at
a Referendum by virtue of the provisions of Article 83, and that once the said
Bill is passed and the Constitution amended accordingly, the Provincial
Councils Bill will not be inconsistent with the so amended Constitution.

The determination of Justice K. A. P. Ranasinghe is that the provisions of
clause 154G(2)(b) and 3(b) of the "Bill to amend the Constitution of Sri Lanka
(Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution)" require approval by the People at
a Referendum by virtue of the provisions of Article 83. He agrees with the
view that no provision of the aforesaid Bill the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution is inconsistent with any of the provisions of Articles 2, 3, 4 or
9 of the Constitution. He states that the. constitutionality of the provisions
of the Provincial Councils Bill will depend upon the aforesaid amendment to
the Constitution becoming law, as set out by him, in terms of Article 83 of
the Constitution.

The determination of the other four Judges viz: Justice R. S. Wanasundera,
Justice L. H. de Alwis, Justice O. S. M. Seneviratne and Justice H. A. G. de
Silva is that, the provisions of the Thirteenth

**318**

Amendment to the Constitution require the approval by the People at a
Referendum by virtue of the provisions of Article 83 of the Constitution.

A technical objection was taken by some of the Petitioners that the Bill for
the 13th Amendment to the Constitution does not conform to Article 82(1) of
the Constitution and that hence it is not a proper Bill that can betaken up
for consideration by this court under Article 120 of the Constitution. It was
said that the Bill was not for the amendment of any Provisions of the
Constitution, as a whole chapter, namely Chapter XVIIA consisting of a number
of new provisions coupled with a Ninth Schedule with appendices and lists is
sought to be added and consequential amendments have not been expressly
specified in the Bill, in terms of Article 82 (1).

We do not see any substance in this objection. No consequential amendment of
the provisions of the Constitution is involved by the addition of Chapter
XVIIA. Article 82(7) states that an amendment includes, repeal, alteration and
addition. The new Chapter XVIIA is an addition to the provisions of the
Constitution and therefore constitutes an amendment. It deals with a new
subject matter and no consequential amendment is, involved. In our view the
Bill is in no way defective. The Bill has been properly placed on the Order
Paper of Parliament and this court can exercise its jurisdiction under Article
120 of the Constitution in respect of that Bill. In any event the question
whether a Bill does comply with the requirements of Article 82(1) is a matter
for the Speaker of Parliament.

The main contentions of the petitioners were that the new Chapter XVIIA
consists of several provisions which are inconsistent with the provisions of
entrenched Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution and therefore that Chapter
cannot become law unless the number of votes cast in favour thereof amounts to
not less than 2/3 of the whole number of members (including those not present)
and is approved by the People at Referendum as; mandated by Article 83 of the
Constitution.

Article 2 states that the Republic of Sri Lanka is a Unitary State:

It was submitted that clause 4 of the 13th Amendment Bill which contains
Chapter XVIIA seeks to establish a constitutional structure which is Federal
or quasi-Federal and hence that clause is inconsistent with-Article 2.

**319**

The term "unitary" in Article 2 is used in contradistinction to the term
"Federal" which means an association of semi-autonomous nits with a
distribution of sovereign powers :between the units and the centre. In a
Unitary State the national government is legally supreme over all other
levels. The essence of a Unitary State Js that the sovereignty is undivided in
other words, that the powers of the central government are unrestricted. The
two essential qualities of a Unitary State are (1) the supremacy of the
central Parliament and (2) the absence of subsidiary sovereign bodies. It does
not mean the absence of subsidiary law-making bodies, but it does mean that,
they may exist and can be abolished at the discretion of the central
authority. It does, therefore, mean that by no stretch of meaning of words can
those subsidiary bodies be called subsidiary sovereign bodies and finally, it
means that there is no possibility of the central and the other authorities
coming into conflicts with which the central government, has not the legal
power to cope. Thus, it is fundamental to a Unitary State that there should be

1\. Supremacy of the central Parliament,

2\. The absence of subsidiary sovereign bodies.

On the other hand, in a Federal State the, field of government. is divided
between the Federal and State governments which. are not subordinate one to
another, but are co-ordinate and independent within the sphere allotted to
them. The existence of co-ordinate authorities. independent of each other is
the gist of the federal principle. The Federal government is sovereign in some
matters and the State governments are sovereign in others. Each within its own
spheres exercise its powers without control from the other and neither is
subordinate to the other. It is this feature which distinguishes a Federal
from a unitary Constitution in the latter sovereignty rests only with the
central government,

Dr Wheare in his Book "Modern Constitutions" brings out the distinction at
page 19

...in a Federal Constitution the powers of government are divided between a
government for the whole country and governments for parts of the country in
such a way that each government is legally independent within its own sphere.
The government for the whole country has its own area of powers and its
exercises them without

**320**

any control from the governments of the constituent parts of the country, and
these latter in their turn exercise their powers without being controlled by
the Central Government. In particular the legislature of the whole country has
limited powers and the legislatures of the State or Provinces have limited
powers. Neither is subordinate to the other. Both are co-ordinate. In a
unitary Constitution, on the other hand, the legislature of the whole country
is the Supreme Law-making body in the country. It may permit other
legislatures to exist and to exercise their powers, but it has the right, in
law, to overrule them they are subordinate to it.

The question that arises is whether the 13th Amendment Bill under
consideration creates institutions, of government which are supreme,
independent and not subordinate within their defined spheres. Application of
this test demonstrates that both in respect of the exercise of its legislative
powers and in respect of exercise of executive powers no exclusive or
independent power invested in the Provincial Councils. The Parliament and
President have ultimate control over them and remain supreme.

In regard to legislative power, although there is a sphere of competence
defined by the two Bills both in respect of matters set out in the Provincial
list and in respect of matters set out in the concurrent list within which a
Provincial Council can enact statutes, this legislative competence is not
exclusive in character and is subordinate to that of Central Parliament which
in terms of Article 154G(2) and 154G(3) can, by following the procedure set
out therein, override the Provincial Councils. Article 154G conserves the
sovereignty of Parliament in the legislative field. Parliament can amend or
repeal, the provisions in the Bill relating to, the legislative authority of
the Provincial Councils. The Provincial Council is dependent for its continued
existence and validity and for its legislative competence in respect of
matters in the Provincial list and in the concurrent list on Parliament. It
was submitted by the Petitioners that Articles 154G(2) and (3) restrict the
legislative powers of Parliament in respect of matters in the Provincial
Council list and the concurrent list.

In our view Articles 154G (2) and (3) do not limit the sovereign power of
Parliament. They only impose procedural restraints.

**321**

The Privy Council in Bribery Commissioner vs. Ranasinghe, 66 N.L.R. 73 at page
83 has relevantly observed -

"A Parliament does not cease to be sovereign whenever its component members
fail to produce among themselves a requisite majority e.g. when in the case of
ordinary legislation the voting is evenly divided or when in the case of
legislation to amend the Constitution there is only a bare majority if the
Constitution requires something more. The minority are entitled under the
Constitution of Ceylon to have no amendment of it which is not passed by a 2/3
majority. The limitation thus imposed on some lesser majority of members does
not limit the sovereign powers of Parliament itself, which can always,
whenever it chooses, pass the amendment with the requisite majority."

No abridgment of legislative sovereignty is involved when rules prescribe as
to how legislative authority can be exercised. Article 154G(2) and (3) merely
set out the manner and form for the exercise of its legislative power by
Parliament to repeal or amend the provisions of Chap. XVIIA and the Ninth
schedule or to legislate in respect of any matter included in the Provincial
Council List.

A legislature can provide not merely that a constitutional amendment shall
follow certain procedure (such as receiving the assent of a special majority)
or be approved by a majority of the electors at a Referendum but also that any
Act repealing or amending the Act so providing shall follow the "same manner
and form".

Rules which prescribe the manner and form for the exercise of legislative
power by Parliament do not impinge on or derogate from the sovereignty of
Parliament. Attorney-General for New South Wales v. Trethowan [1932] A.C. 526;
Harris v. Ministry of Interior, (1952) 2 S.A.L.R. 428, "Harris case
established the principle that Parliament may be sovereign and yet be subject
to the manner and form for the legally effective expression of its will"
(Colin Turpin in British Government and the Constitution (1986) at 37).

Thus Parliament can in the exercise of its powers conferred on it by the
Constitution override the Provincial Council. This shows that no question of
legislative competition can arise in the scheme contained in the Bills.

**322**

With respect to executive powers an examination of the relevant provisions of
the Bill underscores the fact that in exercising their executive power, the
Provincial Councils are subject to the control of the centre and are not
sovereign bodies.

Article 154C provides that the executive power extending to the matters with
respect to which a Provincial Council has power to make statutes shall be
exercised by the Governor of the Province either directly or through Ministers
of the Board of Ministers or through officers subordinate to him, in
accordance with Article 154F.

Article 1 54F states that the Governor shall, in the exercise of his
functions, act in accordance with such advice, except in so far as he is by or
under the Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in
his discretion.

The Governor is appointed by the President and holds office in accordance with
Article 4(b) which provides that the executive power of the People shall be
exercised by the President of the Republic, during the pleasure of the
President (Article 154B(2)). The Governor derived his authority from the
President and exercises the executive power vested in him as a delegate of the
President. It is open to the President therefore by virtue of Article 4(b) of
the Constitution to give directions and monitor the Governor's exercise of
this executive power vested in him. Although he is required by Article 154F(1)
to exercise his functions in accordance with the advice of the Board of
Ministers, this is subject to the qualification "except in so far as he is by
or under the Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them
in: his discretion." Under the Constitution the Governor as a representative
of the President is required to act in his discretion in accordance with the
instructions and directions of the President. Article 154F(2) mandates that
the Governor's discretion shall be on the President's directions and that the
decision of the Governor as to what is in his discretion shall be final and
not be called in question in any court on the ground that he ought or ought
not to have acted on his discretion. So long as the President retains, the
power to give directions to the Governor regarding the exercise of his
executive functions, and the Governor is bound by such directions superseding
the advice of the Board of Ministers and where the failure of the Governor or
Provincial Council to comply with or give effect to any directions given to
the Governor or such Council by the President under Chapter XVII of the
Constitution

**323**

will entitle the President to hold that a situation has arisen in which the
administration of the Province cannot be carried on in accordance with the
provisions of the Constitution and take over the functions and powers of the
Provincial Council (Article 154K and 154L), there can be no gainsaying the
fact that the President remains supreme or sovereign in the executive field
and the Provincial Council is only a body subordinate to him.

The Bills do not effect any change in the structure of the Courts or judicial
power of the People. The Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal continue to
exercise unimpaired the several jurisdictions vested in them by the
Constitution. There is only one Supreme Court and one Court of Appeal for the
whole Island, unlike in a Federal State The 13th Amendment Bill only seeks to
give jurisdictions in respect of writs of Habeas Corpus in respect of persons
illegally detained within the Province and Writs of Certiorari, Mandamus and
Prohibition against any person exercising within the Province any power under
any law or statute made by the Provincial Council in respect of any matter in
the Provincial Council list and appellate jurisdiction in respect of
convictions and sentences by Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts within the
Province to the High Court of the Province, without prejudice to the executing
jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Vesting of this additional jurisdiction
in the High Court of each Province only brings justice nearer home to the
citizen and reduces delay and cost of litigation: The power of appointment of
Judges of the High Court remains with the President and the power of
nominating them to the several High Courts remains with the Chief Justice. The
appointment, transfer, dismissal continue to be vested in the Judicial Service
Commission. Thus, the centre continues to be supreme in the judicial area and
the Provincial Council has no control over the judiciary functioning in the
Province.

In our view no division of sovereignty or of legislative, executive or
judicial power has been effected by the 13th Amendment Bill or by the
Provincial Council Bill. The national government continues to be legally
supreme over all other levels or bodies. The Provincial Councils are merely
subordinate bodies. Parliament has of parted with its supremacy or its powers
to the Provincial Councils.

In our view, the Republic of Sri Lanka will continue to be a Unitary State and
the Bills in no way affect its unitariness.

**324**

The Petitioners further alleged that the sovereignty of the people, enshrined
in Article 3 of the Constitution is infringed by the provisions of the two
Bills.

Article 3 states:

'In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the People and is inalienable.
Sovereignty includes the powers of Government, fundamental rights and the
franchise.'

This Article is an entrenched Article.

It was submitted that Article 4 which sets out how the sovereignty of the
People is to be exercised, has to be read with Article 3 as an integral part
of Article 3, and as such is entrenched along with Article 3 by Article 83.
The Constitution expressly specifies the Articles which are entrenched,
Article 4 is not one of those Articles. The legislative history of the 1978
Constitution shows that Article 4 was deliberately omitted from the list of
entrenched articles. The report of the Parliamentary Select Committee on the
Revision of the Constitution published on 22.6,1978 discloses that the
Committee recommended the entrenchment of Articles 1-4, 9, 10, 11, 30(2),
62(2) and 83 (para.9 of the Report). The Bill for the repeal and replacement
of the 1972 Constitution (published in the Gazette of 14.7.78) included
Article 4 in the category of entrenched Articles. However, when the Bill was
passed, Parliament omitted Article 4 from the list of entrenched provisions.
That omission must be presumed to have been deliberate, especially as Article
6, 7 and 8 were added to the list.

In our view, Article 4 sets out the agencies or instruments for the exercise
of the sovereignty of the People, referred to in the entrenched Article 3. It
is always open to change the agency or instrument by amending Article 4,
provided such amendment has no prejudicial impact on the sovereignty of the
People Article 4(a) prescribes that the legislative power of the People shall
be exercised by Parliament, consisting of the elected representatives of the
People and by the People at a Referendum". Article 4(a) can be amended to
provide for another legislative body consisting of elected representatives, so
long as such amendment does not affect Articles 2 and 3.

Similarly, an amendment to Article 4(b) can be enacted by providing for the
exercise of the executive power of the People by a President and a Vice
President elected by the People. However, to the extent that a principle
contained in Article 4 is contained or is a necessary corollary or concomitant
of Article 3, a constitutional amendment

**325**

inconsistent with such principle will require a Referendum in terms of Article
83, not because Article 4 is entrenched, but because it may impinge on Article
3. In our view, Article 4 is not independently entrenched but can be amended
by a two third majority, since it is only, complementary to Article 3,
provided such amendment does not impinge on Article 3. So long as the
sovereignty of the People is preserved as required by article 3, the precise
manner of the exercise of the sovereignty and the institutions for such
exercise are not". fundamental Article 4 does not define or demarcate the
sovereignty of the People. It merely provides one form and manner of exercise
of that sovereignty. A change in the institution for the exercise of,
legislative or executive power incidental to that sovereignty cannot ipso
facto impinge on that sovereignty.

The 13th amendment provides for Provincial Councils having certain legislative
power in respect of matters enumerated in the Provincial Council list and
concurrent list, lists I and III in Ninth Schedule. We have on an examination
of the relevant provisions of the 13th Amendment Bill, set out our reasons
for. taking the view that the Provincial Councils do not exercise sovereign
legislative power and are only subsidiary bodies, exercising limited
legislative power, subordinate to that of Parliament. Parliament has not
thereby abdicated or in any manner alienated its legislative power. It was
contended by the Petitioners that even that small. measure of subsidiary
legislative power vested in the Provincial Councils is forbidden by Article 76
(1) of the Constitution. It was stressed that the article prohibits Parliament
setting up any authority with any legislative power: However Article 76(3)
provides that

"It shall not be a contravention of the provisions of paragraph (1) of this
article for Parliament to make any law containing any provision empowering any
person or body to make subordinate legislation for prescribed. purposes."

Hence delegated legislation is legal and permitted and does not involve any
abandonment or abdication of legislative power in favour of any newly created
legislative authority. No new legislative body armed with general legislative
authority is created when a new body is empowered to make subordinate
legislation. Since the contemplated Provincial Councils in our view do not
perform any sovereign legislative, function but are only empowered to enact
legislation, subordinate in

**326**

character, Parliament in creating them is not establishing another legislative
body rival to it in any respect. Parliament can pass legislation in the
prescribed form and manner superseding the Provincial Council legislation or
even repealing the provisions creating them.

In our view, even if it be said that by the Bill, Parliament is seeking to set
up Provincial Councils with legislative power in derogation of Article 76(1),
since Article 4 is not an entrenched provision, the Bill can be passed by a
two third majority without a Referendum. The Bill does not in any way affect
the sovereignty of the People. Instead of the legislative and executive power
of the People being concentrated in the hands of Parliament and President it
is sought to be diversified in terms of the Directive Principles of State
Policies found in Article 27(4) of the Constitution. This article provides
that:

"The State shall strengthen and broaden the democratic structure of government
and the democratic rights of the People by decentralising the administration
and by affording all, possible opportunities to the People to participate at
every level in national life and in government."

Article 27(1) states that

"the Directive Principles of State Policies contained herein, shall guide
Parliament, the President and the Cabinet of Ministers in the enactment of
laws and the governance of Sri Lanka for the establishment of a just and free
society."

True the Principles of State Policy are not enforceable in a court of law but
that shortcoming does not detract from their value as projecting the aims and
aspirations of a democratic government The Directive Principles require to be
implemented by legislation. in our view, the two Bills represent steps in the
direction of implementing the programme envisaged by the Constitution makers
to build a social and democratic society.

Healthy democracy must, develop and adopt itself to changing circumstances.
The activities of central government now include substantial powers and
functions that should be exercised at a level closer to the People. Article 27
(4) has in mind the aspirations of local people to participate in the
governance of their regions. The Bills

**327**

envisage a handing over of responsibility for the domestic affairs of each
province, within the framework of a united Sri Lanka. They give new scope for
meeting the particular needs and desires of the people for each province.
Decentralisation is a useful means of ensuring that administration in the
provinces is founded on an understanding of the needs and wishes of the
respective provinces. The creation of elected and administrative institutions
with respect to each province that is what devolution means gives shape to the
devolutionary principle.

The concept of devolution is used to mean the delegation of central government
powers without the relinquishment of supremacy. Devolution may be legislative
or administrative or both. It should be distinguished from decentralisation
which is a method whereby some central government powers of decision making
are exercised by officials of the central government located in various
regions. "Devolution of parts of the United Kingdom would not affect the unity
of the United Kingdom or the power of Parliament to legislate (even on
devolved mattes) for all or any part of the United Kingdom, or to repeal or
amend the devolutionary arrangements themselves." Hood Philips Constitutional
and Administrative Law 6th Ed. at page 716 Where legislative powers are
devolved it would, be possible to restrict the use Of, those powers by making
use of Parliaments paramount power to legislate for the region. In Northern
Ireland the principle of devolution had been put into practice.

The 13th Amendment Bill defines those areas of activity where decisions,
affect primarily persons living in the province. It does not devolve powers
over activities which affect people elsewhere or the well being of Sri Lanka
generally. The powers that are conferred on the Provincial Councils are not at
the expense of the benefits which flow from political and economic unity of
Sri Lanka Political unity means that Parliament, representing all the people,
must remain. sovereign over their affairs and that the government of the day
must bear the main responsibility to Parliament for protecting and furthering
the interests of all. Economic unity means that the Government must manage the
nation's external economic relations with other countries. The Government,
must be able to control national taxation, total public expenditure and the
supply of money and credit and the Government must also keep the task of
devising national policies to benefit particular parts of the country and of
distributing resources among them according to relative need. Resources are
distributed not

**328**

according to where they come from but according to where they are needed. This
applies between geographical areas just as much as between individuals.
Article 154R (5) mandates the Finance Commission to formulate principles with
the objective of achieving balanced regional development in the country. The
President is directed to cause every recommendation made by the Finance
Commission to be laid before Parliament and to notify Parliament as to the
action taken.

In our view, the provisions of the Bills ensure that devolution does not
damage the basic unity of Sri Lanka. The scale and character of the devolved
responsibilities will enable the People of the several provinces to
participate in the national life. and government. The general effect of the
new arrangement will be to place under provincial democratic supervision a
wide range of services run in the respective. provinces for the said
provinces, without affecting the sovereign powers of Parliament and the
Central Executive.

In our view the scheme of devolution set out in the Bills does not erode the
sovereignty of the People and does not require the approval of the People at a
Referendum.

It was submitted that the Bills seek to amend the basic structure of the
Constitution. The basis of the submission was that the clauses 4 and 7 of the
13th Constitutional Amendment Bill seek to establish a Constitutional
structure which is Federal or quasi-Federal and these Provisions take away the
Unitarianism enshrined in Article 2. In our considered view, there is no
foundation for the contention that the basic features of the Constitution have
been altered or destroyed by the proposed amendments. The Constitution will
survive without any loss of identity despite the amendment. The basic
structure or framework of the Constitution will continue intact in its
integrity. The unitary state will not be converted into a Federal or quasi-
Federal State. We have already examined the question whether the amendment in
any way affects entrenched Article 2 which stipulates a unitary State and
after an analysis of the relevant provisions of the amending Bill, have come
to the conclusion that the unitary nature of the State is in no way affected
by the proposed amendments and that no new sovereign legislative body
executive or judiciary is established by the amendment. The contra submission
made by the petitioners is based on the misconception that devolution is a
divisive force rather than an integrative force.

**329**

It was contended that the scope of amendment contemplated by Article 82 and 83
is limited and that there are certain basic principles or features of the
Constitution which can in no event be altered even by compliance with Article
83. Reliance was placed for this proposition on the decisions of the Supreme
Court of India in Kesavananda v. State of Kerala, AIR 1973. SC 1461 and
Minerva Mills Ltd., v. Union of India AIR 1980, SC 1789. Those decisions of
the Supreme Court of India were based on Article 368 of the unamended Indian
Constitution which reads as follows:

"An amendment of this Constitution may be initiated only by the introduction
of a Bill for the purpose in either House of Parliament......."

The said section 368 carried no definition of "amendment" nor did it indicate
its scope. It was in this context that the Supreme Court in the Kesavananda
case, reached the conclusion by a narrow majority of seven to six that the
power of amendment under Article 368 is subject to implied limitation and
Parliament cannot amend those provisions of the Constitution which affect the
basic structure or framework of the Constitution. The argument of the majority
was on the following line :-

"The word amendment postulates that the old Constitution survives without loss
of its identity despite the change and continues even though it has been
subjected to alterations. As a result of the amendment the old Constitution
cannot be destroyed, and done away with it is retained though in the amended
form. The words amendment of the Constitution with all their wide sweep and
amplitude cannot have the effect of destroying and abrogating the basic
structure-or frame work of the Constitution" per Khanna, J.,

But both our Constitutions of 1972 and 1978 specifically provide for the
amendment or repeal of any provision of the Constitution or for the repeal of
the entire Constitution-Vide Article 51 of the 1972 Constitution and Article
82 of the 1978 Constitution. In fact, Article 82(7) of the 1978 Constitution
states "in this chapter "Amendment" includes repeal, alteration and addition."
In view of this exhaustive explanation that amendment embraces repeal, in our
Constitution we are of the view that it would not be proper to be guided by
concepts of 'Amendment' found in the Indian judgments which had not to
consider statutory definition of the word 'Amendment.' Fundamental principles
or basic features of the Constitution have to be found in some provision or
provisions of the Constitution and if the Constitution contemplates the repeal
of any provision or provisions of the entire

**330**

Constitution, there is no basis for the contention that some provisions which
reflects fundamental principles or incorporate basic features are immune from
amendment. Accordingly, we do not agree with the contention that some
provisions of the Constitution: are unamnendable.

It was submitted that the proposed Article 154G(2) and (3) add, to the
entrenched provisions contained in Article 83 and hence involve an amendment
of Article 83 of the Constitution. There is no express amendment of Article
83. But it was contended that by providing in the proposed articles 154G(2)
and (3) that approval of the People at a Referendum is necessary, for
amendment or repeal of the provisions of Chapter XVIIA or for passing a Bill
in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council list, one is adding
to the, list of Articles enumerated in Article 83 which postulates a
Referendum for their amendment or repeal, one is thereby amending Article 83
of the Constitution. In our view Article 83 had to be entrenched, otherwise,
by the simple process of amending Article 83 by a two-third majority, the
entrenchment of the several articles specified in it could be frustrated. The
draftsman would otherwise have had to specify separately in each case that the
article is entrenched in the manner set out in Article 83\. The draftsman
instead of doing that had short circuited by specifying all the Articles
subject to the specific amendatory process in Article 83 and providing that
Article 83 is entrenched. The rationale for entrenching Article. 83 was to
ensure the entrenchment of the articles specified therein. If the draftsman
had not followed the short cut set out in Articles 83, but had set down each
such article and followed each one with the entrenching clause; this argument
that article 83 stands amended consequent to Article 154G(2) and (3) would
have ex facie been untenable. The argument that Article 83 is impliedly
amended consequent to Article 154G(2) that have no basis.

In our view Article 82 is in no way added to or its scope enlarged by Article
154G(2) and (3). The latter Articles involve no amendment of Article 83 and
are independent of Article 83 and of the Articles specified therein: The
draftsman has separately provided for the amendatory process of Article 154
G(2) and (3) and had not expressly amended Article 83 by adding to the
Articles specified therein. The draftsman has not thereby impliedly amended
Article 83. In our view the additional instances of entrenchment contemplated
by Article 152 G(2) and (3) do not therefore infringe Article 83.

**331**

The rationale of Referendum is the acknowledgement of the sovereignty of, the
People. Referendum is a method by, which the wishes of the People may be
expressed with regard to the proposed legislation. The proposed Article 154G
(2) and (3) by stipulating a Referendum affirm, the sovereignty of the People.
It will be a sterile exercise to ask the People whether they are sovereign,
that is the purpose which a Referendum to discover whether a Referendum to
amend Article 154G (2). and (3) is required, would serve. Here the draftsman
has preempted the People by offering that Referendum on a platter.
Consideration of the purpose of an enactment is always a legitimate part of
the process of interpretation. The nature and purpose of Article 83 repel the
suggestion that the proposed articles 154G (2) and (3) amend Article 83 of the
Constitution.

Mr. Eric Amerasinghe contended that there is no provision in the Bills to
challenge the vires or validity of "statute" enacted by a Provincial Council.
He submitted that while Article 121 provides an opportunity to a citizen to
test the validity of a Bill before it become law, enacted by Parliament, there
is no corresponding provision in the Bills for any citizen to invoke the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to determine any question as to whether any
"Statute" or any provision thereof, prior to it being enacted into a 'statute'
by a Provincial Council, is inconsistent with the Constitution. He argued that
in that respect, a statute has an- advantage over and is more elevated than a
Parliamentary Bill His submission overlooks Article 80(3) of the Constitution,
which provides that Where a Bill becomes law upon the certificate of the
President or the Speaker, as the case may be, no court or tribunal shall
inquire into pronounce upon-or in any manner call in question the validity of
such Act on any ground whatsoever." This sub-article gives the seal of
finality to a law passed by Parliament. Such a law cannot be challenged on any
ground whatsoever even if it conflicts with the provisions of the
Constitution, even if it is not competent for Parliament to enact it by a
simple majority or two third majority. On the other hand a statute passed by a
Provincial Council does not enjoy any such immunity. It does not have the
attribute of finality and is always subject to review by court. The validity
of a statute can always be canvassed in a court of law, even years after its
passage. If it is ultra vires for a Provincial Council, to enact such a
statute, it is a nullity and is void ab initio. A 'statute' unlike a law which
is proprio vigore valid, does not acquire such validity on its enactment.

**332**

That is why there is no Article corresponding to Article 121, in respect of a
Provincial Bill before it is enacted into a statute. In our view, President
Counsel's submission lacks merit and' cannot be sustained.

It was submitted by Counsel for the Y.M.B.A. that the Bills affect the
entrenched Article 9 which provides that the Republic of Sri Lanka shall give
to Buddhism the foremost place and accordingly it shall be the duty of the
State to protect and foster the Buddha Sasana while assuring to all religions
the rights granted by Articles 10 and 14(e). An analysis of the provisions of
the Bill shows that the capacity of the Republic to perform its obligations
under Article 9 remains unimpaired and that there is no ground for any
reasonable apprehension as entertained by Counsel that the Provinces wilt be
or able to obstruct such performance. Counsel based his apprehension on the
inclusion of the subject ancient and historical monuments other than those
declared- by or under law made by Parliament to be of national importance, in
the Provincial list. It is to be noted that the Reserved List reserves for the
State National Archives, Archaeological activities and sites and antiquities
declared by or under any law made by Parliament to be of national importance.
This would include, ancient and historical. monuments and records and
archaeological sites and remains declared by or under law made by Parliament
to be of national importance. It is further to be noted that all subjects and
functions not specified in the Provincial list or concurrent list come within
the Reserved List and that all residuary powers are vested in the State. In
the background of the above provisions in the Bills, the fear expressed by
Counsel is groundless. In our view, the Provincial Councils can place no
impediment in the way of the State giving Buddhism the foremost place and
protecting and fostering the Buddha Sasana in terms of Article 9 of the
Constitution.

There was a lot of argument about the meaning and significance of the preamble
to clause 4 viz:

"The provisions of this chapter shall not..........

The provisions of such other law shall mutatis mutandis apply."

In our view, this preamble generates uncertainities and confusion and serves
no useful purpose. We suggest deletion of the preamble.

**333**

**

WANASUNDERA, J.

**

These two Bills titled "Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution" and "The
Provincial Councils Bill" have been on the Order Paper of Parliament and our
jurisdiction, in terms of Article. 121 (1) has been invoked by the President
on a written reference addressed to the Chief Justice, and by numerous
petitioners.

In regard to the Bill described in the long title as -Thirteenth Amendment, to
the Constitution," the only question which the Supreme Court may determine is
whether such Bill requires approval by the People of a Referendum by virtue of
the provisions of Article 83. The Provincial Councils Bill is interconnected
with and consequential to the above proposed Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution. It is not described in its long title as being for the amendment
of any provision of the Constitution. Since the constitutionality of this Bill
too is challenged in terms of the constitutional provisions, we would have to
determine whether any provision of the Bill too requires to be passed with the
special majority required by Article 84, or whether any provision of such Bill
requires the approval by the People at a Referendum by virtue of the
provisions of Article 83, or whether such Bill is required to comply with the
provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2) of Article 82.

Before proceeding further, I thought that I should mention a matter relating
to this judgment by way of explanation rather than in extenuation. We can all
agree with counsel who described this case as the most critical, the most
important and the most far-reaching that had ever arisen in the history of our
courts.

Our Constitution enjoins that our determination should be communicated to the
President and the Speaker within three weeks of the making of the reference or
the filing of the petition. Of these three weeks, time was given to all the
parties who are before us 49 petitions, some challenging the Bill, others
supporting to file their written submissions: Hearings began in open court on
the 22nd of October and concluded on the 30th. We were, therefore, left with
only six days to come to a conclusion, draft the order, and have it typed and
ready for transmission. The petitioners themselves were barely able to open
their case and develop it to their satisfaction.

**334**

In our ordinary day to day work, in cases of no great importance, we are
accustomed to take five to six weeks after the conclusion of the hearings to
deliver our judgment. In a case of this magnitude and importance, the time
allotted seems therefore totally inadequate to attend to it as we would wish.

While I had no great difficulty in understanding the Written and oral
submissions and coming to a conclusion of which I entertain no doubts
whatsoever a longer time both for argument and decision would, I am sure, have
helped to produce a judgment containing a better, analysis, a better
arrangement and a better phrasing, and supported by a greater volume of
material and authorities. However, as stated earlier, I am fully satisfied
that the conclusions I have arrived at are right and just in spite of
constraints mentioned above. I regret only that I have been able to deal with
the salient points and the brief time did not permit me to deal with a number
of others of lesser importance which in normal course, would have been
embodied in this determination.

I wish also to place on record our indebtedness to all counsel, both senior
acid junior like Anil de Silva, and the public spirited petitioners who
appeared in person, for their great assistance in this most difficult task.
Without this valuable help it would have been no mean feat to have dealt with
this matter on our own.

The main thrust of the attack on the Thirteenth Amendment is on the basis that
it affects and seeks to alter the basic or fundamental structure of the
Constitution, both in respect of its express provisions and those that are
implied. Accordingly it would be best if we first examine and analyse the
provisions of the Constitution and thereafter match the provisions of the
impugned Bills with the constitutional provisions and find out in what manner
and to what extent (if any) the gills are inconsistent with the Constitution.

Our Constitution contemplates three or even four types of situations in which
the "constitutional" and legislative power of the State can be exercised.
First, the exercise of legislative power in the making of ordinary
legislation, that is by a simple majority. Second, the exercise of "the
constituent" power for amendments of the Constitution in situations other than
those mentioned in Article 83, that is by a two-thirds or special majority.
Third, the situations dealt with in Article

**335**

83 which require, in addition to the two-thirds majority, a Ref There could in
theory be a fourth category even outside the am provisions to which some
reference will be-made later.

It would be sufficient. if I straightaway deal with the third category Article
83 states that

(a) Article 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 83, and

(b) Article 30(2) and Article 62(2)

Of the Constitution can only be amended by the special majority of 2/3 and the
approval by the People at a Referendum.

Even a cursory glance would show that the above entrenched provisions
constitute the heart or the core of the Constitution. Article 1 declares Sri
Lanka to be a Free Sovereign, Independent and Democratic Socialist Republic
Article 2 declares that the Republic of Sri Lanka is a Unitary State. Article
3 declares that the Sovereignty of Sri Lanka is in the People and is
inalienable and that this Sovereignty includes the powers of government,
fundamental rights and the franchise. Article 4, although not mentioned
specifically in Article 83, is consequential to and an elaboration of article
3 and spells out the concept of Sovereignty of the People and how it should be
exercised. There is in Article 4 the laying down of the structure of
Government in the form of the three great departments of Government, namely,
the Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary. Article 4 spells out also
the earlier reference in Article 3 both to fundamental rights and the
franchise.

In spite of what Mr. Mark Fernando said, it must be emphasised that our
Constitution, like the U.S. Constitution and unlike the Indian or the U.K.
Constitutions, vests Sovereignty in the People and the organs of Government
hold a mandate and are agents of the People. In our Constitution the People
have given themselves a Constitution and it is unthinkable therefore as a
general proposition that this Sovereignty, which means the Sovereignty of the,
country and its unitary nature, the democratic form of government, their right
of franchise, their fundamental rights, and the judicial power protecting
them, can be amended without the consent of the People. The requirement that
in certain matters the approval of the People at a Referendum Would be
necessary for the amendment of the Constitution provides the protection for
those rights.

**336**

Interpreting the corresponding amending provision (Article 368) of the Indian
Constitution, the Indian Supreme Court has come to a similar conclusion. The
effect of the ruling in Golak Nath's Case, AIR 1961 SC 1643; Kesavanda
Bahrati's Case (Fundamental Rights Case), AIR 1973 SC 1461; and Mrs. Indira
Gandhi's Case (Election case), AIR 1975 SC 2299, is to the effect that the
amending power contained in Article of 368 does not extend to altering the
basic structure or Framework of the Constitution.

In Kesavanada's Case the Supreme Court sought to explain and illustrate what
they thought were the amendments or features that would constitute the basic
structure of the Constitution Sikri, C.J, referred to :

(1) the supremacy of the Constitution;

(2) the republication and democratic form of Government;

(3) the secular character of the Constitution;

(4) the separation of powers; and

(5) the federal character of the Constitution.

Shelat J. Grover J added:

(6) the mandate to build a welfare state contained in the Directive
principles; and

(7) the integrity of the nation .

Milkerje and Hedge JJ thought it include-

(8) the sovereignty of India ;

(9) the unity of the country; and

(10) the essential features of the individual freedoms.

Jaganmohan Reddy J, included-

(11) parlimentary democracy ; and

(12) the three organs of State.

On comparison one cannot but regard the section enumerated in Article 83(a)
and (b) of our Constitution as also entrenching the basic features of our
Constitution. They include, if not all the matters enumerated in the India
decision, at least nearly all of them. But that is not all.

**337**

It is sometimes contended that Article 4 is hot an entrenched provision. It is
certainly not one of the Articles specified in the entrenching Article 83. Are
there other Articles either because they are inextricably connected with the
specified Articles, or because they themselves must be considered as being
basic to the structure of the Constitution that are equally entrenched? These
are the questions posed in this case, some of which are undoubtedly covered by
previous rulings given by this court.

A few examples should clear up this issue. The office of President is not
mentioned in Articles 1, 2 or 3. It is mentioned in Article 4 (b). Could it be
said that the office of President is not entrenched? The office of President
is the chosen mode for the Executive power of the People and is a fundamental
feature of the Constitution. There is internal material corroborating this.
Article 83, the entrenching Article, specifically refers to Article 30 (2).
Article 30 (2) deals with the election and term of office of the President.
Such an entrenching provision postulates the existence of the office of
President. This is precisely what is set out in Article 4 (b).

Likewise the Legislature is not specifically mentioned in the entrenching
Article. Here again the Legislature is part of the basic structure of the
Constitution and is the chosen instrument for the exercise of the Legislative
power of the People. Even the exercise of the Executive power is made
dependent on it. Article 83 (b), the entrenching Article, however mentions
Article 62(2). This Article prescribes the length of the life of Parliament,
namely, six years and no more. This presupposes parliamentary rule. The
necessity for the Referendum in 1983 was to by-pass this provision by adopting
the alternate procedure of Referendum. Both procedures involved going before
the People.

Then there is the Judicial power. It is nowhere mentioned specifically in
Articles 1, 2, 3, or 83. But can it be seriously argued that the Judicial
power is not a basic feature of the Constitution? A system of courts with the
Supreme Court at the apex, the Court of Appeal and other courts and tribunals
are absolutely necessary for the proper functioning of the Constitution and
for the due administration of justice. The Judicial power however is mentioned
in Article 4. (c), but one has to look even beyond it to other provisions to
ascertain its true nature and content. For example, the provisions relating to
the

**338**

independence of the judiciary, the subject's right to challenge proposed
legislation, his right to vindicate his fundamental rights and to have his
disputes litigated in the courts are essential features of this power.

As a matter of fact it is known why the reference to Article 4 which was in-
the original draft was removed from Article 83 The concept of fundamental
rights, the franchise etc., have extensive features and implications. Some of
those features are absolutely essential for the right, but others may well be
regarded as being inessential. There was a justifiable fear among those who
framed the Constitution that such an inclusion could lead to problems,
particularly as regards the amendment of the inessential provisions. But
really those fears were groundless. Courts have had long experience and are
frequently called upon in matters before them to decide such issues and of
drawing the line between what may be considered essential and what are
inessential, and as to when a difference in quality may amount to a difference
in kind.

This court has in fact ruled in a series of cases that Article 4 had to be
read along with Article 3. Vide our rulings in SD.5/78, Sd.4/80. SD.5/80, SD.
1/82, SD,2/83, SD. 1/84. I think it is too late in the day to: argue. that
this is not so and even Mr. Fernando was not able to distinguish these cases.
The question as to the extent of the application of Article 4 however could be
raised, still, in any particular matter. It is not only Article 4 that we have
often linked with Article 3, but by the same token our rulings would cover any
Article in the Constitution which the court considers as being linked with any
of the entrenched Articles. so as to constitute a basic feature, of the
Constitution.

There are sufficient guidelines in the wording of the Constitution itself to
assist a court in this task. The Preamble to the Constitution declares the
representatives of the People were elected  
  
"to constitute SRI LANKA into a DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, whilst
ratifying the immutable republican principles of REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY, and
assuring to all peoples FREEDOM, EQUALITY, JUSTICE, FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS
and the INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY as the intangible heritage that Qua tees
the dignity and well being of succeeding generations of the People of SRI
LANKA and of all the people of the World, who come to share with those
generations the effort of working for the creation and preservation of a JUST
AND FREE SOCIETY."

**339**

Again, I said earlier Article 4 spells out the concept in Article 3 the
Sovereignty of the People is organised into the three great departments of
Government-namely, the Legislature the Executive and the Judiciary.
Fundamental Rights is again referred to in Article 4.(d). but its substantive
provisions lie elsewhere. The franchise is also referred to in Article 4 (e),
but there are numerous provisions elsewhere relating to the franchise.

Faced with the similar issue, the Indian courts have taken the view that to
determine whether or not a particular provision is linked with one
specifically mentioned and goes to constitute the basic structure of the
Constitution, it would be necessary to examine such provision in the scheme of
the Constitution, its object and purpose, and the consequence of its repeal or
amendment on the integrity of the Constitution.

Applying this test in regard to fundamental rights, could we say that a free
and democratic government can function if the fundamental rights of freedom of
speech and expression, the freedom of association, equality before the law,
and the freedom from unlawful arrest and detention are taken away? In this
connection it should be noted that fundamental rights and the franchise are
specifically mentioned in Article 3 without any limitation. The specific
mention in Articles 83 of Article 10 and 11 relating to freedom of conscience
and freedom from torture is explicable on the basis that they are considered
absolute rights which Cannot be restricted even in the interests of national
security. The protection was carried over specifically to Article 83. This
does not mean that the other fundamental rights are excluded. However they
would have to be examined individually and included only if they are
considered by court as being essential features of the Constitution and not
inessential and peripheral features.

Our Constitution is an adaptation of the Presidential type of Government
incorporating the Westminster model of the Cabinet system and
parliamentarialism of which we have had tong experience. We have superimposed
on the Westminster type of Constitution an elected Executive President who
holds office for a continuous period of six years "immune to changes in the
Cabinet or the voting in Parliament. This is to ensure the stability of the
Government. But unlike the Westminster type of Constitutions or even the
Indian Constitution, our republican Constitution, as stated earlier,

**340**

is a creation of the People in whom Sovereignty is vested. This Sovereignty is
exercised by the three, organs of State, including the President in the name
of the People on their mandate and as their agent. The President and the
Legislature must therefore hold that power and exercise it strictly in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution. Article 4, which spells
out the Sovereignty of the People, is worded as follows:

"4\. The Sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in the
following manner

(a) the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament,
consisting of selected representatives of the People and by the People at a
Referendum

(b) the executive power of the People, including the defence of Sri Lanka,
shall be exercised by the President of, the Republic elected by the People;

(c) the judicial power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament through
courts, tribunals and institutions created and established, or recognised, by
the Constitution, or created and established by law, except in regard to
matters relating to the privileges, immunities and powers of Parliament and of
its Members, wherein the judicial power of the People may be exercised
directly by Parliament according to law;

(d) the fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and
recognized shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of
government, and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the
manner and to the extent hereinafter provided; and

(e) the franchise shall be exercisable at the election of the President of the
Republic and of the Members of Parliament, and at every Referendum by every
citizen who has attained the age of eighteen yeas and who, being qualified to
be an elector as hereinafter provided has his name entered in the register of
electors."

**341**

The President is the Head of the State, the Head of, the Executive and of the
Government, and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces. Article 4 (b)
states that the executive power of the People, including the defence of Sri
Lanka, shall be exercised by the President. As Head of State, he is vested
with both ceremonial and executive functions. In addition, as the Head of the
Executive and of the Government, he combines certain active functions of
office. He is also actively involved in the Parliamentary process. Article 42
makes the President responsible to Parliament for the discharge of his duties.

Further, the Constitution in Chapter Vlll requires that "there shall be a
Cabinet of Ministers charged with the direction and control of the Government
of the Republic, which shall be collectively responsible and answerable to
Parliament." (Article 43 (1)). Article 43 (2) states that "the President shall
be a member of the Cabinet of Ministers, and shall be the Head of the Cabinet
of Ministers. " In this regard the President has the power of the Prime
Minister under a Westminster type of Constitution. He appoints both the Prime
Minister and the other Ministers. He assigns subjects and functions. The
President can assign to himself any subject or function and remain in charge
of any subject or function not assigned.

It is quite clear from the above provisions that the Cabinet of Ministers of
which the President is a component is an intergral part of the mechanism of
government and the distribution of the Executive power and any attempt to by-
pass it and exercise Executive powers without the valve and conduit of the
Cabinet would be contrary to the fundamental mechanism and design of the
Constitution. It could even be said that the exercise of Executive power by
the President is subject to this condition. The People have also decreed in
the Constitution that the Executive power can be distributed to the other
public officers only via the medium and mechanism of the Cabinet system. This
follows from the pattern of our Constitution modelled on the previous
Constitution, which is a Parliamentary democracy with a Cabinet system. The
provisions of the Constitution amply indicate that there cannot be a
government without a Cabinet. The Cabinet continues to function even during
the interregnum after Parliament is dissolved, until a new Parliament is
summoned. To take any other view is to sanction the possibility of
establishing a dictatorship in our country, with a one man rule.

**342**

Turning to the Legislative power of the People, the Constitution has
prescribed that it should be exercised by a Parliament consisting of elected
representatives of the People. It should be noted that Parliament itself is an
agent of the People. When questions on fundamental matters such as the
Sovereignty, the extent of legislative power, the power of amendment etc.
arise, there has been a divergence in approach among judges of countries
having the U. K. type of Constitution as against the American type of
Constitution. The governing factor in this issue appears to be the
identification of the source of the Sovereign power of the State. Where the
mandate theory or the principle of agency applies, courts have tended to limit
the powers and jurisdiction of the organs of, government and deny them plenary
powers unlike in the other type of case. It is interesting to find that Indian
judges and lawyers have often indiscriminately relied on decisions from both
jurisdictions without having regard to this significant difference in
fundamental principles in the two types of Constitutions. For example, Seervai
in his work "Constitutional law of India (3rd Edn.) at page 1849 makes the
following observation :-

6 "Equally, the theory that the legislature is a delegate of the people has no
application to our Constitution. No such theory applied to the legislatures
under the G.I. Act, 35, and the basic distribution of legislative powers
between Parliament and the State legislatures has been taken over by our
Constitution from the G. 1. Act, 35, with alterations not material to the
present argument. In any event, as we have seen, the doctrine of agency can
have no application to the members of a legislature. It is not surprising,
therefore, that our Constitution contains no provision corresponding to the
10th Amendment to the U. S. Constitution. Therefore a resort to American
decisions is not helpful because they are based on postulates which are
inapplicable to and are repudiated by, our Constitution "

The provisions in our law relating to the content and limitations of the
Legislative power of the People is contained in Articles 75 and 76 of the
Constitution. Article 75 appears at first blush to be plenary. It vests in
Parliament the power to make laws including retrospective legislation. It
empowers the repealing or amending of any law including those of the
Constitution or adding any provision thereto.

An examination of the proviso to Article 75 and Article 76 will at once show
that there is an inherent limitation on this power and the power is not
plenary. In this connection I mean Article 76 (1) and the

**343**

proviso to Article 75. These limitations are not merely a procedural bar to
legislation, but they appear to denude Parliament of legislative power and
make this a field which Parliament is incompetent and incapable of entering.
This does not appear to be the only limitation on the legislative power of
Parliament. Vide also the provisions of Articles 26.(4), 36.(2) and 93. If
this view is correct, this would mean that whatever be the extent of the
amending power, the relevant parts of Articles 75 and 76 cannot be amended or
repealed under the amending power.

Now Article 76. (1) states that Parliament shall not abdicate or in any manner
alienate its legislative power and shall not set up any authority with any
legislative powers. In legal parlance alienate" means any type of dealing or
disposal. In the present context it necessarily means the transfer of its
legislative power whether whole or partial in any manner. It cannot mean
anything else. The only exception to this is the power given to the President
to make emergency legislation, which is itself made subject to sufficient
control and supervision of the Legislature. While this exception allows
regulations having the force of law to be made it is a power strictly and
continuously controlled and monitored by Parliament and which Parliament can
recall at will. It is also necessitated by the highest interest, namely for
the protection of the State in a time of emergency. Article 76 (3) states that
the making of subordinate legislation would not be a contravention of the
provisions of Article 76 (1) relating to the abdication and alienation of the
legislative power.

The terminology describing such subordinate legislation is immaterial. They
are called by various names such as regulations, by-laws, orders, statutes,
etc., but the one characteristic about them is that they are not and cannot be
primary legislation, which only Parliament can enact. They cannot over-ride
primary legislation, but they can be over-ridden by such legislation: If the
impugned proposed legislation, is in reality of the character of subordinate
legislation, then this case would present no problems for us.

It is submitted by the propounders of the Bill that the Statutes made by the
Provincial Councils are in fact subordinate legislation, but Mr. Fernando said
that they are of a higher quality than by-laws. But what is strange is that at
the same time they submit that all those provisions that give a parity to such
Statutes with laws passed by Parliament and the entrenchment of such Law-
making power are consistent with that position.

**344**

The view that Statutes made by Provincial Councils constitute subordinate
legislation relies mainly, if not solely, on U.K. authorities. Therefore, it
is necessary to compare the legal position in Sri Lanka with those of U.K. and
other relevant countries to see the validity of that, argument.

In regard to the 'delegation' of legislative power, the U.S. has adopted one
approach and the U.K. and the Dominions another. The U.S. view is founded on
the theory of mandate which also applies to us and of the separation of powers
The position in the U.K. and Dominions is wholly different. While at times the
U.S. courts struck down all delegations of legislative power, the current view
is that delegation would be permissible where policies and standards have been
indicated by the Legislature. The U.S. courts are still inclined to strike
down delegations which are found to be "uncanalised, Uncontrolled and
vagrant".

In India, in some of the earlier cases, the Supreme Court inclined towards the
principles laid down in the American cases that delegation legislative power
was impermissible. In re Delhi Laws Act, A.I.R. 195:1 S.C. 332, the Supreme
Court held that the essential powers of legislation cannot be Negated. Both in
the above case and in Rajanarainsingh v. Chairman, Patna Administration
Committee, (1955) 1 S.C.R. 290, the Supreme Court has held that the
legislature cannot delegate to another authority the declaration of policy and
the laying down of standards or the power to repeal legislation. These
features are considered essential characteristics of legislative powers and
are non delegable. There has been however a slight shift in view in recent
times as shown in later decisions such as S. B. Dayal VUP, A.I.R. 1972 S.C.
1168, and N. K. Papiah v. Excise Commissioner, A.I.R. 1975 S.C. 1007. In the
latter case, in adopting a little more liberal stand, the court placed
particular stress on the provisions for effective Parliamentary control
including the power of repeal, which was provided for in the impunged
legislation. Commenting on this trend, Seervai in his latest edition at page
880 says :-

"With Papiah's Case, the return of the Supreme Court to the Privy Council view
is complete for it adopts the view forcibly expressed in Hodge v. R. that a
,legislature entrusting important regulations to agents does not efface itself
or abdicate its legislative power. The legislature retains its power intact
and can whenever it pleases, destroy it has created and set up another, or
take the matter directly into its own hands by exercising its undoubted power
to repeal, amend or vary a statute."

**345**

If we are to apply the principles applicable in the U. K. or even as laid down
in a modified way by the Indian Supreme Court these decisions being clearly
applicable to our situation then even with reference to Lists Nos. I and III,
any legislation made by a Provincial Council could be struck down for lack of
policy and guidelines. The submission that this result is avoided by reason of
Parliament retaining the power to legislate on National Policy is
misconceived. The fact is that 37 items with their sub-divisions have been
allocated to Provincial Councils to legislate without providing any guidelines
of policy.

Mr. Fernando relied on the first heading in List II "National Policy on all
subjects and functions and said that Parliament has reserved to itself the
right to lay down National Policy on any matter. This he says, meets the
charge that the delegated items in the Provincial List contain no guidelines.
At one stage there was a discussion as to whether the matter referred to above
is an item or a heading.

First let it be understood clearly that this item assuming it is such permits
only laying down National Policy and not legislating on the subject concerned
as such. It is very difficult to contemplate how effective this provision
would be in practice.

Let us take an example. There is item 29.1 relating to theatres, dramatic
performances, exhibition of films and public performances. Suppose the
Provincial Council snakes a law which is unpalatable to the Government and the
Government wants to lay down a policy on the matter. Suppose such a policy
statement is enacted. What is the effect of it? Since Article 154G (6) would
not apply to such a case-it applies only to the Concurrent List the policy
enactment would have no effect. It would be so in every case.

Further, 1 do not think that a declaration of policy after the Provincial
Council had enacted a Provincial statute can go to cure the illegality of the
delegated law which was permissible at the time of enactment.

In the U.K., which enjoys the supremacy of Parliament, the courts allow what
is described as "conditional legislation. One of the leading cases enunciating
this principle is hex v. Burah, [1878] 3 A.C. 829. In this case the Governor-
General, in the exercise of powers vested in by section 8, Garo Mills Act
(which had been duly passed by the Governor - General in Council), extended
the Act to another district.

**346**

When action was taken under the extended law, it was challenged as ultra
vices, and as an improper delegation of legislative power. The Privy Council
held-

(1) that the Act had been passed in the due and ordinary course of
legislation. -

(2) the Indian Legislator which passed the Act had plenary powers and was in
no sense an agent or delegate of the Imperial Parliament.

(3) In enacting that Act "the proper legislature has exercised its judgment as
to place, person, laws, powers and the result of that judgment has been to
legislate conditionally as to all those things. The conditions having been
fulfilled, the legislation is now complete.

But that is the furthest the U.K. courts have gone. In re the initiative and
Referendum Act [1919] A.C. 935, an Act contained machinery for making laws. It
provided, inter alia, that alternate to the normal procedure where the
Lt.-Governor enacted legislation, a law can be submitted to the voters and it
would come into operation on their approval. The Privy Council held that this
machinery was in effect the setting up of a different legislative apparatus
than that provided by the Constitution. In distinguishing this case from a
case of delegation, the Privy Council observed.

"It was argued. . . that a Legislature committing important regulations to
agents or delegates effaced itself. That is not so. It retains its powers-
intact and can, whenever it pleases, destroy the agency it has created and set
up another or take the matter directly into its own-hands."

Hodge v. Rex, [1883] 9 A.C. 117;

Cobb v. Kropp, [1967] 1 A.C. 141.

Those who support the Bills have relied heavily on the U.K. law and U.K.
precedents. They however have little relevance to, our situation. Shukla, a
well known writer on the Indian Constitution, in his work has contrasted the
U.K. and the Indian positions in this regard. About the U.K. he states at page
456

"In England, on the, other hand, there is no written Constitution
circumscribing the powers of Parliament, which in the eyes of law is
sovereign. The British Constitution has entrusted to the two Houses of
Parliament, subject to the assent of the King, an absolute

**347**

power untrammelled by any written instrument obedience to which may be
compelled by some judicial body. 'Parliament may accordingly delegate to any
extent its powers' of law-making to an outside authority. As a matter of law,
Parliament may surrender all its power in favour of another body as it
actually did in 1807 when the English and Scottish Parliament passed Acts of
Union providing for the coming into existence of a new body, Parliament of
Great Britain. The limits of delegated legislation in the English
Constitution, if there are to be any, must, therefore, remain a question of
policy and not a justiciable issue for the courts.'

This is sufficient to dispose of the Attorney-General's arguments where he
relied strongly on developments in the U.K., particularly Scotland and Wales.
He particularly stressed the case of Northern Ireland and its Act of 1920
which, as far as I am aware has hardly ever figured in formulating these
Bills.

Even if Hodge's Case applies to our situation, could it seriously be said that
in relation to Provincial Councils, Parliament has retained its powers intact
and "whenever it please" it can withdraw the delegated power? Factually
speaking even the President has said recently that under the proportionate
representation scheme, no political party would be able to secure anything
more than a 'bare majority in the future.

What is described as conditional or contingent legislation is included in the
category of subordinate legislation. Conditional or contingent legislation is
described as "a statute that provides control but specifies that it is to come
into effect only when a given administrative authority finds the existence of
conditions defined in the statute". This is best illustrated in the case of
Field v. Clark, 143 U.S. 649 where the President was authorised by
proclamation to suspend the operation of an Act duly passed by Congress which
permitted free introduction into the U.S. of certain products upon his finding
that the duties imposed upon the products of the U.S. were reciprocally
unequal and unreasonable. The Supreme Court held the Proclamation valid on the
ground that the President was the mere agent of Congress to ascertain an
declare the contingency upon which the will of Congress

**348**

was to act was not legislative in character. It quoted with approval of the
following dicta in Looke's Appeal, 72 Pa. 491, which the Court said enunciated
the correct principle

"The Legislature cannot delegate its power to make a law; but it can make a
law to delegate a power to determine some fact or state of things upon which
the law intends to make its own action depend."

There appears to be a clear distinction between conditional legislation and
"delegation". Explaining this difference in terminology, Seervai at page 1848
says:

"Counsel and judges in the courts below had spoken of the powers so conferred,
as involving a. 'delegation' of legislative power counsel arguing before the
Privy Council had spoken likewise. The Privy Council however consistently
upheld these powers as 'conditional' legislation or spoke of the delegation of
'so-called legislative powers'. Kania C. J. strongly emphasized this fact to
show that the Privy Council did not uphold the 'delegation' of legislative
power. It is difficult to believe that judges and counsel spoke one language
and the, Privy Council spoke another. It is submitted that the explanation
lies in the fact that the word 'delegation' has more than one meaning and the
Privy Council did not indicate the sense in which it used the word
'delegation'. However, in R. v. Sibnath Banerji Lord Thankerton, in another
context, defined the word 'delegation' in the strict sense of the word, and
that definition explains why the Privy Council consistently spoke of
'conditional' and not-'delegated' legislation. He said:

Their Lordships would also add, on this contention, that sub-s. (5) of s.2 (of
the Defence of India Act,1939) provides a means of delegation in the strict
sense of the word, namely a transfer of the power or duty to the officer or
authority defined in the sub-section, with a corresponding divestiture of the
Governor of any responsibility in the matter, whereas under s.49, sub-s. (1),
of the (G.I.) Act of 1935 the Governor remains responsible for the action of
his subordinates taken in his name"

This would explain why the word "delegate' in the collation of words may not
abdicate, delegate or in any manner alienate" in Article 45. (1) of the 1972
Republican Constitution was not retained in Article

**349**

6(1) of the present Constitution. Mr. Fernando and Dr. Jayewardene argued that
the deletion of the word "delegate" has now resulted in confining the
prohibition to abdication and alienation only. On the contrary the presence of
the word "delegate" would have given room to counsel to argue that even the
stricter, type of delegation was permissible and I think it was rightly
removed in the present context.

Finally on this matter it is necessary to dispose of another of Mr. Fernando's
submissions. Mr. Fernando submitted that the Bill does not contain an unlawful
delegation of legislative power to Provincial Councils and the provisions in
the Bill are consistent with Article 76(3). It was based on an argument that
took us back in constitutional history to the Republican Constitutions of 1972
and even to the Soulbury Constitution.

It was his contention that the present Democratic Socialist Constitution is a
direct successor and heir of the previous Socialist Democratic Constitution of
1972. That the legislative power Parliament enjoys now is identical with that
of the previous Constitutions because the present Constitution was enacted
under the amending provisions of the previous Constitutions. He also said that
the legislative powers of the two legislations were the same and there is no
room for a concept of "constituent" power to be brought in when interpreting
t66 new Constitution.

If I remember right, Mr. Fernando even said that a "legislative judgment"
would be permissible under these provisions. Such an interpretation would be
reactionary and would mean going back not merely two decades to a Constitution
which this country rejected but to the precolonial days and to the sixteenth
century "to which he had gone in search of authority.

Although the present Constitution was enacted taking advantage of a procedure
in the 1972 Constitution, which was specifically repealed, the present
Constitution is a new one and has brought about radical changes. It is
unnecessary to enumerate the great improvements that have been introduced, but
one fact that needs emphasis is that the present Constitution is intended to
be firmly rooted in the will of the People and the power of the organs of
Government flow from the People and the organs are agents of the People and
hold their mandate. In the written submissions this position as been conceded.
See also the resounding and unequivocal declaration of the Preamble.

**350**

Another erroneous view stemming from this is his contention that fetters on
the amending power of Parliament are found in federal constitutions and not in
unitary ones. If he is having in mind the U. K. "Constitution" as compared
with the Indian Constitution, such a difference could be found. But the
difference does not lie in one being unitary and the other federal; but in one
being rigid and the other flexible. The English cases interpreting the written
Constitutions of Dominions and States show that this is the governing factor
and not the one suggested by Mr. Fernando.

Mr. Fernando has supported, his submissions by decisions of the old
Constitutional Court interpreting the 1972 Constitution. They could have no
application to the problem before us, and further I have shown earlier why the
word 'delegate' was omitted from the present Constitution in Article 76.

I have also shown earlier that the bringing into operation by a subordinate
authority of a law made by the proper legislature in prescribing a date for
the cessation of operation does not involve the exercise. of legislative
power. It only involves the determination of a fact or state of things upon
which the law will come into operation or cease. This is the true effect of-
the provisions of clauses (a) and (b) of Article 76. These powers are
subordinate in nature and cannot be used as examples of the true legislative
power which has been delegated to the State.

This seems also to be a convenient place to deal with a connected submission
made by Mr. Fernando. He stated with particular reference to the provisions
of, Article 154G(2) and (3) that once the legislative power is referred back
to the People the source there could be, no invalidity because it would really
bean enlargement and the strengthening of the People's power. I have said
earlier that this is fallacious and arises from a failure to understand the
basic principles that underlie constituent and legislative powers and the
power of amendment, the limitations of manner and form in a Constitution that
has rigidity.

Now I come back to Article 76. It enjoins that Parliament shall not make any
law in respect of the following:-

(1) Abdication of its legislative power

(2) In any manner alienate its legislative power;

(3) Set up any authority with any legislative power.

**351**

Having regard to the wording of Article 76(1)-and there is a similar concept
elsewhere (vide proviso to Article 75) it is possible to argue, (and it was
touched upon but not developed), that these provisos go to the very competence
of Parliament. It is a limitation on the legislative power marking out its
range and extent. If this position is correct no legislation even by a two-
thirds majority and a Referendum can cure this lack of capacity.

This seems also a convenient point to deal with another submission that was
mentioned in the course of the hearing, namely, that since Article 4(a) states
that the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by the Legislature
and the People and any law that would provide for a Referendum would not
violate the constitutional provisions, since Sovereignty is in the People and
an appeal to the People can never derogate from that Sovereignty. As it was
said in the course of the argument, the People as a rabble cannot exercise the
legislative power of the People. It must be the People at a Referendum
following the proper constitutional procedure. Such a Referendum must arise
from a situation where the constitutional procedures have been, faithfully
followed and not in spite of them. Where there are violations of the
Constitution, it is no argument to say that all that would be covered by
reason of a provision for a Referendum. Such a misconception is due to the
failure to distinguish clearly between the original constitutional power, the
amending power and the power of ordinary legislation, and the form and manner
of exercising legislative power. In a rigid Constitution the composition of
Parliament and the procedures must be distinguished from the area power. "The
law existing for the time being is supreme when it prescribes the condition
which must be fulfilled to make a law But on the question what may be done by
a law so made, Parliament is supreme over the law."

It is amply shown in the present case that Provincial Councils

(a) makes statutes which enjoy at the least parity with laws made by
Parliament;

(b) can enact statutes that can suspend and render inoperative laws made by
Parliament;

(c) have plenary power to make statutes in respect of the items in List in
respect of matters in the Provincial List;

(d) have a Concurrent List with Parliament and are placed on terms of
equality: and that

**352**

(e) the Thirteenth Amendment which provides for this arrangement and the lists
distributing the legislative power is sought to be entrenched: and that.

(f) Parliament has disabled itself by placing fetters upon itself in the
exercise of legislative power and in particular has provided the need for a
two-thirds majority and a Referendum to enact legislation.

Regarding the last item, I wish to state that what Parliament has sought to do
is place the legislative powers of Provincial Councils as far beyond its reach
as possible. While a Provincial Council with a simple majority can legislate
on those matters, Parliament which originally had this power of legislation
and which it could have done by a bare majority has now prescribed not merely
the need for a two-thirds majority but the addition of a Referendum too. This
is undoubtedly a renunciation and alienation of its plenary powers over
legislation. This indicates that the new legislative structure is placed on a
par with the most basic features of, the Constitution.

In Article 76 (1) the injunction is in any manner alienate". Both a temporary
alienation and a permanent alienation fall within this prohibition. So does an
alienation of a part or the whole On this analysis one could not but come to
the conclusion that what is sought to be granted to a Provincial Council is
riot the type of conditional legislation mentioned in Article 76 (3) (a) or
(b), but full-blooded legislative power:

Applying the ordinary principles of interpretation, if any, "delegated"
legislation is not saved by the exceptions in subsections (2) and (3) of
Article 76, such exercise of legislative power has necessarily to fall within
the prohibition contained in Article 76(1). Such an exercise of legislative
power is impermissible in the face of Article 76(1) and would be void.

Next the judicial power of the State may be considered. Although it is not
specifically mentioned in Article 3, it is one of the powers of Government and
spelled out in Article 4(c). Justice and the Independence of the Judiciary are
also mentioned in the Preamble as the intangible heritage that has helped the
creation and preservation of a just and free society. We have, as stated
earlier, in previous determinations held that any interference with the
judical power would require the special procedure required by Article 83 and
involve the approval of the People at a Referendum.

**353**

The other feature of government that requires mentioning here that, would
require the special, procedure set, out in Article 83 is any interference with
the franchise. Vide SD. 5/80 where we, held that a Bill that affected the
franchise cannot be passed without approval by the People at a Referendum.

The Indian Constitution provides for a federal structure with a strong centre.
The Indian proposals acceded to by us Clearly indicate a shift in views, no
doubt under pressure tilting the scales in favour of the Tamil demands for
autonomy. In fact some of those proposals go beyond what is found in the
Indian Constitution and is intended to give even a greater autonomy to the
Provincial Council than that obtaining to the States in India. All the
proposals of the Indian Government go to reinforce the position of Provincial
Councils, extend its powers and entrench its legal structure. With this
background indicating the strong pressures for taking the federal Indian
Constitution as a model, let me now proceed to an examination of the
Thirteenth Amendment and where necessary the Provincial Councils Bill which is
supplementary to it.

Dr. Jayewardene who appeared for His Excellency supporting the Bill traced
with his usual thoroughness the historical background regarding the evolution
of the present Provincial and administrative units from the time of the
cession of the Kandyan Kingdom. He also brought to our notice material from
the late colonial period showing suggestions and even agitation for regional
administration. In 1926 Mr. S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike, at the beginning of his
political career, had advocated a system of federation for administrative
purposes. The Kandyans had suggested three regional units in which, as my
brother observed, the Muslim community had been overlooked.

It would appear that with the dawn of independence the thinking of the
politicians underwent radical change. When faced with the task of winning
elections and running a government, and with realities and practical problems,
it is natural that nearly all of them had to adapt themselves to the changing;
situations in the interests of the country and for their own political
survival and future. So we see many of them going back on their views on many
important issues, some completely reversing the opinions they had held
earlier.

I do not think that we could attribute any, great importance to any particular
statement or to any particular individual in this regard. But that material is
helpful as indicating a line of development making for

**354**

greater decentralising of the administration which has found expression in
Article 27(4) of the Directive Principles of State Policy in Chapter VI of the
present Constitution.

Dr. Jayewardene developed another line of argument which was most interesting
and sought to blend it with the above. The provision in the Directive
Principles, he said, goes back to a similar provision in the 1972 Republican
Constitution which was based on Marxist thinking. The decentralisation of
administration and the granting of regional autonomy is a phenomenon of
Marxist States. He referred to the Constitutions of the Peoples Republic of
China, Mongolia and Rumania to illustrate this. Dr. Jayewardene submitted that
this was the genesis of the. Sills and made no reference to the Accord, which
incidentally is referred to in the Provincial Councils Bill.

Dr. Jayewardene next went on to examine item by item in List No. 1, which is
the Provincial Council List. He submitted that there is nothing of any
national importance included in that list but they all related to matters of a
regional nature, properly entrusted to a regional authority.

While I can agree with Dr. Jayewardene with regard to most of those items,
there are a few which do not appear to fit into the pattern outlined by him.
Further, the list cannot be considered in isolation without having regard to a
number of other features in the Bill which affect the Constitution on basic
matters. I have dealt with most of these matters elsewhere. Briefly the
position to be that, in spite of all the good intentions of the Government we
have to decide the legal question as to the extent of the powers, both legal
and executive, which have been devolved on Provincial Councils and whether
that has the effect of making them so autonomous as to derogate from the
unitary character of our Constitution. All those matters are dealt with In the
rest of my order.

But, before I proceed, a few words may be said about the Directive Principles
of State Policy; relied on by Dr. Jayewardene, Mr. Fernando and Mr. Choksy,

**355**

Much stress was laid on the Directive Principles of State Policy. Chapter VI
by most counsel supporting the Bill. They rely in particular on Article 27(4),
which states that-

"The State shall strengthen and broaden the democratic structure of Government
and the Democratic rights of the People by decentralising the administration
and by affording all possible opportunities to the People to participate at
every level in national life and in government."

It may be observed that this refers to the decentralisation of the
administration. It does not mean the decentralisation of power or the
government. It cannot possibly be interpreted to derogate from other
provisions of the Constitution. In fact Article 29 makes this clear. These
rights are not justiciable and confer no rights or impose no obligations.
Besides, some of these. provisions overlap and even contradict each other Vide
Article 29(3).

While the Indian Courts have leaned on these principles to resolve matters of
doubt, I do not think that they should have any controlling effect on any
provision of the Constitution. These Directive Principles are really ethical
or moral principles to guide the State. If any kind of legal importance is to
be given to them, this would make the constitution unworkable. Seervai on a
critical analysis of the Chapter on Directive Principles and the Indian case
law confirms this view. Vide. Seervai, pp. 1577-1695.

Mr. Goonesekera in his reply stated that the emphasis and reliance placed on
Article 27(4) is unjustified because the actual reason for these Bills lies,
elsewhere and is clearly mentioned in the Bills themselves. They have little
connection with Article 27(4).

A considerable portion of time was spent in the arguments in unravelling the
somewhat unusual two sentences that are at the head of the new Chapter XVIIA.
It was in the absence of an appropriate term called for convenience, the
Preamble. It is not numbered. Mr. Mark Fernando who supported the Bills
conceded that it seeks to give precedence to this new Chapter over all the
other provisions of the constitution except the entrenched Articles. He also
submitted that this is a pure and simple interpretation Article and pointed to
other articles such as Article 82(6), 84(3) and 26(6) to show that such a
provision is consistent With the constitutional provisions.

**356**

After the, ingenuity of counsel was exercised on, this provision, it appears
to emerge that this provision, is both contradictory and misconceived. By
seeking to give it a preferred status it contravenes the guarantees and
protections given in the Constitution. It is stated to be subject to the
Constitution but is meant to override the very constitutional provisions. It
contravenes the provisions of Article 83. This Provision is not a defining or
exclusion Article like the Articles relied on in support of it, but an
interpretative Article. Here the Legislature has indicated to court how a
conflict of law, namely contradictory provisions of the Constitutions should
be decided. This is an exercise of judicial power. Its purpose seems to be to
avoid the Bill going before the People at a Referendum for approval. How
misconceived the provision is, can be seen by the fact that such a provision
can never properly appear in a Bill because we are empowered in the exercise
of our constitutional power to decide this very question. The question cannot
be foreclosed without repealing our judicial power.

This unnumbered Article which begins Chapter XVIIA recites the Article
mentioned in Article 83. But Supreme Court decisions and determinations have
interpreted some of these provisions so as to include certain other provisions
and features of the Constitution, for example the Judicial power is not
mentioned in the above specified Articles. There are also, as indicated
earlier, a number of other features and concepts that go to ensure the
Sovereignty of the People. There is the Cabinet system of Government, the
question of the content and limits of the legislative power and the power-of
delegation. None of these Articles and features would be included on an
ordinary and literal reading of the above amending provision. But according to
the interpretation placed on the relevant provisions by the Supreme Court;
Articles 1, 2 and 3 would incorporate by inference all these features.

In view of the above circumstances; a literal reading of the words of the
opening paragraph but save as aforesaid nothing contained in the Constitution
or any other law in force on the date on which this Chapter comes into force
shall be interpreted as derogating from the, provisions of this Chapter do hot
reflect the legal position accurately. It is a misleading statement. On a
literal reading and without reference to the Supreme Court decisions. one can
come to the conclusion that the constitutional provisions and features of a
fundamental nature

**357**

which are linked to those Articles though not specifically mentioned are being
sought to be amended without adopting the special procedure indicated in
Article 83. If the literal meaning has to be given to this clause, then this
would amount to an amendment or repeal of a provision relating to the
Sovereignty of the People and would require the approval of the People at a
Referendum. Further, if the paragraph is intended to preclude the exercise in
interpretation which is solely vested in the Supreme Court, this involves also
an unlawful interference with the judicial power.

Article 15A provides for the establishment of Provincial Councils consisting
of elected members for the nine Provinces specified in the Eighth Schedule.
Sub-section (3) of Article 154A enables Parliament by law to provide for two
or three adjoining Provinces to form one administrative unit with one elected
Provincial Council. This is connected to section 37, of the Provincial
Councils Bill and would be dealt with later

Each Provincial Council is an administrative unit duplicating more or less a
Cabinet system of Government a Provincial Council and a Governor as its head.
These provisions follow close the pattern and provisions of the Indian
Constitution in its relation to the States except for a few variations.

We may properly begin with the Governor. Article 154B states that he shall be
appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and shall hold office in
accordance with Article 4 (b) during the pleasure of the President. This is
not an appointment but a de-routing or relinquishing of the Executive power
committed to the President and is illegal. The Governor has the usual powers
of summoning, proroguing and dissolving the Provincial Council as in a
Westminster type of Constitution.

The Governor's Executive power is co-extensive and coterminous in breadth with
the law-making power of the Council- Article 54C. This Provision is not a
defining or exclusion Article like the Articles the area, of the concurrent
powers, He has to act on the advice of the Board of Ministers except in
relation to his limited discretionary powers. The Board of Ministers is headed
by a Chief Minister and consists of not more than four other Ministers, all of
Whom are appointed by the Governor on the advice of the Chief Minister.
Article

**358**

154C states that the Executive power of the Governor shall be exorcised either
directly or through Ministers of the Board of Ministers or through officers
subordinate to him in accordance with Article 154F.

It is evident from the brief provisions relating to the Governor that he is an
officer to whom the Executive power of the People is purported to be directly
delegated. (use the word "directly" also in another sense, for if it is
considered as an appointment by the President, this delegation has by-passed
the existing Cabinet machinery. If the Cabinet system is fundamental to our
system of government, then this delegation end relationship between the
President and the Governor both ways is wholly illegal. It violates a basic
feature of our Constitution, namely, government with the aid of the Cabinet
and Parliament. Such a fundamental change can only be effected by a Bill
passed in terms of Article 83, with the approval of the People at a
Referendum. Again, Article 154H (4) which vests the President with a
discretion in deciding whether or not to refer a question of the validity of a
Statute of the Provincial Council to the Supreme Court is the vesting of a
discretion regarding the exercise of judicial power. It is in effect an
exercise of judicial power by an executive officer. This also makes the Bill
inconsistent with the Constitution, requiring that it be passed in terms of
Article 83. If, as indicated earlier, the procedure indicated in Article 154H
(4) is the only permitted procedure for challenging the validity of a Statute,
then the position can be much worse, because the entire constitutional
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court has been repealed.

It is also possible to regard the purported delegation of power by the
President to the governor to be illusory and spurious. The President exercises
the Executive powers of the State as an agent or trustee of the People.
Although he is permitted to delegate it to the Cabinet and subordinate public
officers, I do not think he is authorised to alienate or abandon or renounce
it. In reality this is what is sought to be done in this case. The Governor to
whom the Executive power in the Province in delegated is an appointee of the
President and can really exercise on his own behalf or on behalf of the
President only the, discretionary powers vested in him and not the larger
powers purported to be vested in him.

**359**

In regard to the substantive Executive powers falling to the lot of the
governor, these constitute decisions of the Board of Ministers which he is
bound in taw to accept and sanction He has no choice and is given no
discretion in the matter, The Chief Minister and the other Ministers are no
doubt also appointed by him acid even in this instance Article 154F(4) shows
that where the party system operates and a party obtains a majority in the
Provincial Council elections, the governor has no option but to appoint the
leader of that political party as the Chief Minister and his nominees as the
other Ministers. These appointments are in fact non-governmental appointments
and the Governor merely sanctions what the law has provided for. The
Legislature cannot exercise the Executive power either. So in reality, the
substantive Executive power exercised in a Provincial Council emanates and is
created from below and does not in fact constitute a devolution of power
coming from above from the President. The executive, power relating to a
Provincial Council is therefore broken at a dividing point, one purporting to
devolve from the President and the other arising. from the elected members of
the Provincial Council The effect of this is that such executive power vested
in the President is relinquished and a complex arrangement devised to cover up
and cloud, the real nature of the transaction. If the Executive power of the
People can be renounced in this manner," serious questions regarding the
proper administration? of the country could arise. At the bare minimum,
legislation permitting such a renunciation must have the approval of the
People at a Referendum. Mr. Gunasekera presented his argument on somewhat the
same tines, but preferred to describe it as a sharing of the Executive power,
with non-governmental authority which is contrary to the Constitution.

A provincial Council consists of a specified number of elected members. There
is special provision for an existing member of Parliament of an electorate
failing within the area of a provincial Council to participate and vote at a
meeting on a resolution of the Provincial Council. Such a provision affects
both the franchise and the equality provision doubly so if the Northern and
Eastern Provinces become one unit.

A provincial Council is vested with Legislative power. It is empowered to
enact statutes applicable to the province with respect to specified matters.
These are set out in List No. I the Provincial Council List set out in the
Ninth Schedule Article 154G.(1).

**360**

Article 154G (7) states that a Provincial Council shall have no power to make
statutes on any matter set out in List II called the Reserved List. This list
was embodied in consequence of the proposal contained the Draft Framework of
Accord and Understanding initiated on 30.08.1985 and repeated later on 23rd
September 1986 that for the removal of doubts, the subjects and functions that
would be exclusively reserved for Parliament are specified in Annexure II".
So, in effect, We are left with two exclusive lists and a third Concurrent
List.

List No III is called the Concurrent List. Article 154G.(5)(a) states that
Parliament can make laws with respect to matters in this list "after such
consultation with all Provincial Councils as Parliament may such consider
appropriate in the circumstances of each case. Similarly, Article 154G (5)(6)
states that a Provincial Council can make law in respect of such matters
"after such consultation with Parliament as it may consider appropriate in the
circumstances of each case". It is difficult to understand what is meant by
consultation with Parliament It can only mean a resolution of Parliament by a
majority vote in the result the powers of Parliament can be eroded and such
powers given to, a Provincial Council on a mere majority vote. The wording of
the two Article's is identical n substance and quality and gives a parity to
the two authorities as regards law-making power and places a fetter on
Parliament's plenary power, of Legislature, because this is a condition
precedent to the exercise of legislative powers.

It has been sought to entrench this division of legislative power and to give
it permanency and put it beyond constitution al amendment by requiring the
rigid procedure of a Referendum. Here too would be observed the fettering of
the plenary law-making powers of Parliament the adoption of a procedure.
involving the consent of persons and authorities outside Parliament before
passing a law. But more significant is the requirement for a Referendum.

Article 1546 (2) states that a Bill for the amendment or repeal of the
Thirteenth Amendment or the Ninth Schedule cannot be passed unless -

(a) referred by the President before it is placed on the Order Paper of
Parliament to every Provincial Council,

(b) every Provincial Council agrees to the amendment or repeal

**361**

Where one or more Provincial Councils do not agree, it has to be passed by a
two-thirds majority and approved by the People at a Referendum.

Article 154G(3) contains a similar provision prohibiting Parliament from
passing any Bill in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Councils
List. Here too, if any one Provincial Council disagrees, it will have to be
passed by a two-thirds majority and approved by the People at a Referendum.

Mr. Mark Fernando and Mr. Crossette Thambiah tried to make out that the vice,
if any, in this provision is the requirement of a Referendum. It was also
suggested that such a requirement was legally valid, because it was within the
competence of Parliament. They gave the example that a Bill enacted by a
special majority of 2/3 could entrench itself further with a requirement that
it could only be amended by a 3/4 or 5/6 majority. If such a thing is possible
then the result-would be to alter the particular structure of the Constitution
now existing, which the People have given to the country it is the People who
can re-structure he Constitution, not one organ of the State like the
Legislature. The Legislature can only amend the Constitution according to the
terms of the Constitution and, since such an exercise involves the amending
power, it cannot be done in the manner suggested.

To illustrate this further, can a Bill which is passed by only a two-thirds
majority (and where the background material shows that very effort has been
made to refrain from having it passed by way of a Referendum) prescribe that
it can be amended or repealed by a procedure of greater rigidity, namely, by
way of Referendum. In simple terms, can a Bill, for example passed as ordinary
legislation by a bare majority, prescribe that it could be repealed or amended
only by a two thirds majority? Surely not if it were otherwise, this would
mean that the structure of the amending power and the legislative power Now
existing (which are part and parcel of the basic structure of the Constitution
and upon which, a number of provisions, both of fundamental nature and
otherwise; have been framed) would undergo immediate transformation, radically
altering the structure and nature of the present Constitution. It is also
indeed strange to find that at the same time a few provisions of this
Thirteenth Amendment, which is sought to be entrenched, are permitted to be
amended or affected by ordinary legislation enacted by parliament or even by
Order of the President. Vide List No.1 and Schedules.

**362**

But the most important objection to the provisions of Article 154G (2) and (3)
is the attempt to add it to the provisions of the entrenching Article 83. As
Mr. Goonesekere and Mr. Iriyagolle submitted, the argument that this cannot be
done except by a two-thirds majority and with the approval of the People at a
Referendum; is unanswerable.

With the division of the Legislative power, it is natural that provision would
have to be made for resolving conflicts between statutes made by a Provincial
Council within its domain and laws whether already existing or subsequently
made by Parliament. The problem becomes one of great delicacy when this
overlapping takes place in regard to matters in the Concurrent List. We find
the following provisions for the resolution of such conflicts:

Article 154G (6).-This is a general provision and the effect of this is that a
Provincial Council must confine itself to matters in its list and if it were
to make a statute which is inconsistent with a law otherwise made in
accordance with the Provisions of the Thirteenth Amendment, i.e. List III, the
Provisions of the law would prevail.

Article 1 54G (8).-This deals with a conflict between a Statute of a
Provincial Council and an existing law in regard to a matter on the Provincial
Council List. This subsection states that that law will so long only as that
Statute is in force remain suspended and be inoperative within that Province".

Article 154G (9) -Similarly, this deals with a conflict between a Statute made
by a Provincial Council and an existing law in regard to a matter on the
Concurrent List. This provision states "that law shall, unless Parliament by
Resolution decides to the contrary, remain suspended and be inoperative within
that Province ......

There appears, however, to be no provision for the case of a conflict between
a Provincial Statute made under List I being inconsistent with a law newly
enacted by Parliament under its powers re List ll. It would be noted that
Article 154G (6) applies only to the conflicts with the Concurrent List.

These Provisions give an insight into the nature and quality of the
legislation made by Provincial Councils. Could there be any doubt that
Statutes made by Provincial Councils have the dignity and quality of

**363**

primary legislation. There is no way to regard them as subordinate
legislation. There are a number of other provisions in this Thirteenth
Amendment corroborating this view. Vide Articles 154G(4), 1541(b), 154M and
154S.

I do not think that it can be seriously contended that the provisions of
Article -154G (10) negative this. This subsection is worded as follows:

"(10) Nothing in this Article shall be read or construed as derogating from
the powers confined in Parliament by the Constitution to make laws in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution (inclusive of this Chapter)
with respect to any matter for the whole of Sri Lanka or any part thereof."

If it were not for the words bracketed, this provision could have, to a great
extent, preserved the plenary legislative power of Parliament. The bracketed
words however make it clear that the legislative power has now to be exercised
having regard to and in the manner now provided by the Thirteenth Amendment.
This would be strictly on the basis of the Lists. The ultimate effect of this
provision is to confirm the division of the legislative power and at the most
emphasise the island-wide legislative powers of Parliament in respect of other
matters, e.g. We Article 154G (11), 154L. Vide List II item "All Subjects and
Functions not specified in List I or List ill including ...., which means that
any subject or function not specified in the list would be considered as a
power of the central Parliament.

There could be discrimination in regard to the franchise, where only some
members of Parliament may be granted the right of participating and voting at
meetings of the Provincial Councils. The right and privilege of some members
of Parliament are devalued as against other members by reason of two or three
Provinces (especially in the case of the interim arrangement for the North and
East) being constituted into one administrative unit. The right of the
franchise means the right to exercise that right on terms of equality with
others and that right of equality must be carried over also to those members
of Parliament so elected. In the result, one voter or member of Parliament is
afforded a greater right than another. Clearly in the instance mentioned, the
two situations are not identical and equal. Both the franchise and the
essential fundamental right the right of equality have been contravened. An
amendment of this nature can only be passed by a two-thirds majority and the
approval of the People.

**364**

Article 9 states that -

The Republic of Sri Lanka shall give to Buddhism the foremost place and
accordingly it shall be the duty of the State to protect and foster the Buddha
Sasana while assuring to all religions the rights granted by Articles 10 and
14(1)(e).

This entrenched Article enjoins the State to

(a) give to Buddhism the foremost place;

(b) to protect, and

(c) foster the Buddha Sasana;

(d) assure to all other religions, the rights contained in Articles 10 and 14.
(1)(e).

The expression Buddha Sasana" was advisedly substituted for the word
"Buddhism" which was used in the corresponding Article of the 1972 Republican
Constitution. The new expression is a compendious term encompassing all
ancient, historic and sacred objects and places which have from ancient times
been or are associated with the religious practices and worship of Sinhala
Buddhists. This court has in an earlier case expressed such a general opinion.
There is no dispute that the 276 places and sites shown in the Archaeological
Map produced are of this category, except that Dr. Jayewardene said that a few
of them could be non-religious sites and others may be in private hands.

It has been submitted by a number of Buddhist institutions and persons that
the result of this legislation would be to place such holy places, too
numerous to mention, under the control of the Provincial Councils.
Apprehension is felt about the fate of these places in the Provincial Council
intended for the Northern and Eastern Provinces.

In the written submissions filed by the Y.M.B.A., it has stated (para. 9)-

...........that during the period; of nearly two decades immediately
preceding- this date there has been a studied and sedulous campaign by anti-
Sinhala elements to obliterate all traces of places of ancient Buddhist
worship in these two provinces.

**365**

There is documentation provided in respect of two such place s. in the Report
of the Presidential Commission, chaired by retired Chief Justice M. C.
Sansoni, this complaint was inquired into and it had occasion to observe that
(page 293)-

"The widespread damage done to temples and sacred places during the
disturbances and for some time prior to 1977 has revealed the need for early
action to be taken by the Police and all the appropriate Government
authorities to prevent a grave situation arising. It has been shown that
complaints made to the authorities over the damage done to Bo-trees at
Trincomalee and Kilivedy went unheeded until those trees were completely
destroyed. It is to the credit of the adherents of Buddhism-that they
exercised restraint in the face of grave provocation:"

In the Provincial Councils List No.1, item 25:2 is as follows :-

" Ancient and historical monuments and records other than those declared by or
under law made by Parliament to be of national importance."

The Reserved or the Central List. No. 11 contains the following entry:

"National Archives, Archaeological Activities and Sites and Antiquities
declared by or under any law made by Parliament to be of National importance."

This would include

"ancient and historical monuments and records and archaeological sites and
remains declared by or under law, made by Parliament to be of national
importance."

We also see the following entry in the Concurrent List No. III:-

"Archaeological sites and remains; other than those declared by or under any
law made by Parliament to be of national importance: -"

It is apparent that there is considerable overlapping in these items and what
counsel said that the Lists will prove to be a lawyer's paradise, is born out
when we look at examples Such as this. Mr. Mark Fernando conceded that these
provisions need clarification to allay the fears of the Sinhala Buddhists Dr.
Jayewardene also conceded the responsibility and the duty of the State under
Article.9 in this regard which he submitted remain unaffected.

**366**

Be that as it may, upon the enactment of this legislation, Provincial Councils
- we are concerned particularly with those in the Northern and Eastern
Provinces would be empowered to legislate in respect of those shrines. These
lists are entrenched. Up to now Parliament has not declared any one or more of
these places to be of national importance. There is no indication that this is
being done and even if so, which of those shrines and how many would come
under such protection.

What is before us now is the existence of a power in a Provincial Council to
make statutes for those shrines and places of worship When such statutes are
enacted, they would suspend and make inoperative existing law-Article 1546(8).
Also it could lead to a contradiction in the application of the Provisions of
Article 1546(3) and Article 1546(7). If Parliament thereafter seeks to
legislate in respect of the above item, the provisions of Article 154F(3) make
either the consent of all the Provincial Councils or a Referendum imperative.
Thus for all practical purposes, these places would be at the mercy of
Provincial Council legislation.

The result of these provisions is, if not a temporary abdication or alienation
of its legislative power, almost a permanent one. In another connection I have
referred to the fettering of Parliament's power of legislation even in respect
of what it always freely had, with no corresponding restraints on the power of
Provincial Councils, but actually enhancing their powers.

So far I have dealt with one aspect of the power of the Republic, namely the
Legislative power. What of the Executive power? As stated earlier, the
Executive power exercisable by a Provincial Council is coterminous with its
powers to make statutes and this could include items in List ill too. The
guarantee contained in Article 9 is given by the Republic of Sri Lanka. Mr.
Iriyagolle submitted, as an additional argument on Article 9, that when the
power of the Republic is dispersed among eight or nine near autonomous
Provincial Councils, the Republic would be in no effective position to enforce
its guarantee. This would apply to the exercise of all Executive power.

A further argument was addressed to us with reference to Article 2. Article 2
states that 'the Republic of Sri Lanka is a unitary State'. It was submitted
that there is a contravention of this Article, and since it is one of the
entrenched Articles, the Bill has to be passed with the consent of the People
at a Referendum.

**367**

We have earlier dealt with the violation of certain other entrenched Articles
or Article considered to be entrenched. The intention, purpose and the effect
of some of the Articles in the Thirteenth Amendment is to create or facilitate
the creation of a separate entity of administration and government in the
Northern and Eastern provinces as one unit. While the present submission is
supported by those factors, it is not necessarily dependent on it. It requires
separate consideration on its own merits.

The Provisions so far examined reveal-

(a) the conferment of real legislative power on Provincial Councils;

(b) Statutes made by Provincial Councils are given pre-eminence if not parity
with laws made by Parliament;

(c) the taking away of Parliament's right to legislate on certain fields

(d) the fettering of the legislative power of Parliament;

(e) the attempt to entrench the provisions of the Thirteenth Amendment;

(f) the abandonment or renunciation of the Executive power in respect of the
Provinces or the sharing of it with unauthorised authorities who would
administer such Provinces.

(g) the by-passing of the Cabinet system of Government which is "charged with
the direction and control of the Government of the Republic".

The following are considered tote factors of the federal principle:

(a) The existence, of "a federal situation", i.e. a secessionist movement.

(b) The presence of easily definable geographical units definable by physical
features, or in terms of racial, linguistic or cultural factors.

(c) The existence of two systems of government.

(d) The distribution of the, powers of government usually in the classic mode
of Lists

(e) Rigidity in the constitutional structure with limitations on amendment:

(f) An authority to decide questions of respective competency between the
Centre and the periphery. This role is traditionally by the highest courts
which claim an independent position.

**368**

From the two foregoing paragraphs it would be observed that nearly all these
features can be said to be present in the present case. Since here is a
factual aspect to this submission; it is necessary to refer or briefly to
items (a) and (b) of the preceding paragraph in a little more detail.

As far as the modern period is concerned, the demands of the Tamil people for
self determination and a separate state can b e traced officially to the
Trincomaiee Resolution of April 1957 of the so called Federal Party, whose
real name is the Ceylon Tamil State Party which is an exact translation of its
Tamil-name Illankai Tamil Arasu Kadchi. This Resolution which was termed the
First Resolution ran as

" Inasmuch as it is the inalienable right of every nation to enjoy full
political freedom without which its spiritual, cultural and moral stature must
degenerate and inasmuch as the Tamil Speaking People in Ceylon constitute a
nation distinct from that of the Sinhalese by every fundamental test of
nationhood firstly that of a separate historical part in this lsland at least
as ancient and as glorious as that of the Sinhalese, secondly by the fact of
Their being a linguistic entity different from that of the Sinhalese, with an
unsurpassed classical heritage and a modern development of language which
makes Tamil fully adequate for all present day needs and finally by reason of
their traditional habitation of definite areas which Constitute one-third of
this island, the first National Convention of the I.T.A.K. demands for the
Tamil Speaking Nation their inalienable right to political autonomy and calls
for a plebiscite to determine the boundaries of the linguistic states in
consonance with the fundamental and unchallengeable principle of self-
determination."

The claim for the Northern and Eastern Provinces considered as the
"traditional homeland" (for which there is little evidence-vide the historical
material mentioned in petition No. 19/87 and the Map prepared by the
Department of Archaeology annexed to petition No.8/87), the so-called
settlement of Sinhalese in the colonisation schemes under the major irrigation
works, and the government policy on education have been the source of
grievance of the Tamil people.

Political claims and demands led to political agitation and finally to and an
armed secessionist movement. The Government as we know, has made every
reasonable effort to solve it politically and

**369**

not to find a military solution. It is unnecessary to through all the various
stages of negotiations which have taken place in recent years. I shall confine
myself to what is only relevent for this determination.

As early as September 1985 the mechanism of Provincial Councils had been
proposed. In the Draft Framework of terms of Accord and Understanding of
30.08.85, it was stated that -

"5\. A Bill for the .amendment of the Constitution to enable he creation of
Provincial Councils and the devolution of powers of them shall be enacted by
Parliament by a 2/3 majority. Thereafter Parliament will pass an Act directly
conferring on the Provincial Councils the requisite legislative powers. Such
power shall not be revoked or altered in any mariner except by an Act of
Parliament passed by a two-thirds majority after' consultation with the
Provincial Council or the Councils' concerned."

The next development was further talks held between the Sri Lankan Government
and an Indian delegation led by, Hon P Chidanbaram, Minister of State, in July
1986. Based on those talks a detailed Note containing observations on the
proposals of the Sri Lanka Government as the Framework was sent to the Indian
Government The following three paragraphs of the Note are relevant for the
purpose of this determination:-

1\. A Provincial Council shall. be established in each Province. Law-making
and Executive (including Financial)., powers shall be devolved upon the
Provincial Councils by suitable constitutional amendments, without resort to a
referendum. After further discussions subjects broadly corresponding to the
proposals contained in Annexe 1 to the Draft Framework of Accord,. and
Undertaking of 30.08.85, and the entries in List ll and List III of the
Seventh Schedule of the Indian Constitution shall be devolved upon Provincial
Councils.

2\. In the Northern Province and in the Eastern Province the Provincial
Councils shall be deemed to be constituted immediately after the
constitutional amendments come into force........

7\. Any amendments to the constitutional provisions or any other laws
providing for, devolution, of legislative and executive (including financial)
powers shall require a 2/3 majority as provided in the present Constitution.
Any further safeguards for example a further requirement of a referendum may
also be, discussed."

**370**

In a preamble to this Note it was agreed that suitable constitutional and
legal arrangements would be made for those two Provinces to act in co-
ordination. In consequence of these talks a constitutional amendment took
shape and form and three lists-

(1) The Reserved List (List II);

(2) The Provincial List (List I); and

(3) The Concurrent List (List Ill) too were formulated.

The next stage of the discussions were the. Bangalore discussions between our
President Jayewardene and Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in November 1986. The
Agreement between them recognised that the "Northern and Eastern Provinces
have been areas of historical habitation of Sri Lankan Tamil speaking peoples
who have at all times hitherto lived together in the territory with other
ethnic groups. According to these discussions Sri Lanka agreed that these two
Provinces should form one administrative unit for an interim period and that
its continuance should depend on a Referendum and it was also agreed that the
Governor shall, have the same power's as the Governor of a State in India. It
was also proposed to the Sri Lanka Government that the Governor should only
act on the advice of the Board of Ministers and should explore the possibility
of further curtailing the Governor's discretionary powers. The Indian side
also proposed that provision be made on the lines of Article 249 of the Indian
Constitution on the question of Parliament's power to legislate on matters in
the Provincial list and likewise that Article 254 of the Indian Constitution
be adopted in regard to the Provincial Council's power to make a law before or
after a parliamentary law in respect of a matter in the Concurrent List. The
Sri Lanka Government's observations on the Working Paper on Bangalore
Discussion dated 26th November 1986 show that the suggestions made by the
Indian Government were substantially adopted.

On the 29th July 1987 an Accord was signed by our President J1 R. Jayewardene
and the Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi in Colombo. The First part of this
Accord reaffirmed what was a greed at Bangalore that the Northern and Eastern
Provinces have been areas of historical habitation of Sri Lanka Tamil Speaking
people who at all times hitherto lived together in the territory with other
ethnic groups. It also provided for these two Provinces to form one
administrative unit for an interim

**371**

period and for elections to the Provincial Council to be held before 31st
December 1987. The Second Part was the Annexure to the Agreement. It provided,
inter alia, for a Indian Peace Keeping Contingent and for Indian observers at
the Provincial Council Elections and a Referendum to be held in the Eastern
Province to determine whether the Northern and Eastern Provinces should
continue as one administrative unit. The legislation now tabled in Parliament
is in terms of this Accord. Of course, an attempt is now being made to take
shelter under Article 27 (4).

With this background, let me once again comment on the Bills. Article 154A(3)
makes provision for Parliament to make law for two or three adjoining
Provinces to form one administrative unit. The two Provinces would form one
Provincial Council. Such law would also provide the manner for determining
whether such provinces should continue to be administered as one
administrative unit or whether such Province should constitute a separate
administrative unit.

The law to be made by Parliament is the Provincial Councils Bill before us.
This must be viewed as an ordinary piece of legislation and it cannot be
dignified to the status of a constitutional amendment. This legislation
depends on the Thirteenth Amendment for its validity arid existence. If the
Thirteenth Amendment is invalid, as I have earlier held, this law too falls
with the Thirteenth Amendment. Section 37 with the marginal comment "Interim
provision" states that the President may by Proclamation declare that any two
or three adjoining Provinces shall form one administrative unit with one
Provincial Council.

Although it has been submitted that section 37(1) does not refer specifically
to the Northern and Eastern Provinces, having regard to the historical
background, the contents of the recent negotiations show, without a shadow of
doubt that this was designed specifically with the problem of the Northern and
Eastern Provinces in mind. If any corroboration is needed, we see a specific
reference to these two provinces in section 37(1)(b) and section 37(3). These
provisions refer to 29th July 1987, the date of the Accord. It deals with the
surrender of arms, weapons and military equipment, held by the terrorist
militants whose objective was "the establishment of a separate State". There
are many other areas in the country where there is unrest, but those are not
mentioned. This provision is a

**372**

condition precedent to the action that was contemplated in the negotiations,
namely, the linking of the Northern and Eastern Provinces.

Section 37 vests an absolute power in the President. After the linkage is
forged, there is some provision for declining By subsection (2) of section 37,
the President can by order require a poll to be held on a day to be fixed
before the 31st day of December 1988, to enable the electors to decide whether
or not the linkage should continue. The discretion for holding the poll is
also discretionary, for the President is empowered to postpone it, even
indefinitely. In the case of the North and the East, the poll would be
confined only to the Eastern Province. This indicates the true nature of the
matter

It has been urged that this creation of one administrative unit where two or
three existed before without reference to the People; has devalued the
franchise and is also contrary to the equality provision of fundamental
rights. It was submitted that, having regard to the whole background, What has
been done is in the nature of a final settlement because the interim measures
will facilitate the creation of a separate unit. What we see before us is a
device to grant autonomy to a significant portion of Sri Lanka and leave it in
the hands of the Tamils, to the exclusion of Sinhalese and the Muslim who are
also long time residents there and who are equally entitled ,to their rights.
It has been submitted that the two provinces concerned constitute nearly 30%
of the land area of Sri Lanka. 60% of its coast line, and it is being handed
over to one ethnic community who constitute only 12.6% of the population. In
substance and truth, it is urged that the severing of the Northern and Eastern
territory from the rest of Sri Lanka is a violation of the rights of all
peoples of this country, as it does violence to the unitary character of the
State, its territorial integrity which are part of the Sovereignty and basic
features of the Constitution .

Seerali refers to another significant factor in determining whether a
Constitution is unitary or federal: He says -

".......... it is not enough to say that in law a Constitution is federal, we
must inquire further and find out whether the Constitution works as a federal
government. For the law of the Constitution is one thing the practice is
another. The mere presence of unitary features in a Constitution which may
make a Constitution quasi-federal in law does not prevent the Constitution
from being predominently federal in practice."

**373**

This matter can be viewed both from a legal and also from a more factual
point. In terms of general principles and concepts, the difference between a
Unitary State and a Federal State needs a brief discussion. Wheare, one of the
well-known writers on this, topic, takes the United Stares as a model of a
federal Constitution. He states that a Federal Constitution establishes an
association of States so organised that powers are divided between a general
government which is independent of the governments of the associated states
and on the other hand State governments which in certain matters are in their
turn independent of the general government. The test he adopts is the
existence of distinct and co-ordinate governments.

This of course is the traditional method of approaching this: matter. In
recent times there have been great political changes after the dissolution of
the British Empire. There have been developments and experiments in the form
of the constitutional structures of many States. The cases of Nigeria and
India were mentioned in the course of the arguments:

Seervai, whose views are entitled to respect, is of the view that the Indian
Constitution is federal in nature but with strong centralizing features.
Nearly ail the other leading text writers on the Indian Constitution share
this view. The Indian Supreme Court has, in the past, been inclined to stress
the unitary features of the Constitution rather than the federal aspect.
Probably the political atmosphere and background in which the Constitution had
worked Until the time of the Janata Government, would have been conducive to
such a view. In Rajasthan v. Union A.I.R. 1977 S. C  361, Chief Justice Begin
said

"In a sense therefore the Indian Union is federal. But the extent of
federation in it is largely watered down by the need of progress and
development or a country which has to be nationally integrated, politically
and economically co-ordinated, and socially, intellectually and spiritually
uplifted."

In Kesavananda's Case (supra), however, many judges included the federal
nature of the Constitution as one of its basic features.

**374**

Seervai in his work, after a closely reasoned analysis of the Indian Supreme
Court judgments and the relevant constitutional provisions, concludes (page
168)

"........ the view expressed in Supreme Court judgments that the principle of
federalism has been watered down in our Constitution is not supported by an
examination of its provisions when compared with corresponding provisions in
admittedly federal Constitutions. For the reasons given above, the federal
principle is dominant in our Constitution."

Elaborating on this, Seervai says (page 150)

"In, order to be called federal, it is not necessary that a Constitution
should adopt the federal principle completely. It is enough if the federal
principle is the predominent principle in the Constitution."

It is therefore clear that there can be no standard form or blueprint for a
Federal State. It can take many forms depending on the particular needs of
each country, and can range from a nominal association of virtually free and
independent States with minor constraints to a real distribution of power
between centre and the States, but with centralised features.

The introduction of centralising features does not derogate from the federal
principle. The Indian Constitution has strong centralising features.

Let me now examine the provisions of the Thirteenth Amendment, compared with
the provisions of the Indian Constitution.

The appointment and powers of the Governor: Unlike in the Indian constitution
the governor can be removed on a resolution of two-thirds of the members of
the Provincial Council. Again, as regards the Governor's powers, like in India
the Provincial Council Governor has no discretion but to act in accordance
with the advice of the Chief Minister. In Ram Jawaga Kapoor v. Punjab
A.I.R.1955 S.C. 549, the Supreme Court said

"... the Governor ..... occupies the position of the Head of the Executive in
the State but it is virtually the Council of Ministers in each state that
carries on the Executive Government. In the Indian Constitution, therefore, we
have the same system of, parliamentary executive as in England. The Council of
Ministers consisting as it does, of the members of the Legislature is, like
the British Cabinet a hyphen which joins a buckle which fastens the
legislative part of the State to the executive part."

**375**

The discretionary powers vested in the Governor are insignificant in relation
to the day to day exercise of the executive powers " of the State.

In regard to the assent to legislation: Compared with the Indian provision the
Governor and the Central Government has. hardly any control over, Provincial
legislation. In India, the Constitution empowers the Governor to veto a Bill
or to reserve it for the President's consideration where apparently he too can
veto it. There is, no such provision with us. The Governor at his discretion
may in some instances reserve it for reference to the President. The net
result is that the President can refer it to the Supreme Court for
determination of its constitutional validity. There is therefore virtually
total absence of control over Provincial legislation.

Again the corresponding Indian provision -relating to public security or
internal disturbance and armed rebellion gives much greater central control to
the Indian Government than to ours.

The Indian Constitution provides for the Central Government to legislate on
matters in the State List in the national interest. We have no such provision.

The provision for the Central Government to take over on the failure of the
administrative machinery in a Province is almost identical with the provision
obtaining in India. It seems that the Proclamation made under the Indian law
can prevail for a longer period than one made under our law;

Article 154N which enables the President to give directions to the Governor in
case of financial instability is of similar nature:

Seervai also states that the allocation of the residuary power of legislation
to the Central Government and the exercise of Sovereignty in regard to
external and foreign matters is irrelevant for the purpose of determining the
federal nature of a Constitution.

It should also be mentioned that in India, unlike in our Bill, on the conflict
of a valid Federal law and a valid State law, the federal law prevails,
Article 154G (8) and (9) shows that the position of the Centre is much weaker
here than in India.

**376**

It is also sometimes contended that only unimportant and subordinate matters
have been assigned to the States. In this connection it would be noted that
our List I is modelled on the Indian list and is similar to it. Seervai,
dealing with the same argument, says (page 168)

"The view that unimportant matters were assigned to the State cannot be
sustained in face of the very important subjects assigned to the States in
List 11, and the same applies to taxing powers of the State, which are made
mutually exclusive of the taxing powers of the Union so that ordinarily the
States have independent sources of revenue of their own."

In terms of the provisions in the Thirteenth Amendment and the Appendix
dealing with law and order, it would however be observed that the entire
maintenance of law and order and Police powers of the province is in the Chief
Minister and the Board of Ministers. This would include both criminal and
certain aspects of the civil law, such as rights in immovable property,
regulation of religious associations, housing, agricultural matters,
education.

Our earlier discussions of the principles relating to this topic shows that
there is a wide spectrum between an absolute unitary state and a complete
federation. Between these two extremes there are number of intermediate
positions. There could theoretically be a mid-point where the two types of
characteristics blend in equal proportions. On an analysis of our provisions,
it is apparent that the balance is in favour of the regional unit and the
extent of central control is insufficient to alter the picture. These
provisions place the Constitution at a point closer to a federal state. This
has been the declared object of the Sri Lankan Tamils (of late with South
Indian assistance) for the last forty years In any event this is a departure
to a great extent from the situation of the unitary state contemplated in the
Constitution.

On my analysis of the legal provisions I find. that the Bills give the Tamil
people of the Northern and Eastern provinces sufficient autonomy to be masters
of their own destiny. The provisions are flexible and extensive enough to be
worked to that end. It is a fact that the single Provincial Council for the
North and East would be dominated by Tamils, with a overwhelming Tamil
speaking majority. It would be controlled and administered by Tamils who had
for nearly a half century claimed this territory as their traditional homeland
and

**377**

resented a Sinhala presence. They have subscribed to a two nation theory and
not to an ideal of a Sri Lankan nationality. The regional machinery in respect
of Police and Public Order, Land and Land Settlement, Education,
Rehabilitation, Agriculture and Agrarian Services, to name a few give the
ruling authorities ample powers if they wish of making life difficult for the
Sinhalese or evicting them outright. These are not fanciful fears, but they
are real and the Peace Accord nor the assurance's given have had any effect on
this anti-Sinhala policy of the Tamil ruling groups.

In the forefront of the case of the Buddhist and Sinhala organisations,
reliance is placed, on a statement by His Excellency the President. It Is a
matter which I cannot avoid dealing with. This statement, I may say, has not
been produced as a criticism of the President, but as corroboration of their
case that the joinder of the Northern and Eastern Provinces and the official
recognition of the traditional homelands of the Tamils will toll the death
knell of the Sinhala people in those Provinces. There is an undertone of this
fear in all the petitions opposing the Bills.

It is always open to a statesman or politician to change his views and
opinions. This he must do when the interests of the country or party demand
it. This is not the issue here. Neither is the wisdom nor otherwise of the
Accord a matter for us. The only issue is whether the Bills must go before the
People for a Referendum for enactment.

The speech quoted in the petitions constitute the Address the President made
on the solemn occasion of the opening of Parliament. In the speech made by His
Excellency on that occasion, he said:

"There are certain principles which we cannot depart from arriving at a
solution. We cannot barter away the unity of Sri Lanka, its democratic
institutions, the right of every citizen in this country whatever his race,
religion, or caste to consider the whole Island as his Homeland enjoying equal
rights, constitutionally, politically, socially, in education and employment
are equally inviolable."

The documents tabled by him in the course of his address also indicated the
views and policies of the Government on this matter:

"At present the Sri Lanka Tamils are in a minority in the eastern Province
while the Sinhalese and the Muslims together constitute nearly sixty per cent
of the population. Since the Sri Lanka Tamils

**378**

constitute more than ninety per cent of the population in the Northern
Povince, the object of the amalgamation of the North and the East is clear the
Sri Lanka Tamils will after amalgamation become the majority group in the
combined unit of administration. Once the amalgamation is achieved the concept
of the traditional homeland of the Tamils which has been a corner-stone of
agitation in the post-independence period will be revived as this is the only
ground on which the T.U.L.F. denies the legitimate rights of the Sinhala
people to become settlers in the Northern and Eastern provinces. Nor does the
traditional homelands theory recognise any rights for the Muslims either
except as an attenuated minority in the amalgamated territory So on the one
hand while professing to urge the case for all Tamil speaking people in fact
the T.U.L.F. is covertly seeking to secure the extensive areas for
development, especially under the accelerated Mahaweli Programme, for
exploitation by the Sri Lanka Tamils alone. This in short is he duplicitous
motivation behind the demand for amalgamation.

Again

'Quite candidly, the Sinhala people do not regard the demand for the
amalgamation of the Northern and Eastern Provinces as a bona fide claim but as
one motivated by an ulterior purpose, namely, as a first step towards the
creation of a separate state comprising these two Provinces. The recent
outrages by Tamil terrorists against the Sinhala civilian population settled
in the North and East killing vast numbers of them, ravaging their homesteads
and making thousands of them refugees in their own land has only made their
apprehensions seem more real than ever before  
  
and finally

"Even the most, native of people could not expect a single Sinhalese to go
back to the North and/or East if the maintenance of law and order within those
areas becomes he exclusive preserve of the political leaders and patrons of
the very terrorists who chased them out. Could one for instance expect the
survivors of Namalwatta to go back to their village if the leader of the Tamil
Terrorist gang that murdered their families is the A S.P. of the area? Not
only would those poor refugees not go back but those Sinhalese, including
those in Ampara and Trincomalee, who are still living in the North and East,
would necessarily leave their lands and flee to the South, if these proposals
are implemented."

**379**

"These porposals are totally unacceptable. If they are implemented, the T. U.
L. F. would have all but attained Eelam. It need hardly be said that even if
the demand for a Tamil Linguistic State is granted, further problems and
conflicts are bound to arise between that Tamil Linguistic State of the North
and East and the Centre. Water, hydropower, the apportioning of funds are some
of the areas in which conflicts could arise. A cause or pretext for a conflict
on which to base an unilateral declaration of independence could easily be
found. There can be little doubt that what T.U.L.F. seeks to achieve by its
demands is the necessary infrastructure for a State of Eelam, after which a
final pustch could be made for the creation of a State of Eelam, comprising
not only of the North and East, but of at least the hill country and the NCP
as well."

I shall now deal with a few remaining matters urgued by counsel. The first is
in respect of Article 82 of the Constitution.

Admittedly Parliament has the power to amend "any provision of the
Constitution" or add "any provision to the Constitution". The procedure for
the amendment of the Constitution is contained in Chapter XII. Article 82(1)
deals with the amendment and amendment is defined to include repeal,
alteration and addition of any provision of the Constitution. Clauses 2, 3, 5
and 6 of the Thirteenth Amendment would come under this category.

The only other provision is Article, 82 (2) which deals with the repeal of the
Constitution and its replacement. In this connection see Article 75(b). This
is not such a case.

The present matter in so far as it relates to Chapter XVIIA is the
introduction of a new material into the Constitution unconnected with any
particular provision except that some provisions may be consequentially
affected. But these would be the principal and substantial provisions and
those consequential. This is also not a repeal of the entire Constitution.

Chapter XII has not made provision for this situation, that is, for adding any
provision to the Constitution. In Article 82(1) only the repeal, alteration of
any provision of the Constitution or addition to a provision is contemplated.
A new, Chapter dealing with a new matter having no, direct link with a
provision cannot be said to be an addition to a provision.

**380**

I do not agree entirely with Mr. Wickremanayake about the kind of order we can
make in relation to this matter. I agree that it can certainly be passed in
terms of Article 84 with the consequent results. But in my view, if this has
to be passed; otherwise, a suitable amendment of Chapter XII would be
necessary to enable this kind of amendment to be enacted.

Judicial Power

Mr. Senanayake argued that Article 154P interfered with the judicial power.
Mr. Fernando and Dr. Jayewardene contended that the judicial power and the
existing court structure is left untouched and the only innovation is taking
justice close to the people.

I think there is much more to Article 154P than that and there is substance in
Mr. Senanayake's argument. By subsection 4(a) and (b) a High Court is now
given jurisdiction to issue orders in the nature of habeas corpus and the
prerogative writs. This is a Dower vested in the superior courts, namely the
Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal These two Superior courts are
constitutional courts and the High Court and the other courts do not stand in
an entrenched position.

Habeas Corpus and the writs are part of the mechanism that protects
fundamental freedoms of the individual and they cannot be vested in any
institution that is not entrenched. If that is permitted, they could be eroded
and taken away in stages.

It is said that this power would be exercised by a High Court concurrently
with the Court of Appeal. This could lead to absurd situations. To take an
example in the Western Province, there could be two applications for writs of
Habeas Corpus, one in the High Court and the other in the Court of Appeal. The
matter will not end there. The Court of Appeal could hear one in an original
capacity and the other in an appellate capacity. One of them would have one
appeal, the other will be entitled to two appeals. This most valuable remedy
cannot be allowed to be trifled with in this manner. This provision has
devalued this right by vesting it in a court which is not entrenched and by
pro tanto removing that power from the Court of Appeal.

Franchise

Many of the petitioners submitted that the impugned legislation affects the
franchise. Mr. Senanayake contended that the legislative administrative
division of the country to new units would affect

**381**

the franchise as at present exercised on the basis of a unitary State where
every voter and member of Parliament have a voice in the overall
administration of the whole country. These rights would be dismissed by the
Bills.

It was also submitted that the proposed creation by Presidential Proclamation
of a single Provincial Council for the Northern and Eastern Provinces would
result in a dilution or erosion of the right to the franchise of the
inhabitants of the Eastern Province, as decisions affecting them would not be
taken soley by them, but will be joint decisions between their representatives
and those of the Northern Province. It would be remembered in this connection
that members of Parliament are permitted in certain circumstances to
participate and vote in the proceedings of the Provincial Councils. The fact
that voters and members of Parliament of the seven remaining Provinces have no
voice in this constitutes also a violation of the franchise. Mr. Fernando
sought to show that what was involved was a regional franchise and not the
national franchise and that any franchise where the people are given a vote
would not offend the Constitution. From the above it would be seen that this
not so. S.C. No. 5 of 1980-P/cf. 185/8.

Finance

A number of petitioners challenged Article 1548. This Article provides for the
establishment of a Finance Commission. It is the duty of the Finance
Commission to recommend to the President

(a) the principle of, apportionment of funds between various Provinces of
funds granted annually by the Government:

(b) any other matter relating to Provincial Finance referred to it by the
President.

It is quite clear from Article 154R(3) that the Government shall on the
recommendation of and in consultation with the Commission allocate from the
Annual Budget such funds as are adequate for the purpose of meeting the needs
of the Provinces.

Article 154R(7) states that the President shall cause every recommendation
made by the Finance Commission to be laid before Parliament and shall notify
Parliament as to the action taken thereon.

**382**

These provisions indicate that monies from the Annual Budget have be allocated
to the provinces. This is mandatory. Parliament has no control over this
operation except to be informed and if necessary to debate it This is after
the event Control over public finance is one of cardinal principles of a
Parliamentary democracy. The passing o the Appropriation bill is the, most
effective control Parliament has over the Executive. This right was won after
long struggle. I cannot agree with Mr. Mark Fernando that the impugned
provisions mean otherwise. This provision contravenes the provisions of
Chapter XVIl of the Constitution, which cannot be considered as a basic
feature of tie Constitution

Official Language

Counsel challenging the Bill submitted that the amendment o Article" 3 making
Tamil also an official language and English a link Language contravenes a
fundamental feature of the Constitution It is not necessary to delve into the
history of the language problem in this country except, to state that it has
been a live issue since 1956, and Sinhala as the only official language in
this country (with reasonable use of Tamil in Northern and Eastern Provinces
and by Tamils) has been the major plank in the manifestos of the leading
Sinhala political parties throughout the last four decades. It has been
submitted that such a fundamental change cannot be effected without consulting
the People

It was also submitted that the existing language provisions are set out in
Chapter IV and run into, eight sections. All those are left untouched. What is
sought to be done is to add three sub-paragraphs to paragraph (1) of Article
18. Counsel asked what is going to happen to all those provisions which are
basically inconsistent with the proposed Articles. At the least, counsel
submitted that the suspension of any part of the Constitution contravenes the
proviso to Article 75, which is entrenched by implication.

Oath

Some counsel also. drew our attention to the omission of any provision, making
the Governor, the Chief Minister and the other Ministers, and presumably all
other provincial officers, from subscribing to the oath which was brought in
by the Sixth Amendment to safeguard the independence, sovereignty, unity and
territorial

**383**

integrity of Sri Lanka, which was threatened by persons and political parties
and organisations claiming self determination and a separate state. All State
officers have hereto subscribed to this oath.

The Thirteenth Amendment requires all such persons mentioned above to take
instead the oath of office-set out in the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.
This omission, it has been submitted, is discriminatory and also shows the
intention of the Bill to create or to remove the restraints that prevent the
creation of conditions for a separate State.

It would be seen from the foregoing that the Thirteenth Amendment seeks to
create an arrangement which is structurally in conflict with the structure of
the Constitution and with its provisions both express and implied. Further,.
the provisions of the Thirteenth Amendment also contravene both the express
and implied provisions of the Constitution. The Bill therefore cannot be
passed without at least a Referendum.

**

RANASINGHE, J.

**

Several objections alleging, inter alia, that the provisions of Articles 2, 3,
4, 3, 76, 83 of the Constitution would be violated, have been raised by the
Petitioners in regard to the constitutionality of the two Bills-the Thirteenth
Amendment to the Constitution, and the Provincial Councils Bill-which have
been referred to this Court by His Excellency the President.

I agree with the view expressed by His Lordship the Chief Justice that no
provision of the aforesaid Bill, the Thirteenth Amendment. to the
Constitution, is inconsistent with any of the provisions of Articles 2, 3, 4
or 9 of the Constitution.

Although it seems to me that the powers of legislation sought to be conferred
upon the Provincial Councils referred to in the said Bills cannot, in law, be
held to be "subordinate legislation", as set out in sub-article (3) of Article
78, and would, therefore, be inconsistent with the provisions of the said
Article 76(3), yet, as the supremacy of the Parliament is retained-in that it
has the power to legislate, even though in a special manner and form, not only
to render ineffective any statute passed by a Provincial Council in respect of
even a subject set

**384**

out in the Provincial Council List; but also to repeal the provisions of
Chapter XVII A itself in its entirety I am of the view that the provisions of
neither Article 3, nor of Article 2-having regard to the essential
characteristics of a Unitary State, as set out by both the earlier and the
more recent text writers; and also to the recent legislation passed by the
Parliament of the United Kingdom, in respect of Scotland, Wales and Northern
Ireland which were referred to by learned Counsel at the argument before us
could be said to be violated. The executive power of the people entrusted to
the President of the Republic is not whittled down.

In regard to Article 9, which was also referred to as being an Article of the
Constitution with the provisions of which the provisions of the aforesaid
Bills are inconsistent, it appears to me that the solemn duty cast upon the
Central Government by the provisions of the said Article would remain
untrammelled and undiminished. The Provincial Councils will not, in law; have
the power to interfere with the discharge of the duties cast upon the Central
Government by the provisions of this Article. If an act of a Provincial
Council, purporting to be done in terms of item 25:2 or item 28 set out in the
Provincial Council List contained in the 9th Schedule, in respect of which
submissions were made by learned Counsel appearing for several of the
Petitioners, were to constitute an encroachment of or an interference with the
duty cast upon the Central Government resulting in an erosion of the rights
guaranteed' to the Buddhists, or a diminution of the rights assured to the
other religions, the Central Government could then, in law, take steps to
discharge the obligations cast upon it by the provisions of this Article. It
is indeed the duty of the Central Government to do so and do so effectively.
The power now conferred upon the Central Government in this behalf under the
Constitution remains untouched and unimpaired. The law of the Constitution,
provides for prompt action. How effective such action will, in practice, be
would depend entirely. on the response of the Central Government. Fears were
expressed particularly by learned Counsel appearing on behalf of the Young
Men's Buddhist Association and the Colombo- Buddhist Theosophical Society
about the safety and the preservation of places of worship of, and the freedom
to exercise the rights of the Buddhist in certain specified provinces. Such
fears are based upon incidents that are said to have taken place in those
areas in the recent, past. The Sansoni Report provides ample incontrovertible
proof in supports and its findings do, justify the fears so entertained and
expressed. If, however, there is a recurrence of such incidents after the
provisions of

**385**

the two Bills, referred to above, become operative it would not be because
another body has been vested with power which entitles it to act in that
manner. Nor would the failure to prevent any such recurrence be due to any
diminution of the authority which is presently vested bylaw, in that behalf,
in the Central Government.

I shall now proceed to consider the objection put forward by the Petitioners
founded upon the provisions of Article 83.

Clauses 154 G(2)(b) and (3) (b) in the Thirteenth Amendment set out the manner
in which a Bill for the amendment of Chapter XVII A, and a Bill in respect of
any matter set out in the Provincial Councils List respectively shall become
law, in the event of one or more Provincial Councils not agreeing either to an
amendment or repeal of the said Chapter onto the passing of such Bill, as the
case may be. In each of these instances the manner and the form for the
process of amendment is as required by the provisions of Article 83; for the
amendment of either that Article itself or any of the other Articles, viz: 1,
2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 30(2) and 60(2), set out therein.

In the Constitution all the articles which should be amended only by a 2/3
majority and by a Referendum, have been grouped together in Article 83. In
Article 83 are included all the Articles of the Constitution which are
entrenched in that special way; and, in order to prevent an amendment of
Article 83 itself in the ordinary way, and thereby taking the Articles so
grouped together in Article 83 out of the category of Articles which require
such special manner and form for amending them, Article 83 itself has been
made alterable only by the selfsame process of a 2/3 majority-and a
Referendum. That is the effect of the provisions of Article 83 The resulting
position then was that once the Constitution came into operation, any
amendment of the provision of Article 83, could be effected not in the
ordinary manner by a simple majority, but only in that special manner and form
of a 2/3 majority and a Referendum so expressly and clearly set out in Article
83. This then is the scheme of the Constitution. Thenceforth any amendment of
the Constitution, which constitutes an amendment, either expressly or by
necessary implication, of an already entrenched provision such as Article 83,
could be validly effected only by compliance with the procedure so laid down
in Article 83. That being so, any steps taken thereafter to entrench any other
Article, included or t6 be included in the Constitution by laying down the
selfsame special process for amendment would in truth and in fact, amount to
an 'addition' to the existing provisions enumerated in the said Article 83.
Sub-Article (7)

**386**

of Article 82, which is in the same chapter as Article 83, provides that in
this Chapter 'amendment' includes repeat, alteration and addition'. The,
introduction therefore, of any such new Article to the Constitution without
having recourse to Article 83 and expressly including such new Article too in
the list of Articles already included in, and entrenched by the said Article
83, would have the effect of adding a new provision to the Articles already et
out in Article 83: and would, in law, amount to an 'implied amendment' of
Article 83. It would amount to an amendment by implication. The term 'implied
amendment' has been used by Courts in determining whether the Constitutional
requirement as to the form of an amendatory Act has been violated (Bindra:
Interpretation of Statutes (7 edt.) p. 915). It is not in my opinion, open to
state that, because the new provision carves with it an ultimate appeal to the
People; the legal Sovereign under the Constitution; such provision could be
entrenched in the Constitution separately and independently of Article 83.
Such an approach would not be in keeping with the spirit of the Constitution
either. The intention of. the makers of the Constitution seems also to have
been that, after the date on which the Constitution comes into operation., no
provision was also to be entrenched in the Constitution without it being
expressly approved by the People. That the provisions of only a Sub-Article of
an Article in a Constitution could be entrenched without the rest of the
Article being entrenched is clear law A .G. of Trinidad v. McLeod, [1984] (1)
AER 697. Any attempt to have a. new Article entrenched in the Constitution
without reference to Article 83 and without having recourse to the special
manner and form required by Article 83 would be tantamount to doing indirectly
what cannot be done directly. Such a procedure is not permissible.

In this view of the matter, I am of opinion that the provisions of Clauses
154G(2)(b), and(3)(b) of the said Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution
constitute an amendment of Article 83, and that, therefore, it is an amendment
which shall become law only if passed in the manner and form spelt out by the
provisions of the said Article 83.

My determination, therefore, in regard to the questions referred to this Court
by His Excellency the President is that:

(1) The provisions of Clauses 154G(2)(b) and (3)(b) of the Bill to amend the
Constitution of Sri Lanka (Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution) require
approval by the People at a Referendum by. virtue of the provisions of Article
83;

**387**

(2) That the Constitutionality of the provisions of the Provincial Councils
Bill will depend upon the aforesaid Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution
becoming law, asset out in the answer (1) above, in terms of Sec.83 of the
Constitution.

There is just one other matter to be-referred to Article 123(2) of the
Constitution provides that, where this Court "determines that a Bill or any
provision thereof is inconsistent with the Constitution"; this Court may" also
"specify the nature of the amendments which would make he Bill or such
provision cease to be inconsistent". I have considered whether such a
statement should be made. In view, however, of the fact that the Reference
requires this Court only to state whether a Referendum is required, 'the fact
that it was also submitted at the hearing that the only jurisdiction this
Court exercises in these proceedings is to determine, in terms of Proviso (a)
of Article 120 of the Constitution, whether the Bill referred to requires the
approval by the People at a Referendum, and the fact that, at the hearing,
this matter was also put to learned Counsel for the Petitioners but was not
pursued, I do not propose to make any such statement.

**

SENEVIRATNE. J.

**

His Excellency the President 'of Sri Lanka has referred to this Court-

(a) S. D. No. 1/87 of 15.10.1987, and

(b) S. D. No.; 2/87 of 15.10.1987,

in terms of Article 121 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka for determination
whether "the Bills.:

(a) A Bill to amend the Constitution of Sri Lanka (THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT TO THE
CONSTITUTION) ; and

(b) Provincial Councils Bill.

or any provisions thereof; require approval by. the People at a Referendum by
virtue of provisions; of Article 83". Four petitions have been filed in
support of the proposition that these two above named Sills do not require
approval, by the People at a Referendum as required by Article..83-Nos 33 and
34/87,. 35/87 and 38/87. Petitions Nos. 7/87 to 48/87 have been filed by
various petitioners submitting that these two Bills require the approval by
the People at a Referendum. Some of these petitioners have filed petitions
only as regards the Bill to amend the Constitution, the THIRTEENTH

**388**

AMENDMENT and some of the petitioners have filed petitions in respect of both
Bills, the THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT and Provincial Councils Bill.

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q C., and K. N. Choksy, P. C. made submissions on
behalf of His Excellency the President to the effect that these two Bills do
not require approval by the People at a Referendum. The petitions of some of
the petitioners were supported by learned counsel, and some petitioners
supported their petitions in person.

I will at the outset refer to a submission made by certain petitioners on the
basis that the Bill THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION has not been
property placed before the Parliament, and as such is not property before this
Court. Chapter Xll of the Constitution THE LEGISLATURE.-AMENDMENT OF THE
CONSTITUTION, has Section 82, sub-section (7), which defines the term
'Amendment' as follows:- "in this Chapter 'Amendment' includes repeal,
alteration and addition". Article 4 of this 'Amendment' is as follows:- "The
following Chapter and Articles are hereby inserted after Article 154, and
shall have effect as Chapter XVIIA and Articles 154A-154T of the
Constitution". Plainly Article 4 adds certain Articles to Chapter XVII of the
Constitution. Articles 2 and 3 of this "Amendment" are described as
"Amendments". Article 2 states that Article 18 of the Constitution is amended
as follows, and Article 3 states that Article 138 of the Constitution is
hereby amended as follows, and the consequential amendments are specified in
Article 3\. The objection was in respect of Article 4 of this ill on the
ground that it does not comply with Articles 82(1) and 82(2) of the
Constitution. Article 4; which is Chapter XVIIA adds to the Constitution. It
is not so stated that it is an amendment by addition, and what is added to the
Constitution. Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q. C., submitted that it is for the
Speaker to determine whether a Bill is properly before Parliament. What is
before Court now is a Reference made by His Excellency the. President, and the
Court has to make a determination under Article 120 of the Proviso, which is
as follows: In case of a Bill described in its long title as being for the
amendment of any provision of the Constitution or for the repeal and
replacement of the Constitution; the only question which the Supreme Court may
determine is whether such Bill requires approval by the People at a Referendum
by virtue of provisions of Article 83.

**389**

I will not make any ruling on this procedural matter. I will consider and rule
on the submissions made that this THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT and the Provincial
Councils Bill require not less than two-third votes in the Parliament, and
have to be approved by the People at a Referendum, as this legislation was
inconsistent with Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution read with other
consequential Articles. Submissions were made that Article 4 of the THIRTEENTH
AMENDMENT Chapter XVIIA Articles 154A-154T is violative of Article 2 which has
laid down that Sri Lanka is a Unitary State, and also of Article 3, as it
alienates the Sovereignty in the People. As such Article 83 should operate,
that is these two Bills can become law only if approved by the People at a
Referendum.

Those who opposed the above proposition relied mainly on Article 27(4) of the
Constitution, which is as follows:- "The State shall strengthen and broaden
the democratic structure of government and the democratic rights of the People
by decentralising the administration and by affording all possible
opportunities to the People to participate at every level in national life and
in government". The submission was that clause 4 Chapter XVIIA of this
THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT did not derogate from the character of the State or
alienate the sovereignty of the People, it only seeks to decentralise the
administration, and that the power of legislation given to the Provincial
Councils was in fact and in law "subordinate legislation in terms of Article
76(3) of the Constitution. It was submitted that Article 27(4) lays down a
directive principle of State policy which the legislature is implementing in
this instance.

In reply to this submission the advocates of the proposition that a Referendum
must be held submitted that, even in an instance of implementing the State
policy set out in Article 27(4); the Legislature should also pay consideration
and implement the State policy set down in Article 27(3) to wit:- "The State
shall safeguard, the independence, sovereignty, unity, and the territorial
integrity of Sri Lanka". Under the guise of implementing the policy set out in
Article 27(4) the policy laid. down in Article 27(3) quoted above cannot be
ignored. Further, that under the guise of implementing. The Directive
Principles of State Policy (chapter 6), the Parliament cannot violate the
mandatory provision of Article 76(1), which is as follows: Parliament shall
not abdicate or in any manner alienate its legislative power, and shall not
set up any authority with any legislative power". From the submissions based
on our Constitution, the submissions

**390**

and arguments flowed into the sphere of political theory and philosophy, which
submissions were made at such a high level that I would describe what was
propounded as metaphysical political theory and philosophy, In propounding
these metaphysical theories the parties appeared to lose sight of the history
and the background in which these pieces of legislation have been drafted. A
volume of such material has been placed before this Court by various
petitioners. I must state that I have voraciously read and digested such
material, but I would not make references to them firstly, because such
material is now history and known to the intelligent and educated public of
Sri Lanka, and because there is no time to discuss such material. But I must
record that in coming to my conclusions I have considered all such background
material, the copies of the texts submitted, and consulted as many texts and.
authorities referred to, and even such other texts which were available to me.
These two Bills have to be considered in the light of the background and the
situation in which this legislation has been drafted. The Statutory time
factor placed or, this Court to toward the determination to His Excellency the
President and the Speaker prevents me from making such detailed reference.

For the consideration of the submissions made by these parties, it is
necessary to analyse in brief the provisions of the THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT in
respect of the three standard categories of separation of powers set out in
our Constitution (1978).

(1) The Executive,

(2) The Legislature,

(3) The Judiciary.

I must state at the outset, that 3 above, the Judiciary as at present under
our Constitution has not been that much affected by the Amendment. The
material part of this Amendment is clause 4, the insertion of Chapter XVIIA in
the Constitution as Articles 154A \- 54T of the Constitution. The heading
Chapter XVIIA is followed by an unnumbered paragraph which can be called a
'preamble' with the marginal note '"effect and construction of this chapter" .
This so-called "preamble" is in TWO parts-

(1) "The provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to Articles 1, 2, 3, 6,
7, 8 , 9, 10, 11, 30(2), 62(2); and 83, and shall not affect or derogate from,
or be read or construed as affecting or derogating from; any such Article,

**391**

(2) but, save as aforesaid. nothing contained in the Constitution or any other
law in force on the date on which this Chapter comes into force shall be
interpreted as derogating from the provisions of this Chapter. The provisions
of such other law shall mutatis mutandis apply".

Much criticism was made on the first part of this 'preamble'. The criticism
was that it was misleading and inserted merely to enable this Amendment
Chapter XVIIA to be passed in Parliament by a mere two-thirds majority as a
common Amendment to the Constitution-Article 82 (5). it was submitted that it
was the duty of the Court nevertheless to test whether this Amendment Chapter
XVIIA is Violative of any of the Articles referred to in the "preamble", and
is required to be passed in terms of Article 83. The second part of the
"Preamble" makes Articles 154A- 154T a part of the Constitution and gives it
such a status. I agree with the submissions that the first part of this
"preamble" is a facade, to cover the dangers lurking in "several provisions of
this Amendment. Even though this "preamble" states that this Chapter "shall
not affect or derogate from" the Articles mentioned in the "preamble", it is
the duty of this Court to consider whether any provision in this Amendment is
inconsistent with the said Articles which are the entrenched provisions of the
Constitution (1978).

It is necessary to set out the main provisions of this Amendment, to
understand the status of the Provincial Councils re Executive: Legislature,
Judiciary and consider the same, in order "to determine whether this Amendment
requires approval by the People at a Referendum by virtue of provisions. of
Article 83

The Executive

The intention of this THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT is to create a new body a
Legislature, the Provincial Councils as a separate administration unit with
its own Provincial Council; and Governor, Chief Minister and Board of
Ministers.

Article 154B - "A Governor to be appointed for each Provincial Council".

Article 1.548(2)-"The Governor shall be appointed by the President by warrant
in accordance with Article 4B to hold office during the pleasure of the
President".

**392**

Article 154B(5)- "The Governor to hold office for a period of five years".

Article 154B(8)(a), B(8) (b) & B(8)(c)- "The Governor shall summon the
Provicial Council, prorogue the Provincial Council, may dissolve-the
Provincial Council".

Article 154B(8)(d)- "The Governor shall exercise his powers in accordance with
the advice of the Chief Minister".

Article 1548(10)-"Provided where the Governor does not agree with the advice
of the Board or Ministers, he may refer that case to the President for
orders".

Article 154(f) (1)-"The Governor shall, in the exercise of his functions, act
in accordance with the advice of the Board of Ministers".

Article 154(f)(2)-" Where the Governor has to exercise his discretion, such
discretion shall be exercised on the President's direction".

Article 154H(2), (3) & (4) -The Governor shall give his assent to the statute.
When a statute is presented for assent the Governor can return it to the
Provincial Council with a message to reconsider the statute. If, after
reconsideration the statute is presented to the Governor, he may assent to the
statute or reserve it for- reference by the President to the Supreme Court for
determination whether the statute is consistent with the provisions of the
Constitution.

The important powers of the Governor are found in the Provincial Councils
Bill, Part III-Finance Sections 24(1), 25(1), and such sections, and in Part
IV of the same Bill, Provincial Public Service Commission, Sections 32(2),
32(3) and such. In terms of Section 31 of the Provincial Councils Bill the
President shall appoint the Chief Secretary for each Province with the
concurrence of the Chief Minister of the Province. This Amendment is silent on
the executive functions of the Chief Minister and the Board of Ministers. The
powers of the Governor in respect of Finance, the Provincial Public Service,
and Law and Order are vast. It can be said that the Governor is sharing
executive power with the President which is contrary to Article 4(b). One of
the pillars of our Constitution is that the executive power of the

**393**

People "shall be exercised by the President". Article 4(b). There is no room
for the sharing of the executive power with the President. The powers of the
President in the instance of an Emergency situation are rightly preserved, and
must be preserved.

The Legislature -

The Amendment Article 154A-Provides for the establishment of a Provincial
Council for every Province specified in the Eighth Schedule. (Nine Provinces
subject to Section 37 of the Provincial Councils Bill which enables the
President initially to amalgamate two Provinces).

Provincial Councils Bill Part I-Sections 2-6. -Provides for Membership of the
Provincial Councils.

Amendment Bill Article 154G(1)-G(11) -Article 154H(1)-(4).- Provides for the
legislative power of the Councils.

Article 154G(1)-Every Provincial Council may, subject to the provisions of the
Constitution make statutes applicable to the Province for which it is
established with respect to any matter set out in List I of the Ninth Schedule
(hereinafter referred to as ("The Provincial Council List")

154G(2) -No Bill for the Amendment or repeal of the provisions of this Chapter
or the Ninth Schedule shall become law unless such Bill has been referred by
the President .......... to every Provincial Council for the expression of its
views thereon,......... as may be specified in the reference,

(a) where every such Council agrees to the Amendment or. repeal of such Bill,
and such Bill is passed by a majority of the members of Parliament present and
voting; or

(b) where one or more Councils do not agree to the Amendment or repeal such
Bill is

(i) Passed by the special majority required by article 82; and

(ii) Approved by the People at a Referendum,

**394**

(3) No Bill in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council list
shall become law unless such Bill has been referred by the President,
.........to every Provincial Council for the expression of its views thereon
................. and

(a) where every such Council agrees to the passing of the Bill, such Bill is
passed by a majority of the members of Parliament present and voting ; and

(b) where one or more Councils do not agree to the passing of the  Bill, such
Bill is

(i) Passed by a. special majority required by Article 82, and

-Provided ......... some, but not all the Provincial Councils agree to the passing of a Bill, such Bill shall become law applicable only to the Provinces for which the Provincial Councils agreeing to the Bill............. upon such Bill being passed by a majority of the members of Parliament present and voting 

Article 154S(1) -A Provincial Council may by resolution decide not to exercise
its powers under Article 154G with respect to any matter or part thereof set
out in the Provincial Council list or the concurrent list of the Ninth
Schedule.

Article 154S(2)-where resolution has been passed by a Provincial Council under
paragraph 1, the Parliament may make laws with respect to that matter
applicable to such Provincial Council.

Article 154G(5a) -Parliament may make laws with respect to any matter.

I have now set- out the constitution of the Executive and the Legislature of a
Provincial Council. Before I discuss the legal or constitutional effect of
these provisions, it is essential that references should be made to the list
of subjects referred to above. Ninth Schedule List I the Provincial Council
List is the most exhaustive List with appendices i, ii and iii. This List with
the appendices set out the area of authority vested in a Provincial Council.
The list begins with No. 1 Police and Public Order-but not including National
Defence, National Security. The details of these subjects are set out in an
exhaustive appendix No. 1-Law and Order. This appendix deals the exercise- of
police powers by a Provincial Council.

**395**

**APPENDIX 1  
Law and Order**

(2) The Sri Lanka Police Force shall be divided into

(a) National Division.

(b) A Provincial Division for each police.

(4) Recruitment to each Provincial Police Division shall be made by a
Provincial Police Commission composed of three members, namely

(a) The D.I.G. of the Province.

(b) A person nominated by the Public, Service, Commission in consultation with
the President; and

(c) A nominee of the Chief Minister of the Province.

(6) The Inspector General of Police shall appoint a Deputy Inspector General
of police for; each Province with the concurrence of the Chief Minister of the
Province. (Thus it will be seen that two members of the Provincial Police
Commission will be agents of the Chief Minister of the Province).

12 : 1-The Provincial Police Division shall be responsible for the
preservation of Public Order within the Province.

**APPENDIX II  
**Land and Land Settlement

State Land shall continue to vest in the Republic ................ Subject as
aforesaid land shall be a Provincial subject.. (This will mean private land,
even land belonging to religious institutions which may have a bearing on
Article 9 of the Constitution).

**APPENDIX III.  
**Education

The question arises what is the. nature and content of the Provincial Council
Unit sought to be created by the THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT. To make this query
posed by me clearer the question is, is, the Provincial Unit sought to be
created- by this, THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT, a mere Administrative District as at
present or any

**396**

Local Government Unit? These problems were posed because it was submitted by
most of the petitioners who spoke against this Amendment, that what was sought
to be created was an independent Provincial Unit which undermined or eroded
the very basis of a Unitary State. To consider this submission as I have
stated, the Court has to consider the executive structure and power of the
Unit, the legislative power conferred on the Unit and the State subjects
Provincial List and Concurrent List assigned to a Provincial Council Unit. It
was submitted that the division of the Republic of Sri Lanka into these
Provincial Units which are in the, nature of independent or quasi independent
Units was a first step in the erosion of the Unitary State and the make up of
a federal structure of Government. On the other hand the learned President's
Counsel who supported this Amendment on behalf of the Intervenient-Petitioners
in Applications Nos. 33/87 and 34/87, submitted that these Units were
extensions of Local Government Administration Units, such as inter alias the
new Local Government Units, Pradeshiya Sabhas or Gramodhaya Mandalayas.
Learned President's Counsel submitted, that these Provincial Units were not
Bodies that can be called "subsidiary sovereign bodies;" a body which has
rights in respect of legislation and executive power which the Central
Government was incapable of diminishing and in any event these Provincial
Units were not Bodies which had independent powers of legislation and which
were in their sphere sovereign. Learned President's Counsel submitted that
these Bodies were not Bodies that had the power of legislation beyond the
control of the central legislature. The fact that there was some difficulty in
diminishing the powers of these subsidiary Bodies was not sufficient to make
these. Bodies sovereign bodies. It was only if the central legislature was
incapable of diminishing. such powers, that such body can be said to be a
subsidiary sovereign body.

The learned, counsel- the Queen's Counsel, the President's Counsel who
appeared for His Excellency, and- the President's Counsel who appeared for the
Intervenient-Petitioners in Applications Nos. 33/87 and 34/87 submitted that
the Provincial Units sought to be created by this Amendment must be considered
as the implementation of a directive principle of State policy contained in
Article 27(4) of the Constitution to wit the State shall strengthen and
broaden the democratic structure of Government and democratic rights of the
People by decentralising the administration and by affording all possible
opportunities to the People to participate at every level in

**397**

national life and in Government". The emphasis was on decentralising the
administration. The question arose, whether decentralising the administration
meant the extension of the Government Agent-Kachcheri administration of the
Province from the time of British rule, whether the later extensions of the
decentralisation of the administration by Local Government Units such as
Municipal Councils, Urban Councils and the present day bodies-District
Development Councils, Pradheshiya Sabhas and Gramodhaya Mandalayas, (In fact
the District Development Councils were established in the North and Fast),
were the Bodies intended by the phrase-decentralising the administration in
Article 27(4).

On the other hand learned counsel who supported the petitioners' cases that
the THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT was inconsistent with the Constitution submitted that
these Provincial Units created almost Federal Units or in the least quasi
federal Units and resulted in a federal structure of the State A question was
asked by the Court from the learned counsel who supported the petitions Nos.
33/87 and 34/87, thus if it is your case that these Council Units are not
"Subsidiary Sovereign Bodies", how would you describe the nature and content
of these bodies, whether autonomous, or semi-autonomous or any such? The
answer was that he would describe these Provincial Units as semi autonomous
Units., I am of opinion that in a Unitary State such as ours there "is no room
even for semi-autonomous Units. Learned counsel for the petitioners hose case
was that the Provincial Councils were not units which decentralised the
administration but independent bodies, submitted that in implementing the
policy contained in Article 27(4) the State must also give paramount
consideration to the directive principle of State policy contained in article
27(3) as follows:- "The State shall safeguard the independence, sovereignty,
unity and the territorial integrity of Sri Lanka", It was their submission
that the creation of these Provincial Councils was a violation of the above
Article.

I will now proceed to analyse the nature of-these Provincial Units with
reference to the legislative power conferred to the Units. The learned counsel
who supported the: THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT submitted that the legislative power
given to the Provincial Council was covered by Article 76(3) of the
Constitution, which is as follows :- "It shall not be a contravention of the
provisions of paragraph

**398**

1(1) of this Article for Parliament to make any yaw containing any provision
empowering any person or body to make subordinate legislation for prescribed
purposes, including the power

(a).

(b).

that is the learned counsel related the legislation by the Provincial Councils
to the category of subordinate legislation on the ground that it was the
legislation made by a body created by the Parliament and under the powers
conferred by the Parliament.

Mr. Choksy P.C. one of the counsel, who supported the Amendment on behalf of
His Excellency the President strenuously submitted that the modern concept of
what is subordinate legislation has advanced, and that, now, the concept
subordinate legislation takes into account that there was one supreme
Legislature and subordinate Legislatures created by this supreme body, hence
the legislation arising from the Provincial Council List in the Amendment will
be subordinate legislation in terms, of, Article 76(3) of the Constitution.
Mr. Choksy P.C. referred to the Scotland Act of 1978 passed by the Parliament
of the United Kingdom to give a legislative body to Scotland, which Act for
reasons not relevant to us, had not been implemented. He submitted that this
was an instance where the Unitary State of Britain having a supreme Parliament
gave powers of legislation to a legislative body in Scotland. He submitted
that there was some resemblance of this Scotland Act of 1978 to the THIRTEENTH
AMENDMENT. In my view in making this submission the learned President's
Counsel did not take into account two necessary factors:-

Firstly-was that Britain did not have a written Constitution. Britain had an
unwritten Constitution, a Unitary State with a supreme Parliament: The
Constitution being an unwritten Constitution, it was guided by constitutional
precedents and practices. Our Parliament is not supreme in that sense. When we
refer to the legislative power of our Parliament we must consider: it with
reference to Article 4 of our Constitution-

4(a) "the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament,
consisting of elected representatives of the People an by the People at a
Referendum"

**399**

We must take into account that under Article 3 "in the Republic of Sri Lanka
sovereignty is in the People". The Parliament is not supreme,. it is the
Parliament and the People that are supreme in Sri Lanka. And further Sri Lanka
has a written Constitution to guide the Legislation. When legislation is
mooted in Sri Lanka, one has to consider whether it is inconsistent with any
entrenched provisions (in that case Article 83 will be involved) or 'any other
provisions of our Constitution, (in which case Article 82(5) will apply). That
is the very question that has arisen in these References, whether the
THIRTEENTH. AMENDMENT is inconsistent with the Constitution to the extent that
a Referendum will also become necessary-Article 83.

Secondly whether any provision of law with erode the constitutional concept of
the Unitary State of Sri Lanka must also be considered in the political
background in which both the 1972 Constitution and the present 1978
Constitution have been made. Article 2 of the 1972 Constitution lays down. The
Republic of Sri Lanka is a Unitary State. There is the identical Article 2 in
the present Constitution (1978). The only reason that can be adduced for
incorporating this provision in the Constitution must be that both
Constitutions have. been drafted at a time when there was a demand for a
Federal State of Sri Lanka or a separate state for the North and East. In fact
the 1978 Constitution has been drafted after the famous or what may even be
calmed infamous Vaddukoddai Resolution which called for a Separate state for
the North and East.

I am of the view that a construction advocated by learned President's Counsel
Mr. Choksy cannot be placed on the phrase subordinate legislation in Article
76(3) of the Constitution. The term "subordinate legislation' has an accepted
meaning in Constitutional Law. The Constitution of Sri Lanka (1972) had a
similar provision,

45(3)(a) -

The National State Assembly may by law confer the power of making subordinate
legislation for prescribed purposes on any person or body,

(b) -

whenever- any provision in an existing written law confers the power of making
subordinate legislation for prescribed purposes on any person or body, such
power shall be deemed to have been conferred by a law of the National State
Assembly."

**400**

A comparison of the above Articles 3(a) & (b) with Article 76(3) of the
present Constitution shows that the 1972 Constitution Articles are cleat and
explicit on the face of the Articles as to what is 'subordinate legislation.
The term subordinate legislation is a term of Constitutional law which is
understood in a certain sense. Two authorities on English Constitutional Law,
Wade and Phillips in their well known text Constitutional and Administrative
Law state as follows.

"the term statute law covers both Acts of Parliament and delegated
legislation, or as it is sometimes called subordinate IegisIation (underlining
is mine for emphasis) is made in the form of statutory instruments". Chapter
33, Delegated Legislation, Page 564

These Learned authors further state as follows:- "delegated legislation is all
inevitable feature of the modern State for the following reasons:

(1) pressure upon Parliamentary time,

(2) technicality of subject matter,

(3) the need for flexibility,

(4) the state of emergency:

Chapter 33: Pages 556-567".

C. K. Allen - another authority on Constitutional law deals with this aspect
of law in his authoritative and well known book Law in the Making Chapter 7
Page 516 "Subordinate and Autonomic Legislation, and Page 521 Chief Spheres of
Delegated Legislation".

The Administration of Justice Bill of 1973 came up for consideration before
the Constitutional Court under the Constitution (1972). His Excellency the
President J. R. Jayewardene, then as Leader of the United National Party gave
notice to the Speaker that several provisos of the Administration of Justice
Bill are inconsistent with the Constitution (1972). The Constitutional Court
consisting of three Judges of the Supreme Court met to determine these
objections, and Mr. H. W. Jayewardene Q.C., with Mr. Mark Fernando and several
other counsel appeared for Mr. J. R. Jayewardene in support of the objection.
Objection had been taken that under clause 47 of the Bill the Minister was
given power to legislate which was contrary to the clause in the Bill which
said that the "National State Assembly may not abdicate, delegate, or in any

**401**

manner alienate its legislative power". The Constitutional Court ruled as
follows:- We are of the view that clause 47 (1) empowers the Minister to make
Regulations to carry out the- purposes set out in that clause. A& wee, say is
subordinate legislation as contemplated is section 45 of the Constitution;
besides as we pointed out this regulation must come under clause 61 before the
National State Assembly for approval. If the National State Assembly does not
approve the regulation it can reject it thereby asserting its supremacy. As we
understand the words 'subordinate legislation', it means all legislation other
than that which r is passed by, the National State Assembly under the law
making powers in chapter 9 of the Constitution. We are also fortified by the
view expressed in Halisbury's Laws of England, Volume 36, page 476; paragraph
723, which states as follows :-

"subordinate legislation, is legislation made by a per son or other than the
sovereign in Parliament by virtue, of powers conferred either by statute or by
legislation which, made under statutory Powers".

Therefore, this is "subordinate legislation", as is ordinarily understood and
as contemplated in section 45(3) of the Constitution: (Decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Sri Lanka Volume V 1973, -page 57 at 70) Article
45(3)(a) (b) of the Constitution (1972) almost corresponds to Articles 6,(b) &
(c) of the present Constitution The then en Constitutional Court has
determined the meaning of the phrase "subordinate legislation" in Article
45(3) of the Constitution (1.97.2): On the rules of interpretation this Court
his 6 hold that the phrase Subordinate legislation used in Article 76(3) of o
ion must bear the same meaning. As the THIRTEENTH, AMENDMENT chapter -(a) has
been drafted on the lines of she relevant. Chapters of the Constitution of
India, it is relevant to pose this question Can the legislation passed by the
Legislative Councils 6f the 'States' in India be called "subordinate I
legislation"? I do not agree to the submissions that the legislation the
provincial Councils should be I classed as subordinate legislation in terms of
Articles 76(3) of he Constitution.

**402**

The learned counsel who had opposed this amendment have submitted that if the
THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT is incorporated into our Constitution, our Constitution
will have certain hallmarks of a Federal Constitution, that is-

(1) A written Constitution

(2) Division of the country into Units or Components,

(3) Division of Executive and Legislative Powers between the Centre and the
Units

(4) Division of state subjects into Lists as in this amendment, and such other
features, of a Federal State.

It has been strongly submitted that the legislative power granted to the
Provinces is a kind of power that erodes the supremacy of the Parliament and
the People, and also that certain powers granted to the Provincial
Legislatures restricts the supremacy of the Parliament and the People under
our Constitution, and as such is violative of Articles (2) & (3) of the
Constitution read with Articles 4 (a) and 4(b). It was also submitted that the
learned counsel who supported this Amendment has relied on Article 76(3)
ignoring the more important provisions of Article 76(1) "Parliament shall not
abdicate or in any manner alienate its legislative power, and shall not set up
any authority with any legislative-power". There was a similar provision in
the Constitution (1972) Article 45(1) "The National State Assembly may not
abdicate, delegate or in any, manner alienate its legislative power, nor may
set up an authority with any legislative power other than the power to make
subordinate laws. It Will be noted that the present Constitution Article 76(1)
has dropped the word "delegate" in Article 45(1) of the Constitution (1972)
and kept the same phrase in a more imperative way "shall not abdicate or in
any manner alienate its legislative power". It is of clear why the word
"delegate" has been dropped. The scope of the parallel Article, that is
Article 45(1) of the Constitution (1972) has been raised before the
Constitutional Court in the objections made to the Associated Newspapers of
Ceylon Ltd. (Special Provisions) Bill heard on 24.6.73(Decisions of the
Constitutional Court of Sri Lanka, Volume 1. 1973, page 35 at page 38) In its
ruling on this objection the Constitutional Court has stated "Lastly, it is
submitted that the provisions of clause 15(2) of the Bill are inconsistent
with sections 3, 4, 5, 44 and 45 of the Constitution, in that this clause, if
enacted into law, will constitute an abdication, delegation or alienation, of
the legislative power of the People which can be exercised by the National
State Assembly, to the

**403**

extent and in a manner prohibited by the Constitution for the reason that it
enables the Minister to nullify and modify the provisions of the Companies
Ordinance. The next reference to this objection is at page 54, and is as
follows:- Another contention which was not pressed by counsel was that clause
15(2) of the Bill was inconsistent with sections 3, 4, 5, 44 and 45 of the
Constitution, in that this clause, if enacted into law, will constitute an
abdication; delegation, or other alienation of the legislative power of the
People which can be exercised by the National State Assembly to an extent that
it purports to empower the Minister to nullify, modify and amend the provision
of the Companies Ordinance. We see nothing inconsistent in this provision with
the Constitution. Unfortunately, the Constitutional Court has not considered
the interpretation of the phrase abdication, delegation, or other alienation,
of legislative power, probably because the contention was not pressed by
counsel. Article 45(1) of the Constitution particularly the word "abdicate"
was interpreted by the Constitutional Court in its decision on the Companies
(Special Provisions) Bill, in which case Mr. Mark Fernando the learned
President's Counsel who is appearing for the Intervenient-Petitioners in
Applications Nos. 33/87 and 34/87 has appeared. Mr. Mark Fernando P.C. had
objected to a clause in the above bill which vested power in the Minister to
issue written directions exempting certain Companies from the application of
the provisions of clause 2 of the Bill Mr. Mark Fernando P.C. has submitted
that the clause so empowering the Minister, would amount- to a delegation of
the legislative power of the National State Assembly which is prohibited by
section 45(1) of the Constitution. In that case, after considering all
authorities, the Constitutional Court accepted the interpretation placed by
the then Acting Attorney-General (now Senior Justice R. S. Wanasundera), which
was as follows:-"The learned Acting Attorney-General submitted that the word
'delegate' in Section 45(1) juxtaposed as it is between the words 'may not
abdicate' and or in any manner alienate necessarily means divest itself of,
and that only such legislation as divested the National State Assembly of its
legislative power would be inconsistent with section 45(1) of the
Constitution. This Constitutional Court then ruled as follows:- the modern
State, which has become so complex and would be increasingly so as many years
pass by, cannot be effectively and smoothly run without a certain amount of
delegation of limited powers to the executive provided the delegation does not
involve divestiture of the powers of the legislature (Decisions of the
Constitutional Court

**404**

of Sri Lanka Volume III, 1974, Page will be seen the word "delegate" in
Article 45 of the Constitution (1972) has been given a very limited
interpretation. This interpretation cannot cover an instance such as the one
before this Court where the Parliament, and the People are divesting its power
to a Provincial Legislature.

I will now deal with the legislative power of the Provincial Council with
reference to two aspects-

(1) the legislative powers of the Provincial Council,

(2) the manner in which the provisions pertaining to the legislative power of
the Provincial Councils restrict and curtail the supreme power of the
Parliament Articles 3 and 4 (a)

I have set out earlier almost verbatim relevant Articles of the Amendment
giving legislative power to the Provincial Councils. The power of making
legislation is the power to legislate in respect of any matter set out in List
I of the Ninth Schedule described as the Provincial List. The legislative
power of the Parliament is restricted in this manner in this Amendment Bill.
In terms of Articles 154(a)(1) and 154(a)(2) only if the Provincial Council by
resolution decides not to exercise its powers in respect of the Provincial
Councils. List or the Concurrent List the Parliament may make laws on those
matters in respect of such Provincial Councils-Article 154(g)(8) is a
provision which provides for a statute made by the Provincial Council to
prevail over a law made in respect of a matter on the Provincial Councils
List. This is an imperative provision that "the law so long only as that
statute is in force remains suspended and be inoperative within that
province". What I call the drastic provisions which restrict and curtail the
legislative' power of the Parliament and the people are contained in Articles
154G(2) and 154G(3) cited above Article 154G sets down" no Bill for the
amendment or repeal of the provisions of this Chapter or the Ninth Schedule
shall become law except under the terms and conditions set in Articles
154(2)(b) and 154(3)(b). These provisions restrict, curtail and abrogate the
powers of the Parliament (and of the People) to pass such law to the extent of
bringing into operation Articles 82 & 83 of the Constitution. That is, such a
Sill must be passed by the special majority of not less than two-thirds and
approved by the people at a Referendum. In fact though the so called preamble
to Chapter 17A of the Amendment states that the provisions of this Chapter
shall be subject to Article 83 and shall not

**405**

affect or derogate from such Article the said Articles 154G(2)(b) and (3)(b)
introduced in this Chapter, an Article comparable to Article 83. Article 82(7)
states that Amendment includes an "addition". Articles 154G(2) and (3) can
only be considered as an Amendment of Article 83 by means of an addition to
this Article. This Amendment by way of addition alone requires that this
Amendment Bill should be approved by the people at a Referendum.

Mr. E. S. Amerasinghe P.C. Who appeared for the Petitioner-Young Men's
Buddhist Association, Colombo in petition No. 16/87 lamented that in respect
of the said two Articles, the Parliament was abdicating and alienating its
power without the consent of the people, but to get back that power which it
abdicates and alienates the Parliament will have to go to the People. The
legislative power that I have referred to above violates Article 3, read with
Article 4(b) of the Constitution, that is the Sovereignty of the People and
the legislative power of the People exercised through the Parliament.

BUDDHISM

I will now refer to another matter very ably urged by Mr. E. S. Amerasinghe
P.C. who appeared for the Young Men's Buddhist Association, in his inimitable,
courteous, but forceful style. Mr. Amerasinghe P.C. submitted that the Ninth
Schedule List I (Provincial Councils List) in clause 25(2) assigns to the
Provincial Council exclusively the subject ancient and historical monuments
and records other than those declared by or under law made by Parliament to be
of national importance. There is no explanation as to what are these "ancient
and historical monuments". There is no reference to any place of Buddhist
worship or worship of any other religions, Christian and Muslim. There is no
reference to those that can be called recent place of worship, assuming that
he word "monuments", covers places of religious worship.

LIST II-(Reserved List)

Has a clause which comes under.. the. head Provincial and Occupational
training (Page 37) (seems to be unnumbered) as follows "National Archives,
Archaeological activities and sites, and this would include ancient and
historical monuments and records". These subjects also do not cover up
directly religious places of worship.

**406**

LIST III-(Concurrent List)

There is clause 34 Archaeological sites and remains. In none of these lists is
mentioned directly religious places of worship, and land belonging to
religious institutions-recent or otherwise.

Mr. Amerasinghe P.C. has in the written submissions of the said Application
produced extracts from the report of the eminent Chief Justice Sansoni, which
sets out a number of instances of proved deliberate desecration and
destruction of Buddhist places of worship. In the List of subjects which are
in the Ninth Schedule to this Amendment there is no reference whatsoever as to
whose duty it was (which is really 'the duty of the State') 'to protect and
'foster the Buddha Sasana, while assuring to all religions rights granted by
Articles 10 and 14(1) (e)'.

I hold that to this extent the Amendment is also violative of Article 9 of the
Constitution which is related to Article 83 of the Constitution.

OATH

Articles 154B(6) and 154F(7) has presented an Oath for the Governor and the
Chief Minister respectively as set out in the Fourth Schedule. The Provincial
Councils Bill Section 4 prescribes the Oath set out in the Fourth Schedule to
the Constitution for a member of the Provincial Council. The Fourth Schedule
sets out the Oath as follows

'I............affirm ............. that I will be faithful to the Republic of
Sri Lanka, and that I will to the best of my ability uphold and defend the
Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka'. Article
165(1) of the Constitution provides that 'every public officer', Judicial
Officer and every other-person as is required by the Constitution to take an
Oath, before the prescribed date and if he does not do so he shall cease to be
in service or hold office. Articles 32 and 53 provide that the President and
the Cabinet of Ministers respectively, should take the Oath set out in the
Fourth Schedule. The Sixth Amendment to the Constitution which came into force
on 8th August 1983 amended the Oath that has to betaken under the Constitution
by the Amending Article 157A(7) which brought in a new Oath of office set out
in the Amendment as the Seventh Schedule. This Amendment lays down that 'all
persons required to take an Oath of office shall take Oath in the form set out
in the Seventh Schedule. Certain penal consequences were provided for those
who did not take

**407**

this Oath within one month of the appointment. The Oath set out in the Seventh
Schedule is as follows:- "I affirm.............that I will uphold and defend
the Constitution...... of Sri Lanka and that I will not, directly or
indirectly, in or outside Sri Lanka.. support, espouse, promote, finance,
encourage or advocate the establishment of a separate State within territory
of Sri Lanka".. No apparent reason can be found in this THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT
for dropping the Oath in the Seventh Schedule which is a part and parcel of
the Constitution and for reviving the Oath in the Fourth Schedule and must be
deemed to be repealed by this Amendment to the Constitution. A Sovereign State
cannot have two Oaths in its Constitution for different classes of citizens.

I am of the view that, if the Oath, in the now repealed Fourth Schedule is to
be revived it will be an Amendment, of the Sixth Amendment and its Seventh
Schedule. The reference to the Fourth Schedule is an openly unconstitutional
act of draftsmanship which affects the Sovereignty of the People referred to
in Article 3. An Oath of office is a mode by which a State asserts its
Sovereignty, and a mode by which a subject of the state submits to the
Sovereignty of the State. I am of the view that the reference to a repealed
Oath-Fourth Schedule of the Constitution is violative of Article 3 of the
Constitution.

For the reasons given by me above, and for many other reasons which cannot be
set out for lack of time, I hold that the THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT and the
consequent Provincial Councils Bill are violative of Articles 2 and 3 of the
Constitution, read with the relevant subsections of Article 4, and that in
terms of Article 83, the THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT and the Provincial Councils Bill
require approval by the People at a Referendum.

I have read the order made by my- brother Wanasundera, J., and I fully agree
with the order which has held that for many multitudinous reasons that the
THIRTEENTH AMENDMENT requires a Referendum.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J. and H. A. G.: DE SILVA, J.

**

A Bill to amend the Constitution of Sri Lanka  
(Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution)

Our view is that the provisions of the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution, referred to below, require the approval by the People at a
Referendum by virtue of the provisions of Article 83 of the Constitution.

**408**

Section 4 of the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution which is described
as "An Act to amend the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka" provides that "Chapter XVIIA" containing Articles 154A to 154T be
inserted after Article 154 of the Constitution.

(1) Chapter XVIIA commences as follows:

"The provisions of this Chapter shall be subject to Articles 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8,
9, 10, 11, 30(2), 62(2), and 83 and shall not affect or derogate from.; or be
read or construed as affecting or derogating from, any such Article, but, save
as aforesaid, nothing contained in the Constitution or any other law in force
on the date on which this Chapter comes into force shall be interpreted as
derogating from the provisions of this Chapter. The provisions of such other
law shall, mutatis mutandis, apply".

These words, described by some Counsel at the hearing, as a preamble", appear
at, first sight to be ambiguous. But if we consider that this, Chapter deals
with the establishment of Provincial Councils and their powers, it would mean
that this Chapter overrides the provisions of the Constitution other than the
entrenched Articles. This amounts to a diminution of the legislative power of
the People who gave their mandate to Parliament to enact the Constitution and
will result in an erosion of the Sovereignty of the People as enshrined in
Article 3 of the Constitution

This provision thus contravenes Articles 3 and 4(a) of the Constitution and
requires to be passed by the two-thirds majority approved by the People at a
Referendum by virtue of the provisions of Article Z3

(2) Article 154G(2) enacts that:

"No Bill for the amendment or repeal of the provisions of this Chapter or the.
Ninth Schedule shall become law unless such Bill has been referred by the
President, after its publication in the Gazette and before it is placed on the
Order Paper of Parliament, to every Provincial Council for the expression of
its view thereon, within such period as may be specified in the reference, and

(a) where every such Council agrees to the amendment. or repeal and such Bill
is passed by a majority of the Members of Parliament present and voting

Or

**409**

(b) where one or more Councils do not agree to the amendment or repeal such
Bill is

(1) passed by the special majority required by Article 82 ; and

(2) approved by the People at a Referendum"

This Article provides that a special majority and the approval by the People
at a Referendum are, required for the amendment of this Chapter or the Ninth
Schedule thereto, in the event of one or more Provincial Councils not agreeing
to the amendment or repeal of the Bill,

Article 75 of the Constitution provides that "the Parliament shall have power
to make laws including laws having retrospective effect and repealing or
amending any provision of the Constitution or adding any provision to the
Constitution.............

Article 154G(2) therefore imposes a fetter on. the Parliament in amending or
repealing Chapter XVIIA or the Ninth Schedule and thereby; abridges the
Sovereignty of the People, in the exercise of its legislative power by
Parliament, in contravention of Articles 3 and 4(a) of the Constitution.

(3) Article 154G(3) which relates to Bills concerning matters set out in the
Provincial Councils List provides as follows:

No Bill in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Councils List shall
become law unless such Bill has been referred by the President, after its
publication in the Gazette and before it is placed on the Order Paper of
Parliament, to every Provincial Council for the expression of its views
thereon, within such period as may be specified in the reference, and

(a) where every such Council agrees to the passing of the Bill, such Bill is
passed by a majority of the Members of Parliament present and voting; or

(b) where one or more Councils do not agree to the passing of the Bill, such
Bill is

(i) passed by the special majority required by Article 82; and

(ii) approved by the People at a Referendum.

Provided that where on such reference, some but not all the Provincial
Councils agree to the passing of a Bill, such Bill shall become law applicable
only to the Provinces for which the Provincial Councils agreeing to the Bill
have been established, upon such Bill being passed by a majority of the
Members of Parliament present and voting".

**410**

As in the preceding Sub-Article, a special majority. and approval by the
People at a Referendum are required even for the passage of a Bill relating to
a matter in the Provincial Councils List, in respect of a Provincial Council
which does not agree to the passing of the gill. This again restricts the
power of Parliament to pass an ordinary Bill on a subject in the Provincial
Councils List except by a special majority and a Referendum. For the same
reasons stated earlier the Sovereignty of the People enshrined in Article 3
read with Article 4(a) of the Constitution is eroded.

Articles 154G(2) and (3) therefore, also require to be passed by the two-
thirds majority and approved by the People at a Referendum, by virtue of the
provisions of Article 83.

(4) The provisions of Articles 154G(2) and (3) are in truth and in fact an
addition to the: Articles entrenched in Article 83 of the Constitution. An
"addition" is included in the word "amendment" by virtue of Article 82(7).
Hence the amendment of Article 83 of the Constitution by the addition of
Articles 154G(2) and (3) will require to be passed by the two thirds majority
referred to in Article 83 and approved by the People at a Referendum.

After we had prepared our determination we have had the benefit of perusing
the determination of Wanasundera, J. We find that all the matters dealt with
by us are covered by Wanasundera, J. We are further in entire agreement with
him on all the other matters referred to in his determination.

**PROVINCIAL COUNCILS BILL  
**Determination

In view of our determination on the Bill-titled "Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution", we are of the view that a determination on the questions raised
in the reference by His Excellency the President relating to the Provincial
Councils Bill be given after the Thirteenth Amendment becomes law.

_Referendum unnecessary except for Clauses 154 G(2)(b) and (3) (b) of
Thirteenth Amendment ._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/13.html_  

