[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1981](./) >> **[1981] LKSC 13**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1981+13 or 1981+LKSC+13) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1981+LKSC+13) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Waharaka Alias Moratota Sobhita Thero v. Amunugama Ratnapala Thero - SLR -
201, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 13; (1981) 1 Sri LR 201 (6 April 1981)

**201**

**WAHARAKA ALIAS MORATOTA SOBHITA THERO  
v.  
AMUNUGAMA RATNAPALA THERO**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAKOON, Q.C., C.J. SAMARAWICKREMA, Q.C., J, ISMAIL, J  
WEERARATNE, J. AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C. (S.C.) 178/71(F) D. C. KEGALLE 17176/L  
JANUARY 26, 28, 1981  
**  
_Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law - Succession by dedication -. Res judicata -
Misjoinder - Prescription - S.17 Civil Procedure Code - S. 3 and 10
Prescription Ordinance - S.34 Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance.  
_  
The rules of res judicata apply to cases involving succession to an incumbency
and the Courts cannot and will not allow the same question to be re-agitated.
once a competent Court has decided the issue. In cases where the pupil derives
his right from the dedication by right of pupillary succession, and. not in
reality from his tutor, successive incumbents in the same paramparawa are
bound by decisions concerning devolution in the same paramparawa.  
  
Section 17 of the Civil Procedure Code enjoins a Judge not to dismiss an
action for misjoinder or non-joinder of parties. The wrong party should be
struck off and the necessary amendments to the pleadings made. Merely striking
out the name of a wrongly joined plaintiff would sometimes suffice.  
  
The right to an incumbency is a legal right enforceable in law and it is not
purely an ecclesiastical matter. When a Viharadhipathi of a temple sues to be
declared entitled to the office of Viharadhipathi of a temple and to eject
those disputing his rights or to recover possession of the temple and its
endowments he is enforcing a right he has in law and any such claim is exempt
from the provisions of the Prescription Ordinance by virtue of the provisions
of s. 34 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance of 1931. Therefore all cases
that have held that such an action is bound by the provisions of s. 3 or s: 10
of the Prescription Ordinance have been wrongly decided.  
  
The Viharadhipathi has the control and management of the Temple premises and
its occupation. No priest can select for himself a place of occupation
independently of the wishes of the Viharadhipathi. A priest who is guilty of
contumacy can be ejected from the temple.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_(1) Moragolle Sumangala v. Kiribamune Piyadassi_ 56 N.L.R. 32  
  
_(2) Podiya v. Sumangala Thero_ 58 N.L.R. 29  
  
_(3) Piyaratne Thero v. Pemananda Thero_ 62 N.L.R. 193, 202  
  
_(4) London and Lanchashire Fire Insurance Co. v. P. & O. Company_ 18 N. L. R.
15  
  
_(5) AIgama v. Mohamadu_ 4 C.W.R. 73.  
  
_(6) Kudhoos v Joonoos_ 41 N. L: R. 25  
  
_(7) Dingiri Appuhamy v. Pangananda Thero_ 67 N. L. R. 89  
  
_(8) Rewata Unanse v. Ratnajothi Unanse_ (1916) 3 C. W. R. 193  
  
_(9) Terunnanse v. Terunnanse_ (1927) 28 N. L. R. 477.  
  
_(10) Premaratne v. lndasara_ (1938) 40 N.L.R. 233. ,  
  
_(11) Kirikitta Saranankara Thero v. Medagama Dhammananda Thero_ 55 N.L.R. 313

**202**

_(12) Pandith Watugedera Amaraseeha Thero v. Tittagalle Sasanatilleke Thero_
59 N.L.R. 292 . .  
  
_(13) Henepolle Pansalle Sumangala Unanse v. Henepolla Pansalle Sobita Unanse_
5 S.C.C. 235, 236  
  
_(14) Saranankara Unnanse v. Indajoti Unnanse_ 20 M L. R. 385,401  
  
_(15) Ratnapala Unnanse v. Sego Saibu Sego Abdul Cader_ 5 S.C.C. 61  
  
_(16) Mahattaya v. Kumarihamy_ 7 S.C.C. 84  
  
_(17) Kande v. Kiri Naide_ (1843 - 1955) Ramanathan's Reports 51.  
  
_(18) Rathanapala Unanse v. Kewitiagale Unanse_ 2 S.C.C. 26  
  
_(19) Heneya v. Ratnapala Unnanse_ 2 S.C.C. 38  
  
_(20) Somittare v. Jasin_ 1 A.C.R. 167  
  
_(21) Sidharta Unanse v. Udayara_ 6 C.W.R. 29  
  
_(22) Terunnanse v. Don Aron_ 34 N.L.R. 348, 351.  
  
_(23) Wimalatissa v. Perera_ 1 A.C.R. 83  
  
_(24) Dias v. Ratnapala Terunnanse_ 40 N.L.R. 41  
  
_(25) Devarakkita v. Dharmaratne_ 21 N.L.R. 255  
  
_(26) Sumana Tissa Unanse v. Sometara Unanse_ 4 Leader L. R. 27  
  
_(27) Piyadasa v. Deevamitta_ 23 N.L.R. 24, 25  
  
_(28) Dhammejoty v. Tikiri Banda_ (1891) 3 S.C.C. 121  
  
_(29) Gooneratne Nayake Thero v. Punchi Banda Korala_ 28 N. L. R. 145,148  
  
_(30) Guneratne v. Punchi Banda_ 29 N.L.R. 249  
  
_(31) Terunnanse v. Ratnaweera_ 1 Times 48.  
  
_(32) Therunnanse v. Andrayas Appu_ 68 N.L.R. 286  
  
_(33) Weeraman v. Somaratne Thero_ 69 N.L.R. 438  
  
_(34) Dharmaratne v. lndasara lsthavira_ 47 N.L.R. 460  
  
_(35) Sobita Thero v. Wimalabuddhi Thero_ 42 N.L.R. 453  
  
_(36) Dhammananda Thero v. Saddananda Thero_ 79(1) N.L.R. 289  
  
**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
C. R. Gunaratne with T. B. Dissanayake and Keerthi Sri Tillekeratne for the
1st defendant appellant.  
  
Eric Amerasinghe with J. W. Subasinghe, N.R.M. Daluwatte and Y. N. W.
Abayaratne for the substituted plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

April 6, 1981.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C.J.  
**  
This is an action that was instituted in the District Court of Kegalle - on
the 2nd February, .1965. After a chequered career it finally came up for
hearing on the 7th July 1969 on which date issues were framed. These and other
issues were finally accepted on 16th January, 1970, and the trial commenced
immediately thereafter. Order was delivered by the District Judge on 20th
June, 1971, and the Plaintiffs who were unsuccessful, appealed to the Supreme
Court on the 2nd July, 1971. Pending the hearing in appeal the 1st Plaintiff
died and the '2nd Plaintiff was substituted in his place by order of the then
Supreme Court made on 10th March, 1975. The appeal itself was heard by the
Court of Appeal and allowed on 6th December, 1979. The first Defendant
appellant has now appealed to this Court.

**203**

The action was instituted by the deceased 1st Plaintiff (hereinafter referred
to as 1st Plaintiff) and the substituted Plaintiff (hereinafter referred to as
the 2nd Plaintiff) for the recovery of possession of a temple known as Selawa
Vihara in Tunpalata Pattu of Paranakuru Korale in the District of Kegalle.
They averred that the 1st Plaintiff was the Viharadhipathi and the 2nd
Plaintiff . was the Trustee of Degaldoruwa Temple and the Meda Pansala at
Malwatte Vihara which were "comprised in a Charitable Trust for the
advancement of Buddhism and for the maintenance, supports benefit and use of
the pupillary successors of Moratota Unnanse:" They stated further that Selawa
Vihare has from the time of Moratota Unnanse been appurtenant to Degaldoruwa
Vihare and as such they were entitled to possess it with. its endowments. The
1st Plaintiff claimed as the pupillary successor of Moratota Unnanse and the
2nd Plaintiff, who was the only pupil of the 1st Plaintiff, claimed as the
Trustee of the Vihare.. Their prayer in the plaint (and all its subsequent
amendments) was as follows:  
  
"1\. For a declaration that the said Selawa Vihara is comprised in a
charitable Trust.  
  
2\. That the 1st plaintiff as Viharadhipathi and/or the 2nd plaintiff as
Trustee be declared entitled to be quieted in possession of the said Vihara
and its endowments.  
  
3\. The 1st_ defendant be ejected from the said Selawa Vihara and be decreed
to pay plaintiffs the sum of Rs. 3,000/as damages already sustained with
further damages at the rate of Rs.100/- per month till the plaintiffs are
restored to possession of the said Vihare and its endowments.  
  
4\. For costs and for such other and further relief as to this Court shall
seem meet."  
  
It is common ground that the Venerable Moratota Rajaguru Dhammakkande Thero,
Mahanayake of Malwatte; was the Viharadhipathi of Degaldoruwa Vihara of Meda
Pansala in` Malwatte and of Selawa Vihara and that the succession to the said
temples was governed by the Sisyanu Sissiya Paramparawa (pupillary) rule of
succession. Each Vihara had been separately. endowed with vast acres of land.
To the Selawa Vihara King Sri Wickrema Rajasinghe, the last King of the
Kandyan provinces, gifted large tracts of land on its restoration by Moratota
Unnanse in 1806 A.D. (2349 AB). This grant is engraved on a stone slab built
into the outer wall of the Vihara. (Vide an extract of the Archaeological
Survey of Ceylon - Vol. "XI I - 1892 by P.C. Bel p. 19). The Plaintiffs
pleaded that the 2nd Defendant had been placed in possession

**204**

of Selawa Vihara by the Plaintiffs, and that the 1st Defendant had been
permitted to occupy a portion of the Vihara and is now disputing the
Plaintiff's rights to the temple and its endowments. The first Defendant
denied this. The 1st Defendant claimed the temple in his own right by
pupillary succession to Moratota Unnanse and denied that Selawa Vihara was
appurtenant to Degaldoruwa Vihara. He claimed for it a distinct and separate
existence. The 2nd Defendant did not file answer.  
  
The Plaintiffs averred that Moratota Unnanse died leaving 2 pupils:  
  
1.Dunumale Seelawansa Unnanse, and  
2.Paranatale Unnanse.  
  
It was alleged that Paranatale Unnanse was beheaded by the King and: that
Seelawansa Unnanse succeeded to the incumbency. He died and was succeeded by
Balaharuwe Sonuththara Unnanse. He in turn was succeeded by his only pupil
Paranatala Seelawansa Und who disrobed himself leaving  
  
1\. Sumana Unnanse,  
2.Sumangala Unnanse, and  
3.Ratnapala Unnanse.  
  
The first named died and the second named disrobed himself. Neither left
pupils. and Rathanapala Unnanse succeeded to the incumbency. The 1st Plaintiff
claimed the incumbency to Selawa Vihara by pupillary succession to Ratnapala
Unnanse.  
  
The 1st Defendant contested this line of succession. He contended that
Moratota Mahanayake died leaving two pupils  
  
1.Deliwala Dhammadinna Unnanse, and  
2.Paranatale Unnanse.  
  
Paranatale Unnanse as senior pupil succeeded to the incumbency and upon his
being beheaded his senior pupil Mahalle Sobitha Unnanse succeeded him. Sobitha
Unnanse died and was succeeded by his chief pupil Parusselle Dhammajothi
Thero. The 1st Defendant claimed that he. succeeded Parusselle Dhammajothi
Thero.  
  
The 1st Defendant also took up an alternative position. He stated that when
Paranatale Unnanse was beheaded the King reigning at the time took back the
Vihara and handed it to Kobbewala Unnanse but the British Government restored
it to Deliwala

**205**

Dhammadinna Thero and upon his death Udayale Gunaratana Thero became the
Adhipathi. Gunaratana Thero. by Deed No. 1661 dated 18th July 1936 "nominated
and constituted" Paranatale. Ratnapala Unnanse as Viharadhipathi who
thereafter officiated. He in turn by Deed No.11007 dated 7th May, 1839
nominated the following  
  
1\. Balaharuwe alias Paranatale Sumana Unnanse,  
2\. Balaharuwe alias Paranatale Ratnapala Samanera,  
3\. Parusselle Samanera Unnanse (later Parusselle Dhammajothi Thero), and  
4: Sirimalwatte Sumangala Unnanse.  
  
The fourth named officiated as Viharadhipathi and on his death Parusselle
Dhammajothi succeeded him. He was succeeded by one of his pupils Waharaka
Sonnuttara Thero. Sonnuttara Thero died in 1946 and he was succeeded by
Waharaka Gunaratana Thero. The 1st Defendant claims to have succeeded to the
incumbency on the death of Gunaratana Thero in 1962. Certain admissions by
parties recorded on 7-7-1969 curtailed the lengthy dispute somewhat. They are
as follows  
  
"1\. It is admitted that Selawa Vihare and its endowments were dedicated to
Moratota Anu Nayaka and the papillary successors according to the rule
'Sissiyanu-Sissiya-Paramaparawa.  
  
2\. It is also admitted that although the parties come by different process in
or about 1836 Paranatala Ratanapala (senior) was the lawful Viharadhipathi of
the said Vihare as the pupillary successor of Moratota according to rule of
Sissyanu-Sissiya-Paramparawa and that the said Paranatala Ratanapala by his
deed No.11007 of the 7th May, 1849 conveyed the said Vihare to four persons
namely  
  
(1) Sumana;  
(2) Ratanapala (Junior);  
(3) Sumangala;  
and (4) Parussella.  
  
Admission 2 was later modified on 7-7-1969 as follows:  
  
"2\. It is stated by the plaintiff and admitted by the defendant as an
alternative claim that although the parties come by different process that in
or about 1836 Paranatala Ratanapala Senior was the lawful Viharadhipathi of
the said Vihara as the pupillary successor of Moratota according to the rule
of Sissyanu-Sissiya-Paramparawa and that the said Paranatala Ratanapala by his
deed No. 11007 of the 7th . May, 1849, conveyed the said Vihara to four
persons namely:

**206**

(1) Sumana;  
(2) Ratnapala (Junior);  
(3) Sumangala;  
and (4) Parussella.  
  
This second admission concerned the alternative claim of the 1st Defendant.  
  
'The following issues were framed and finally accepted by the Judge;  
  
(1)Is the Judgment and Decree in' D.C. Kandy Case No. 81630 re-judicata
between the parties that Parussella was neither robed or ordained by the said
Paranatala Ratanapala senior?  
  
(2) If issue No. (1) is: answered in the affirmative, was the said deed No.
11007 inoperative to pass any right, title or interests to the said Parussella
or to his pupillary successors?  
  
(3) Is the said Selawa Vihare appurtenant to Degaldoruwa Vihare  
  
(4) Is the Judgment and Decree in D.C. Kandy Case No.45415 res judicata
between the parties that the 1st plaintiff is the pupillary successor of
Paranatala Ratanapala senior ?  
  
(5) Is the 2nd plaintiff the lawful trustee of Degaldoruwa Vihare-?  
  
(6) If issues (3) (4) and (5) are answered in the affirmative, are the
plaintiffs entitled to the reliefs prayed for in the plaint?  
  
(7) Is there a misjoinder of plaintiffs and causes of action  
  
(8) Is the Selawa Vihare a Buddhist Temple separate and distinct from
Degaldoruwa Vihare?  
  
(9) Is the 1st defendant the duly appointed Trustee of Selawa Vihare ?

**207**

(10) If issue No. (9) is answered in the affirmative, are the Plaintiffs in
this case entitled to any relief ?  
  
(11) Have the 1st Plaintiff and his predecessors abandoned their claims, if
any, to the Office of Viharadhipathi of Selawa Vihare?  
  
(12) Is the cause of action of the 1st Plaintiff and/or the 2nd Plaintiff
barred by lapse of time ?  
  
(13) a. Is the 1st defendant in the line of pupillary succession to Moratota
Anu Nayaka as set out in paragraphs 4, , 10 and 11 of the further amended
answer dated 1-2-68 ?  
  
(13)b. Or as set out in paragraphs 6, 7, 8; 9, 10 and 11 of the amended answer
of 1-2-68 ?  
  
(14) If issue (13) is answered in the affirmative, is the 1st defendant liable
to be ejected ?  
  
(15) Did Paranatala Ratanapala die leaving three pupils - viz  
  
(1) Sumana;  
(2) Amunugama Ratanapala; and  
(3) Sumangala ?  
  
(16) Did Amunugama Ratnapala succeed to Paranatala Ratanapala by virtue of
Sumana dying leaving no pupils and Sumangala having disrobed himself as stated
in the plaint?  
  
(17) If issues (15) and (16) are answered i n the negative, is the 1st
Plaintiff entitled to the relief claimed ?  
  
(18) Did Paranatala Ratanapala die without nominating his successor as set out
in the plaint ;

**OR**

Did he nominate his successor on deed No. 11007 of 1849?  
  
(19) If Paranatala Ratanapala did execute deed No.11007 of 1849 nominating his
successor, is the 1st Plaintiff entitled to succeed on the averments pleaded
in the amended plaint of 17th December; 1967 ?  
  
(20) Is there any appointment in favour of either of the plaintiff to the
office of Trustee of the Selawa Vihare ?

**208**

(21) If not are the plaintiffs entitled to be placed in possession of : the
endowments of the Selawa Vihare and to the ejectment of the defendants?  
  
(22) If issue No. 3 is answered in the affirmative is the appointment of the
1st defendant as Trustee of the Selawa Vihare void and of no value in law?  
  
(23) is the judgment and decree in D.C. Kandy case No.90099 resjudicata and
are the defendants estopped from claiming that Mahella was a pupil of Moratota
or a pupillary sucessor of Moratota?  
  
(24) Was Paranatala Anu Nayake ever the Viharadhipathi of Selawa temple?  
  
(25) Even if Paranatala Ratnapala No. 1, was the lawful Viharadhipathi as
stated by the plaintiff and he, the said Paranatala Ratanapala No. 1, disrobed
himself leaving three pupils:  
  
Sumana;  
Ratanapala No. 2;  
and Sumangala.  
  
and the said Sumana succeeded to Ratanapala No. 1, and Sumana died leaving no
pupil as stated by the 2nd plaintiff in his evidence; was Ratanapala No. 2
entitled in law to succeed to the office of Viharadhipathi?  
  
(26) If the preceding issue is answered in the negative, is the plaintiff
entitled to the office of Selawa Viharadhipathy  
  
After trial the learned Judge answered issue 7 in the 1st Defendant's favour
and dismissed the Plaintiff's action. Issue 26 was not answered by the
District Judge.  
  
The 1st Plaintiff relies on three. decisions of the Supreme Court to establish
his claim as pupillary successor of Moratota Rajaguru Dhammakkande Thero who
was admittedly the original Viharadhipathi of Degaldoruwa Vihare. The first of
these was he case No. 81630 instituted in the District Court of Kandy in 1879
by Paruselle Dharmajothi Unnanse of Malwatte (through whom the 1st Defendant
now claims in this case) against Tikiri Banda Paranatala, Pillawala
Dhammadassi Unnanse and Amunugama Ratanapala Unnanse .(Plaint P10). He claimed
to be entitled to Degaldoruwa Vihare and its endowments upon a Deed, dated 7th
May 1849

**209**

executed by Paranatala Thero (Senior). The Supreme Court held that Dhammajothi
Unnanse was not a pupil of Paranatala (Senior) and therefore not a pupillary
successor: of the original grantee Moratota Mahanayake. (Vide 4 S.C.C. 121).  
  
The next case is the case No. 9009 which was instituted in the, District Court
of Kandy. This was also instituted by Parusselle Dharmajothi Thero on 27th
January 1882 against the three persons who were the Defendants in Case No.
81630 referred to above. In this the priest claimed to be the sole incumbent
of Degaldoruwa Vihare by right of pupillary succession to Mahalle Sobitha
Unnanse (Plaint P13) who, he alleged, was a pupil of Moratota Mahanayake. The
plaintiff failed to establish this and his action was dismissed.  
  
The last of the cases. is No. 45415 instituted in the District Court of Kandy
on 4-7-1934 (Plaint P5). In that case the 1st Plaintiff and 2nd Plaintiff
(both appellants in this case) claimed Meda Pansala in Malwatte Pansala as
being part and parcel of the endowments of Degaldoruwa Vihare: The four
Defendants who were priests residing in Meda Pansala claimed it by right of
succession to Parusselle Dhammajothi Thero. The second Defendant in this case,
Waharaka Gunaratne Thero; was the Tutor of the 1st Defendant in that case, and
the 1st Defendant claims to have succeeded him.  
  
The Supreme Court held that Meda Pansala was appurtenant to Degaldoruwa Vihare
and that the 1st Plaintiff as the rightful incumbent of Degaldoruwa Vihare was
entitled to Meda Pansala (Vide 39 N.L.R. 236). These cases establish that
Parusselle Dhammajothi Thero was not a pupillary successor to Moratota
Mahanayake, that the 1st Plaintiff was the rightful pupillary successor to
Moratota Mahanayake and therefore entitled to Degaldoruwa Vihare and its
appurtenant, Meda Pansala. In this case both contestants agree that Selawa
Vihare was granted to Moratota Mahanayake and his pupillary successors. It is
this same line of succession that applies to Degaldoruwa Vihare. In District
Court Kandy Case No. 9009 the Supreme Court held that Mahalle Sobitha Unnanse
was not a pupil of Moratota Mahanayake. The 1st Plaintiff pleaded that these
decisions were res adjudicata between the parties. There is no doubt that the
rules of res judicata will apply in cases of this kind. Courts cannot and will
not allow the same question to be reagitated once a competent Court has
decided the issue. There must be an end to litigation. Moragolle Sumangala vs.
Kiribamune Piyadassi (1) Podiya vs. Sumangala Thero (2) I n a case such as
this where the pupil derives his right from the dedication by right of
pupillary succession, and not in reality from his tutor, successive incumbents
in the same paramparawa are

**210**

bound by decisions concerning devolution in the same paramparawa. It is
analogous to fidei commissum. "While a fiduciary in relation to fidei
commissaries, can be regarded as representing the inheritance, a tutor in'
relation to his pupils in a particular line of succession can be regarded as
re presenting the succession or that line-per Sansoni J. in Piyaratne Thero
vs. Pemananda Thero 131 Therefore issues 1, 2 and 4 were correctly answered
and 1st Plaintiff was properly held to be the de jure Viharadhipathi of Selawa
Vihare.  
  
The question was raised as to whether Selawa Vihare was an appurtenance of
Degaldoruwa Vihare. Degaldoruwa Vihare was granted on a Sannas by King Sri
Rajadhi Rajasinghe to Moratota Mahanayake Thero. This Sannas is reproduced by
Lawrie at page 138 of Vol. 1 of his Gazetteer (Vide judgment P8). Selawa
Vihare was restored in the year 1779 A.D. (2322 A.B.) by Moratota Mahanayake
and King Sri Wickrama Rajasinghe, who reigned in Kandy from 1798 - 1815 AA,
dedicated lands to this temple which were to be inherited by pupillary
succession to Moratota Mahanayake. This dedication is engraved on a rock built
into the outer wall of the Vihare and is dated 2439 A.B. (1806 A.D.) (Vide
P19). Lands belonging to Selawa Vihare were surveyed in 1864 and registered as
Temple Land under the Temple Land Registration Ordinance 1856 (P1 and P2). A
Service Tenures Register had been prepared for its lands that were subject to
service tenures (P3 and P4). Services were performed by Paraveni Nilakarayas
of Selawa Vihare which services were also utilised to maintain Meda Pansala
which was the Avasa of Moratota Unnanse. But this last fact does not prove
that Selawa Vihare was appurtenant to Degaldoruwa. The finding that Selawa
Vihare was not appurtenant to Degaldoruwa Vihare is correct.  
  
Issue 7 raised a question of misjoinder of Plaintiffs and causes of action.
The learned District Judge answered it in the affirmative. His view was that
"the status of a Trustee and the status of Viharadhipathi cannot constitute
one cause of action." They were, in his opinion distinct. In the original
plaint and its subsequent amendments the 1st Plaintiff pleaded that he was the
Viharadhipathi of Selawa Vihare and the 2nd Plaintiff stated that he was
Trustee of Selawa Vihare by virtue, of the fact that he was Trustee of
Degaldoruwa Vihare. Neither prayed for a declaration of status. The joint
prayer is as follows

**211**

1\. That Selawa be declared a Charitable Trust.  
  
2\. That they or one of them be quieted in possession.  
  
3\. That they be awarded damages against the first Defendant.  
  
In the original plaint dated 2-2-1965 (and all its subsequent 'amendments) the
Plaintiffs pleaded that since 30th September, 1964, the first Defendant was in
forcible possession and disputing their rights. In considering this objection
one must first look at the plaint and its averments. The first Plaintiff does
not ask for a declaration that he is the Viharadhipathi nor does the 2nd
Plaintiff ask for a declaration that he is the Trustee of Degaldoruwa Vihare
or even of Selawa Vihare. The Plaintiffs plead that the first Defendant is
"wrongfully and unlawfully disputing the plaintiffs' rights to the said Selawa
Vihare . . . . . and is in wrongful and unlawful possession thereof" causing
loss and damage. "Cause of action" is defined in section 5 of the Civil
Procedure Code as follows:  
  
"cause of action" is the wrong for the prevention or redress of which an
action may be brought, and includes the denial of a right, the refusal to
fulfil an. obligation, the neglect to perform a duty, and the infliction of an
affirmative injury.."  
  
The relief claimed was alleged to exist in them jointly against the first
Defendant. Therefore the joinder conformed to the provisions of section 11 of
the Civil Procedure Code. At the end of the trial the learned Judge found that
Selawa Vihare was not a appurtenant of Degaldoruwa Vihare and this finding
implied that the 2nd Plaintiff had at no time a cause of action to join in
this action as he . could claim no rights in Selawa Vihare based on his status
as Trustee of Degaldoruwa Vihare. It was then open to him, to give judgment
for the 1st Plaintiff alone without amendment of the pleadings as he was
empowered by section 11 of the Civil Procedure Code to do. Instead, he
dismissed the action which dismissal was not warranted in law. The Court of
Appeal was of the view that the Judge should have acted under the provisions
of section 17 of the Civil Procedure Code. This section enjoins. a Judge not
to dismiss an action for misjoinder or non joinder of parties. The Supreme
Court has held that in cases of misjoinder the Court should facilitate the
correction of defects by striking off wrong parties and by making the
necessary amendments to pleadings. London and Lanchashire Fire Insurance Co.
v. P. & 0\. Company(4) Algamma v. Mohamadu (5) Kudhoos v. Joonoos (6) Dingiri
Appuhamy v. Pannananda Thero(7). Even if section 17 of the Civil Procedure
Code was applicable I would not in this case send the case back for

**212**

such action to be taken in view of the fact that the 2nd Plaintiff had no
cause of action whatsoever. Technicalities of this nature must be overcome to
ensure the least possible expense and delay. Merely striking out the name of
the 2nd Plaintiff from the caption would have sufficed. However in the
circumstances of this case this course of action is not necessary.  
  
The next question is the issue of Prescription. The Appellant's contention is
that this action is a claim for an incumbency and therefore one for
declaration of a status which claim is barred in 3 years in terms of section
10 of the Prescription Ordinance. Hewata Unnanse v. Ratnajothi Unnanse(8)
Terunnanse v. Terunnanse(9) and Premaratne v. lndasara(l0). I n Kirikitta
Saranankara Thero v. Medegama Dhammananda Thero(11 ) Gratiaen J. came to the
same conclusion, though reluctantly, but he expressed doubts as to this
proposition in the following manner:  
  
"The earlier authorities certainly seem to indicate that, if a trespasser who
disputes the status of the true incumbent of a temple continues thereafter to
remain in adverse possession without interruption for a period of three years
the dilatory incumbent's right to relief in the form of a declaratory decree
becomes barred by limitation under section 10. We must, of course, regard
ourselves as bound by these decisions, but with great respect, I think that,
on this particular point, the question calls for reconsideration by a fuller
Bench on an appropriate occasion. It is clear law that an impostor cannot
acquire a right to an incumbency by prescription; nor can the rights of the
true incumbent be extinguished by prescription. Although the operation of
section 10 may destroy the remedy accruing from a particular "denial", the
right or status itself still subsists. It is true that the lawful incumbent
can take no steps after three years to enforce his remedy if it is based
exclusively on that particular "denial" of his status, but there is much to be
said for the argument that a continuing invasion of a subsisting right
constitutes in truth a continuing cause of action. Indeed, the contrary view
would indirectly produce the anomalous result of converting the provision of
section 10 into a weapon for the extinction of a right which cannot in law be
extinguished by prescription."  
  
He adopted the same principle in Moragolla Sumangala vs. Kiribamune Piyadassi
(1) Basnayake C. J. also expressed doubts as to the correctness of this view.
He thought that such an action was in effect not only for a declaration of
status but also for the recovery of the temple and its property and therefore
the provisions of section 3 ,of the Prescription Ordinance should apply. His
obiter

**213**

dictum in the case of Pandith Watugedera Amaraseeha Thero v. Tittagalle
Sasanatilake Thero (12) is as follows:  
  
"The plaintiff's action is in effect an action, for not only a declaration of
status, but also for the recovery of the temple and its property, for, his
prayer is that the defendant be ejected from the premises described in the
Schedule to the plaint.  
  
It would therefore not be correct to treat the instant case as an action for-
declaration of a status alone. The period of prescription in respect of
actions for the purpose of being quieted in possession of lands or other
immovable property, or to prevent encroachment or usurpation thereof, or to
establish a claim in any other manner to land or property is governed by
section 3 and not by section 10 of the Prescription Ordinance. The decisions
of this Court (1916) 3 C.W.R. 1981 ,(8) (1927) 28 N.L.R. 477 (9), and (1938)
40 N.L.R. 235 (10') which held that an action for an incumbency of a temple,
being an action for a declaration of a status, is barred by the lapse of three
years from the date when the cause of action arose, may have to be re-examined
in a suitable case in the light of the altered rights of a Viharadhipathi who
is now empowered to sue and be sued as he person in whom the management of the
property belonging to a temple is' vested."  
  
In the case of Kirikitta Saranankara Thero (supra) Gratiaen J. expressed the
view that "an impostor cannot acquire a right to an incumbency by prescription
nor can the rights of the true incumbent be extinguished by prescription.", He
cited no authority for this proposition. When he later came to decide the case
of Moragolla Sumangala vs. Kiribamune Piyadassi (supra) he stated this to be
settled law. As a part of Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law this is true.
Prescription was a later British concept. The question I ask myself is - Does
the Prescription Ordinance apply in this case ?  
  
It must be borne in mind that the prayer to the plaint in this action merely
asks that the plaintiffs be quieted in possession of the Vihare and its
endowments and for the ejectment of the first Defendant. As a result of the
issues framed the learned District Judge held that the 1st Plaintiff must be
deemed to be the lawful successor to Moratota Mahanayake in respect of the
incumbency of Selawa Vihare It is in that capacity, that the prayer to the
plaint must be considered. In the result he is praying for recovery of
possession and damages as Viharadhipathi. I n considering this question I
proceed on the basis that Selawa Vihare was at all times sangika property, as
this was the accepted basis throughout the trial by

**214**

both contesting parties. What was the Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law in regard to
the rights and powers of a Viharadhipathi in the temple and its endowments,
and in what form do they now exist after the many British Statutes interfering
with them? No doubt one has to refer to the Buddhist Scriptures to find the
original rules. They are the three Pitakes but over the centuries rites,
rituals, customs and practices have developed, particularly in relation to
dealings in property, and these are tolerated by Buddhists as accretions
growing out of historical necessity. Dias J. in Henepolle Pansalle Sumangala
Unnanse v. Henepolle Panselle Sobita Unnanse (13) stated the position thus:  
  
"These Pitakas, three I believe in number,. contain a large body of rules and
regulations with reference to the conduct of the priesthood, to the succession
to ecclesiastical property, and so forth; but the Buddhists of Ceylon have not
adopted all these rules, and our Courts have only given effect to such rules
as have been adopted in this country. Now, one of the fundamental rules of
right, a priest, according to Buddhist theology is that a priest is not
entitled to hold property commonly called Pudgalika in this individual right.
A priest, according to Buddhist law, is supposed to be a pauper, and he is
indebted for his daily subsistence to the charity of Buddhists. This rule is,
to some extent, in force in this country, for we occasionally see Buddhist
priests going round with their pattre of vessel to collect their daily food.
This is the correct Buddhist usage; but in point of fact, the Buddhist priests
of this country are landed proprietors they buy and sell and enter into
contracts in their own right, and these dealings are' upheld by our courts."  
  
De Sampayo J. in Saranankara Unnanse v. Indajoti Unnanse(14) preferred to look
to actual practice and custom. He found himself in agreement with Dias J.
(quoted above) and added:  
  
"This view is confirmed by the number of departures from the strict Buddhist
law and the creation of new precedents. For instance, notwithstanding the rule
of absolute poverty, priests generally hold considerable private property
which is at their own disposal, and on their death descends to their lay
heirs, Ratanapala Unnanse v. Abdul Cader(1 5) Mahattaya v. Kumarihamy(1 6).
passages in Marshall's Judgments and Morgan's Digest which reproduce the old
Buddhist' rule. Again, a priest

**215**

may acquire property by special gift or bequest, and he may inherit his
brother's or sister's' estate, or if he be the only child, he has a right to
his father's lands in preference to collaterals. Kande v. Kiri Naide( l 7). He
was also entitled, before the enactment of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance, to the savings out of the revenue of the temple. See Ratnapala vs.
Abdul Cader (supra) and the authorities therein cited. Another instance of
modification is found in Sumangala Unnanse vs. Sobita Unnanse (supra), where
it has been held, notwithstanding the authority of the Buddhist scriptures to
the contrary, that a deed of gift conferring the incumbency on a pupil may be
revoked by the grantor and a new appointment made. 'Without referring to all
the examples of this kind, I may mention that the jurisdiction exercised
without any question by the Asgiriya and Malwatte Colleges in appointing
incumbents to vacant temples where the line of succession has been broken,
appears to have no support in the Buddhist scriptures, which confer that power
upon the entire priesthood. Nor is there any warrant in the books for the
distinction between the Siamese and the Amarapura sects, and for the
incapacity of a priest of one sect to succeed to an incumbency held by a
priest of the other sect. I wish, however, to make it clear that these changes
should be regarded, not as lapses, but as necessary developments in the course
of centuries. Doctrine and belief are, of course, immutable, but discipline
and administration are naturally subject to modifications. Accordingly, it
becomes necessary, in matters of the latter kind, to look to actual practice
and custom rather than to the ancient canons."  
  
Then again he quotes the statement of Sri Sumangala Gahagoda Nayake Thero of
Dambulla in regard to the much litigated rule of pupillary succession as
follows:  
  
"What I have now stated does not appear in any books but is the custom handed
down for ages. Buddha did not create Sissiyanu Sisya paramparawa succession
but the Kings did, who in ancient times dedicated temples to the worship of
Buddha by Royal Sannas".  
  
I think one can safely assume that the original rules contained in the
scriptures have not uniformly been adhered to by the Buddhists of this country
but various practices, custom and usage have sprung up and these have from
time to time been recognised by the Courts. It is to those decisions that one
must look to find that part of the Buddhist ecclesiastical law that has
escaped the ravages of British and other legislations. The historical
evolution of this-law

**216**

is contained in a series of decisions the correctness of which however is not
necessary for us to examine. The Viharadhipathi was entitled to the temple and
its lands (1 Beven & Siebel Reports 1859p. 32). An incumbent held "the temple.
lands subject to the duty of making provision out of the revenues for the
maintenance of the temple. Anything which he saves out of revenues and dies
possessed of, passes to his legal representative - that is the person who
would be his legal representative were he a layman, per Clarence J. in
Ratnapala Unanse vs. Sego Saibu Sego Abdul Cader (supra). This was a decision
in June 1882. Property dedicated to a Vihare or Pansala was the property of
the incumbent for the purposes of his office, including his own support and
the maintenance of the temple and its services. Rathanapala Unanse vs.
Kewitiagala Unanse(18) He could alienate or encumber the lands to meet the
needs and exigencies of the Vihare. Heneya vs. Ratnapala Unnanse(19). These
decisions show that the Viharadhipathi referred to as the 'incumbent' which
term is more appropriate to English law; was considered to have proprietary
rights over the temple and its endowments and to wield almost unfettered power
over them.  
  
The first of the legislative attempts to control this power was the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance No. 3 of 1889 as amended by Ordinance No. 17 of 1895
and Ordinance No. 3 of 1901. They were subsequently consolidated into the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No. 8 of 1905. The essence of this Statute
was that title to the temple and its endowments movable and immovable was
vested in Trustees elected in terms of section 17 of the Ordinance. Section 20
reads as follows :  
  
"All property, movable and immovable, belonging or in anywise appertaining to
or appropriated to the use of any temple, together with all the issues, rents,
and profits of the same, and all offerings made for the use of such temple
other than the pudgalika offerings which are offered for the exclusive
personal use of any individual priest, shall vest in the trustees of such
temple; subject, however, to any leases and other tenancies, charges, and
encumbrances affecting any such immovable property; and such issues, rents,
profits, and offerings shall be appropriated by such trustees for the  
  
following purposes and no other:  
  
(a) The proper repair and furnishing of such temple and the upkeep of the
roads and buildings belonging there;

**217**

(b) The maintenance `of the priesthood and ministerial officers attached to
such temple;  
  
(c) The due performance of religious services and ceremonies as heretofore
carried on,. in, or by or in connection with,, such temple;  
  
(d) The promotion of education;  
  
(e) The relief of the poor in the case of a dewale, and the customary
hospitality to priests and others in the case of a vihare;  
  
(f) The payment of compensation under sections 37 or 38 ;  
  
(g) The payment of such share of the, expenses incurred or to be incurred in
carrying out the provisions of this Ordinance as shall be determined by the
district committee."  
  
One of the Trustee's duties was to utilise income for the maintenance of the
priesthood and ministerial officers, the maintenance and repair of the temple
and buildings and for the performance of religious services. By section 30 he
was permitted to sue and could be sued as Trustee in the name of the temple.
The reasons why this was necessary was considered to be that neither the
temple nor the Viharadhipathi was a corporation and could not therefore, in
the law maintain an action for temple property. Section 28 casts a duty on
the. incumbent to furnish information to the Trustee and to the President of
the District Committee with regard to offerings made to the temple, regarding
value of paraveni, maruveni and other lands and the value of rents issues and
profits of these lands.  
  
"Incumbent" here is defined as follows in section 2:  
  
"Incumbent" here is defined as follows in section 2: ''Incumbent" shall mean
the chief resident priest of a temple."  
  
This definition includes both the Viharadhipathi or the Chief resident priest
officiating on his behalf. The latter was known as 'Adhikari'. This term
'incumbent' could include the Viharadhipathi if he was resident in the temple.
(vide 20 N.L.R. at 39714). There after sections for vindication of title to
temple property could. only: be maintained by a Trustee as title was vested in
him, Somittare . v. Jasin (20) not by reason of the fact that section 30
empowers the Trustee to sue (as this decision states) but by reason of the
vesting in terms of section 20 of the Ordinance. Yet it appears that this
right of action in the Viharadhipathi was not lost till a Trustee was

**218**

in fact elected. The title remained in the: incumbent until such time. In the
case of Sidharta Unnanse v. Udayara (21) a case decided in 1919; de Sampayo J.
held that the incumbent priest, as de facto Trustee,. was entitled to maintain
a possessory action to recover -a field belonging to a Dagoba . This right was
recognised because a Trustee had of been 'elected as required by the
Ordinance. (Vide Drieberg J. in Terunnanse v. Don Aron (22) .On the other hand
in the case of Wimalatissa v. Perera (23) it was held that the incumbent was
not entitled to sue for rights to land and only the Trustee could do so. See
also Dias vs. . Ratanapala Terunnase(24)  
  
These provisions in the Ordinance of 1889, and especially section 20 thereof,
did not however remove certain inalienable rights and interests of the
incumbent in the temple and its endowments. In the year 1919 -in the case of
Devarakkita v. Dharmaratne (25) the incumbent priest was declared entitled to
the control and administration of the Vihare. Ennis, A.: C. J. expressed
himself thus:  
  
"Till the passing of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance a question of the
incumbency involved without doubt the possession of the lands and other
property of the Vihare. After the enactment of these Ordinances the property
of the Vihare was, vested in the trustee, and it is suggested now that the
incumbent has no material interest in the property. I am unable to say that
this is so; it would seem that the prevailing priest or incumbent has the
control and administration of the Vihare itself,. although the :property vests
in the trustee; and, therefore, the right to an incumbency is still a legal
right, and not purely an ecclesiastical matter."  
  
The incumbent was not however granted a right to obtain ejectment. So also in
the case of Sumana Tissa Unnanse v. Sometara Unnanse (26) in which the
incumbent priest was granted only a declaration of his' right to the
incumbency of the Vihare but was denied the right to eject the trespasser and
the right to damages. l will . revert to this later in this judgement. I n the
year 1.921 in the case of Piyadasa vs. Deevamitta(27) De Sampayo J. reiterated
this right of control and management. He stated:  
  
"The first defendant, in the first place, depends on the document granted to
him by the High Priest Galgiriawa Terunnanse. The document is an informal non-
notarial instrument; and is therefore insufficient to create such an interest
in the ,property; as the first defendant claims. Moreover, -,1 doubt whether
the: High Priest, even apart from: the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance,
though he had control :and management of the premises and 'might regulate its
occupation and use,

**219**

had .any right to give away. any part of it or to create an interest., therein
to last beyond his own tenure of office. The first defendant, in the next
place, falls back upon the general principle that sangika property is common
to the entire priesthood, and that an individual priest cannot be ejected
therefrom. This , principle was stated by Cayley C. J. in Dhammejoty v. Tikiri
Banda(28) as follows: 'A Buddhist priest cannot be ejected from . a Buddhist
vihare except for some personal cause, irrespective of the rights of
property'. There is no doubt about this Buddhist law, and it is therefore
unnecessary to examine further the authorities on that subject. This right of
the priesthood, however, surely -does not mean that an individual priest can,
select for himself a particular place in the vihare independently of the
chief, incumbent and against his wishes. l think that any persistent assertion
of an insistence on such an alleged right is a 'personal cause', for which he
may properly be asked to leave. Such conduct would amount to contumacy, and in
the exercise of ecclesiastical discipline and order, the incumbent has, I
think, sufficient authority: even to eject the offending priest.".  
  
In the year 1926 in the case of Gooneratne Nayake Thero v. Punchi Banda
Korala(29) the chief priest of Dambulla Vihare was declared entitled to the
gabadage (store) and multenge (kitchen) of the Vihare and their unhampered use
for the purpose of performing, the religious rites and ceremonies of the
Vihare. A Trustee was not entitled to appoint. or dismiss the ministerial
officers attached to the Temple. Lyall Grant J. stated as follows:  
  
"In order to understand the position, one has to inquire into the precise
functions which the gabadage and the multenge serve in the temple economy. The
gabadage is the store-room containing rice set apart for the temple offerings
and for the maintenance of the priests. It also contains some utensils used in
the handling of the rice. The Multenge is the kitchen to which the rice is
taken from the gabadage, and where it is prepared for the purpose of 'pooja'.
and offerings in the temple.  
  
 It is clear from the evidence that this preparation of rice is part of
religious ceremony.  
  
In order to ascertain how far the duties of the trustee extend, one has to
consider the scope and intention of the Ordinance. It is clear that the main
intention of the Ordinance is to remove from the priesthood the general
control and management of the property belonging to a temple. Such property
usually consists - apart from the temple buildings and ornaments - of lands
which are set aside for the maintenance of

**220**

temple worship.  
  
No intention is shown in the Ordinance, and it is inconceivable that any such
intention could exist, to interfere in any way with the due performance of
religious rites.  
  
The general effect of section 20 appears to be that the property is vested in
the trustee for. the purposes set out. in subsection (a), (b), (c) and (d).  
  
Sub-section (b), elates to the maintenance of the priesthood and ministerial
officers attached to such temple, and sub-section (c) relates- to, the 'due
performance of religious services: and ceremonies as heretofore carried on,
in, by, or in connection  
with, such temple'.  
  
Rice brought into the gabadage is rice which has either been grown- on :temple
lands, and is therefore an issue or the profit of immovable property, or it is
an offering for the use of the temple, or it is rice. bought by the trustee
from the rents and profits of the temple. I n any case, it. is rice vested in
the trustee which he has placed in this building.  
  
But the general store of rice of which the trustee is in: charge is kept in a
building called the 'attuwa', and when he removes any of this rice to the
gabadage he makes an appropriation for the purposes set out in sub-sections
(b) and (c), as contemplated by section 20 of the Ordinance. Once he has made
such an appropriation, it appears to us that he has nothing further to do with
the disposal of the rice.. He has handed it over for the special purpose of
religious worship, and the manner in which it is so used is entirely a matter
for the Nayake Unnanse or high priest."  
  
With regard to the interference by the Trustee he stated as follows:  
  
"The second issue is as to the appointment of ministerial officers attached to
the temple. We can find nothing in the Ordinance which entitles a trustee to
appoint or dismiss such officers.  
  
Their duties are religious or quasi-religious, connected with the rites and
ceremonies of the temple, and they are officers who must appropriately come
under the jurisdiction of the', high priest. That this is so appears clearly
from the appellant's own evidence. He' admits that the account given by the
plaintiff of the duties of the Kattiyana R alas is correct, and that. After

**221**

the Padaviya Vidane has removed rice from the store he (the appellant) has
nothing further to do with it. He cannot point to any duties which the
officials perform which are of a purely secular nature and which pertain to
duties entrusted to the trustee.  
  
An incumbent's right to maintenance from the income of the temple and its
endowments was a right that could be enforced against the Trustee. The above
cases show clearly that the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinances of 1889 and 1905
left untouched an incumbent's inalienable customary rights and interests in
the temple and its endowments required to be exercised or used by him for the
purpose of his office.  
  
The next enactment is the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance of 1931 (Cap. 318).
We now have a return to the strict Ecclesiastical law in that "incumbent" has
been replaced by "Viharadhipathi", Section 2 defines the term as follows:  
  
"Viharadhipathi" means the principal bhikku of. a temple other than a dewale
or kovila whether resident or not."  
  
Realisation seems to have dawned on all concerned that the Viharadhipathi
carried with him all the powers accruing to that office, which was of special
significance, and the chief resident monk (adhikari) was in fact merely the
agent of the Viharadhipathi, resident elsewhere. Title was vested in the
Trustee appointed` by the Viharadhipathi. Section 20 reads as follows:.  
  
"All property, movable and immovable, belonging or in anywise appertaining to
or appropriated to the use of any temple, together with all the issues, rents,
moneys, and profits of the same, and all offerings` made for the use of such
temple other than the pudgalika offerings which are offered for the exclusive
personal use of any individual bhikku, shall vest in the trustee or the
controlling Viharadhipathi for the time being of such temple subject however,
to any leases and other tenancies, charges, and incumbrances already affecting
any such immovable property."  
  
The Trustee or the Controlling Viharadhipathi remained as the person who could
bring on action rei vindicatio in respect of the Temple and its lands.
Therunuanse v. Andrayas Appu(32)Weeraman v. Somaratne Thero.(33) Management of
the property belonging to a Temple not exempted from the provisions of section
4(1) vested in the Trustee. Application of income received by the Trustee is
go-

**222**

verned by section 25. They have to be applied inter alia for maintenance of
the temple, the bhikkhus ministerial officers and the due performance of
religious worship and such customary ceremonies" as. heretofore ,maintained."
Besides recognising the "Viharadhipathi" of a temple in place of the
"incumbent" the Ordinance of 1931 made some other significant changes.
District Committees and elected Trustees ceased to exist. In their place we
have a Trustee nominated by the Viharadhipathi (section 10) for every temple
not exempted from the operation of section 4(1) and a "Controlling
Viharadhipathi" for the management of a temple exempted from the provisions of
section 4(1) but not exempted from the operation of the entire Ordinance
(section 4 (2)). The Public Trustee is given a number of duties and functions
by the provisions of this Ordinance. All property, movable and immovable, are
vested in the Trustee or Controlling Viharadhipathi. Vide section 20 (which
corresponds to section 20 of the 1905 Ordinance). Section 25 stipulates the
purpose for which the income of the temple shall be appropriated by the
Trustee. Section 18 empowers a Trustee or Controlling Viharadhipathi to sue
and be sued as Trustee or Controlling Viharadhipathi in the name of the
temple. (Vide section 30 of 1905 Ordinance). Another important innovation in
the 1931 Ordinance is the provision for the registration of Bhikkus. [Section
41(1)]. It is not necessary hereto refer in detail to the various differences
between the 1905 Ordinance and the 1931 Ordinance. For the purpose of this
case 1 need only refer to the provisions of section 34 which reads as follows;  
  
"in the case of any claim for the recovery of any property, movable or
immovable, belonging or alleged to belong to any temple, or for the assertion
of title to any such property, the claim shall not be held to be barred or
prejudiced by any provision of the Prescription Ordinance.  
  
Provided that this section shall of affect rights acquired prior to the
commencement of this Ordinance.  
  
This was a most important addition and one of the reasons for its
introduction, I think, is the recognition of the existence and the rights and
powers of the Viharadhipathi vis a vis the temple and its endowments.: It
provided that the Prescription Ordinance shall not apply in two instances:  
  
1\. To any claim for the recovery of property movable or immovable, belonging
to or alleged to belong to any temple, and  
  
2\. To any claim for the assertion of title to any property of any temple:

**223**

 The application of the second of these is obvious. Title to temple property
is vested in the Trustee by virtue of section 20 and he alone is entitled to
assert title and to institute actions rei vindicatio in respect of such
property. The first limb must therefore apply to recovery other than by way of
action rei vindicatio Action for recovery of dues from Nilakarayas would be
covered by this. So also would all these rights of the Viharadhipathi in the
temple property. The right to an incumbency is a legal right enforceable in
law and it is not purely an ecclesiastical matter. Devarakkita v. Dharmaratne
(supra). With this legal right goes not rights of ownership in the property of
the temple but those other rights acquired by virtue of his office which
rights are enforceable in law against Trustees and all those denying such
rights. He has the right to be maintained from the funds of the temple and its
temporalities and he is entitled to call on the Trustee for this and even to
enforce his right in law. This is recognised by the provisions of section 25
of the Ordinance (Cap. 318), Gunaratne v. Punchi Banda ;supra),. Indeed, I
would go further, He is entitled to claim such income for discharging his duty
of maintaining all his pupils and all resident priests. He is entitled to the
full possession of the Vihare and all buildings within the temple premises and
their unhampered use- for the purpose of performing his religious duties and
ceremonies, Gunaratne Nayake Thero v. Punchi Banda Korale (supra): For this
purpose he is entitled to the income of the temple and its temporalities
(section 25). He has the sole right to the appointment, control and dismissal
of the ministerial officers of the temple who assist in the maintenance and
the performance of the religious rites of the temple. (28 N.L.R. at 149 29.),
He has the control and management of the temple premises and its occupation..
No priest can select for himself a place of occupation independently of the
wishes of the Viharadhipathi. A priest who is guilty of -contumacy can be
ejected from the temple. Piyadasa v. Deevamitta (supra). Dharmaratne vs.
lndasara lsthaviral(34) Podiya vs. Sumangala Thero (supra) He alone has the
right to appoint a Trustee in whom title thereafter vests. (Section 10(1)).
For all these he clearly must have possession of the buildings which comprise
the temple and of the buildings and other property used for the purpose of
residence of the monks and for the services conducted in the temple. The lands
which constitute the endowments are, in a sense, appurtenant to the temple and
some of them are held by tenants on performance of services, and the income of
the rest is intended to be used for the purposes of the temple. It is true
that the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance provides that such lands should vest
in a duly appointed trustee. In the case of this temple, there is no such
trustee but the 1st defendant is not setting. up any distinct title to

**224**

such lands. He admits that they constitute the endowments of and belong to
Selawa Vihara and he is in possession only because he claims-to be the
Viharadhipathi of the said temple. Plaintiff will not obtain complete relief
in respect of the dispute adjudicated upon in this action, and the 1st
defendant will be permitted to continue, to some extent, his denial of the
rights of the plaintiff under the dedication relied on in the plaint if the
Defendant is not removed from the control and possession. of the lands which
he has entered into on his claim to be the Viharadhipathi which claim has now
been found to be wrong and unsupportable. Recovery of such possession is "the
recovery of property" referred to in the first part of section 34. When a
Viharadhipathi sues to be declared entitled to the office of Viharadhipathi of
a temple and to eject those disputing his rights or to recover possession of
the temple and its endowments he is enforcing a right he has in law and any
such claim is exempt from the provisions of the Prescription Ordinance by
virtue of the provisions of section 34 (Cap. 318). Therefore all cases that
have held that such an action is bound by the provisions of either section 3
or section 10 of the Prescription Ordinance have been wrongly decided and
should no longer be considered good law.  
  
We are conscious of the fact that the law as stated by us may not be fully in
accord with the Buddhist doctrines and scriptures, but decisions of long
standing and the legislation on the subject are the proper basis on which we
may proceed even though we are a final court of appeal. Any real changes. in
the law must come from the legislature and it would not be proper for us to.
encroach on the functions of that body.  
  
Issue 24 reads thus:  
  
(24) Was Paranatala Anunayake ever the Viharadhipathi of Selawa Temple ?  
  
The learned District Judge answered this issue "No". The President of the
Court of Appeal thought that this issue referred to Paranatala Ratnapala (1)
in regard to whom an admission was made at the commencement of the trial and
that admission was later amended. The President of the Court of Appeal
expressed surprise at the answer to the issue in view of the relevant facts
and other findings. It has been submitted to us that the issue refers to
Paranatala Unnanse who was a pupil of Moratota himself, who was later
Annunayake, and was beheaded by' the King. This issue was raised by Counsel
for the Plaintiff apparently -because the first claim of the Defendant was-
that Paranatala became the Viharadhipathi after Moratota and that he. left, as
his pupil, Mahilla, and the 1st Defendant claims to. be in line of succession
from Mahilla.

**225**

This submission appears to us to be correct and the President of the Court of
Appeal erred in thinking that the Issue referred to Paranatala Ratanapala (1).  
  
In view of the findings above no useful purpose will be served in discussing
the issue as to whether Selawa Vihare is a Charitable Trust. If and when such
need arises it will be time to decide whet her Sobitha Thera v. Wimalabuddhi
Thera35 was correct in law. I have grave doubts as to its correctness.  
  
As stated earlier the 1st Plaintiff died pending the decision in appeal. By
its order dated 10th March, 1975, the then Supreme Court ordered the
substitution of the 2nd Plaintiff in his stead. The order proceeded on the
basis that it was admitted that the 2nd Plaintiff is the only pupil of the
deceased. This was a decision made in terms of section 404 of the Civil
Procedure Code following the decision in the case of Dhammananda Thero v.
Saddananda Thero 36. The substituted Plaintiff is therefore entitled to the .
reliefs claimed in the plaint against the 1st Defendant who is an impostor.
The appeal of the first Defendant is dismissed and the first Plaintiff as
Viharadhipathi of Selawa Temple is hereby declared entitled to the control and
possession of the temple and its endowments and I order that he be restored to
and be quieted in possession of Selawa Temple and its endowments. I further
order the first Defendant not to interfere with the first Plaintiff's control
and possession of the temple and its endowments and further direct that the
first Defendant be ejected from the endowments described in the schedule to
the plaint.. The first Plaintiff will be entitled to_ costs of this appeal.
The order of the Court of Appeal in respect of costs in that Court and the
District Court will stand.  
  
**SAMARAWICKREMA, J.** \- I agree  
  
**ISMAIL L, J.                   **  \- I agree  
**  
WEERARATNE, J.           **\- I agree  
**  
WANASUNDERA, J.        **\- I agree  
  
**_1st defendant's Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/13.html_  

