[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [2005](./) >> **[2005] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+2005+14 or 2005+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=2005+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Ameer Ali And Others v. Srilanka Muslim Congress And Others - SLR - 189,
Vol 1 of 2006 [2005] LKSC 14; (2006) 1 Sri LR 189 (1 July 2005)

**189**

**AMEER ALI AND OTHERS**

**VS**

**SRILANKA MUSLIM CONGRESS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT,  
S. N. SILVA, CJ,  
JAYASINGHE, J,  
UDALAGAMA, J,  
DISSANAYAKE, J AND  
FERNANDO, J,  
SC (EXPULSIONS) NO. 2/2005 WITH SC (EXPULSIONS) NOS 3 AND 4/2005 31ST MAY AND
3RD AND 7TH JUNE, 2005.  
  
Constitutional Law- Article 99(13) (a) of the Constitution - Explusion from
political party - Mala fides, bias and failure of natural justice - Invalidity
of expulsions Â­Policy of SLMC- Alleged failure to sign a pledge of loyalty to
SLMC and its leader - Burden of proof to adduce evidence to support
allegations against petitioners.  
_  
The petitioners in Applications Nos. 2 and 3/05 contested the Parliamentary
elections as SLMC candidates and were elected to the Batticaloa and
Trincomalee Districts respectively. The petitioner in Application No. 4/05, a
SLMC member contested the Wanni District as a UNP candidate and was elected as
Member of Parliament for that District, in terms of an electoral pact between
the SLMC and the UNP.  
  
The petitioners supported the then President's National Advisory Council for
Peace and Reconciliation and were appointed Project Ministers for Batticaloa,
Trincomalee and the Wanni Districts respectively. This resulted in a letter by
the 3rd respondent, Secretary, SLMC addressed to the petitioners calling upon
them to sign a. pledge of loyalty to the SLMC and its leader (the 2nd
respondent) and the High Command, and to follow their policies and directions.
The petitioners severely criticized the leader and the party for not  
joining the peace process to the detriment of Muslims.  
  
Consequently, the 3rd respondent informed the petitioner that disciplinary
action will be taken against the petitioners. The 2nd respondent denied the
allegations against the SLMC and threatened disciplinary action against the
petitioners. The allegations by the petitioners against the SLMC included
criticism for signing an amended electoral pact with the UNP and allowing
three SLMC members to join the UNP.  
  
In the absence of clarification as to who was the disciplinary authority,
whether it was the High Command of the politbureau as asserted by the 3rd
respondent and criticism against the SLMC and its leader, the petitioners
refused to attend an inquiry at a hotel and were summarily expelled from the
SLMC by the High Command by letter dated 04.04.2005, and without hearing them.

**190**

**Held:  
  
**Notwithstanding a purported withdrawal of the letters of expulsions by the
3rd respondent on 28.05.2005 whilst the petitions were pending -  
  
(a) The Supreme Court had jurisdiction to determine the validity of expulsions
;  
  
(b) The expulsions were contrary to natural justice, mala fide and ultra vires
the SLMC constitution;  
  
(c) Minutes of the meetings of the High Command and polibureau were not
produced in evidence. The burden of producing such evidence was on the
respondents;  
  
(d) The expulsion of the petitioner in Application No. 4/05 based on his
purported expulsion from the UNP was invalid;  
  
(e) expulsions of the petitioners from their political party were invalid;  
  
(f) a Member of Parliament cannot be expelled from his party save on cogent
grounds which are beyond doubt, in the public interest. The benefit of the
doubt will be resolved in favour of the Member.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1. _Tilak Karunaratne v. Sirimavo Bandaranaike_ (1993) Sri LR 91  
  
2\. _Gamini Dissanayake v. M. C. M. Kaleel and Others_ (1993) 2 SriLR 135, 234  
  
**APPLICATIONS** challenging expulsions from party.  
  
_D. S. Wijesinghe, P. C. with Sanjeewa Jayawardena, Priyanthi Goonaratne,
Kaushalya Mo/ligoda and M. I.M. Azver_ for petitioners in Application Nos. 2/
2005 and 3/2005  
  
_Wijayadasa Rajapase, P. C. with Kapila Liyanagamage and Rasika Dissanayake_
for petitioner in Application No. 4/.2005  


_Romesh de Silva, P. C. with Harsha Amarasekera_ for 1st and 2nd respondents
in Application Nos. 2, 3 and 4/2005.  
  
_Ikram Mohamed, P. C., with A. A. M. lIlias, Nizam Kariapper and Padma
Bandara_ for 3rd respondent in Application Nos. 2, 3 and 4/2005  
  
_K. N. Choksy, P. C. with L. C. Seneviratne, P.C. Daya Pelpola, S. J.
Mohideen, Ronald Perera and Shamila Amarawickrema_ for 4th, 5th and 6th
respondents in SC Application No. 4/2005.  
  
_I. Demuni de Silva,_ Senior State Counsel for 4th and 5th respondents is SC
Application Nos 1 and 3 of 2005 and for 7th and 8th respondents in SC
Application No. 4/2005

_Cur.adv. vult._

**191**

1st July 2005

**JUDGMENT OF THE COURT**

The Petitioner in application No. 2/2005 has been a member of the 1st
Respondent Party (SLMC). He contested the general election held in April 2004,
as a candidate nominated by the SLMC and was the only nominee of the Party to
be returned as a Member of Parliament for the Batticaloa District.  
  
The Petitioner in application No. 3/2005, has been a member of the SLMC and
contested the general election held in April 2004, as a candidate nominated by
the party and was returned as a Member of Parliament for the Tricomalee
District.  
  
The Petitioner in application No. 4/2005 has been a member of the SLMC and was
a nominee of the United National Party at the general election in April 2004,
for the Wanni District. His name was included in the nomination paper of the
United National Party on the basis of an electoral agreement with the SLMC and
was returned as a Member of Parliament.  
  
The three Petitioners have been expelled from the SLMC by letters dated 4th
April 2005, sent by the 3rd Respondent, being the Secretary General of the
Party. Since the expulsions were effected by letters bearing the same date and
in view of the similarity in the relevant facts and circumstances, it was
decided to hear these matters together.  
  
These Petitioners have filed applications in terms of the proviso to Article
99 (13) (a) of the Constitution seeking declarations from this Court that
their respective expulsions from SLMC and in the case of the Petitioner in
application No. 4/2005, the consequential expulsion from the United National
Party, are invalid and that the seats held by them in Parliament have not
become vacant consequent to such expulsions.  
  
The circumstances leading to the impugned expulsions are similar in respect of
all three applications. The Petitioners contend that they had serious
differences of views in regard to the manner in which the Members elected from
the SLMC Should conduct themselves in Parliament, with the 2nd Respondent,
being the Leader of the Party. The charges on which the expulsions were made
have a direct bearing on these differences .

**192**

According to the sequence of events the first incident relevant to the
expulsions is a letter dated 5.10.2004, sent by the General Secretary of the
Party requesting the Petitioners to sign a pledge in the specimen form that
was annexed, declaring loyalty and total allegiance to the Party, to its
Leader and the High Command. The pledge also required the person to follow
_inter alia_ the polices and directions of the Leader and the High Command.  
  
The Petitioners refused to sign the pledge and when they were called for
explanations wrote letters dated 13.11.2004, stating, inter alia, that the
requirement to sign the pledge is ultra vires the Constitution of the Party
and they also raised questions as to whether three members of the Party were
permitted to take membership of the United National Party, prior to their
being nominated as Members of Parliament.  
  
In the interim period the Petitioners wrote a joint letter dated 25.10.2004,
to the Leader of the Party (P7) setting out serious criticisms of the conduct
of the Leader in relation to the interests of the Party and of the Muslim
community who have reposed confidence in the Party. In particular they
criticized the decision of the Leader in not attending the meeting of the
National Advisory Council for Peace and Reconciliation (NACPR) convened by Her
Excellency the President to bring about a national consensus to achieve a just
and durable solution to the ethnic problem that has devastated the country for
more than two decades. They alleged that the failure of the Leader to
cooperate in the national endeavour will have a serious impact on the
interests of the Muslims of the North and East, who have been languishing in
abject poverty and destitution in refugee camps for several decades. Further,
that the mandate they received at the election was to make use of every
opportunity to work towards a viable solution that would encompass the just
and reasonable aspirations of the Muslims of the North and East. Accordingly,
they informed the Leader that they would extend their fullest support to the
Government in its endeavour to find a lasting solution to the problems
identified by them which will benefit the Muslims in particular and the
country at large, in general.  
  
Shortly thereafter the 3 Petitioners were appointed as Project Ministers for
Rehabilitation and Development for the Batticaloa, Trincomalee and Wanni
Districts, being the three Districts from which they have been elected.  
  
The reply of the Leader to the Party is contained in a single letter dated
05.11.2004, addressed to all three Petitioners, the contents of which would be
referred to later.

**193**

The Petitioners thereafter received letters dated 19.11.2004 that were
similary worded, requiring them to show cause as to why disciplinary action
should not be taken against them, inter alia for anyone or more of the
following, summarized as follows:  
  
(a) failure to sign the pledge of allagiance to the Party and to the Leader;  
  
(b) the acceptance of the post of Project Minister;  
  
(c) The active support extended to the Government;  
  
(d) joining the ranks of the Government Members in Parliament  
  
The letters have been signed by the General Secretary and state that the
action is taken on a decision of the High Command.  
  
The Petitioners were requested to show cause on or before 30.11.2004, and be
present at a meeting of the High Command to be held at the headquarters of the
Party on 09.12.2004.  
  
The Petitioners responded by letter dated 29.11.2004, requesting time to
answer and were granted an additional 10 days time and were required to be
present at the meeting of the High Command scheduled for 09.12.2004.  
  
The Petitioners replied to the charges by letter dated 07.12.2004, denying the
allegations and setting out most of the facts and circumstances included in
the letter previously addressed to the Leader referred to above. They further
stated that there is no validly constituted High Command in force and accused
the General Secretary who wrote the letter that he would be liable to be
dismissed from the Party in view of his signing the amended electoral
agreement with the United National Party which had been disputed by the
Petitioners in their previous correspondence.  
  
By letter dated 20.12.2004, the Secretary General, disputed the contents of
the reply and informed the Petitioners that they could present their case to
the High Command and requested that a date be nominated in the month of
January, on which date the matter would be heard at one of the Hotels that
were specified.  
  
It appears that no further action was taken in the matter until March 2005,
when letters dated 01.03.2005, was received by the Petitioners, signed by the
Secretary General who informed them that the Politbureau

**194**

will go in to the show cause notice at a meeting on 12.03.2005 to be held at
the Earls Court, Trans Asia Hotel at 5.00 p.m. The Petitioners were requested
to be present. Another letter was received by the Petitioner bearing the same
date sent by the Secretary General requesting the Petitioner to be present on
Sunday 13th March at 5.00 p. m. at the same venue for a meeting of the High
Command and at which meeting the High Command will go into the show cause
notice that had been issued.  
  
The Petitioners replied by letters dated 11.03.2005, referring to the two sets
of Inquiries to be held by two bodies of the 1st Respondent party and stated
that they were puzzled as to how they have been summoned to face two
disciplinary inquiries on two successive dates in respect of allegations set
out in one show cause notice The Petitioners sought specific clarification as
to which particular body would seek to exercise disciplinary control.
Thereupon letter dated 14.03.2005 was sent by the General Secretary to the
Petitioners requiring them to be present at a meeting of the High Command to
be held on 23.03.2005 at the Hotel specified above at 7.00 p.m.  
  
The Petitioner responded by letter dated 21.03.2005, stating that the General
Secretary has failed to clarify the several fundamental issues raised in
letter dated 14.03.2005, and as such would not attend the meeting of the High
Command on 23.03.2005. Thereupon the 2nd Respondent notified the expulsion of
the Petitioners by letter dated 04.04.2005, referred to above. It is claimed
that the decision for expulsion has been taken at the meeting of the High
Command said to have held on 23.03.2005.  
  
The Petitioners have challenged the expulsions on the following grounds:  
  
(a) that the decisions for expulsion have been made in violation of the
principles of natural justice, without affording a proper hearing to the
Petitioners at a time when they had raised serious issues as to the particular
body of the party that could exercise disciplinary control;  
  
(b) that there are no grounds for the expulsion of the Petitioners, since they
have acted at all times in the best interests of the SLMC, its collective
membership and in keeping in mind the  interests of the Nation;  
  
(c) that the expulsions were mala fide and intended to victimize the
Petitioners;

**195**

(d) that the expulsions lack bona fides, since 3 members of the Party have
been permitted to take membership of the United National Party, in violation
of the Constitution of the 1st Respondent party.  
  
(e) that the decisions have been activated through bias arising from
differences within the Party by a group hostile to the Petitioners.  
  
After this Court issued notice on the Respondents and when pleadings were
completed, by letter dated 28.05.2005, addressed to the respective
Petitioners, General Secretary of the Party stated that the High Command has
taken into consideration the statements in the affidavits filed in Court and
since the Petitioners have taken up the position that they were not afforded a
hearing prior to adopting the extreme measure of expulsion, the High Command
has decided to withdraw the expulsions communicated by letter dated 04.04.2005
in order to give a further opportunity to present their position before the
Party. The withdrawal of the expulsions has also been communicated by letter
bearing the same date to the Secretary General of Parliament.  
  
Counsel for the 1, 2nd and 3rd Respondents, being the Party, its Leader and
Secretary General, submitted that since the expulsions have been withdrawn it
is unnecessary for this Court to make any decision as to the validity of the
expulsions and that the proceedings should be accordingly terminated. On the
other hand, the Petitioners contended that the withdrawal of the expulsions is
conditional and restricted only to one of the grounds on which the expulsions
have been challenged before this Court, namely the failure to comply with the
principles of natural justice. The Petitioners contended that this Court
should hear and determine the matter in its entirety.  
  
In terms of Article 99(13) (a) of the Constitution, where a Member of
Parliament ceases by expulsion to be a member of a recognized party on whose
nomination paper, his name appeared at the time of becoming such Member of
Parliament, his seat becomes vacant upon the expiration of a period of one
month from the date of his ceasing to be such member. The proviso to the Sub-
article states that the seat will not become vacant if prior to the expiration
of one month the member applies to the Supreme Court and this Court detemines
in such application that the expulsion was invalid. It is to be noted that the
withdrawal of the expulsion by the 3rd Respondent on behalf of the 1st
Respondent party was done on 28.05.2005, after a period of one month had
elapsed from the date of the impugned expulsions. Thus the withdrawal was done
at a time when this Court was

**196**

seized with the matter and in terms of the proviso the seat will not become
vacant only if this Court makes a determination that the expulsion is invalid.
Accordingly the withdrawal by the 3rd Respondent does not per se result in a
position where the expulsions become invalid and the Petitioners are correct
in requesting a determination to be made by Court as to the invalidity of
their expulsions.  
  
The Petitioners submitted the letter seeking to withdraw the expulsions on the
alleged non-compliance with principles of natural justice in arriving at a
decision to expel the Petitioners, and this should be taken as a concession on
the part of the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents of this ground  of invalidity.  
  
The sequence of events outlined above reveals that serious differences of
views had arisen between the Petitioners, who were elected from 3 different
Districts, presumably on the basis of the support extended by the voters of
the respective Districts to the cause of the 1st Respondent party and their
personal preference of the respective Petitioners as candidates most suited to
serve their needs on the one hand and, the Leader of the Party on the other.  
  
The long letter dated 25.10.2004 addressed by the Petitioners collectively to
the Leader, the contents of which have been referred to above clearly state
the concerns of the Petitioners from a perspective of what should be the
policy of the party in relation to the ethnic issue and the serious adverse
impact it has on the Muslims in the North and East. They have expressed
serious concern as to the stand taken by the Leader on these issues and
indicated that they would support the Government to serve the cause of the
Muslims and their electorates best. This Court cannot in any way decide on the
correctness of the matters stated by the Petitioners in their letter. Suffice
it to state for the purpose of these applications, that the matters raised by
the Petitioners relate to questions of policy to be decided by the Party in
the interests of the Party and its voters. We have to note that there is no
element of personal acrimony disclosed in the letter sent collectively by the
Petitioners to the Leader.  
  
The reply of the Leader dated 05.11.2004, on the other hand, commences on a
note of hostility with the opening paragraph which reads as follows:  
  
"I wish to deny all the assertions, comments and allegations contained in the
said letter under reference, since they are false and made with an

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/14.html_  

