[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1995](./) >> **[1995] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1995+14 or 1995+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1995+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Cooray v. Illukumbura - SLR - 263, Vol 2 of 1996 [1995] LKSC 14; (1996) 2
Sri LR 263 (31 January 1995)

**263**

**COORAY  
v.  
ILLUKUMBURA**

SUPREME COURT.  
DR. AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
WIJETUNGA J.,  
S.C. NO. 62/91.  
C.A. 653/90.  
D.C. MT LAVINIA 1592/RE.  
DECEMBER 05, 1994.

_Writ pending Appeal - Section 763(2) - Civil Procedure Code - Amended by
section 53 of 1980 section 23 of Judicature Act - amended by Act No. 37 of
1979 - Substantial loss - substantial question of law- Hardships caused to 3rd
parties._

**Held :**

(i) The matter is governed by the provisions of section 23 of the Judicature
Act as amended by Act No.37 of 1979 and section 763 (2) of the Civil Procedure
Code as amended by Act No. 53 of 1980.

Section 23 permits the court to stay writ of execution if it sees fit.

Section 763(2) permits it to stay writ if the judgment debtor satisfies the
court that substantial loss may result. These two provisions are not linked.
The Court is empowered to act under either of these sections:

"The Judge should take into account hardships to all who may be affected by
the grant or refusal of an order for possession-relatives, dependents,
lodgers, guests and the stranger within the gates-but should weigh such
hardship with due regard to the status of the persons affected and their
proximity to the tenant or landlord and the extent to which consequently,
hardship, to them would be hardship to him.

**_Per_ WIJETUNGA, J.**

"Claims of third parties would in relation to business premises apply to the
hardship that may be caused to the employees of the tenant on the basis of
their proximity to him.

**264**

(2) That there were substantial questions of law for determination in appeal
would also have been a valid reason, for court to have "seen it fit" to stay
execution of writ under Section 23.

**AN APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. Charlotte Perera v. Thambiah - 1983-1 SLR 352

2\. Suppiah Chettiar v. Samarakoon \- 56 NLR 161 at 163

3\. Harte v. Frampton (1947) 2 All E. R. 604

4\. Perera v. Gunawardene - 1991 BLR 7

Faiz Musthapha P.C., with Amarasiri Panditharatne for Petitioner.  
  
H.L. de Silva P.C. with Sanath Jayatileke for Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 31, 1995.

**WIJETUNGA, J.**

The Plaintiff - Respondent Appellant (Appellant) instituted this action in the
District Court of Mount Lavinia against the Defendant -PetitionerÂ­Respondent
(Respondent) seeking inter alia the ejectment of the Respondent from premises
No. 16/1, Church Street, Nugegoda, of which the Respondent is the tenant. It
was admitted at the trial that the premises are business premises, governed by
the Rent Act and that the monthly rental was over Rs. 100/-.

The basis of the action is that the premises in question were required by the
Appellant and the members of her family for occupation as a residence, as well
as to conduct a business, within the meaning of section 22(2) (ii) (b) of the
Rent Act. as amended.

The Respondent in his answer stated inter alia that his mother came into
occupation of the said premises as a tenant of the Appellant's father in 1967
and commenced a business under the name and style of Modern Pharmacy. He
became the tenant thereafter in 1971 and subsequently the Appellant became his
landlady in 1976. He claimed that his tenancy was protected under the Rent
Act.

**265**

The Appellant as well as the Respondent gave evidence at the trial and
adverted to their respective hardships. The learned District Judge delivered
judgment in favour of the appellant on 26.1.88. The Respondent appealed
therefrom to the Court of Appeal. While the said appeal was pending, the
Appellant made an application to the District Court for execution of the
decree which had been entered in her favour. The Respondent filed his
objections and, after inquiry the learned District Judge made order on 29.6.90
directing the issue of writ, three months after the date of the said order.

The Respondent made applications to the Court of Appeal for Leave to Appeal as
well as for Revision. The Court of Appeal by its order dated 20.11.90 set
aside the order of the learned District Judge dated 29.6.90 allowing execution
of writ pending appeal and directed that execution of the decree of the
District Court be stayed pending the final determination of the appeal.

The Appellant being aggrieved by the said order sought and obtained leave from
the Court of Appeal to appeal to this Court. The question before us,
therefore, is whether the Court of Appeal was right in reversing the order of
the learned District Judge, on the basis that the status quo should remain
until the issues between the parties are determined by the said Court, in
appeal.

The matter is governed by the provisions of section 23 of the Judicature Act,
as amended by Act No. 37 of 1979 and by section 763(2) of the Civil Procedure
Code, as amended by Act No. 53 of 1980\. This Court has, in _Charlotte Perera
v. Thambiah_.(1) held that section 23 permits the Court to stay writ of
execution if it sees fit, while section 763(2) permits it to stay writ if the
judgment debtor satisfies the Court that substantial loss may result; and
these two provisions are not linked. The Court is thus empowered to act under
either of these sections.

The original tenant, the mother of the Respondent, had as stated above carried
on the pharmacy business from 1967 and the Respondent had succeeded to the
same in 1971. It is the Respondent's position that he had a large volume of
business in the said premises. After he received the notice to quit, he made
every endeavour to obtain alternative accommodation but was unsuccessful. He
placed an

**266**

advertisement in the newspapers (Receipt V1) with a view to obtaining
alternative accommodation. He also responded to advertisements offering
accommodation in Nugegoda. He has produced (V2) to (V6) to show that the
response he had did not result in his being able to obtain suitable
alternative premises where he could continue his business.

He has in his affidavit dated 5.3.90 submitted to the District Court, given
cogent reasons why the available premises were not suitable for his business.

It also appears that the learned District Judge had, in considering the
question of the Respondent's ability to obtain suitable alternative
accommodation, erroneously assumed that the action against the Respondent had
been instituted in 1968 and, as the judgment had been delivered in 1988, the
Respondent had about 20 years within which to look for alternative
accommodation. But, in fact, the plaint had been filed only on 29.10.81 and
the judgment had been delivered on 26.1.88. This error seems to have coloured
the District Judge's attitude to the question of assessment of substantial
loss.

As observed by Sansoni, J. (as he then was) in _Suppiah Chettiyar v.
Samarakoon_ (2) "the advantage of continuing to occupy the same premises and
the proportionate disadvantage suffered by being forced to leave them, are not
matters that should be regarded lightly . . . . . . The value of a business
such as this would depend to a large extent on the length of time that it has
been carried on in the same premises, for it is to those premises that their
customers would naturally have acquired the habit of going."

The Appellant further submitted that the Court of Appeal was in error when it
considered the ejectment of the Respondent not only from the stand point of
the Respondent, but on an extended basis, taking into account its effect on
the Respondent's employees.

_Suppiah Chettiyar v. Samarakoon_ (supra) at page 164 is once again relevant.
His Lordship having made the observation that "the further question then is
whether it is hardship to the landlord or the tenant alone that must be taken
into account or whether there is a claim of third persons whose reflected
hardship, so to speak, may be taken

**267**

into account". cited with approval the following dictum of _Asquith L.J. in
Harte v. Frampton_ , (3) "The true view, we think, is that the county court
judge should take into account hardship to all who may be affected by the
grant or refusal of an order for possession - relatives, dependents, lodgers,
guests and the stranger within the gates - but should weigh such hardship with
due regard to the status of the persons affected and their proximity to the
tenant or landlord and the extent to which consequently, hardship to them
would be hardship to him."

That case, however, was dealing with certain provisions of law relating to the
ejectment of a tenant from a dwelling house, claimed to be reasonably required
by the landlord, where the Court had to be satisfied that having regard to all
the circumstances of the case, including the question of availability of other
accommodation for the landlord or the tenant, whether greater hardship would
be caused by granting the order or judgment than by refusing to grant it.

But, I am of the view that the principle laid down in that case regarding the
claims of third parties would, in relation to business premises, apply to the
hardship that may be caused to the employees of the tenant on the basis of
their proximity to him. The Court of Appeal was, therefore, right in taking
into consideration the effect of such an order on the Respondent's employees.

_Perera v. Gunawardena_ ,(4) on which the Appellant relied can be
distinguished, as the facts in that case did not warrant a stay of execution
pending appeal.

Taking the totality of the relevant circumstances into consideration, I think
the Court of Appeal was justified in its view that the Respondent had placed
adequate material before the Court to satisfy it that the status quo should
remain until the issues between the parties are determined by that Court.

On the submissions made by learned counsel at the hearing of this matter, the
Court of Appeal has identified two substantial questions of law which arise
for determination at the hearing of the main appeal. Similar submissions had
been made before the District Court too, though that Court had paid no heed to
them. That there were such substantial

**268**

questions of law for determination in appeal, would also have been a valid
reason for the learned District Judge to have seen it fit to stay execution of
writ, under the provisions of section 23 of the Judicature Act.

For the reasons aforesaid, I would dismiss this appeal with costs.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/14.html_  

