[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1993](./) >> **[1993] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1993+14 or 1993+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1993+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Daniel v. Chandradeva - SLR - 1, Vol 2 of 1994 [1993] LKSC 14; (1994) 2
Sri LR 1 (4 November 1993)

##### 1

  **DANIEL**

**v.**

**CHANDRADEVA**

SUPREME COURT.

AMERASINGHE, J.

WADUGODAPITIYA J, AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. RULE 1/93(D)

NOVEMBER 04, 1993, MAY 31, 1994, AUGUST 15 AND 20, 1994.



Attorney ‑at‑Law ‑ Duties to client on filing proxy ‑Instructing Attorney
Discourtesy to Court ‑ Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for
Attorneys‑at­ -law) Rules of 1988 (Rules 15, 16 and 28) ‑ Panel of
Professional Purposes Committee of the Bar Association ‑ Judicature Act, No. 2
of 1978, Section 42(2) ‑ Deceit ‑ Malpractice ‑ Criminal Breach of trust ‑
Moral turpitude ‑ Standard of proof ‑ Is failure to attend court because of
work in another Court or non‑payment of fees an acceptable reason? ‑ Absence
owing to circumstances beyond control._



One Daniel was sued on a liquid claim by way of summary procedure. Daniel gave
a proxy to Mrs. Subramaniam, Attorney‑at‑Law and her assistant Raviraj. The
proxy was filed in Court on 13th January, 1988\. Subsequently Daniel was
introduced to another Attorney‑at‑Law Panditharatne and revoked her proxy.
Panditharatne got a fresh proxy in his name but handed over the case to the
respondent Chandradeva. Chandradeva amended the proxy given to Panditharatne
by crossing his name and substituting her name and filed it in Court on 22
March 1988. She thus became the registered attorney on record between
22.3.1988 and 06 August, 1992. On 23.3.1988 she found F. C. Perera appearing
for Daniel and seeking permission to file answer. The Court ordered written
submissions to be filed on 04th May, 1988\. No written submissions were filed
on 04th May, 1988 and the respondent was absent from Court. The Court reserved
order for 06.6.1988. The Respondent was absent again and the Court issued
notice for 27 June, 1988. On this day respondent was absent but Attorney-
at‑Law Welcome appeared and asked for a postponement. The Court fixed 11 July
1988 as the final date for written submissions. No written submissions were
yet filed though Welcome appeared again. The Court fixed 19.8.1988 for order.
The respondent claimed she retained Welcome, but her fees were not paid. She
admitted receipt of Rs. 750/‑ from Daniel but said she paid this to
Parathalingam to prepare written submissions. The Report of the Panel of the



**  2**

Professional Purposes Committee of the Bar Association on the complaint of
Daniel was that the respondent had committed "acts of (a) deceit; and (b)
malpractice; and/or (c) crime (criminal breach of trust) under section 42(2)
of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978."



**Held:**



(1)        Discourtesy to Court is much more than a matter of good manners. It
is axiomatic that every attorney must encourage respect for the administration
of justice by treating the courts and tribunals of the country not only with
candour and fairness, but also with respect and courtesy. An attorney who is
discourteous to Court acts in a manner prejudicial to the administration of
justice in that he undermines the work of the court. He renders himself unfit
to be an officer of the Court. As an officer of the Court, and as a privileged
member of the community who has been conditionally allowed to practise his
profession to assist in the administration of justice, every attorney must act
with courtesy to Court. It is a duty recognized by Rule 15 of the Supreme
Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules of 1988.



(2)        (a) The relationship of attorney and client is much more than an
ordinary contractual relationship. It does not terminate automatically on the
non‑payment of fees. Nor can it be abruptly terminated. An attorney is
ordinarily justified in withdrawing if the client fails or refuses to pay or
secure the proper fees or expenses of the attorney after being reasonably
requested to do so, provided his right of withdrawal is not exercised at a
moment at which the client may be unable to find other legal assistance in
time to prevent damage being done. The attorney must give his client
reasonable warning that he will withdraw unless the client fulfils his
obligations.



(b) The respondent gave no warning of her inability to continue the
professional relationship on account of the client's failure to pay her fees.
If she was unwilling to continue the professional relationship on account of
the failure of the complainant to pay her fees, she should have taken steps to
have her proxy revoked after warning the client and giving him a reasonable
time to appoint another registered attorney. On the other hand, the
respondent's conduct by appearing for him from time to time shows that she had
no intention of withdrawing altogether from the case. But on other occasions
she abandoned him altogether or left him unrepresented. She did so in
violation of the contractual duties undertaken by her in the proxy and in
violation of her professional obligations prescribed by Rule 16 of the Supreme
Court (Conduct of an Etiquette for Attorneys‑at‑law) Rules of 1988 whereunder
"where the services of an



#####  3

Attorney‑at‑Law have been retained in any proceedings, ... it shall the duty
of such Attorney‑at‑Law to appear at such proceedings, unless prevented by
circumstances beyond his control". The phrase "circumstances beyond his
control" should be strictly interpreted. In general, the unexpected inability
of the Attorney to attend Court for good reasons, supported by sufficient
proof which the Court in its discretion considers adequate, would constitute
circumstances beyond the control of the Attorney. Assuming that her version
that she retained Welcome because she had work in another Court to be true,
her absence was unexcusable. Failure to attend Court because of work in
another Court is not an acceptable reason. The respondent ought not to have
accepted conflicting professional engagements. It was not her case that the
conflicts arose as no doubt they sometimes do, on account of circumstances
beyond her control.



(3)        Even an instructing attorney has a right of audience and must
appear in terms of his or her undertakings to the client. An Attorney
appointed by proxy formulated in terms of the Civil Procedure Code has every
right to conduct the case in Court. Where an Attorney intends to function in a
contentious civil matter only as a Registered Attorney, and not also as
Counsel, he or she should ensure that an Attorney who is to appear as Counsel
is retained and instructed. Otherwise the Registered Attorney would be acting
in contravention of Rules 15 and 16 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and
Etiquette for Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules of 1988.



(4)        Having asked Welcome to obtain a postponement, it was her duty to
ascertain what the decision of the Court was in response to his application,
from Welcome, or by examining the Journal Entries.



(5)        The fact that the Court had allowed the defendant to file answer
unconditionally is no excuse for the misconduct. An act or omission is either
proper or improper at the time it was done and not by reference to its
consequences.



(6)        An Attorney should have and maintain full and accurate records so
that monies paid or entrusted to him could be accounted for. He should have
properly written books of account showing among other things, the amounts of
receipts and disbursements against relevant dates and particulars of receipts
and disbursements. The respondent had no such records. She admitted she
received Rs. 750 and said she paid it for written submissions but has failed
to establish this with any records. Rule 28 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of
and Etiquette for Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules of 1988 states, "Attorneys‑at‑Law
shall not appropriate any funds of his client held by him in trust for a
specific purpose except with the



#####  4

permission of the client". Respondent has violated this provision by
appropriating the sum of Rs. 750 for her own purposes rather than the purpose
intended by Daniel. She erroneously presumed that F. C. Perera would prepare
the answer. The respondent has been guilty of deceitful conduct and a breach
of trust that was criminal in nature. The respondent is unfit to be a member
of the legal profession.



(7)        In disciplinary proceedings against an Attorney‑at‑law, proof
beyond reasonable doubt is not necessary but something more than a balancing
of scales is necessary to enable the Court to have the desired feeling of
comfortable satisfaction. A very high standard of proof is required where
there are allegations involving a suggestion of criminality, deceit or moral
turpitude.



**Cases referred to:**



1.         _Rondel v. Worsley_ [1967] 3 All E.R. 993, 1033\. 

2.         _Herber v._ _Rand_ (1821) 9 Price 58.

3.         _Swannel v. Ellis_ (1823) 1 Bing. 347.

4\.         _Courtney v. Stock_ (1842) 2 Dr. & War. 251.

5\.         _Ranaweera v. Jinadasa and_ _Gunapala_ S.C. Appeal 41.91 ‑ S.C.
Minutes of 27.03.92.

6\.         _Law Society of_ _New South Wales v. Starky,_ C.A. 205/97 New
South Wales Solicitors' Manual (4131).



Rule under section 42(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 against
Attorney‑at­-Law of the Supreme Court.



_Rohan Sahabandu_ for respondent.



_N. R. M. Daluwatte P.C._   with _G. Candappa_ PC. and _Dr. J. Wickramaratne_
for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka.



_A.      S. M. Perera, _ Deputy Solicitor‑General as _amicus curiae._ _ _

_Cur. adv. vult._

 November 23, 1994.

**AMERASINGHE, J.**  



On 26 October 1987, an action was filed in the District Court of Colombo
invoking the provisions of Chapter 53 of the Civil Procedure Code relating to
the summary procedure on liquid claims, for the recovery of a sum of Rs.
141,051 from D. E. Daniel, the Complainant

#####  

##### 5

in the matter before this Court. A document of appointment as a registered
attorney in terms of the Civil Procedure Code, usually described as a "proxy",
dated 12 January 1988 (D1), was given by Daniel to Mrs. S. Subramaniam and her
assistant N. Raviraj and tendered to Court on 13 January 1988\. Subsequently,
Subramaniam introduced Daniel to another Attorney‑at‑Law, Mr. L.
Panditharatne, because she was too busy with other engagements to undertake
Daniel's work.



On 22 March 1988, on her way to Court, the respondent met Mr. Panditharatne,
who had explained that he was "in a difficulty", and requested her to "help
him by appearing in the case". The respondent says she "took up this matter"
"just to oblige" Mr. Panditharatne, whom she had known from the time she was a
law student. She had not met the client before this time. Panditharatne handed
her two papers: the proxy intended to be filed on behalf of Daniel (C2), and
the revocation of the proxy of Subramaniam and her assistant, Raviraj. The
respondent struck out Panditharatne's name and address in the 'proxy', and
inserted her own name and address. The printed proxy form is filled in black
ink; whereas the alterations and the signature of the client, Daniel appear in
blue ink. The Journal Entries relating to the proceedings in Court on 22 March
1988 show that the 'proxy' of Subramaniam was revoked, and that the proxy of
Chandradeva (the respondent) had been filed.



The registered Attorney on record between 22 March, 1988 and 6 August 1992 was
Chandradeva, the respondent. I am unable to understand the relevance of the
question raised by learned Counsel for the respondent in his written
submissions: "Is there a valid legal and binding contract between a client and
his Attorney‑at‑Law if he is not properly retained?", for there was no dispute
that the professional services of the respondent had been engaged,
notwithstanding the highly unsatisfactory way in which the document of
appointment was amended. The respondent herself amended the proxy and filed it
in Court. The proxy, which is in the standard prescribed form, not only
empowered the appointed attorney to act for her client, but also imposed the
usual contractual obligations on the attorney. Attorneys who accept
appointments as Registered Attorneys would do well,



##### 6

from time to time, to read what a proxy states. In addition to being liable
for resulting loss on account of a breach of contractual obligations, a
Registered Attorney who fails to ensure that all things expected of him or her
by reason of his or her appointment are done promptly, conscientiously and
with reasonable competence, would be guilty of failing to act with due
diligence. He or she would therefore be liable for the contravention of Rule
15 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules
of 1988. From her evidence, the respondent appeared to be quite conscious of
the grave responsibilities she bore as a Registered Attorney. In the
circumstances. the casualness with which so important an instrument as a
'proxy' seems to have been regarded is astonishing.



Learned Counsel for the respondent in his written submissions suggested that
the failure of the respondent to appear in Court "only amounts to being
discourteous to Court (only)." (sic); and he raised the question: "If so, in
such a circumstance, could a rule be issued against the Attorney‑at‑Law for
not appearing in Court, for not having performed his duties on behalf of the
client?" It comes as a surprise that the word "only" was used and repeated for
emphasis, as if discourtesy was of little or no significance in the matter of
professional conduct. Discourtesy to Court is a very serious matter. The rough
and rude conduct of an uncouth attorney unaccustomed to following the usual
ways of members of the profession who are of good repute is always shocking
and repellent and deplorable, although it may not amount to professional
misconduct warranting disciplinary action. However, discourtesy to Court is
much more than a matter of good manners. It is axiomatic that every attorney
must encourage respect for the administration of justice by treating the
courts and tribunals of the country not only with candour and fairness, but
also with respect and courtesy. An attorney who is discourteous to Court acts
in a manner prejudicial to the administration of justice in that he undermines
the work of the Court. He renders himself unfit to be an officer of the Court.
As an officer of the Court, and as a privileged member of the community who
has **** been conditionally allowed to practise his profession to assist in
the administration of justice, every attorney must act with courtesy to



#####  7

 Court. It is a duty recognized by Rule 15 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of
and Etiquette for Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules of 1988.



According to the respondent, when she went into court on 23 March 1988, she
found another Attorney‑at‑Law, Mr. F C. Perera, appearing for her client and
seeking the permission of Court to file answer. The Court ordered that written
submissions should be filed by the defendant on 4 May, 1988 and by the
plaintiff on 11 May, 1988 to enable it to decide whether leave was to be
granted conditionally or unconditionally.



Written submissions were not filed on the 4th of May, 1988 as directed by the
Court. The defendant's Registered Attorney, the respondent, was absent on the
4th of May, 1988. The Court reserved its order for 6 June, 1988. However, on
the 6th of June, 1988, the defendant's Registered Attorney was absent again
and the Court issued notice for 27 June, 1988. On the 27th of June, the
Registered Attorney was not present in Court, but Mr. Welcome appeared for the
defendant and applied for a postponement. The Court fixed the 11th of July
1988 as the final date for the filing of the written submissions. On the 11th
of July the written submissions had not yet been filed and the Court directed
that the matter be called on the 19th of August 1988 for an Order. The
defendant was represented on the 11th  of July by Mr. Welcome, but the
Registered Attorney was absent.



The Registered Attorney explained in her evidence that on 27 June and 11 July
she had retained Mr. Welcome, Attorney‑at‑Law, and personally paid him to
obtain postponements on those two dates. The complainant's position was that
he himself retained Mr. Welcome and paid him. The importance of determining
who retained Mr. Welcome is this: if Mr. Welcome appeared at the request of
Chandradeva, then her duty to ensure that her client was represented would
have been fulfilled if, having been reasonably satisfied that in the
circumstances the attendance of the registered attorney could be dispensed
with, Counsel had agreed to dispense with the attendance of the registered
attorney. On the other hand, if representation had been arranged by the client
himself without the knowledge of the Registered Attorney, her presence could
not have been dispensed



##### 8

with by Counsel and her absence on the 27th of June and the 11th of July would
be culpable. The respondent's explanation for her absence on some of the dates
was that she had "no instructions", meaning that she had not been paid her
fees. In the circumstances it is highly improbable that the respondent paid
Mr. Welcome and retained him. The complainant's version that he himself
retained Mr. Welcome, who was personally known to him, is a more acceptable
explanation of how Mr. Welcome happened to appear in the case.



Learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that an attorney is entitled to
be paid for his services. I agree that an attorney is not engaged in a
charitable activity and is not obliged to accept any work unless the client is
prepared to meet the expense of litigation and to pay the fees he stipulates.
I also agree that the continuation of the attorney‑client relationship may
depend upon the payment of the agreed fees and compliance by the client with
the terms and conditions prescribed by the attorney with regard to deposits to
meet disbursements. However, I am unable to accept the submission of learned
Counsel for the respondent that "this litigant simply refused to remunerate
his lawyer. Thus putting the contract to an end." The relationship of attorney
and client is much more than an ordinary contractual relationship. It does not
terminate automatically upon the non‑payment of fees. Nor can it be abruptly
terminated. An attorney is ordinarily justified in withdrawing if the client
fails or refuses to pay or secure the proper fees or expenses of the attorney
after being reasonably requested to do so; provided his right of withdrawal is
not exercised at a moment at which the client may be unable to find other
legal assistance in time to prevent damage being done. An Attorney is obliged
to protect his client's interests as far as possible and should not desert the
client at a critical stage of a matter when the withdrawal would put the
client in a position of disadvantage or peril. An attorney should not
summarily withdraw from a case or matter he has undertaken. He must not
suddenly decide to cease to act for the client and jettison him. The attorney
must give his client reasonable warning that he will withdraw unless the
client fulfils his obligations. The respondent gave no warning of her
inability to continue as the Registered Attorney on account of the client's
failure to pay her fees. If she was unwilling to continue the professional



##### 9

 account of the failure of the complainant to pay her fees, she should have
taken steps to have her proxy revoked after warning the client and giving him
a reasonable time to appoint another Registered Attorney. On the other hand,
the respondent's conduct shows that she had no intention of withdrawing
altogether from the case. She did appear from time to time. Either she did so
whenever she was paid; or, if we are to accept the respondent's explanation
that she was trying to help a poor man, whenever she was moved by a feeling of
compassion. On other occasions, however, she either deliberately abandoned her
client because she had not been paid or left him unrepresented owing to her
unmindfulness of the client's misfortune from time to time. She did so in
violation of the contractual duties undertaken by her in the proxy and in
violation of her professional obligations prescribed by Rule 16 of the Supreme
Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules of 1988 which
provides that "where the services of an Attorney‑at‑Law have been retained in
any proceedings in any Court, Tribunal or other institution established for
the administration of justice, it shall be the duty of such Attorney‑at­-Law
to appear at such proceedings, unless prevented by circumstances beyond his
control."



The phrase "circumstances beyond his control' should be strictly interpreted.
In general, the unexpected inability of the Attorney to attend Court for good
reasons, supported by sufficient proof. e.g. by way of certificates and/or
affidavits or otherwise, which the Court in its discretion considers adequate,
would constitute circumstances beyond the control of an Attorney. The
explanation of the respondent in her evidence that she had "no instructions"
in the sense that she had not been paid, is a well‑known, but deceptive and
dishonourable, devise used **to obtain postponements** not only in this
country but even in England (e.g. see per Lord Upjohn in _Rondel v. Worsley_
(1)). __ However, it is not a circumstance that would ever excuse an
Attorney's failure to observe his or her duty to appear in Court.



The respondent in her evidence, and learned Counsel in his submissions
explained that the complainant was unco‑operative and had failed to give
"instructions" in the sense of information relevant for the preparation of the
case. Learned Counsel for the respondent



##### 10

 said that the professional relationship had broken down "irretrievably". In
her evidence the respondent stated that she did not have the written
submissions and therefore thought that her attendance in Court might be
detrimental to the complainant. However she correctly acknowledged the fact
that if she had no instructions she ought to have attended Court and so
informed Court. It was not a circumstance that excused her absence. As for
non-co­operation and the breaking down of their professional relationship, if
a client, when requested, declines or neglects to give the attorney any
instructions after a reasonable time has elapsed since the engagement of his
services, or where the client when requested, declines to give such further
instructions as may be necessary to enable him to act on behalf of the client,
or where the client fails substantially to fulfil an obligation to the
attorney regarding his services, after due warning, the attorney should
terminate his services. The respondent did not warn the complainant. She was
content to maintain the professional relationship, and therefore continued to
be liable to fulfil her obligations as the complainant's registered attorney.
Assuming the respondent's version that she retained Mr. Welcome to appear on
the 27th of June and the 11th  of July to obtain postponements because she had
work in another court to be true, her absence was inexcusable, for it has been
settled a very long time ago that the failure to attend Court because of work
in another Court is not an acceptable reason. (See _Herber v. Rand_ (2)). The
respondent ought not to have accepted conflicting professional engagements. It
was not her case that the conflicts arose, as no doubt they sometimes do, on
account of circumstances beyond her control.



When the matter came up on the 19th of August 1988, the respondent was absent
and the Court ordered the issue of notice for 20th  September, 1988.



In the course of her evidence, the respondent stated that she does not appear
in Court except as an "instructing attorney".



The respondent was expressly empowered by the proxy and contractually obliged
to appear for her client. Moreover she had a

##### 11

 professional obligation in terms of Rule 16 to appear for her client. The
fact that she only acted as an "instructing attorney" was not a valid ground
for her absence. If the respondent was unwilling to open her mouth in Court,
she should have ensured that there was an Attorney retained and instructed by
her to appear as Counsel to protect her client's interests. If the respondent
had not engaged the services of Counsel, then she was, despite her personal
preferences and inclinations, obliged to be present in Court and also speak
for her client. It is no excuse for a registered attorney in a contentious
civil matter to say that he or she failed to appear in any Court or Tribunal
because such a person acts, as a matter of personal preference, only as an
"instructing attorney" and never did any advocacy and did not ordinarily
appear in Court or that he or she did not usually appear in that type of
Court. Every Attorney has a right of audience before all Courts and Tribunals
(unless statutorily excluded) and he or she must, therefore, appear in terms
of his or her undertakings to the client. If an Attorney has been appointed by
a proxy formulated in terms of the Civil Procedure Code, as it is the case in
this matter, such an Attorney has every right to conduct the case in Court.
Indeed, even where there are two distinct branches of the profession, as for
instance in England, it has been held that if a person in the position of an
"instructing attorney" (e.g. a "Solicitor") has a right of audience, then he
must appear (See _Swannel v. Ellis_ (3) cf. _Courtney v. Stock_ (4)). Where an
attorney intends to function in a contentious civil matter only as a
Registered Attorney, and not also as Counsel, he or she should ensure that an
Attorney who is to appear as Counsel is retained and instructed. Otherwise the
Registered Attorney would be acting in contravention of his or her contractual
duties in terms of the proxy. He or she would also be acting in contravention
of Rules 15 and 16 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for
Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules of 1988.



The respondent also maintained that she was not present in Court on the 19th
of August 1988 because on the previous date, namely, 11 July, 1988 Mr. Welcome
had appeared on her instructions and obtained the date. Not being present
herself, she did not know that the date given was 19 August, 1988. Learned
**** Counsel for the

##### 12

 respondent submitted that when Counsel appears and obtains a date, it is a
date convenient to him, and therefore "the responsibility shifts to Counsel"
to "keep track of the case and appear on the next date or prepare answer or
written submissions or whatever document he undertook to prepare before the
next date." The decision in _Ranaweera v. Jinadasa and Gunapala_ (5) __ was
cited in support of his submissions.



While an Attorney who has been retained and instructed by a Registered
Attorney to appear as Counsel for the purpose of conducting the case, and who
in so acting, obtains a date to suit his convenience, could be reasonably
expected to appear on that date to conduct the case, Mr. Welcome had not been
so retained and instructed. According to the evidence of the respondent, she
retained Mr. Welcome on each of the two occasions on which he appeared for the
specific and limited purpose of obtaining postponements because the respondent
was engaged in the business of another Court. There was nothing to show that
the date was suggested by Mr. Welcome to suit his convenience. There was no
reason for him to have asked for a particular date since he was not the
Counsel in the case. The respondent knew the circumstances in which Mr.
Welcome was retained and she could not have reasonably assumed that Mr.
Welcome would appear once again. There is certainly no duty, as suggested by
learned Counsel for the respondent, that an Attorney who is merely instructed
to appear for the purpose of requesting a postponement, should, without being
instructed to do so, appear again. Having asked Mr. Welcome to obtain a
postponement, it was her duty to ascertain what the decision of the Court was
in response to his application. This, she should have ascertained from Mr.
Welcome, who, she claims, she retained, or by examining the Journal Entries
from time to time, as a Registered Attorney should do, especially if he or she
has not been in Court on account of his or her presence having been dispensed
with by Counsel. Having ascertained the next date, the respondent should have
either instructed Counsel to appear on that date or personally appeared for
the client on that date. _Ranaweera v. Jinadasa and Gunapala (supra)_ does not
assist the respondent. If a registered Attorney has not appointed another
Attorney to act as Counsel, or having appointed **** Counsel, he has not
agreed with Counsel that the attendance in _ _

##### 13

Court of such Registered Attorney may be dispensed with, then such Registered
Attorney must personally keep a track of the dates of hearing, having regard
to the usual way in which dates of hearing are fixed and notice is given in
the Court or tribunal, and appear when the case comes on for hearing or other
purpose decided or ordered by the Court or Tribunal. In the circumstances, the
absence of the respondent on the 19th of August 1988 was an inexcusable
contravention of her obligation to appear for the complainant.



On the 20 of September, the respondent attended Court and found Mr. F. C.
Perera, whom she had neither briefed, nor retained nor instructed, appearing
for her client. However, it seems the respondent was quite satisfied having
her appearance marked as the "instructing attorney." On that day the Court
made Order permitting the defendant ‑ the complainant in the matter before us
‑ to file answer unconditionally on the 26th of October 1988.



Learned Counsel for the respondent submitted that the Registered Attorney's
absence on certain dates between 22 March, 1988 and the 20th of September,
1988 "had not caused any prejudice to the complainant as the Court had allowed
the respondent to file answer unconditionally." In my view, this is an
erroneous way of approaching the matter. If an act of professional misconduct
results in a benefit to a client, does it mean that the attorney is excused? I
do not think so. What we have for consideration is not the result of
misconduct, good, bad or indifferent, but whether there was misconduct. In a
matter of the kind before us, an act or omission is either proper or improper
at the time it was done and not by reference to its consequences. This quite
obvious principle was illustrated in the Australian case of _Law Society of
New South Wales v. Starky,_ (6). In that case, the clients whose money had
been "juggled with", as the Court observed, by their Solicitor "in pursuance
of his land speculation schemes", fortuitously escaped without loss. The
Solicitor was, nevertheless, struck off the Roll.



The Court, as we have seen, had ordered that answer should be filed on the
26th of October 1988. However, when the matter came up on the 26th  of
October, the answer had not been filed and the Court fixed the matter for _ex
parte_ trial on the 7th of November 1988. The

##### 14

 defendant was present on 26 October, but he was unrepresented by either
Counsel or by his registered attorney.



            When the matter came up on the 7th of November, the defendant, D. E. Daniel, was absent and unrepresented and judgment was given in favour of the plaintiff.



Daniel complained to the Bar Association by his letter dated 14 March 1991. He
said, among other things, that, although he had "handed over" his case to
Chandradeva, she had "only appeared twice", and that he "came to hear" that
Chandradeva "was supporting the other party".



With regard to the allegation that Chandradeva was guilty of disloyalty and
was "supporting the other party", the complainant adduced no admissible
evidence in that regard either before the Bar Association or in these
proceedings and I reject that allegation as being unproved.



           

            Daniel also complained to the Bar Association as follows:



"I trusted her and paid Rs. 750/‑ to file the answer, but as my case was not
called for months, with the help of another Proctor I went and checked in the
Record Room and found out that the answer has not been submitted. I went and
asked Chandradeva, she told me that she has filed the answer and I am mad."
(Sic.) "After a month or so, I came to hear that the case was called and
judgment given, the Plaintiff was present." (Sic.) "I again approached
Chandradeva, she told me that it is not so. I once again went to meet
Chandradeva at Kalubowila, she wanted me to come to her office but she did not
come. Thereafter I gave her three telephone calls but she was evading and did
not take up the calls. She undoubtedly has cheated me and let me down very
badly.



Sir, I appeal to you, to kindly ask her to give me a letter revoking the
proxy, and as I am jobless and undergoing great hardships, I managed to settle
her up to date. I do hope that you would help me in this matter and to kindly
get me the letter of revocation as early as possible."



##### 15

It is not necessary for our purposes to go into the correspondence between the
Bar Association and the respondent although some time and effort was spent on
the matter during the leading of evidence and in the submissions of learned
counsel. What needs to be noted is that the Professional Purposes Committee of
the Bar Association on the 11th of July 1992, after an inquiry at which the
respondent was not present despite notice to her to be present, recommended
that the matter be reported to the Chief Justice.



On the 19th of May 1993, a Rule was issued under the hand of the Registrar of
the Supreme Court referring to the complaint of Daniel and the Report of the
Panel of the Professional Purposes Committee of the Bar Association and
stating that the complaint and report disclosed that the respondent has
committed "acts of (a) deceit; and (b) malpractice; and/or (c) crime (criminal
breach of trust) under section 42 (2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978."



For the reasons explained above, I am of the view that the failure of the
respondent to appear in Court on the various dates referred to was in
dereliction of her professional duties as a Registered Attorney­-at‑Law.



I turn now to the question of deceit. There was no dispute with regard to the
fact that the complainant paid the respondent a sum of Rs. 750. The
complainant states that this sum was paid to the respondent for the
preparation of the 'Answer' to be filed in the District Court but that no
'Answer' was prepared or filed, and he was unrepresented when the matter came
up in Court, with the result that the matter was decided _ex parte_ against
him. The respondent, however, states that the money was paid by her to Mr.
Shankey Parathalingam for the preparation **of written submissions.** Although
there was some confusion at one stage, it was eventually established by the
evidence that the sum of Rs. 750 was paid two weeks before the date for the
filing of the answer, namely the 26th of October 1988. By this time there was
no need to file written submissions to enable the Court to decide whether the
answer should be filed conditionally or otherwise. That matter had been
already decided by the Court on the 20 of September. The respondent did not
call Mr. Parathalingam to give evidence. She had not asked Mr. Parathalingam
whether he

##### 16

 would give evidence. Understandably so, for Mr. Parathalingam had nothing to
do with Daniel's case. If the respondent had obtained the written submissions
of Mr. Parathalingam after paying him the sum of Rs. 750 entrusted to her for
the purpose of paying his fees; why did the respondent not file the
submissions in Court, or at least make them available to Mr. Perera, the
Counsel appearing instructed by her when it might have been of some use to him
in making his oral submissions? The written submissions were not produced in
these proceedings. I do not think it was possible to do so simply because they
never existed. An Attorney should have and maintain full and accurate records
so that monies paid or entrusted to him could be accounted for. He should have
properly written books of account showing, among other things, the amounts of
receipts and disbursements against relevant dates and particulars of receipts
and disbursements. The respondent in her evidence said that she had no records
of moneys paid to her. She was unable to demonstrate by reference to any
record when or why she received payments or made disbursements. She admitted
receiving the sum of Rs. 750 and said that she had paid it for written
submissions, but she has failed to establish it by reference to records which
she should have maintained. The money was in my view not appropriated for the
specific purpose for which it was entrusted to her, but for her private
purposes. Rule 28 of the Supreme Court (Conduct of and Etiquette for
Attorneys‑at‑Law) Rules of 1988 states that "Attorneys‑at‑Law shall not
appropriate any funds of his client held by him in trust for a specific
purpose except with the permission of the client." I am of the view that the
respondent violated that provision by appropriating the sum of Rs. 750 to her
own purposes rather than the purpose intended by Daniel, her client. In my
view the respondent obtained the sum of Rs. 750 from the complainant on the
**pretext** of having the 'Answer' prepared by Counsel. She never had any
intention of paying Counsel to do so, for her position was that, albeit
erroneously, she presumed that Mr. Perera, because he was in Court on the 20th
of September and was aware of the fact that 'Answer' was to be filed on 26
October 1988, had a duty to and would prepare and file the 'Answer' in time.
In the circumstances I hold that the respondent was guilty of deceitful
conduct and a breach of trust that was criminal in nature. The respondent is
unfit to be a member of the legal profession.  

##### 17

 Learned Counsel for the respondent drew our attention to the standard of
proof in matters of this nature. Where the conduct of an attorney is in
question in disciplinary proceedings, it requires as a matter of common sense
and worldly wisdom the careful weighing of testimony, the close examination of
facts proved as a basis of inference and a comfortable satisfaction that a
just and correct decision has been reached. The importance and gravity of
asking an attorney to show cause makes it impossible for the Court to be
satisfied of the truth of an allegation without the exercise of caution and
unless the proofs survive a careful scrutiny. Proof beyond reasonable doubt is
not necessary, but something more than a balancing of the scales is necessary
to enable the Court to have the desired feeling of comfortable satisfaction. A
very high standard of proof is required where there are allegations involving
a suggestion of criminality, deceit or moral turpitude. I have very carefully
scrutinized the evidence in this case and in all the circumstances established
I have a comfortable satisfaction that a just and correct decision has been
reached.



For the reasons stated in my judgment, I make the Rule absolute and make order
that Chandradeva, the respondent in these proceedings, shall be forthwith
struck out of the Roll of Attorneys‑at-­Law.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Rule made absolute. Respondent struck off the roll of Attorneys­-at ‑Law._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/14.html_  

