[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1989](./) >> **[1989] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1989+14 or 1989+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1989+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Seelawathie v. Ediriweera - SLR - 170, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 14;
(1989) 2 Sri LR 170 (3 November 1989)

**

170

SEELAWATHIE  
v.  
EDIRIWEERA

**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND RAMANATHAN, J  
S.C. APPEAL No. 65/87  
C.A. No. 16/78(F),  
DC. MOUNT LAVINIA 302/RE  
SEPTEMBER 19, 1989.

_

Landlord and tenant _\- _Tenant notified of change of ownership and of
transferee's election to recognise him as tenant- Statement under Section 37
of the Rent Act, No._ 7 _of 1972 - Tenants express refusal to attorn - Tenant
continuing in occupation - Has privity of contract been established between
the transferee (appellant) and tenant (respondent) ?

_

**171**

The tenanted premises were transferred and the tenant apprised of the change
of ownership and of the transferee's option to take possession of the premises
with the tenant in occupation, by letter and by a statement under Section 37
of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 signed by the appellant as landlord. The tenant
expressly refused to attorn to the appellant and continued to occupy the
premises.

**

Held **-

1\. Continuance in occupation by the tenant (with notice of the transferee's
election to recognise the tenant) constitutes an exercise of the tenant's
option to acknowledge the transferee as landlord, establishing privity of
contract between the parties. No other act or conduct is necessary.

2\. The respondent became the tenant of the appellant, upon the expiration of
the monthly tenancy that was in force at the time she received the letter and
the statement under Section 37 signed by the appellant as landlord indicative
of her election to recognise the respondent as tenant, and the appellant was
entitled to maintain this action against the respondent for rent, damages and
ejectment, upon her failure to pay rent.

3\. Distinguished (a) _Naidu_ V _Mudalige_ (1), where there was a fresh
agreement between the new owners and the former tenant, which transformed the
character of the latter's occupation; there was no occupation _qua_ tenant and
no tenancy, and an action for rent and ejectment could not be maintained; (b)
_Fernando v. Wijesekera_ (18), where the purchaser and the tenant had
negotiated a new agreement.

_

Zackariya _V _Benedict_ (7) not followed.

**

Cases Referred to** :

_

1\. Naidu vs. Mudalige _76 NLR 385

_

2\. David Silva vs. Madanayake _69 N.L.R 396, 398

_

3\. Silva vs. Silva _16 N.L.R 315, 316

_

4\. Perera vs. de Costa _57 N.L.R 293

_

5\. Morris vs. Mortimer 2 _S.C.C. 46

_

6\. Silva vs. Muniamma _56 N.L.R. 357

_

7\. Zackariya vs. Benedict _53 N.L.R. 311

_

8\. Perera vs. Padmakanthi _1987 2 Sri L.R.1

_

9\. Wijesinghe _vs. _Charles_ 18 N.L.R- 168, 170

_

10\. Fernando vs. Appuhamy _23 N.L.R. 476, 477

_

11\. De Alwis vs. Perera _52 N.L.R. 433, 445

12\. De _Silva vs. Abeyaratne_ 56 N.L.R. 574, 575

_

13\. Mohomed vs. Singer Sewing Machine Co. _64 N.L.R. 407

_

14\. Subramanium vs. Pathmanathan _[1984] 1 Sri. L.R. 252, 257.

_

15\. Sabapathipillai vs. Ramupillai _58 N.L.R. 367

_

16\. Fernandes vs. Perera 11 _N.L.R. 220

_

17\. Mensina vs. Joslin _1 Srikantha's L.R. 76

**172**

18\. _Fernando vs. Wijiesekera_ 73 N.LR 110

_

A.K. Premadasa. P.C. _with _T.B. Dillimuni_ for the Plaintiff-Appellant-
Appellant.

_

N.R.M. Daluwatte, P.C, _with _K. Balapatabendi_ for the Defendant - Respondent
-Respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

November 3, 1989.

**

FERNANDO, J.

**

This appeal involves an important question of law, as to the circumstances in
which a tenant who continues in occupation after receiving notice of the
transfer of the rented premises becomes the tenant of the transferee.

The rented premises were gifted to the Appellant by her sister and brother-in-
law, the original owners, on 18.5.74. By letter dated 9.11.74 the brother-in-
law informed the tenant, the Respondent, of the transfer, and forwarded a
statement in terms of section 37 of the Rent Act, which described the
Appellant as the landlord, and which was signed by her as landlord. In the
column headed "name and address of the person to whom the rent is payable",
the name and address of the brother-in-law was set out: but, as the Court of
Appeal held, this did not have the effect of designating the brother-in-law as
the landlord. There was no reply to that letter, and the Respondent continued
in occupation of the premises. By letter dated 30.12.74, the Appellant's
Attorney-at-law informed the Respondent that she had become the owner of the
premises by virtue of the aforesaid gift, and called upon the Respondent to
attorn, and to pay the rent, to her. That letter also stated that "this state
of affairs, I understand, had been intimated to you by the previous owner....
by registered post on or about 9th [November] 1974", an obvious reference to
the letter and statement of particulars sent on 9.11.74. There is an apparent
inconsistency, in that the former required the rent to be paid to the brother-
in-law whereas the latter required payment to the Appellant, but this was in
no way the cause of the Respondent's failure to pay rent. A payment to the
brother-in-law would have been a valid discharge of the obligation to pay the
Appellant; and a simple inquiry would have settled any real doubt on that
score. To this the Respondent's reply was "without prejudice to my rights
under the provisions of the Rent Act No 7 of 1972 and the Ceiling on Housing

**173**

Law, I acknowledge the receipt of your letter."

It became clear in the course of the trial (and the Court of Appeal so held)
that the premises were not vested under the Ceiling on Housing Property Law;
the owners were thus free to sell or otherwise alienate the premises. An
application by the Respondent for the purchase of the premises under that Law
was pending, but it was not contended before us that those proceedings in any
way restricted the right of the owners to alienate the premises.

The Appellant's Attorney-at-law, by letter dated 29.3.75, gave notice to quit
on the ground of arrears of rent (for a period in excess of three months),
requiring the Respondent to deliver vacant possession on 15.7.75. The
Respondent's reply was, firstly, that "the

house was vested with the Commissioner of Housing, and therefore I have no
dealings with your client", and secondly, that "as the previous owners had
charged excess rent", I am not obliged to pay rent till that sum is covered in
full". There was no unequivocal refusal to have dealings with the Appellant,
or to recognise her as landlord; such refusal was based on the premise that
the Commissioner had become the owner. Further, the refusal to pay rent
(presumably, to the new owner) was for the reason that excess rent had been
charged, thereby implying that rent would have been paid had no excess rent
been charged, or after such excess had been set off in full.

The issue which arises for decision in this appeal was framed thus at the
trial -

"Did the [Respondent] become a tenant of the [Appellant] as pleaded in para C
of column 1 of the plaint ?"

In paragraph C it was averred that the Respondent was given due notice of the
transfer and therefore by operation of law the Respondent became the tenant of
the Appellant on the terms of a monthly rental. The learned trial Judge
answered this issue in the negative, and held also that the original landlord
had not lawfully terminated the tenancy, and that the Appellant had not
succeeded to the rights and obligations of the original landlord. The reasons
given by him were not considered to be acceptable by the Court of Appeal:

(a) that the statement under section 37 of the Rent Act referred to the
brother-in-law as the person entitled to receive rent: as the Court

**174**

of Appeal observes, this "does not make [him] the landlord only the agent of
the landlord to collect the rents due to the landlord";

(b) that there were discrepancies in regard to the quantum of rent claimed by
the Appellant: the Court of Appeal points out that the Respondent could have
discharged her obligation by paying the authorised rent;  
  
(c)  that there were discrepancies in regard to the commencement of the
tenancy, and the date from which the Respondent was in arrears: the original
tenancy commenced on 15.3.64, and the Court of Appeal was of the view that the
new tenancy, if any, commenced on 15.6.74 (upon the expiry of the monthly
tenancy which was in operation when the transfer took place on 18.5.74).
However, I incline to the view that a new tenancy could have commenced only on
15.11.74, after **** the tenant had notice of the transfer, and as at 15.3.75
rent had not been paid for four months;  
  
(d) that the Respondent had not been duly informed of the change of ownership
with relevant particulars, and that the transfer to the Appellant amounted to
"an eye-wash": the Court of Appeal held that a donee from the landlord is in
the same position as a transferee, and that the Respondent had adequate notice
of the transfer.

The Court of Appeal held that the existence of privity of contract between the
Appellant and the Respondent is a pre-requisite to the Appellant's cause of
action; that the Respondent, though she remained in occupation of the premises
with adequate notice of the transfer, cannot be presumed or regarded as having
attorned to the Appellant, since she refused to attorn; that in _Naidu v
Mudalige_ (1) the (former) Court of Appeal held that "mere continuing of
occupation on the part of a tenant after notice of transfer by his landlord
without more, does not suffice to constitute an attornment"; that no privity
of contract has been established between the Appellant and the Respondent, and
accordingly the Appellant's action was misconceived.

Learned President's Counsel appearing for the Respondent contended that the
Respondent had expressly refused to accept the Appellant as the landlord, and
had not agreed to pay rent to her; that privity of contract had not been
established between the parties; and accordingly, there being no relationship
of landlord and tenant between them, the Appellant was not entitled to
maintain an action for rent and ejectment, although possibly but this he did
not

**175**

concede - the Appellant may have been entitled to maintain an action based on
title.

We were not referred to any provision of the Rent Act which dealt with the
rights _inter se_ of a tenant vis-a-vis a transferee from the landlord, and
the arguments proceeded on the basis of the common law principles.

Different aspects of the question of law that arises here have been discussed
in numerous decisions of this Court, and apart from three decisions which are
referred to later in this judgment, these decisions appear to be self-
consistent and consistent in principle, and establish the following
principles.

Under the Roman Law, the sale of the leased premises by the landlord
terminated the lease {unless it had been stipulated in the contract of sale
that the lease should remain in force); the purchaser could eject the tenant,
whose only remedy was an action on the contract against his landlord. The
Roman-Dutch law adopted a different principle, that "hire goes before sale":
_David Silva v Madanayake_ (2) and _Silva v Silva_ (3). A passage from Wille,
Landlord and Tenant in South Africa, has been cited in the latter case.

"A purchaser from the landlord of the property leased steps into the shoes of
the landlord, and receives all his rights and becomes subject to all his
obligations, so that he is bound to the tenant, and the tenant is bound to
him, in the relation of landlord and tenant."

However, this is not an automatic consequence of the transfer. Both the
transferee and the tenant have options: whether to permit the relationship of
landlord and tenant to exist between them.

The same principles apply, whether it is a sale or a sale in execution:
_Perera v de Costa_ (4) and _Morris v Mortimer_ (5), or, as in this case, a
donation: _Silva v Muniamma_ (6), _Zackariya v Benedict_ (7) and _Perera v
Padmakanthi_ (8).

Thus the purchaser has the option, as against his vendor, to insist on vacant
possession (or in the alternative to claim rescission of the sale) or to take
possession, with the tenant in occupation \- subject to the tenant's option.
Where the purchaser opts for the former course, the occasion for the exercise
of the tenant's option does not arise: the relationship of landlord and tenant
as between vendor and tenant

**176**

continues, and the vendor alone can take steps to terminate the tenancy and
eject the tenant in terms of the contract: _Wijesinghe v Charles_ (9);
_Fernando v Appuhamy_ (10); de _Alwis v Perera_ (11); de _Silva v Abeyaratne_
(12); _Mohamed v Singer Sewing Machine Co_ (13). Where the purchaser opts to
take possession with the tenant in occupation, then -

"The lessee had the option of cancelling and surrendering the lease and
pursuing his remedy upon his contract against his landlord, or of retaining
occupation of the property in terms of his lease against the purchaser. But in
the event of his pursuing the latter course, he was under an obligation to pay
rent to the purchaser and also to perform all the other obligations due by him
as a tenant to his landlord. The option [or] privilege that the tenant had to
decide whether he would become a tenant of the purchaser consisted in this,
that it was open to him to cancel or surrender the lease if he did not desire
to become a tenant of the purchaser. Where he chose to continue in possession
as tenant of the premises, it does not appear to me that he had any right to
refuse to pay rent or to fulfil the other obligations of a tenant to the
purchaser." _(David Silva v Madanayake,(2))_ per Samerawickrame, J. at 399."

The crucial matter for decision in this appeal is whether a tenant who remains
in occupation of the rented premises, after receiving notice of the transfer
and of the purchaser's election, has thereby exercised the option to become
the tenant of the purchaser; or whether a tenant is entitled, while continuing
to remain in occupation, to refuse to accept the purchaser as his landlord.
Gratiaen, J., in de Alwis v Perera (11), Sansoni, J., (as he then was) in
Silva v Muniamma (6), and de Silva v Abeyaratne (12), K.D. de Silva, J., in
Perera v de Costa (4), and Samerawickrame, J., in David Silva v Madanayake (2)
all appear to be of the view that "a tenant who remains in occupation with
notice of the purchaser's election to recognise him as a tenant" may
legitimately be regarded as having exercised his option to acknowledge the
purchaser as his landlord, and thus to establish privity of contract between
them. (These decisions have been cited with approval, more recently, in Perera
v Padmakanthi (8), and Subramaniam v Pathmanathan (14). If the tenant does not
wish to acknowledge the purchaser as his landlord, he must give up the tenancy
and quit the premises, for -  
  
If he refuses to continue as tenant, his first duty is to quit the

**177**

premises. If he chooses to stay in occupation he remains there as tenant ...."
( (12) at 575).

In _Sabapathipillai v Ramupillai_ (15), Weerasooriya, J., held that a tenant
who received notice of the purchaser's election to recognise him as tenant
cannot be heard to say that he did not attorn to the purchaser if he continued
to be in occupation without informing the purchaser that he did not elect to
attorn to him. However, he did not discuss the case of a tenant who, without
remaining silent, expressly refuses to recognise the purchaser - which was the
position in _David Silva v Madanayake_ (2). There the tenant had claimed that
his company, and not he, was the tenant; it was held that an action on the
tenancy, for the ejectment of the tenant, was maintainable. In _Fernandes v
Perera_ (16), the purchaser called upon the tenant to attorn and pay rent to
him: the tenant, claiming that he had been the tenant of another person for
many years, refused to attorn unless the purchaser obtained that person's
consent to the payment of rent to the purchaser. Following _David Silva v
Madanayake_ (2) it was held that, despite this refusal to pay rent to the
purchaser, the tenant had become the tenant of the purchaser by operation of
faw _Mensina v Joslin_ (17) is similar.

There is thus a long and authoritative series of decisions to the effect that
continuance in occupation by the tenant (with notice of the transferee's
election to recognise the tenant) constitutes an exercise of the tenant's
option to acknowledge the purchaser as landlord, establishing privity of
contract between the parties. No other act or conduct is necessary. I hold
that the Respondent became the tenant of the Appellant on 15.11.74, upon the
expiration of the monthly tenancy that was in force at the time she received a
letter dated 9.11.74 and the statement under section 37 signed by the
Appellant as landlord, indicative of her election to recognise the Respondent
as tenant; and the Appellant was entitled to maintain this action against the
Respondent, for rent, damages and ejectment, upon her failure to pay rent.

It is necessary to refer to three decisions, which are to some extent
inconsistent with the decisions referred to above. In _Zackariya v Benedict_
(7) the tenant refused to pay rent to the transferee, and even questioned the
validity of the transfer; an action for rent and ejectment was held not to be
maintainable. This decision was not followed in _Perera v de Costa_ (4) and
was doubted in

**178**

_

Muniamma_ (6); _Fernandes v Perera_ (16) is totally inconsistent with it.

Observations in _Naidu v Mudalige_ (1) that "mere continuing of occupation
without more" does not constitute an acknowledgement of the transferee as
landlord, cannot be regarded as part of the ratio of that case. The landlord
had informally agreed to sell the rented premises to the tenant, who then paid
an advance; some months later, a firm of proctors wrote to the tenant that the
deed of transfer in his favour could be executed, and requested payment of the
balance purchase price. The same day, the premises were sold to the
plaintiffs. The aforesaid firm was purporting to look after the interests of
both the landlord and the plaintiffs, but made no mention of any sale or
proposed sale. Six months later, the firm informed the tenant of the transfer,
and that the new owners had consented to an extension of time for the payment
of the balance purchase price; the tenant paid within the stipulated time. In
these circumstances, no question of attornment arose: the tenant's occupation
of the premises, after notice of the transfer, was not as tenant under the new
owners, but as a prospective purchaser. There was a fresh agreement between
the new owners and the former tenant, which transformed the character of the
latter's occupation; and the latter duly complied with the stipulated
condition as to the payment of the balance purchase price. There was thus no
occupation _qua_ tenant, and no tenancy, and an action for rent and ejectment
could not be maintained.

Weeramantry, J., in _Fernando v Wijesekera_ (18) defined the precise meaning
of "attornment" and went on to consider whether the continued existence of the
original contract of tenancy is a necessary consequence of attornment (at page
115); however, he refrained from deciding any question as to the manner in
which the tenant's option is to be exercised, or the creation of privity of
contract, and rested his decision on the finding that the purchaser and the
tenant had negotiated a new agreement.

In _Fernandes v Perera_ (16) and in _Mensina v Joslin_ (17), it was held that
in these circumstances the transferee is not entitled to bring a vindicatory
action or an action for declaration of title, although in the latter case the
tenant had disputed the transferee's title; however, it is not necessary for
me to express any opinion on the question whether the transferee is entitled,
either in addition or alternatively, to claim relief based on title.

**179**

I allow the appeal, and set aside the judgments and decrees of both Courts
below, with costs throughout.

The learned District Judge, having held that the Respondent did not become a
tenant of the Appellant, considered it unnecessary to answer other issues
which related to the period in respect of which the Respondent had failed to
pay rent, and the amount payable as rent. Since all the relevant evidence was
available, findings of fact should have been reached on these issues,
obviating the need for a fresh trial if an Appellate Court came to a different
conclusion on the legal issues. In the circumstances of this case, I do not
propose to remit this case to the District Court for the determination of
those issues, as it is quite clear that the Respondent did not pay rent,
either to the Appellant or her predecessors in title, after 9.11.74. Although
there was some dispute as to the quantum of the rent, according to the plaint
the authorised rent was Rs 96/58 per mensem (in 1974), and Rs 100/27 per
mensem (in 1975), and the Court of Appeal has held that the authorised rent
was Rs.96/58 according to the extracts from the Assessment Register. The
Respondent did not contend for a lower figure, and in was not contended before
us that the Respondent had the right to claim a set-off of the amount, if any,
which she had overpaid to the Appellant's predecessors in title. The Court of
Appeal also held that the original tenancy commenced on the 15th of the month,
and that the new tenancy, had there been one, would have run from the 15th of
each month. On that basis, the Appellant will be entitled to a decree for
ejectment of the Respondent as prayed for in her amended plaint; a sum of Rs
1,296/13, on account of arrears of rent from 15.11.74 and damages upto date of
plaint (15.12.75), and damages at the rate of Rs 100/27 per mensem thereafter
until vacant possession of the premises is delivered to her; and costs.

**

DHEERARATNE, J. **I agree.

**

RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/14.html_  

