[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1988](./) >> **[1988] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1988+14 or 1988+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1988+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Madurasinghe v. Madurasinghe - SLR - 142, Vol 2 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 14;
(1988) 2 Sri LR 142 (1 September 1988)

**

142

MADURASINGHE  
v.  
MADURASINGHE

**

SUPREME COURT.  
RANASINGHE C.J.;  
H.A.G. DE SILVA, J. AND,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 71/86,  
C.A. NO: 408/78 (F),  
D.C. GAMPAHA- 16946/L.  
MAY 25;-1988

_

Declaration of title and ejectment - Compensation -Jus retentionis -
Nomination as successor - Land Development Ordinance ss. 60 and 72 - Lex non
cogit ad impossibilia-Principle of nunc pro tunc.

_

One Marthina Hamine was the owner of the lands in suit and they were sold in
execution of a mortgage decree. She applied under the provisions of the Land
Redemption Ordinance No. 61 of 1942 to the Land Commissioner for their
redemption in 1945 but she died during the pendency of the proceedings. Her
husband Haramanis Perera continued the proceedings and the land was acquired
by the Crown and possession thereof handed over to him, in 1955. On 12.1
1.1956 Haramanis executed a document nominating the-defendant (Meraya) as his
successor after his death in the presence of the D.R.O. who signed as a
witness. The defendant married in 1954 and Haramanis lived with her and her
husband until his death on 29.01.'1960. After the nomination. Haramanis
delivered possession of these lands to the defendant, and her husband began
improving the land. The defendant enjoyed the produce of these lands. In
August 1961 the defendant received two grants in respect of these lands duly
registered and on 26.08.1961 she nominated her son Susantha Jayaweera as her
successor 'reserving life interest to herself. This nomination was duly
registered under the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance in 1968: Her
own nomination as successor to her father Haramanis was registered only on
10.01.1970 long after her fathers death after the Attorney-General advised the
Land Commissioner that he could register her nomination nunc pro tune.

On 16.01.1962 the Land Commissioner by a document marked in the case
recognised Edmund Peter, Haramanis's eldest child by the second marriage as
the legal successor to Haramanis in respect of these. lands and he entered
into possession of these lands. The plaintiff claimed the nomination was
invalid in view of s. 60 of the Land Redemption Ordinance whereby nomination
had to be duly registered before the death of the owner of the holding or the
permit holder. The Court of Appeal held that the plaintiff was entitled to the
land and defendant should be evicted but as defendant was a bona fide improver
she was entitled to compensation and a jus retentionis until payment of
compensation.

**143**

**

Held:

**

(1) The defendant cannot rely on the maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia (same
as impotentia excusat Iegem) because she failed to get her own nomination
registered while she got the nomination of her son registered in 1968. The
maxim will not apply if the necessity was created by the act of the person
relying on it or where all practical endeavours have not been used to surmount
it and where the clearest proof that the necessity compelled the violation is
not there.

(2) The principle nunc pro tunc (now for then) is really an application of the
principle actus curiae neminem gravabit - the act of the court will prejudice
no man and is founded upon justice and good sense. This maxim is applicable in
cases of delay by courts and not delays by administrative action.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Faiz Mustapha P.C. with H. Withanachchi for defendant - Appellant

J. de Almeida Gunaratne for plaintiff-respondent.

_

September 01, 1988

**

DE SILVA, J.

**_

Cur. adv. vult

_

The plaintiff-respondent instituted this action in the District Court of
Gampaha, against the defendant-appellant, his half-sister, seeking a
declaration that he was entitled to two allotments of` land called
Delgahalanda and referred to in the Schedule to the plaint. In addition he
sought an ejectment of the defendant-therefrom and damages of Rs. 2,400/- in
respect of the two years the defendant was in unlawful. possession and at Rs.
100/- per month till he is placed in quiet possession thereof. After trial the
learned District Judge dismissed the plaintiff's action with costs.

The plaintiff thereupon filed an appeal to the Court of Appeal and the latter
Court by its judgment, set aside the judgement of the District Court and
entered judgment, declaring, the plaintiff entitled to the land in question,
and for a writ of ejectment of the defendant. It also held that the defendant
as the bona fide improver of the land was entitled to compensation from the
plaintiff for the improvements and to a jus retentions till such compensation
was paid. The case was also remitted back to the District Court for the
ascertainment of the quantum of compensation payable to the defendant for the
improvements.

**144**

From the judgment of the Court of Appeal the defendant has appealed to this
Court, with leave of that Court on the following three. questions viz:-

(1) Whether the finding of the Court of Appeal that the admission of the
defendant in paragraph 18 of her affidavit P9 determines the question whether
the plaintiff was the eldest surviving son of Haramanis Perera at he time of
Haramanis's death.

(2) Whether the nomination of the defendant as successor having been
registered after the death of Haramanis Perera renders such nomination invalid
in terms of Section 60 of the Land Development Ordinance considering the
circumstances of this case.

(3) Whether the amendment to Section 72 of the Land Development Ordinance by
Act No. 16 of 1969 can have retrospective effect.

At the hearing of this appeal learned Counsel for the defendant-appellant
submitted that he would not be canvassing the Appeal Court judgment in respect
of the third question formulated for our determination and hence it will not
be necessary for me to deal with it. We are therefore left with two questions
for decision, the first being whether the admission of the defendant in
paragraph 18 of the affidavit P9, which was filed by her in an application for
a Writ of Mandamus made by the present plaintiff against inter alia the
present defendant determines the question :whether the plaintiff is the eldest
surviving child of Haramanis. In that application the present plaintiff had
averred in paragraph 5 of his petition that Haramanis Perera. (his father) had
died on 29:1.1960 leaving surviving him the following children, his wife
having-predeceased him, viz. the plaintiff/petitioner being a child of the
first marriage and five children of the second marriage including the
defendant, the 3rd respondent to that application. What was significant was
that the plaintiff/petitioner had not included in the list of children in that
averment the name of Richard Perera the eldest child of Haramanis by his first
marriage.

**145**

It was the evidence of the plaintiff and his witness Edmund Peter, a full
brother of the defendant, and the eldest child of Haramanis by his second
marriage', that Richard was not married and had left the residing house about
30 years ago and the information received was that Richard was-dead, that
Richard had not attended his father's or mother's funeral nor the marriages of
any of his sisters: On the other hand the defendant contended that the
plaintiff's and his witness's evidence that Richard was dead, was not true as
she had seen Richard in his fathers house in 1961. The learned District Judge
had- held that that evidence relied on by the plaintiff to prove Richard's
death was contradictory and hence rejected it.

The Court of Appeal stated that while there was no doubt that there were
certain contradictions in the evidence of the plaintiff and his witness Edmund
Peter, there was also an important admission by the defendant which the
learned District Judge had not taken into consideration viz: the admission by
the defendant in para 18 of P9 in which she stated

'' I admit the averments contained in paragraphs 1,3,4,5, (except the date of
death of my father) 10 and 13 of the affidavit of the petitioner above named".

The Court of Appeal therefore held that by admitting para 5 of the petition in
which Richard's name as one of the surviving sons of Haramanis Perera had been
omitted, the defendant had thereby admitted that he was no longer living and
that the plaintiff/petitioner was his eldest surviving child by the first
marriage. In these circumstances, the Court of Appeal held that the burden
shifted to the defendant to prove that Richard was living, which it was stated
the defendant had failed to do and hence it could be presumed that Richard
was, dead and the plaintiff was the eldest surviving child of Haramanis
Perera.

Learned Counsel for the defendant submitted that though there was such a
situation created by the inclusion of paragraph 5 in the admissions- contained
in paragraph 18 of the defendant's affidavit P9, in paragraph 19 of her
affidavit she had

**146**

denied inter alia the averments contained in paragraph 7 of the petition
wherein the plaintiff /petitioner had averred' that he was the eldest
surviving male child of Haramanis Perera at the date of his death, 29.1.196.0.
We. therefore have two positions taken up by the defendant. in her affidavit
contradictory of each other. While one would be able to say that the effect.
of the admission of the averments of paragraph. 5 of the petition is an
admission that the plaintiff / petitioner was the only surviving child of the
first marriage and hence the other child Richard who was elder to him was,
dead, it was an admission of the death of Richard by necessary implication,
the denial of the averment in paragraph 7 of the petition was also a denial by
implication that Richard was dead or put in other words an assertion by
implication that Richard was alive and hence the plaintiff/petitioner was not
the eldest surviving male child of Haramanis Perera. In this state of affairs
it is my view that one cannot fault the view taken by the Court of Appeal
because if it was the defendant's position that Richard was alive, she could
have made a positive averment to that effect. I would therefore prefer- not to
interfere with the conclusions arrived at, by the Court of Appeal on this
matter.

There remains to be answered the second question viz: whether -the. nomination
of the defendant as successor having been registered after the death of
Haramanis Perera is rendered invalid by Section 60 of the Land Development
Act.

The facts elicited at the trial disclose that Haramanis Perera, the father of
both the plaintiff and the defendant was placed in possession of lands in
question on 28th February 1955. The manner in which. he became possessed of
these lands was that his second wife and 'mother' of the defendant, Kahandana
Aarachchige Dona Marthina Hamine was the owner- of those lands. These lands
had been sold under a mortgage decree entered against her in DC Colombo Case .
No. 7780/M.R. Marthina Hamine being, entitled to apply under the provisions of
the Land Redemption Ordinance No. 61 of 1942, duly applied to the Land
Commissioner for their redemption in 1945 but she died before the proceedings
were concluded.

Haramanis Perera, her  husband, however continued the proceedings and the
lands were acquired by the Crown and possession thereof handed over to him in
1955.

**147**

On 12th November 1956, Haramanis Perera went to the office of the Divisional
Revenue Officer, Siyane Korale West (Medu Pattu) Imbulgoda and in the presence
of the D. R. O. he executed a document nominating the `defendant as his
successor to the lands after his death and the D. R. O. signed as a witness.

The defendant who was unmarried at the time of her mother's death, married in
1954 and Harmanis Perera lived with the defendant and her husband until his
death on 29th January 1960. After the defendant was nominated as his successor
Haramanis Perera delivered possession of those lands to the defendant, and her
husband began improving the land by planting coconuts etc. at their expense.
The defendant was in possession of the lands and she enjoyed the produce. of
the lands. In August 1961 the defendant received the two grants P1 and P2 in
respect of these lands duly registered and on 26th August 1961 she nominated
her son Meegodage Lokitha Susantha Jayaweera as her successor with herself as
the life holder. This nomination has been duly registered under the provisions
of the Land Development Ordinance in 1968. Her own nomination as the successor
to her father was registered only on 10th January 1970 nearly 10 years after
her father's death.

On 16th January 1962 by P3 the Land Commissioner has recognised Edmund Peter,
Haramanis's eldest child by the second "marriage as the legal successor to
Haramanis Perera in respect of these lands and he entered into possession
thereof.

For the first time the Land Commissioner, after receipt of the Attorney-
General's advice by P14 on 28th March 1967, that the plaintiff's claim to the
land could be accepted, has on 20th May 1968 sought a review of that advice by
P1 5 stating that Haramanis Perera had nominated his daughter before his
death. Following this letter the Attorney-General changed his earlier view and
expressed a re-considered view in D8 of 12th August 1968, that in the special
circumstances of this case it was possible to take the view that the
nomination made by Haramanis Perera of his daughter the defendant is a valid
one notwithstanding that the formal grant was issued later and advised the
Land Commissioner to register that nomination

**148**

nunc pro tune and recognise the defendant as the duly nominated successor of
Haramanis Perera. This nomination, as :stated earlier was registered therefore
only in 1970.

It was the plaintiff's contention that in view of the provisions of Section 60
of the Land Development Ordinance as amended by Act No. 16 of 1969 which
states that "no nomination . . . . . of a successor shall be valid unless the
document (other than a last will) effecting such nomination ..... is duly
registered before the death of the owner of the holding or the permit-holder"
the nomination of the defendant; if there be such a nomination is of no
effect` and does not pass title to her. To overcome this obstacle, learned
Counsel for the defendant has called into aid two legal maxims viz: (1) lex
non cogit ad impossibilia and (2) the principle of nunc pro tune. I will first
deal with the first legal maxim and its application to the facts of this case.

Broome's Legal Maxim's page 197 states that "lex non cogit ad impossibilia" is
the same as the maxim impotentia excusat legem". This maxim means
"Impossibility is an excuse for noncompliance with an absolute provision". It
goes on to say "impotentia" excuses when there is a necessary or invincible
disability to perform the mandatory part of the law or to forbear the
prohibitory. In the performance of that duty it has three 'points: to which
its attention must be directed. Firstly it must see that the nature of the
necessity pleaded be such as the law itself would respect. A necessity created
by a man's own act, with a fair previous knowledge of the consequences that
would follow and under - circumstances which he then had a power of
controlling, is of that nature. Secondly, that the party who was so placed,
used all practical endeavours to surmount the difficulties which already
formed that necessity and which on fair trial he found unsurmountable.
Thirdly, that all this shall appear by distinct and unsuspected testimony for
the positive injunctions of the law, if proved to be violated, can give way to
nothing but the clearest proof of the necessity that compelled the violation".

Cranes on Statute Law, 7th edition states at page 265 -

"under certain circumstances compliance with the provisions of statutes which
prescribes how something is to

**149**

be done will be excused. i.e if it appears that the the performance of the
formalities prescribed by a statute has been rendered impossible by
circumstances over which the persons intended had no control, like the act of
God, or the King's enemies, these circumstances will be taken as a valid
excuse'".

Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes, 12th edition page 326 says -

"Enactments which impose duties upon or conditions are, when these are not
construed as conditions precedent to the exercise of a jurisdiction, subject
to the maxim "lex non cogit ad impossibilia". They are understood as
dispensing with the performance of what is prescribed when performance of it
is impossible".

According to the material available, possession of the lands were handed over
to Haramanis Perera in 1955. In November 1956 he is alleged to have made the
nomination but even at that time the formal grants had not been issued-to him
and were not issued even up to the date of his death January 1960. The
defendant received the grants only in August 1961. There is no evidence to
show that either Haramanis Perera or the defendant his nominee took any steps
to obtain the formal grants even up to 1961. The defendant then on 26th August
1961 nominated her son and she got that nomination registered in 1968 but
failed to get her own nomination registered even at that stage. It was only in
1970, two years after the Attorney-General by D8 had expressed a re-considered
view that the defendant submitted the original nomination of herself for
registration. Even if one could say that till 1961 she could not register the
nomination due to an absence of the formal grants and their being duly
registered, there is no excuse for her waiting another 9"years to get the
registration done. Since the nomination was made even before the formal grants
were issued. I do not see any reason why the nominations could not be
registered before such issue, because these lands had been the subject matter
of transactions even during the lifetime of the defendant's mother. In these
circumstances, even if this maxim could be applied to a situation where a
nomination had not been registered during the lifetime

**150**

of the owner, in compliance with the mandatory requirement of Section 60, I do
not think that in the circumstances of this case, the application of that
maxim is justified.

The next matter that calls for consideration is the principles of "nunc pro
tune" which is really the application of the maxim "Actus curiae neminem
gravabit" - An act of the Court shall prejudice no man". Broome's Legal Maxims
7th edition page 97 reads, "this maxim is founded upon justice and good sense;
and affords a safe and certain guide for the administration of the Law". In
virtue of it, where a case stands over for argument on account of the
multiplicity of business in the Court, or for judgment from the intricacy of
the question, the party ought not to be prejudiced by that delay; but should
be allowed to enter up his judgment retrospectively to meet the justice of the
case; and, therefore,  if one party to an action dies during a curia advisari
vult, judgment may be entered nunc  pro tunc,  for the delay is the act of the
Court, for which neither party should suffer". ....... It may be here
mentioned that the power of the Court to enter judgment nunc pro tune does not
depend upon statute: it is a power of common law, and, in accordance with the
ancient practice of the Court, is adopted in order to prevent prejudice to a
suitor from delay occasioned by the act of the Court. Where, however, the
delay is not attributable to the act of the Court, the above maxim does not
apply".

A study of the treatises on interpretation of Statutes and Law Lexicons drive
me to the conclusion that this maxim is applicable in cases of delay by Courts
and not in administrative actions. In any event the registration of the
nomination of the defendant as a; successor could be considered only if the
other maxim "lex non cogit ad impossibilia" could be applied and I have
already held that the latter maxim is not applicable in the circumstances of
this case. Accordingly the question of the application of the principle of
nunc pro tunc does not arise in this instance. I would therefore hold that the
defendant has failed on both matters agitated before this Court. I affirm the
judgment of the Court of Appeal and dismiss-the defendant's appeal with costs.

**

RANASINGHE, C.J**. - agree. **  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/14.html_  

