[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1986](./) >> **[1986] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1986+14 or 1986+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1986+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Fernando v. Bernie De Silva - SLR - 406, Vol 1 of 1986 [1986] LKSC 14;
(1986) 1 Sri LR 406 (5 February 1986)

**

406

FERNANDO  
v.  
BERNIE DE SILVA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., RANASINGHE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 76/85. C.A. (L.A. No 29/82).  
D.C. PANADURA No. 16657.  
FEBRUARY 5, 1986.

_

Landlord and tenant - S. 22(3)(c) Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 - Tender of arrears
of rent by deposit in Court to the credit of the case \- Issues - Judgment -
Ss. 146(2), 184(l) and 187 Civil Procedure Code.

_

Where the only issue in the case was whether because of the fact that the
defendant had deposited the arrears of rent to the credit of the case before
the service of summons, the plaintiff could proceed with the action in view of
section 22 (3) ( _c_ ) of the Rent Act of 1972 and the court was of the
opinion that the deposit of the arrears in Court did not amount to tender of
arrears to the landlord within the meaning of the provisions of the said
section 22 (3) ( _c_ ) the District Judge should have entered judgment
dismissing the action in final disposal of the action and not enter as he did
an interlocutory order-

There was no need to have raised a consequential issue asking for judgment as
it had been prayed for in the plaint and in the written submissions of
plaintiff. If the District Judge thought such an issue was necessary he could
have framed it under section 146(2) of the Civil Procedure Code and answered
it in favour of the plaintiff .

The District Judge was bound to enter a proper judgment in terms of s. 184(1)
and 187 of the Civil Procedure Code dismissing the action.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C._ with _Kithsiri Gunaratne_ and _Miss S.M. Senaratne
_for plaintiff-appellant.

_

E. D. Wikramanayake_ for defendant-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

March, 4, 1986. **  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J.

**

This is an appeal, with the Special Leave of this Court, from the judgment of
the Court of Appeal, dismissing the appeal and affirming the order of the
District Judge of Mt. Lavinia and remitting the case to

**407**

the District Court for determination. The District Court had answered the only
issue raised in the trial against the defendant, holding that the action could
be maintained.

This was an action instituted by the plaintiff on 27.1.1980 against the
defendants for arrears of rent in a sum of Rs. 825 from March 1977 up to April
1978 at the rate of Rs. 75 per month and ejectment from the premises in suit.

The defendant filed answer on 9.1.80 and at the commencement of the trial the
following admissions were recorded :-

1. Tenancy under the plaintiff.

2. Rent at Rs. 75 per month.

3. Notice to quit.

4. Receipt by the plaintiff of a deposit note dated 7.5.80 that the defendant had deposited the money.

5. A sum of Rs. 825 has been deposited. 

6. The sum of Rs. 825 has been deposited in Court as arrears of rent .

7. The monthly rental of Rs. 75 was deposited with the Commissioner of National Housing from March 1977 up to January, 1978.

8. Further rent was deposited with the Commissioner of National Housing in view of his letter dated 25.9.77.

9. Acceptance of letter dated 21.4. 78 (D2).

It is then recorded that parties state that since arrears of rent is a
question of law, they wish to tender written submissions, (that is, without
leading oral evidence)

The defendant then raised the single issue in the trial, which has erroneously
been recorded as admission No. 10. It runs as follows:

1\. Since the sum of Rs. 825 which the plaintiff states is arrears of rent,
has been deposited to the credit of the case prior to 20.5.80, can the
plaintiff proceed with this action in view of section 22 (3) ( _c_ ) of the
Rent Act of 1972?

** **

**408**

The relevant portion of section 22(3) of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972, reads as
follows:-

"The landlord of any premises referred to in subsection (1) ......... shall
not be entitled to ......... proceed with, any action ........... for the
ejectment of the tenant of such premises on the ground that the rent of such
premises **** has been in arrears for three months or more ........... after
it has become due-

( _c_ ) if the tenant has, on or before the date fixed, in such summons as is
served on him, as the date on which he shall appear in court, in respect of
such action .... _tendered_ to __ the landlord all arrears of rent. "(The
emphasis is mine).

The decision of the District Judge related to the interpretation of the word
"tender" in the context of the section. Subsection (1) referred to above
relates to premises the standard rent of which for a month does not exceed one
hundred rupees. It is applicable to these premises, the admitted rent of which
is Rs. 75 per month. Under this subsection, one of the grounds, viz ( _a_ )
provides for instituting an action for ejectment of the tenant where rent has
been in arrears for three Months or more, after it has become due.

Under section 22 (3) ( _c_ ) a tenant against whom an action for arrears of
rent and ejectment has been instituted, is afforded an opportunity of
tendering all ** _**_ he arrears of rent to the landlord on or before the
summons returnable date. In the present case summons was returnable on 20.5.80
and the defendant deposited the arrears to the credit of the case on 5.5.80.
The tenancy, arrears of rent, notice to quit and the deposit of the arrears
are admitted by the parties. The defendant then raised the issue as set out
above as to whether the plaintiff could proceed with the action in view of the
deposit of the arrears, in terms of section 22 (3) ( _c_ ) of the Rent Act of
1972.

The learned District Judge took the view that the deposit of the arrears of
rent in court did not amount to a tender of the arrears to the landlord and
answered the issue to the effect that the plaintiff "can proceed with the
action". This is the English version of the judgment which is in Sinhala. He
was obviously quoting the language of section 22 (3) of the Rent Act when he
used the above, words within inverted commas.

**409**

Learned counsel for the appellant contended that having come to the conclusion
that there was no tender of all the arrears of rent to the plaintiff by the
defendant in terms of section 22 (3) ( _c_ ) of the Rent Act, the learned
District Judge should have entered judgment for the plaintiff as prayed for.
He also argued that the Court of Appeal erred in upholding the judgment of the
District Judge because no consequential issue asking for judgment had been
raised, and that if judgment was entered it would have deprived the defendant
of raising any further issues, or as counsel for the respondent submitted
before us, of even amending his answer thereafter.

Counsel for the appellant contended that once the District Judge had come to a
finding that the defendant was in arrears of rent there was no alternative
left for him but to enter judgment for the plaintiff. There was nothing more
left for the plaintiff to prove in his case, in view of the recorded
admissions, which supplied the necessary proof of the matters entitling her to
judgment. I agree with the learned Counsel for the appellant.

The judgment that the District Judge entered was regarded as an interlocutory
order because it did not give finality to the matter in issue between the
parties. This was due to the District Judge employing the same language as
section 22 (3), in entering judgment. The finding of the District Judge under
this section in this case should have resulted in a conclusion of the action,
one way or another. If, for instance, the defendant succeeded in establishing
that he paid the plaintiff the arrears of rent in terms of section 22(3) ( _c_
), the judge would have been bound to enter judgment dismissing the
plaintiff's action. Similarly, if the defendant failed to establish the
payment of all arrears of rent in terms of the section, and no other matters
had been raised in issue between the parties, the District Judge was obliged
to enter judgment for the plaintiff. In this case there were no other matters
in issue between the parties that had to be resolved, in view of the
admissions recorded before commencement of the trial. The only matter put in
issue was the question of arrears of rent, and that was answered in the
plaintiff's favour. The learned District Judge should accordingly have entered
judgment for the plaintiff. There was no need to have raised a consequential
issue asking for judgment as it had been prayed for in the plaint and also in
the written submissions

**410**

tendered by plaintiff's counsel in the District Court. If, however, the
District Judge thought that such an issue was necessary it was his duty to
have framed such an issue under section 146(2) of the Civil Procedure Code and
then answered it in favour of the plaintiff.

As the learned counsel for the appellant contended, the learned District Judge
was bound to enter a proper judgment in terms of sections 184(1) **** and 187
of the Civil Procedure Code after he answered the only issue raised in the
case in the plaintiff's favour. It should have been a judgment which gave
finality to the action and on which a decree under section 188 could have been
entered. The judgment on the other hand that the District Judge pronounced,
took the form of an interlocutory order on which a decree could not have been
entered. The learned District Judge appears to have been led into this error
by endeavouring to follow the language of section 22 (3) of the Rent Act of
1972.

A submission was made that on the judgment entered by the District Judge, the
trial would have continued and the defendant would have been entitled to
satisfy the court under section 22 (5) that the rent was in arrears on account
of "other sufficient cause," namely that he had erroneously deposited it in
court .

But this was a 'defence' on which the defendant could have raised an issue at
the trial but chose not to do so. In fact he raised it in his written
submissions tendered in the District Court and has not been given the relief
he sought.

In my __ view no prejudice will be caused to the defendant if the District
Judge is directed to enter a final judgment in the action on the proceedings
held by him. When such a judgment is entered it will be open to the defendant,
if he so wishes, to canvass the correctness of the District Judge's finding on
the question that the deposit of the arrears of rent to the credit of the case
does not amount to a tender of the arrears to the plaintiff landlord in
compliance with section 22(3) ( _c_ ) of the Rent Act.

I therefore set aside the judgment of the District Court and of the Court of
Appeal and direct that the record be remitted to the District Court to enable
the District Judge to pronounce a proper judgment on the findings he had
reached in the proceedings held before him, after notice to the parties, and
then to enter decree in accordance with the judgment:

**411**

The plaintiff-appellant will be entitled to costs in this court and in the
other two courts below.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.

**

RANASINGHIE, J.** \- I agree.

_

Judgment set aside. Record remitted to District Judge to pronounce judgment,
after notice, on his findings.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/14.html_  

