[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1981](./) >> **[1981] LKSC 14**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1981+14 or 1981+LKSC+14) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1981+LKSC+14) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Khan v. Jayman - SLR - 233, Vol 2 of 1994 [1981] LKSC 14; (1994) 2 Sri LR
233 (13 December 1981)

**  233**

**KHAN**

**v.**

**JAYMAN**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J. AND

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 38/95.

C.A. APPEAL NO. 827/81(F).

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 2904/ZL.

AUGUST 25, SEPTEMBER 7 AND 29 , 1993.



Landlord and Tenant ‑ Licencee ‑ Vindicatory suit ‑ Burden of proof ‑ Civil
Procedure Code, sections 121 and 175(2) proviso ‑ Secondary evidence ‑Evidence
Ordinance, sections 65, 66, 109._

_  _

The plaintiff sued the defendant for declaration of title, eviction of the
defendant and damages. The plaintiff claimed that the defendant who was his
cousin was permitted to occupy the premises in suit and was a licencee. The
defendant claimed he was tenant and that his tenancy was protected by the Rent
Act. The defendant produced a letter wherein the plaintiff had said "I shall .
. . bring the house rent receipts" which defendant claimed was in response to
his demand for receipts. The plaintiff stated that receipts referred to were
in respect of another transaction relating to another house.



**Held:**



1.      The defendant did not list the letter by which he claims to have demanded rent receipts as required by S.121 of the Civil Procedure Code. Under the proviso to S.175(2) of the Code it could have been produced in cross‑examination though not listed. If the letter could not be produced as it was in the plaintiff's possession, secondary evidence thereof could have been produced under s. 65 of the Evidence Ordinance after giving notice to the plaintiff under s. 66 to produce the original. The District Judge allowed secondary evidence by way of oral testimony of the contents of the document in breach of the express prohibition against such procedure contained in s. 66. The District Judge criticized the failure of the plaintiff to produce the original of defendant's letter when the burden of producing legal evidence of his own letter was on the defendant whether such evidence was intended to "prove" the tenancy or for "showing" that the parties had been acting as landlord and tenant within the meaning of s. 109 of the Evidence Ordinance. Defendant also admitted making a false statement to the Police in connection with another incident. Defendant had failed to show that he and plaintiff had acted as tenant and landlord.

**  234**

2\.         The plaintiff was the owner and had established the _factum
probandum_ , namely the licence and its termination and was entitled to
judgment. The defendant had failed to prove a better title.



**Case referred to :**



1\. _Pessona v. Babonchi Bass_ 49 N.L.R. 442, 444.



**Appeal** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



_Faiz Musthapha, P.C._ with _S. Mahenthiran_ for appellant.



_L. L. P. Wettasinghe_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv vult._

October 12, 1993.

**KULATUNGA, J.**





The plaintiff sued the defendant for ejectment from premises No. 6, Lillie
Street, Colombo 2, more fully described in the schedule to the plaint and for
damages. In his plaint the plaintiff states that he resided in the premises in
suit from 1963, as a tenant; that in 1974 he became its owner, having
purchased it from his landlord on Deed No. 478 dated 29.05.74 (P4); that the
defendant is a cousin of the plaintiff and a bachelor, and a travelling
salesman whom the plaintiff permitted to occupy a room in the said premises,
whenever he was in Colombo; that the plaintiff had a business in Bandarawela
and resided there on account of his business; and that while he was away on
such business, the plaintiff expected the defendant to look after the said
premises.



The plaint alleges that on or about 04.02.1976, the defendant (who was only a
licensee) brought his mother and sisters to the premises in suit whereupon the
plaintiff requested him to leave the same; instead, he was forcibly staying
there on a false claim of tenancy. In the premises, the plaintiff prayed for
ejectment and damages and for vacant possession of the premises.



The defendant filed answer stating that in or about November, 1971 the
plaintiff gave him the premises on a monthly tenancy at a rental of Rs. 200/‑
per mensem after recovering an advance of Rs. 5000/‑; that after 09.02.76 the
plaintiff attempted to forcibly eject him and his family from the premises
whereupon he made a complaint to the police, that he was in lawful occupation
thereof as a

**  235**

protected tenant under the Rent Act and hence no cause of action had accrued
to the plaintiff to sue him.



After trial, the learned District Judge held that from February, 1976 the
defendant was in occupation of the premises against the wishes of the
plaintiff but that the plaintiff had failed to establish that the defendant's
occupation of the premises was by leave and licence, even though the evidence
was insufficient to establish a tenancy; and hence dismissed the plaintiff's
action. The Judge held that as the plaintiff had failed to establish that the
respondent was a licensee, it was unnecessary to answer the issue on tenancy.
After an unsuccessful appeal to the Court of Appeal, the plaintiff now appeals
to this Court.



The plaintiff did not pray for a declaration of title or raise an issue on
ownership, presumably because no challenge to his ownership was anticipated.
Indeed the defendant's answer did not deny the plaintiff's title. At the
trial, the plaintiff established his title and the defendant in his evidence
admitted the plaintiff's title to the premises in suit. This action is,
therefore, a vindicatory action i.e. an action founded on ownership.
Maasdorp's Institutes of South African Law Vol. II Eighth Edition page 70
commenting on the right of an owner to recover possession of his property
states ‑



"The plaintiff's ownership in the thing is the very essence of such an action
and will have to be both alleged and proved . . ."



He also states ‑



". . . The ownership of a thing consists in the exclusive rights of possession
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . and in the absence of any
agreement or other legal restriction to the contrary, it entitles the owner to
claim possession from any one who cannot set up **a better title** to it and
warn him off the property, and eject him from it".



This Court granted leave to appeal limited to one question, namely where title
of the plaintiff to the premises in suit is admitted, whether in the
circumstances of this case there is a burden on the defendant to prove by what
right he is in occupation of the premises. In any event, has the defendant
discharged that burden ?

_  _

**  236**

            Learned Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant submitted that although the District Judge had not answered the issue on tenancy, defendant's claim to have been a tenant of these premises stands discredited by his own evidence and he has clearly failed to establish that claim; and that in the circumstances, once he admitted the plaintiff's title, the burden was on him to establish a superior title to the property. He has failed to discharge this burden and hence the plaintiff is entitled to judgment.           

           

Learned Counsel for the defendant-respondent submitted that he would not
question the principle of common law applicable to the owner's right to
recover possession of his property from a person in unlawful possession. In
such a case the _factum probandum_ is ownership. However, in this case the
plaintiff claimed to have permitted the defendant to occupy the premises in
suit by leave and licence. Hence the _factum probandum_ is the licence; and
the burden is on the plaintiff to prove the licence and its termination. If
the evidence leaves the matter in doubt, the plaintiff must fail. Counsel
added that even if the burden is on the defendant, it would suffice, in view
of s.109 of the Evidence Ordinance, for the defendant to have "shown" that the
parties have been acting as landlord and tenant in which event, the burden of
proving that there was no such relationship is on the plaintiff; that on the
facts of this case, the defendant has "shown" the existence of a tenancy and
the plaintiff has failed to rebut it. The word "shown" in s.109 of the
Evidence Ordinance is not synonymous with the word "prove" and connotes a
lesser degree of legal proof. _Pessona v. Babonchi Baas_ (1). On this ground
too, the plaintiff must fail.  

           

In considering the above submissions in the light of the facts, it may perhaps
be appropriate to first consider the defendant's claim of a tenancy. There is
no documentary evidence of a tenancy agreement in respect of the premises in
suit. The defendant, however, produced a letter dated 05.08.73 sent to him by
the plaintiff (V3) where the plaintiff has said "I shall . . . bring the house
rent receipts". V3 is a reply to a letter sent by the defendant and the major
part of it explains the efforts made by the plaintiff to recover for the
defendant certain monies from a man in Batticaloa. It does not identify the
premises in respect of which the plaintiff promised to bring house rent
receipts. The defendant said in evidence that since he took the house on rent
in 1971, the plaintiff did not issue receipts  

                                                           



**  237**

for rents paid; but in view of the new rent laws, he thought it desirable the
to insist on receipts and hence wrote a letter demanding receipts to which he
received the reply V3.



By way of explanation of the reference to rent receipts in V3, the plaintiff
said that his father had rented out a house in Bandarawela; that the landlord
of that house was living in Singapore and the rents          were collected in
his behalf by the post-mistress Bandarawela who issued rent receipts. After
some time, the landlord's wife who lived in Panadura objected to the post-
mistress collecting the rents and desired to peruse the receipts which had
already been issued. Those are the receipts which are referred to in V3. They
were given to the defendant to be handed over to the landlord's wife.



The defendant did not list the letter by which he claims to have demanded rent
receipts, as required by s.121 of the Civil Procedure Code. In view of the
proviso to s.175(2) of the Code, there was, however, no bar against producing
it in cross-examination though it was not listed. If the letter could not be
produced as it was in the plaintiff's possession then, secondary evidence
thereof had to be produced under s. 65 of the Evidence Ordinance after giving
notice to the plaintiff under s. 66 to produce the original. Presumably, no
such notice was given but the District Judge permitted the defendant to give
secondary evidence by way of oral testimony of the contents of the document,
in breach of the express prohibition against such procedure contained in s.
66. That section provides that notice to produce a document may be dispensed
with in certain cases. I am of the opinion that this was not such a case.  


            Having irregularly permitted secondary evidence of the document, the District Judge proceeded to comment adversely on the failure of the plaintiff to produce the original and the Court of Appeal alleged that the plaintiff thereby attempted to suppress evidence of the tenancy. I hold that such criticism of the plaintiff's conduct was not justified, for the reason that the burden of producing legal evidence of his own letter in proof of the alleged tenancy was on the defendant, whether such evidence was intended to "prove" the tenancy or for "showing" that the parties had been acting as landlord and tenant within the meaning of s.109 of the Evidence Ordinance. 

**  238**

 The available evidence supports the allegation that the defendant attempted
to set out a tenancy claim only as late as 1975‑1976\. The relevant items of
evidence are as follows:‑



1\.         The file maintained by the Insurance Corporation in respect of the
defendant's insurance policy shows that he applied for the policy in or about
December, 1969 (P16). At that time he gave his address as 9/24, Muhandiram
Lane, Colombo 12. In 1970 the address was changed as Nagalagam Street, Colombo
12. It was only on 07.01.75 that he gave the premises in suit as his new
address.



2\.         The defendant's name has been entered in the electoral register as
a resident of the premises in suit only from 1975 onwards (D17, D18 and D19).



3\.         The house holders' list maintained by the Food Department shows
that his name has been entered as the chief house holder of the said premises
only in 1976 (P17). Prior to that, it was the plaintiff who appears as the
chief house holder.



4\.         It was on 20.02.76 that the defendant made a statement to the
police (P5) wherein he said that he had been a tenant of the premises in suit
from 1971. It is relevant to note that in P5 the defendant also said that from
December, 1975 the plaintiff had been asking him to quit the house.
Defendant's witness Steven (Janatha Committee member) had accompanied the
defendant to the Police Station on that occasion. Steven says that prior to
1976 he had seen the defendant in the premises in suit but he does not speak
to having known the defendant as a tenant during that period.



We next have the document P15 viz. the defendant's complaint dated 03.09.74
which he made to the Grandpass Police giving his residence as No. 37,
Nagalagam Street, Totalanga. He says that he was boarded in a room of that
house where he kept his belongings; that on 29.08.74 when he returned from
work, he found his suit case forced opened and his belongings including his
clothing's, wrist watch, an umbrella, insurance policy and a ring stolen. His
driver Ariyapala's savings pass books were also missing. He suspected

**  239**

Premasiri and Indrasena who used to loiter there to have been concerned in the
theft. In cross examination, the defendant admitted that P15 is a false
statement and that he made it solely to help his driver who was residing at
No. 37, Nagalagam Street, where he himself resided, before shifting to the
premises in suit.



Thus the available evidence shows that the defendant is a self­confessed liar;
and on a consideration of the totality of the evidence, I cannot agree that
the District Judge was left in doubt as to which version is true. The
defendant's claim of tenancy was wholly discredited and the District Judge
ought to have answered the issue on tenancy in the negative. Further, on the
available evidence, it cannot be said that the defendant has even "shown" that
the parties had been acting as landlord and tenant within the ambit of s.109.
That section has no application to this case.



We are, therefore, left with the fact that the plaintiff is the owner of the
premises in suit and his uncontroverted evidence that the defendant occupied a
room by leave and licence. Admittedly, that licence was terminated by the end
of 1975. The plaintiff has thus established the _factum probandum_ namely, the
licence and its termination and he is, therefore, entitled to judgment as
prayed for.



Learned Counsel for the defendant‑respondent also submitted that in view of
the fact that this was not a case of the plaintiff suing as owner
_simpliciter_ and in the absence of an issue on ownership, the defendant would
not have known the case he had to meet and was prejudiced in his defence. I
cannot agree. As stated early in his judgment, the plaintiff pleaded his
ownership and clearly set out his case, including the fact that the defendant
was in occupation of a room of the premises in suit by leave and licence. The
defendant too set out his case in unambiguous terms viz. that he was a
protected tenant from 1971. In the end, the plaintiff proved his case whilst
the defendant failed to establish a better title to the property. As such, the
question of prejudice does not arise.



For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgments of
District Judge and the Court of Appeal and enter judgment for the plaintiff as
prayed for, for ejectment and damages

**  240**

together with legal interest on the aggregate from 13.12.1981, until payment
in full. The plaintiff will also be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 8500/‑
(Rupees Eight Thousand Five Hundred) as costs of appeal here and in the Court
of Appeal, in addition to the costs of action in the District Court.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** ‑ I agree.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/14.html_  

