[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1990](./) >> **[1990] LKSC 15**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1990+15 or 1990+LKSC+15) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1990+LKSC+15) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Jayaweera v. National Film Corporation - SLR - 120, Vol 2 of 1995 [1990]
LKSC 15; (1995) 2 Sri LR 120 (7 December 1990)

**120**

**JAYAWEERA  
 v.  
NATIONAL FILM CORPORATION **

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J.,

RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION 119/93  
(WITH S.C. APPLICATIONS NOS. 120-144/93)

Constitutional Law - Article 126 of the Constitution - Time Bar - Relevant
date for computation of time._

The Petitioners were employed by the respondent Corporation. On 24.9.90 the
Corporation called for applications for promotion to Grade IV, V A and V B.
The Petitioner and the others were interviewed on 20.10.90 and 27.10.90. On
30.10.90 the Corporation published a list of the Names of the Promotees.
Letters of appointment dated **29.10.90** were given to the promotees. The
petitioners appealed to the Chairman of the Corporation, and he on **7.12.90**
replied that no useful purpose will be served by forwarding their
representations to the President and the Minister. On further appeals, the
Secretary to the Minister was appointed to hold an inquiry. On **1.2.93** the
Chairman confirmed the impugned promotions and decided to pay the increments
of the promotees which had been withheld pending inquiry. These applications
under Article 126 were filed on **22.02.93.**

A preliminary objection was taken that the claims of the petitioners are time
barred.

**Held:**

(1) The impugned appointments were published on 30.10.90. The promotees were
issued with letters of appointment dated 29.10.90. They were not informed of
any suspension of those appointments; hence at the conclusion of
administrative inquiries in 1993, they were paid all increments of salary
which had been withheld.

(2) In the circumstances, the alleged violation of rights occurred in October
1990; pursuit of administrative remedies does not interupt the time limit of
one month; hence the Petitioners applications are time barred.

121

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Gamaethige v Siriwardane -1988 1 SLR 384._  
  
_2\. Wijenaike v Air Lanka Ltd. - 1990 1 SLR 293._

**APPLICATION** for infringement of the Fundamental Right of Equality.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera for Petitioner._  
  

_Asoka de Silva, D.S.G., for 1-4 Respondents._  
  
_L.C. Seneviratne, PC. with Ronald Perera for 5, 6, 8,-28th and 27th-35th
Respondents.._

_Cur. adv vult._

August 04, 1995\.  
**KULATUNGA, J..**

Of consent the above application and applications Nos. 120 to 144/93 were
heard together. Counsel agreed that the decision herein will determine all the
applications.

A preliminary objection was raised against these applications on the ground
that the claims of the petitioners are time barred. We heard arguments of
Counsel on that objection and reserved our judgment thereon.

The petitioners are officers employed by the 1st respondent Corporation. On
24.09.90 the corporation called for applications for promotion to Grades IV, V
- A and V - B of the Corporation's Service. There were 169 applicants
(including the petitioners) who were interviewed by an Interview Board on
20.10.90 and 27.10.90. On 30.10.90 the Corporation published a list of 31
promotees. The petitioners allege that the said promotions were discriminatory
in that the selections were unfairly made, overlooking relevant considerations
such as seniority and experience, in derogation of the Scheme of Recruitment.

122

Letters of appointment dated 29.10.90 were given to the promotees; whereupon
the petitioners appealed to the former Chairman of the Corporation who replied
on 07.12.90 that no useful purpose will be served by forwarding the
representations made against the impugned appointments to the President and
the Minister.

On further appeals by the petitioners, Mr. Wijeratne Banda, the former
Secretary to the Ministry of Fisheries was appointed to hold an inquiry into
the matter. On the basis of his report the Board of Directors decided on
23.11.92 that certain officers should be charge sheeted for allegedly
misleading the Interview Board by presenting wrong information. However, on
01.02.93 the 2nd respondent (The Chairman of the Corporation) confirmed the
impugned promotions and decided to pay the increments of the promotees which
had been withheld pending inquiry. Whereupon the petitioners filed these
applications on 22.02.93.

Pursuant to a direction of this Court to add the 31 promotees as parties,
amended applications were filed on 09.03.93.

Mr. J. A. N. de Silva, D.S.G. and Mr. Seneviratne President's Counsel for the
respondents argued that the alleged infringement was the making of the
impugned promotions on 29.10.90 which were published on 30.10.90; the former
Chairman by his letter dated 07.12.90 rejected the representations made by the
petitioners; the petitioners have failed to come before this Court within one
month of the alleged infringement; pursuit of administrative remedies does not
interrupt the operation of time limit. Gamaethige v. Siriwardena "' there was
nothing to prevent the petitioners filing their applications before this Court
within time and then seeking administrative relief also, if so advised.

Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera for the petitioners conceded that if the violation
was the appointments in October, 1990, then the petitioners are out of time.
He, however, contended that there was no finality to those appointments,
pending inquiry into the appeals by the petitioners, as is seen by the fact
that the promotees were not paid their increments. Mr. Goonesekera argued that
there can be a

123

decision in respect of which time will not run until it becomes final. He
cited _Wijenaike v. Air Lanka Limited_ "(2)', in support.

In Wijenaike's case the impugned decision was a notice of vacation of post
dated 06.05.88 served on the petitioner. After the petitioner had given his
explanation the Chairman. Air Lanka refused re-employment to the petitioner on
08.11.88; whereupon the petitioner filed his application complaining of
infringement of his rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution. This Court
held that there is no automatic termination of services of an officer by
reason of unauthorised absence; that the principle of Roman Dutch Law
entitling the employer to repudiate the contract on the ground of absence of
the servant in appropriate circumstances necessarily implies a right in the
employee to give his explanation before a final decision is taken to repudiate
or revoke the contract. Hence the relevant date for computation of time was
08.11.88 when the Chairman refused re-employment.

Wijenaike's case has no application to the instant case. In that case the
final decision was postponed in terms of the applicable principles of law.
Here, there is no such decision. The impugned appointments were published on
30.10.90. No question of finality, as a matter of law arose. The promotees
were issued with letters of appointment dated 29.10.90. They were not informed
of any suspension of those appointments; hence, at the conclusion of
administrative inquiries in 1993, they were paid all increments of salary
which had been withheld. I am, therefore, of the view that the alleged
violation of rights occurred in October, 1990.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the applications of the petitioners are
time barred. This application and applications Nos. 120 to 144193 (both
inclusive) are accordingly dismissed, but without costs.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J. -** I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Applications dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/15.html_  

