[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1987](./) >> **[1987] LKSC 15**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1987+15 or 1987+LKSC+15) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1987+LKSC+15) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Moonesinghe and Others v. Attorney General - SLR - 20, Vol 2 of 1987
[1987] LKSC 15; (1987) 2 Sri LR 20 (6 February 1987)

**

20

MOONESINGHE AND OTHERS** **  
v.** **  
ATTORNEY-GENERAL**  

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN-THOME, J., RANASINGHE, J.  
AND TAMBIAH. J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 6/86 (Spl.)  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 174/86.  
JANUARY 19 AND 20, 1987.

_

    Constitutional jurisdiction of Supreme Court-Reference by H. E. the President of urgent Bill to the Supreme Court-Article 122(1)(b) and (c) and Article, 123 of the Constitution Copy of Reference delivered at the same time at the Speaker's, official residence when Speaker was out of the island-Validity of determination of Supreme Court._

There was a sufficient compliance with the Constitutional stipulation of
Article 122(1)(b) of the Constitution of 1978 that when His Excellency ,the
President makes a written reference to the Chief Justice requiring the special
determination of the Supreme Court as to whether a Bill or any provision
thereof is inconsistent with the Constitution, a copy of such reference should
at the same time be delivered to the Speaker when the copy of the Reference
was delivered at the same time at the Speaker's official residence. although
the Speaker was out of the island at the time.

**

APPLICATIONS** for re-hearing on Constitutionality of Bill.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C._ with _Sanath Jayatifieke, Miss S. M. Senaratne, Safiya
Mathew, N. Siripala de Silva, Mrs. A, B. Dissanayake, Miss Lalitha Senaratne_
and _Miss Shiranthi de Saram_ for 1st, 2nd and 3rd petitioners in Application
No. 6/86.  

_

Prins Gunasekera_ with _Senaka Weeraratne, K Abeypala_ and _Mrs. M.
Abeyawickrema_ for the petitioners in Application No. 174/86.  

_

M. S. Aziz, D.S.G._ with _Ananda Kasturiarachchi, S.C. instructed by V. P.
Tillekeratne, State Attorney_ for respondents in Application No. 6/86 and
instructed by U. R. Wijetunga, State Attorney for the respondents in
Application No. 174/86.

_

Cur. adv. vult._

February 6, 1987.  
**  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.**

His Excellency the President, in terms of Article 122(1)(b) of the
Constitution referred on 7.10.1986, the Special Presidential Commissions of
Inquiry (Amendment) Bill for the special determination of the Supreme Court,
as to whether the Bill or any provision thereof was inconsistent with the
Constitution.

**21**

A Bench of the Supreme Court accordingly assembled on 10th October 1986 to
examine the provisions of the Bill and after considering the submissions
placed before them by the Deputy Solicitor General and K. M. P. Rajaratne,
Attorney-at-Law and Morris Rajapakse, Attorney-at-Law, determined that the
Bill was not inconsistent with any provisions of the Constitution and
communicated the determination of the Supreme Court to the President and
Speaker on that date itself.

The petitioners in both these applications complain that a copy of the
aforesaid Reference made by the President to the Supreme Court was not at the
same time delivered to the Speaker as required by the mandatory provisions of
Article 122 (1) (b) and hence the determination is invalid in law on the
ground that there was no proper reference Article. 122 (1) (b) provides as
follows:

"122(1). In the case of a Bill which is; in the view of the Cabinet of
Ministers, urgent in the national interest, and bears an endorsement to that.
effect under the hand of the Secretary to. the Cabinet

(a) ..........

(b). the President shall by a written reference addressed to the Chief
Justice, require the special determination of the Supreme Court as to whether
the Bill or any provision thereof is" inconsistent with the Constitution. A
copy of such reference shall at the same time be delivered to the Speaker;

(c) the Supreme Court shall make its determination within twenty-four hours
(or such longer period not exceeding three days as the President may specify)
of the assembling of the court, and shall communicate its determination only
to the President and the Speaker".

The gravamen of Petitioner's complaint is that the copy of the Reference was
in fact delivered to the Hon. Speaker only after the proceedings of the
Supreme Court had commenced and concluded.

The petitioners in Application, No. 6/86 allege hat the Supreme Court had
acted per incuriam being unaware that a condition precedent for the
constitution and assembling of a Bench under Article 122 (1) (c) had not been
complied with. They state that in consequence of the non-compliance with the
said requirement the rights of Members of Parliament in relation to the
legislative process of a Bill, which such requirement was intended to protect
have, been defeated. They pray, for the constitution of a new Bench of the

**22**

Supreme Court to make the determination under Article 122 (1) (c), when they
would be able to urge that he Bill was in conflict with the Constitution.

The petitioners in application No. 174/86 averred in-their petition that the
Secretary to the Cabinet and/or Secretary to the President-

"severally or acting in concert have failed and neglected to follow the
procedure laid down in Article 122(2) and acted unconstitutionally, illegally,
mala fide, in not forwarding a copy of the said Reference to the Speaker of
Parliament, as required by Article 122(2) of the Constitution, which action
constituted a violation of the fundamental rights of the petitioners, vouched
by Article. 12 and 14 of the Constitution".

They state that the special determination obtained without a copy of the
Reference having been delivered to the Speaker as required by Article 122 (2)
(b) was unconstitutional and of no avail in law.

It would appear from the Hansard of 10.10.86 (P1) that the Deputy Speaker had
at about 12.15 p. m. that day in reply to a question from a Member of
Parliament said that he had not received a copy of the aforesaid Bill as yet.
It would further appear from the document filed by the Petitioners that the
copy of the Reference which was made to the Supreme Court by the President for
the special determination of that court under Article 122(1)(b) was received
by the Secretary-General of Parliament only at 3.55 p.m. on 10th October, 1986

According to the affidavit of H. K. Fernando, clerk attached to the
Presidential Secretariat, he had on 7. 10. 86 despatched the letter signed by
the President addressed to the Acting Chief Justice with a copy to the Hon
Speaker, under sealed, covers marked "By hand-Urgent" to the Acting Chief
Justice and Hon Speaker, respectively that the outer cover of the letter
addressed to the Hon. Acting Chief Justice was addressed to the Registrar,
Supreme Court, while the copy of the Hon. Speaker was addressed to "Hon.
Speaker-Parliament" that the two packets were handed over to the despatch
clerk with a request that it be despatched immediately. According to the
affidavit of Ginihaluge Sarath, cycle orderly attached to the Presidential
Secretariat, he had on 7.10.86 handed over the letter addressed to the Hon.
Speaker at 3.10 p.m. to an employee of "Mumtaz Mahal", the official residence
of the Hon. Speaker, and obtained the signature on the delivery book at the
time of delivery this employee was the person who ordinarily received
communications

**23**

from the Presidential Secretariat and to whom he, in the past, handed over
similar letters. He further stated that there had been earlier over when he
had taken letters addressed to the Hon. Speaker direct to Parliament, but had
on some such occasions been re-directed to the Speaker's residence whenever
the Speaker was not in Parliament. "Thereafter it became the practice adopted
by him to take such letters first to the Hon. Speaker's residence and if such
letters are not accepted to take the letters to Parliament."

From the above affidavits one has to conclude that a copy of the Reference
made by President under Article 122 (1) (b) was in fact delivered at the
Speaker's official residence 06 7.10.86 at the same time the President made
the Reference to the Acting Chief Justice and that the said copy was re-
delivered in Parliament on "10th October, 1986 at 3.55 p.m.

In the context of the undisputed fact that the Hon. Speaker was on 7.10.1986
out of the country on State business, the question arises whether the
requirement mandated by Article 122(1)(b) of the Constitution that a copy of
the Reference "shall at the same time be delivered to the Speaker" was
complied with, when such a copy addressed to the Hon. Speaker was in fact
delivered- at the official residence of the Speaker, on 7.10.86:

According to the Hansard of the 23. 10. 1986, Hon. the Speaker had at the
outset of the proceedings of that day made the following pronouncement:

"Since the matter as to when the copy of this Bill was delivered to the
Speaker has been raised in the House, I wish to inform the House that the copy
of the Bill concerned had been received at my official residence on 7th
October, 1986, and had been sent to my office in Parliament on 10.10.1986,
after the matter was raised in the House"

To a point of order raised by the 1st petitioner in Application No. 6/86as
Member of Parliament-"it is a known fact that you were not here in this
country. Therefore to send a copy to your House is utterly irrelevant, because
when you are away there is a Deputy Speaker who acts in your place, with all
the powers that you exercise". The Hon. Speaker made the following ruling

"In regard to the point of order I rule that in this particular instance I am
satisfied that all the necessary legal requirements have been- adhered; to for
the consideration of, this Bill ("Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry
(Amendment) Bill").

**24**

The Parliament has accepted the above ruling of the Speaker. The Speaker is
the best person to testify as to whether a copy of the Reference made in
connection with the Bill had at the same time been delivered to him as
required by, the terms of Article 122 (1) (b) of the Constitution. Implicit in
his ruling is the determination that the requirement of law had been
satisfied. In view of this ruling there is no basis for the contention of the
petitioners that there was a breach of the mandatory provisions of Article
122(1) (b).

The petitioners in Application No. 174/86 urged that the provisions of the,
Bill infringe the fundamental rights of the petitioners. This contention
involves the re-agitation of the question "whether the Bill or any provision
thereof is inconsistent with the Constitution". By its determination, dated
10. 10.86, this court had held that the Bill was not inconsistent with any
provisions of the Constitution. We cannot sit in appeal over that
determination. That determination is final and its correctness cannot be
questioned.

On the 29th October, 1986, the Speaker in terms of Article 79 of the
Constitution certified "This Bill-Special Presidential Commissions of Inquiry
(Amendment) Bill, has been duly passed by Parliament." The Bill has thus
passed into law ,as Act No. 38 of 1986-Special Presidential Commissions of
Inquiry (Amendment) Act.

Article 80(1) of the Constitution provides

"Subject to the provisions of paragraph (2) of this Article, a Bill passed by
Parliament shall become law when the certificate of the Speaker is endorsed
thereon."

Article 80(3) of the Constitution provides

"Where a Bill becomes law upon the certificate of the. President or the
Speaker, as, the case may be, being endorsed thereon, no court or tribunal
shall inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, the
validity of such Act on any ground, whatsoever."

Counsel for the petitioners in Application No. 174/86 doubted the apparent
dimension of Article 80(3) as to whether it covered cases where it could be
demonstrated that a mandatory step preliminary to a Bill becoming law had been
omitted. He contended that when a condition precedent or on essential step in
procedure prescribed by the Constitution had not in fact been complied with,
Article 80(3) would not be a bar to a court "inquiring into the validity of
such law or

**25**

Act". He submitted that the conclusiveness secured by Article 80(3) is
attracted only when the preliminary requirements mandated by the provisions of
the Constitution have been complied with. He questioned the validity of an
amendment introduced to a Bill, subsequent to a determination of the Supreme
Court under Articles 121 and 122 of the Constitution with reference thereto
and which cannot be identified as the amendment referred to in Article 123 (2)
of the Constitution. According to him the certificate of the Speaker does not
impart validity to legislative process which has missed a vital step. The
force of the argument of counsel is apparent. This contention; of counsel
raises vital constitutional issues which require very full consideration in an
appropriate case which calls for a determination of the said issues as a
necessary step to the decision of the case. As in the present case the
omission postulated by Counsel as the basis for his legal submission is not
present. It is not necessary to make any pronouncement on the correctness of
his contention. In a proper case the scope and sweep of Article 80(3) will
have to be gone into.

Counsel for the petitioners also urged that the purpose of the copy of the
Reference under Article 122(2) being delivered to the Speaker, is for the
Members of Parliament to be made aware of the Reference to' enable them to
arrange to be heard by the Supreme Court in proceedings in court preceding its
determination. On the other hand, the Deputy Solicitor-General submitted that
the purpose was to alert the Hon. Speaker that "no proceedings shall, be had
in Parliament in relation-to such Bill until the determination of the Supreme
Court had been made, or the expiry of a period of three weeks from the date of
such Reference" as directed by Article 122 (2) read with Article 121(2) of the
Constitution. Again in view of our holding that there has been no breach of
the provisions of Article 122(1)(b) of the Constitution, it is not necessary
for us to decide this constitutional question.

Both petitions are accordingly dismissed without costs.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.  

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- I agree.  

**

RANASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree.

_Applications refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/15.html_  

