[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1981](./) >> **[1981] LKSC 15**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1981+15 or 1981+LKSC+15) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1981+LKSC+15) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Sumanadasa v. Edmund - SLR - 147, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 15; (1981) 1
Sri LR 147 (3 June 1981)

**147**

**SUMANADASA  
v.  
EDMUND**

SUPREME COURT.  
SAMARAKOON, C.J., ISMAIL, J. AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S.C. 45/80-C.A. 14/76-C. R. COLOMBO 4571 /ED.  
MAY 4,5,1981 **  
**  
_Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, section 22 (1) (d)-Action for ejectment on ground
that tenant or person residing with him has been convicted of using premises
for illegal purpose -Case records produced to establish convictions -Whether
oral evidence admissible to relate such conviction to premises in suit-
Evidence Ordinance, section 91-Need to establish that tenant had taken
advantage of tenancy to commit offence- Burden of proof -Discretion of trial
judge.  
_  
The plaintiff sued the tenant, the defendant, for ejectment from certain
premises relying on the provisions of section 22 (1) (d) of Rent Act, No. 7 of
1972, which provided for institution of such an action where "the tenant or
any person residing or lodging with him or being his sub-tenant has, in the
opinion of the Court, been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance to adjoining
occupiers or has been convicted of using the premises for an immoral or
illegal purpose". The plaintiff produced several case records where the
defendant's daughters and son-in-law had been convicted of offences in
connection with possession of unlawfully manufactured liquor or possessing
liquor in contravention of the law; in all these cases the address of the
accused persons was given as the premises in suit. The scene of the offence
was described in all cases except one as "at Ward Place, Borell1a, within the
jurisdiction of this Court". The plaintiff also led evidence to supplement
this material by showing that the offences had been committed on or about the
premises in suit.  
  
It was submitted on behalf of the defendant in appeal that the plaintiff was
confined to the records in the aforesaid criminal cases and that section 91 of
the Evidence Ordinance precluded him from altering, amending or supplementing
the record with any other evidence. It was also submitted that it was not
sufficient that there is a conviction for a crime committed on the premises,
but the plaintiff must show that the tenant had taken advantage of his tenancy
and of the opportunity it afforded for committing the offence.  
  
**Held  
**  
(1) A plaintiff is entitled to lead oral evidence to establish the fact that a
conviction was related to the premises in respect of which the defendant's
ejectment is sought in the manner required by law. There is nothing in the
provisions of section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance to prevent such evidence
from being led.  
  
(2) Upon the evidence led in this case there was ample material for the Court
to infer that the convictions were associated with the premises in such a way
as to constitute the user of the premises for an illegal purpose. There was
evidence that the inmates of the premises had been prosecuted no less than in
20 cases; that the offences were committed in the premises and the close
vicinity and were in respect of varying quantities of liquor. The offence
covered a continuous period from 1970 to 1973 when this action was filed. The
inmates of the premises who were the accused in such cases did not give

**148**

evidence in the present case and the defendant herself made an attempt to show
that these persons were not residing with her, but was disbelieved by the
trial judge.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_(1) R. v. Wallwork, (1956) 42 Cr. App. R. 153.  
  
(2) Abrahams v. Wilson, (1971)2 All E.R. 1114; (1971)2 W.L.R. 923; (1971)2
Q.B. 88.  
  
(3) Schneiders & Sons Ltd. v. Abrahams, (1925)1 K.B. 301; 132 L. T. 721; 41
T.L.R. 24.  
  
(4) Saris Appuhamy v. Ceylon Tea Plantations Co., Ltd., (1953) 55 N.L.R. 447.  
  
(5) Abraham Singho v. Ariyadasa, (1968) 71 N. L. R. 138.  
  
(6) Aslin Nona v. Don William, (1971) 75 N.L.R. 136.  
  
(7) Asiya Umma v. Kachi Mohideen, (1959) 61 N.L.R. 330.  
_  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_V. S. A. Pullenayagam with Faiz Mustapha, Miss C. Abeysekera and Miss D.
Wijesundera_ for the substituted defendant-appellant.  
  
_H. L. de Silva, with W, Siriwardene,_ for the plaintiff -respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 3,1981.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
This is an action for ejectment filed by the plaintiff -respondent against the
defendant- appellant in respect of a monthly tenancy of premises No. 285/9,
Ward Place, Colombo. The plaintiff came to court relying on the provisions of
section 22 (1) (d) of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, which allows the
institution of an action for ejectment where "the tenant or any person
residing or lodging with him or being his sub-tenant has, in the opinion of
the court, been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance to adjoining occupiers
or has been convicted of using the premises for an immoral or illegal
purpose". Incidentally the requirement of a conviction under this limb (which
existed in the Rent Act of 1948) was taken away by Act No. 12 of 1966, but has
now been- reintroduced by the present Act. This matter does not affect the
issues which are before us in this case.  
  
The plaintiff produced in evidence the case records P3, P4, P5, P6, P7, P8,
P9, and P10 of the Magistrate's Court, Colombo, where the defendant's
daughters Leelawathie and Wimalawathie, and her son-in-law Victor Perera have
been convicted of possessing unlawfully manufactured Iiquor or possessing
liquor in contravention of the law. In al I these cases, the address of the
accused persons is given as No. 285/9, Ward Place, which are the premises
relating to this action. In all those cases the accused pleaded guilty to the
charges and hid been convicted and given a sentence. Except in one case (P6),
where the venue is given as Maradana Road, Borella, which is also adjacent to
the premises, in all the other cases the

**149**

scene of offence is described as "at Ward Place, Borella, within the
jurisdiction of this court". The plaintiff has sought to supplement this
material by showing that these offences had been committed on or about the
premises. SI. Navaratnam of the Borella Police has stated that these accused
were detected "in the house, at various places close to the house, and in the
near vicinity". He has also mentioned two other instances where the accused
were seen going into the house with a plastic can and on another occasion the
accused had rushed out of the house with a bottle in his hand.  
  
Mr. Pullenayegum for the appellant objected to P6, referred to above and also
to P10, because the record does not contain the charge sheet. The report to
court in this case shows that it was a case of possession of about 25 bottles
of pot arrack. The accused had pleaded guilty to the charge and was sentenced
to pay a fine. The court had ordered the destruction of the productions.  
  
The first ground urged by Mr. Pullenayegum is that there is no legally
admissible evidence to show that these offences were committed in or on the
premises to satisfy the legal requirement of being convicted of using the
premises. The records, he says, do not bear this out. Further, he relies on
the provisions of section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance and has submitted that
in law the plaintiff is confined to the records in the criminal cases and is
precluded from altering, amending or supplementing that record with any other
evidence.  
  
There would be merit in Mr. Pullenayegum's submission if the criminal law
prescribes that the exact spot where a crime is committed should be set out in
the charge, on the basis that it constitutes an ingredient of the offence. Our
law certainly contains provisions for the giving of particulars in regard to
the time and place of the alleged offence. This requirement is for the purpose
of giving the accused reasonable information regarding the charge against him
and to indicate to court that the offence took place in a place or area within
the territorial jurisdiction of the court. In the U.K. law, I find that there
is no legal requirement that the location of the offence should be included in
the particulars and accordingly an indictment is not rendered invalid by an
incorrect statement about the venue. R. v. Wallwork (1); Abrahams v. Wilson
(2). The latter case shows clearly that the certificate of conviction made no
reference whatsoever to the premises but nevertheless a police witness was
allowed to testify to the finding of cannabis

**150**

resin in one of the rooms occupied by the tenant. In fact Widgery, L. J. after
referring to the test as laid down by Scrutton, L.J. in Schneiders & Sons Ltd.
v. Abrahams (3) the leading case on this matter, said -  
  
"Taking that as the test, when one looks at the certificate of conviction
here, that certificate by itself is clearly not enough. It indicates a
conviction for possession of cannabis, but in itself it contains no kind of
reference to the premises sufficient to bring the matter within case 2. In my
judgment a plaintiff, faced with such a situation, can and should lead
evidence at the court of trial to connect the certificate of conviction with
case 2; in other words, to prove such facts as are necessary -if they can be
proved-which turn a conviction of itself unrelated to the premises into a
conviction adequately related to the premises, to satisfy Scrutton, L. J.' s
test."  
  
The words of Edmund Davies, L. J. are to the same effect. He said:  
  
"........But I think that, in cases (such as the present) where the user of
the premises is the focal point of the claim to possession, evidence should be
called as to what actually transpired in the criminal trial, so that the civil
judge may know with precision the basis of the conviction."  
  
In the case of the convictions produced in the case before us, the accused had
pleaded guilty to the charges and no question about the venue of this offence
has been raised. The fact that the criminal law does not regard the exact spot
where a crime has been committed as an ingredient of the offence or as an
essential particular going to invalidate a conviction must be taken
conjunctively with the fact that the case before us is a separate civil
proceeding and it is incumbent on the plaintiff to establish those matters
which constitute his cause of action. The use of the premises for an illegal
purpose is, as it were, the focal point of this claim for possession. This he
must do by legally admissible evidence, and I can see nothing in the
provisions of section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance to prevent a plaintiff from
leading oral evidence to establish the fact that a conviction was related to
the premises in respect of which the defendant's ejectment is sought in the
manner required by the law.

**151**

 It seems to me that Mr. Pullenayegum's submission was an attempt to get round
the formidable difficulties created by a series of decisions both of the U.K.
and in our own country in regard to this matter. I may first refer to
Schneiders & Sons Ltd. v. Abrahams (supra).  
  
Schneiders' case concerned a somewhat corresponding provision in a U.K. Rent
Act. Under section 4 of the U.K. Rent and Mortgage Interest Restrictions Act,
1923, no judgment for the recovery of possession of any dwelling house could
be given unless the tenant "has been convicted of using the premises or
allowing the premises to be used for immoral or illegal purpose". The tenant
was convicted by a court of summary jurisdiction of receiving at the premises
a roll of cloth valued at £: 5, well-knowing it to be stolen. It was argued
that a conviction that would be relevant was a conviction which is recorded as
a conviction for using the premises for immoral or illegal purposes. The
offence of receiving stolen goods, it was submitted, is constituted
independent of the place where the receiving took place.  
  
The court rejected this narrow interpretation. The number of cases in law of
the type contemplated by the appellant would be very small and even those few
cases dealt with the "keeping" of premises for this or that immoral purpose
and not with 'using'. Such an interpretation would have made the law almost
totally unworkable. A strong bench consisting of Bankes, L.J., Scrutton, L. J.
and Atkin, L. J. rejected the narrow interpretation contended for, and held
that the relevant provisions did not require that the user of the premises
should be an essential element but that it was sufficient if such use was an
incidental circumstance of the offence; but it must be proved that the tenant
had taken advantage of his tenancy and the opportunity it afforded for
committing the offence. This case has been followed in Abrahams v. Wilson
(supra).  
  
On the local scene, Schneiders' case was followed by Rose, C.J. in Saris
Appuhamy v. Ceylon Tea Plantations Co. Ltd. (4), and by Weeramantry, J., in
Abraham Singho v. Ariyadasa (5), and in Aslin Nona v. Don William (6). As
against this line of authorities, Sinnetamby, J. in Asiya Umma v. Kachi
Mohideen (7) adopted the narrow interpretation which was considered and
rejected in Schneiders' case. It appears that Sinnetamby, J ., reached that
conclusion apparently unaware of the earlier authorities.

**152**

The point now raised by Mr. Pullenayegum, it appears, is implicitly covered by
those decisions. Mr. Pullenayegurn implied that his present arguments founded
on the provisions of section 91, Evidence Ordinance, renders the earlier
authorities inapplicable. The provisions of section 91 are based on the well-
known parol evidence rule of English law relating to the exclusiveness and
conclusiveness of documentary evidence. These are therefore parallel
provisions. The Judges in the U.K., I am sure, were aware of these
corresponding provisions when they decided those cases. Mr. Pullenayegum's
argument goes counter to all these decisions. He has presented the very same
arguments rejected in those cases in a new garb. For these reasons, his first
submission therefore fails.  
  
For Mr. Pullenayegum's second argument he has sought to take advantage of
certain dicta in these very same cases. Mr. Pullenayegum's contention is that
the case against his client is of possession of unlawfully manufacture liquor
and the fact that it took place on these premises was merely incidental and
does not show a use as such of these premises. Relying on those cases he says
that it is not enough that there is a convocation of a crime committed on the
premises, but it is necessary to show that the tenant had taken advantage of
his tenancy and of the opportunity it afforded for committing the offence.  
  
In Saris Appuhamy's case, the tenant was found in possession of three gunny
bags of manufactured tea dust and eight gunny bags of tea sweepings-offences
under the Protection of Produce Ordinance. The premises were a boutique. Rose,
C. J., refused to interfere with the finding of the trial Judge that the
premises had been made use of for storing goods reasonably suspected of being
stolen.  
  
In Abraham Singho v. Ariyadasa (supra), a single conviction for the sale of an
excisable article was proved. Weeramantry, J. said:  
  
"Consequently, I have little difficulty in holding in this case that the
conviction for the sale of arrack is a conviction of using the premises for an
illegal purpose inasmuch as advantage has been taken of the tenancy of the
premises and of the opportunity they afforded for committing the offence. Such
case cannot be likened to a case of assault where the premises merely afford
the venue or the scene for commission of the

**153**

offence. An illegal sale of arrack requires a measure of cover, and there is
no doubt that the building has in this sense been taken advantage of. I may
add that in this view of the matter it would make no difference to the
decision in this case whether the law applicable be the original statute or
the amending Act No. 12 of 1966, for the premises have been used in the sense
of being taken advantage of and are not merely the fortuitous scene of
commission of a crime."  
  
Aslin Nona v. Don William's case (supra) involved a conviction for possession
of unlawfully manufactured arrack. Weeramantry, J. said that the landlord has
not been ready with the requisite proof of his allegation and the court was
left with the evidence of a conviction which was not too clear. He said that
there was no evidence of the tenant taking advantage of the premises for
committing the offence. He added-  
  
".......Unlike in the case of an illicit sale where the cover of the building
is made use of or taken advantage of for the purpose of effecting the sale,
the mere offence of possession does not appear to involve taking advantage of
the building as such."  
  
If Weeramantry, J. by this statement meant that one act of possession cannot
in any circumstances constitute a use of the premises within the meaning of
the section, then I think he has declared the law a little too narrowly as we
can gather from the U.K. decisions.  
  
In Abraham v. Wilson (supra), the tenant had been convicted of possessing 66
grams of cannabis resin. No reference was made to the premises in the
certificate of conviction. There was the evidence of a police witness that he
had found this drug under a cupboard in one of the rooms. The tenant, while
not denying that this was found in the premises, vehemently denied knowledge
of its existence. The tenant was convicted in the criminal proceedings; but in
the proceedings under the Rent Act, the court exercised its discretion against
issuing an order for possession by the landlord. The U. K. law contains an
overriding provision that no order for possession should be made by the court
even when the required circumstances are established, unless the court
considers it reasonable to make the order. Widgery, L.J. observed-

**154**

 ".......Some kind of attempt was made by the landlady to show that the
cannabis in question has been found under a cupboard in the demised premises.
I am prepared, for present purposes, to assume that she proved that, although
it is not altogether clear to me that she did. One would then have to consider
whether a conviction for possession of cannabis, which was shown to have been
cannabis located in such a position, came within case 2. Applying Scrutton, L.
J.' s test, the position in regard to the finding of dangerous drugs on the
demised premises I think is simply this. If the drugs are on the demised
premises merely because the tenant is there and has them in his or her
immediate custody, such as a pocket or a handbag, then I would say without
hesitation that that does not involve a 'using' of the premises in connection
with the offence. On the other hand, if the premises are employed as a storage
place or hiding place for dangerous drugs, a conviction for possession of such
drugs, when the conviction is illuminated by further evidence to show the
manner in which the drugs themselves were located, would I think be sufficient
to satisfy the section and come within case 2."  
  
Although Widgery, L.J. ultimately declined to interfere with the discretion of
the trial Judge, his own view on the facts was that they were adequate to
establish a user of the premises for an illegal purpose. He said-  
  
"Accordingly, I think on the evidence here, such as it was, the learned Judge
might have been entitled to take a contrary view on the strict matter of law
and to have concluded that there was here a conviction of 'using the dwelling-
house' for an illegal purpose......"  
  
Edmund Davies, L.J. appears to have favoured even a broader application of
these principles. He said-  
  
"Applying that test to the present case, I for my part would put it in this
way. In proper and clear circumstances -which must be established, of course,
by the landlord-a conviction of using premises for an illegal purpose, within
the meaning of case 2, can be established by proof that in the demised
premises a quantity of cannabis resin was found. One must, however, look at
the circumstances very carefully before an isolated finding on a single
occasion is held to constitute proof of such user."

**155**

 The situations mentioned in this case are not exhaustive of the instances
when the required inference can be drawn.  
  
Turning now to the facts of the case before us, there is evidence that the
inmates of these premises have been prosecuted no less than in 20 of these
cases. The offences were committed 'in the premises and in the close vicinity.
The quantities possessed range from 4 or 5 drams to 25 bottles in P10. The
offences cover a continuous period from 1970 to 1973 till the present action
was filed. The inmates of the premises, who were the accused in these cases,
did not choose to give evidence in the present case. The defendant made an
attempt, in the face of overwhelming evidence, to show that these persons were
not residing with her; but she was rightly disbelieved by the trial Judge. She
however admitted that these persons were selling unlawfully manufactured
arrack in the garden which was common to a number of tenements, including
this. She also said that she herself visited her house only once or twice a
week and did not know what took place there when she was away.  
  
upon this evidence, bearing always in mind that the burden lay with the
plaintiff, there was ample material for an inference to be drawn as to whether
or not the convictions were associated with the premises in such a way as to
constitute a user of the premises for an illegal purpose. This Court will not
interfere with the discretion of a lower court if there is sufficient material
to support that decision, although it could be said that another tribunal may
have come to a different conclusion. We have on this matter the concurrent
findings of the trial Judge and of the Court of Appeal. I am unable to say
that their decision is wrong or unreasonable. The appeal is therefore
dismissed with costs.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C.J. -I** agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. - I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/15.html_  

