[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1981](./) >> **[1981] LKSC 1**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1981+1 or 1981+LKSC+1) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1981+LKSC+1) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Kelaart v. Van Twest - SLR - 353, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 1; (1981) 1
Sri LR 353 (27 October 1981)

**353**

**KELAART  
v.  
VAN TWEST**

**SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL, J., RATWATTE, J., &  
VICTOR PERERA, J.,  
S. C. 67/80  
D. C. MT. LAVINIA 917-/L  
OCTOBER 27, 1981  
AND NOVEMBER 16 AND 17, 1981  
**  
_Last Will -Option to purchase - Abolition of Fidei commissa and Entails Act
No. 20 of 1972-Executor -Trustee-S. 58 of the Trust Ordinance.  
_  
A Will must be construed as a whole and apparent contradictions must be
reconciled if possible. If that cannot be done, then only will a later
provision prevail. But the main thing is to get at the intention' of the
testator from-the whole Will and when that is found on evidence satisfactory
in kind and degree, to. that we must sacrifice the inconsistent clause or
words whether standing first or last.  
  
From clause 8 of the Will it is clear that the testator desired that 'Ralston
House' belonging to the estate should be sold by the. Executor with
consideration for the market value at the time and for the best advantage to
the beneficiaries. For this purpose the title to the premises must necessarily
vest in the Executor and continue to remain in him till he decides to exercise
the powers given to him. Although the testator used the word 'desire' in this
clause, in the context it had the clear -effect of a peremptory direction
rather than a precatory wish.  
  
Clause 8 indicated the testator's dominant intention and by sacrificing the
inconsistent words in Clause 9 it is possible to reconcile it with the
testator's intention. Clause 9 - could be given effect to as ancillary to
clause 8\. The plaintiff and defendant had elected to take "Ralston House" in
terms of Clause 8 and the. Executor had executed a deed of conveyance No. 570
of 4.4.39 by which Ralston House was conveyed to the plaintiff and defendant.
This deed which the Executor must be regarded as haying executed as trustee
under s. 58 of the Trust Ordinance, did not specify shares but would vest 213
of Ralston House in the plaintiff and 1/3 in the defendant as provided for in
cf. 8 and subject to the provisions of c l. 9 whereby the testator had
provided that if the defendant died without issue the house would become the
absolute property of the plaintiff and her children. In view of this
Fideicommissum the testator had clearly given the plaintiff an option to
purchase '1 /3 share at any time she was, in a position to before the
Fideicommissum became operative and for that event valued the 1/3 at Rs.
10,000/-.  
  
An option to buy is purely a personal right and it places no burden on the
land. A breach of such a right could give rise to an action for damages only
but the land cannot be pursued in the hands of strangers. But in this case in
view of the Fideicommissum the plaintiff and her children could have followed
the property in the hands of a purchaser from the defendant if she died
without issue.  
  
The abolition of Fidei commissa and Entails Act No. 20 of 1972 came into
operation on 12.5.1972. On this date by s. 4 of the Act the defendant became
vested with absolute title to 1/3 share of the house and by s. 6 was granted
the absolute power to dispose of her 1/3 share. Hence when plaintiff in 1974
tried to seek to enforce the right to buy,

**354**

her right had become frustrated by operation of law as by then the defendant's
title to 1/3 share ceased to be referable to the title which devolved on her
under and by virtue of the Last Will,  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
_(1) Fan Eye v. The Public Trustee (1944) 46 NL R 59.  
  
(2) In Re Morkel's Will (1938) T.P.D. 432.  
  
(3) Menda v. Meda & Others (1938) A.D. 259.  
  
(4) Ex Parte Estate Paley 1943 C. P. D. 181.  
  
(5) Sinno Appu v. Dingirihamy (1912) 15 NLR 259.  
  
(6) Appu v. Silva (1922) 24 NLR 428:  
_  
**APPEAL** from-judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Eric Amerasinghe, S. A. A. L. with A. Sivagurunathan, Mrs. S.
Kalyanasunderam, Hiran Jayawardena, J. P. Almeida and Miss D. Guniyangoda_ for
defendant-appellant.  
  
_H. L. de Silva, S A. A. L. with K. Shanmugalingam_ for plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 11, 1881  
**VICTOR PERERA, J.  
**  
This is an action filed on the 10th October 1974 by the plaintiff-. respondent
seeking to enforce a provision in the Last Will of her adoptive father in
which she alleges she had been given the option or right to purchase an
undivided 1/3 share of the house and property cal led 'Ralston House' from the
defendant-appellant, another adopted daughter of the testator at and for the
price of Rs. 10,000/- which according to her the testator had placed as the
price to be paid for the said 1/3 share. The defendant-appellant has resisted
this claim on several grounds. She has denied that the clause which contains
the alleged option does not in law give the plaintiff-respondent such a right.
She further pleads that even if such a right did exist by virtue of the
provisions of the Abolition of Fidei commissa and Entails Act No. 20 of 1972,
the plaintiff respondent had lost the alleged. right which was contained in
the said Last Will and Testament in view of the drastic change in the
character of the interests held by her as at the date of-this action.  
  
Admittedly the late Charles Alexander Marshall, a Proctor who had practiced at
Avissawella, had died on the 21st February 1929 leaving a Last Will No. 367
dated 4th August 1928. which was - duly admitted to probate in Testamentary,
Suit No..4521/T of the District Court of Colombo. According to the documentary
and oral evidence led in the case, the testator left the following immovable
properties only;-

**355**

(1) lands at Debagama in Kegalla District,  
  
(2) the house and property called `Ralston Mouse' bearing assessment No.
473/48, later 276, Ridge-way Place, Wellawatta Road, Colombo:  
  
By this Last Will he made a clear and specific device of the lands at
Debagama, Kegalle, to his adopted daughter Beatrice, the plaintiff-respondent;
and Irene the defendant-appellant in the proportions of 2/3 and 1/3 shares
respectively absolutely without any conditions attached. But: in regard to the
only other immovable property, namely 'Ralston House,' he by clause 8 of the
Will desired. that it be sold and directed that the proceeds of sale be paid
to the plaintiff-respondent and the defendant-appellant in the proportion of
1./3 share each and the remaining 1/3 share was to be applied for the
education, maintenance etc. of the children of Beatrice, the plaintiff-
respondent; By clause 9 he made further provisions in regard to this same
'Ralston House' apparently 'inconsistent with the provisions in clause 8\. It
is significant that the testator dealt with his lands in two different ways.  
  
It is the construction, interpretation and implementation of the two clauses 8
and 9 in the said Will that have given rise to this controversy which appears
to have started only after the Abolition of Fidei commissa and Entails Act No.
20 of 1972 came into operation-It would appear from the pleadings in the case
that the plaintiff-respondent and the defendant-appellant had right up to that
time accepted that each was entitled to the premises in the proportion of 2/3
and 1/3 on the basis of a Deed No. 570 dated 4th April 1939 attested by. P. D.
A, Mack, Notary Public, by which the executor of the Last Will had purported
to convey the said premises to them without specifying the shares but making
the transfer "subject to. the terms and conditions of clauses 8 and 9 of the
said Last Will and testament of the late Charles James Alexander."  
  
In paragraph 9 of the plaint filed in this case, the plaintiff respondent
specifically pleaded that she had in terms of clause 9 of the said Last Will
No. 367 of 4th August 1928 regularly paid without default Rs. 30/- per month
to the defendant-appellant and had paid all taxes and charges. The defendant-
appellant in her answer admitted the said averments. There has thus been an
acquiescence of the title created by the execution of Deed No. 570 in 1939.  
  
In regard to the construction of clause 8, the Senior Attorneys at-Law for the
defendant-appellant and the plaintiff-respondent, at

**356**

the argument before us agreed that taken. by itself clause 8 was a clear,
complete and specific legacy of the proceeds of the sale with an unambiguous
direction in regard to the appropriation of the proceeds of sale. In fact;
Senior Attorney-at-law for the plaintiff respondent agreed that if the
executor had carried out the direction in clause 8 by the sale of the premises
to a third party there would have been no room for the controversy whether the
property vested in the adopted daughters of the testator and the necessity to
examine the provisions in clause 9 would not have arisen.  
  
Our Courts have in- -a. series of judgments consistently laid down the
principles to be followed in construing Wills. It would be sufficient to refer
only to the case of. Fan Eyre v. The Public Trustee (46 N L R 59)(1) in which
de Kretser, J. stated as follows at page 6T:_  
  
"The Will must be construed as a whole and apparent contradictions must be
reconciled, if possible. If that cannot be done, then only will a later
provision prevail. But the main thing is to. get at the intention of the
testator from the whole Will. If authority be needed for this well-known
proposition, I would refer to Burrows on Interpretation of Documents, p. 71.
Beale's Cardinal Rules of Legal Interpretation, p. 607, gives many interesting
dicta, e.g. "the -paramount rule is that before all things we must look for
the intention of the testator as we find it expressed and clearly' implied in
the general terms of the Will; and when we have found that on evidence
satisfactory in kind and degree, to that we must sacrifice the -inconsistent
clause or words whether standing first or last. ''This is precisely what I
propose to do to reconcile if possible the apparent contradiction avoiding
getting enmeshed in the plethora of various decisions of other Courts
enumerated in great detail by the Court of Appeal.  
  
Senior Attorney-at-law for the defendant-appellant contended that the dominant
intention of the testator in regard to 'Ralston House' was contained in clause
8 and that clause 9 should be read as ancillary to clause 8 sacrificing the
inconsistent words or phrases. Senior Attorney-at-law for the plaintiff-
respondent, however, contended that clause 9 evinced the dominant intention of
the testator even though he frankly conceded, there was no clear expressed
disposition of the said premises to either. of the adopted. children.
Nevertheless, he agreed that for the purpose of clause 8 the premises would
vest in the Executor to enable him to carry out the directions of the
testator. If that be so at the date of

**357**

the death of the testator, the property could not possibly have vested
simultaneously. in both the Executor as well as in the adopted daughters.  
  
The provisions in regard, to 'Ralston House' contained in the Last Will and
Testament read as follows:  
  
"Clause 8. I also desire that my home known as 'Ralston House' bearing-
assessment No. 473/48 and now 276 Ridgeway Place, Wellawatta Road, Colombo, be
sold having consideration to the market value at the time and to the best
advantage and the proceeds thereof be. allotted as follows-, One third (1/3)
share to Beatrice Emaline Murray Marshall nee Van Twest, One Third (1/3) share
to Irene Patricia Marshall nee Kelaart and the remaining 1/3 share for the
education and maintenance etc. of my adopted daughter Beatrice Evelene
Marshall nee Van Twest."  
  
Clause 9. My daughter Beatrice Emaline Murray Marshall nee Van Twest shall
have the right to occupy the house known as 'Ralston House' as long as she
pleases so to do, paying all the taxes. and other charges etc. in respect
thereof and a sum equivalent to rupees Thirty (Rs. 30/-) a month to my adopted
daughter Irene Patricia Murray Marshall nee- Kelaart as rent for the use of
her undivided one third (1/3) share of the said bungalow until such time as
she is in a position to purchase the said one third share which I value at
rupees Ten Thousand (Rs. 10;000/-). If, however, the said Irene Patricia
Murray Marshall nee Kelaart shall die without issue then in that case the
payment of rupees thirty (Rs.30/-) a month shall cease and the said one third
(1/3) share shall become the absolute property of my adopted daughter Emaline
Murray Marshall nee Van Twest and her children."  
  
On an examination of clause 8 it is clear that the testator desired that
'Ralston House' should be sold by the Executor. The specific legacies in
'respect of the proceeds of sale are clear and unambiguous. There was no
discretion given to the Executor in regard to the distribution or
appropriation of the proceeds of sale. The only discretion which 'the Executor
was given was the consideration of the market- value at the time and the best
advantage, which necessarily meant the best advantage to the beneficiaries. As
I understand this clause it expresses ' a clear and unequivocal intention
precisely worded in regard to sale and appropriation of the proceeds. For that
purpose the title to the premises must necessarily vest in the Executor to
carry out this exercise and will continue to -remain in him till he decides to
exercise the powers given to him.

**358**

It was contended that the word used, namely 'desire', in clause 8 was a mere
suggestion or recommendation to the executor and could not. be treated as a
peremptory or mandatory direction t0 the, executor. The testator had used the
words "will and desire" in clause 2, in clause 4, in clause 10 and in clause
13. It was therefore contended that the use of the word "desire". only, in
clause 8 did not have the effect of the more forceful words 'will and
desire.'' Senior Attorney-at-law for the plaintiff-respondent cited several
cases from the South African Law Reports: In Re Morkel's Will (1938 Transvaal
Provincial Division, p. 432)(2) Mende v. Mende & others (1938 Appellate
Division, p. 259)(3) where the word "desire" had been used by testators. In
those cases the word had been used to express a desire that something be done
if in the opinion of persons previously vested with an absolute discretion
should think it advisable to be done. The Courts held that in such cases the
expression of desire was precatory only and not peremptory. The situations
that were considered in those cases were . not analogous to the position in
this case.  
  
In the present case by the expressed desire that the premises be sold vests in
the executor and he is not left with a discretion whether to sell or not
according to his desire, and therefore the word in this context has the clear
effect of a peremptory direction.  
  
It was next contended that even though in clause 9 there was no expressed
intention or direction that these premises do vest in the two adopted
daughters or anyone of them; there were words or phrases used which amounted
to an implied device of an undivided 1/3 share to Irene, the defendant-
appellant. The words or phrases referred to in clause 9 are: "as rent for the
use of her undivided one third (1/3) share of the said bungalow," "until such
time as she is in a position to purchase the said one third share," the "said
one third (1/3) share shall become the absolute property." There could be no
doubt .that the testator appeared to have' contemplated certain situations
such as Beatrice's continued occupation of the bungalow till the sale in view
of his direction that it be sold, and of Irene, the defendant-appellant, dying
without issue. These are matters that he testator did seem to have given some
thought to after making clear his intention that the premises be sold in
clause 8.The question that arises is whether these expressions amount to an
implied device which could be given ' effect to as his dominant intention or
whether such an implied device could be given effect to as ancillary to the
earlier direction to sell. The case of Ex Parte Estate Paley (1943 Cape
Division, p. 181) (4) was cited in support of the contention that by

**359**

necessary implication there could be such an implied device. In . that case it
was held that necessary implication meant a strong probability of intention,
that an intention contrary to that. which is imputed cannot be supposed.
However, in the present ;case the probability of the imputed intention must be
gathered in consider ration with all the provisions in the Will. If these
words or expressions could be read and given effect to taking the provisions
of clause 8 also into consideration then the probable intention of the
testator implied in clause 9 could be ascertained, reconciled and given
practical effect to as far as possible.  
  
The Court of Appeal had been called upon to construe the Will but it had not
given sufficient consideration to the intention of the testator so clearly
expressed in clause 8 and to the impact it had on the legal title to 'Ralston
House.' Clause 8 had the effect of vesting the legal title to the property on
the Executor immediately on the death of the testator to enable him to carry
out the trust imposed on him by the testator. The true wish of the testator
was that the Executor should at the appropriate time and under suitable
conditions obtain by sale the best value for the property for the
beneficiaries of these specific legacies. The words 'having consideration to
the market at the time' is an indication of what the testator had in mind,
namely, that the best price should be obtained. The words having consideration
to the 'best advantage' is a matter relative to the beneficiaries again. Thus
if Beatrice, the plaintiff-respondent, realised that her advantage would be
best served by her getting the maximum price by giving up` residence, then she
could have assisted the Executor to her benefit. The Court of Appeal instead
of interpreting the Last Will to give effect to this intention, had embarked
on an attempt to ascertain the dominant intention by ignoring clause 8 and
concentrating only on the use of certain words or phrases contained- in clause
9 not reconciling as far as possible, the wishes not so clearly expressed with
the clearly expressed intention of the testator. Clause 9 does contain certain
unexpressed but implied wishes that could be gathered from the words or
phrases used therein, which indicate that the testator having expressed his
earlier intention and wish that 'Ralston House' be sold for the best advantage
of the same beneficiaries, had given his mind to consequential situations. Had
the Court of Appeal tried to expound, rather than conjecture the testator's
intention, it would have come to a different finding from that of the District
Court. In my view, it is reasonably possible to interpret the words or phrases
used in clause 9 in a manner which best. harmonises with the intention
expressed in clause 8 :having due regard to the context of the consideration
of the

**360**

consequential circumstances that would have come into the con temptation of
the testator after giving a direction to sell the property. He as a practising
-Lawyer would have been well aware that .there would have inevitably been a
considerable delay between the date of his death, the testamentary
proceedings, obtaining 'of probate and the sale of the property by the
Executor. He was very conscious of the fact that his adopted daughter Beatrice
the plaintiff-respondent and her, children were living in 'Ralston House' and
according to clause 13 specifically mentioned that all 'her property was in
that house and he proceeded to leave his movable property 'therein to her.
Having taken into consideration all these circumstances he secured her
continued occupation of the house during the interim period that would lapse
before the sale is completed. The words "as long as she pleases so to do" read
in that context does not necessarily mean that she was to live there during
her lifetime. The testator had even contemplated the situation that the
plaintiff-respondent may. decide to buy the property if she was in a position.
so to do. In that event, the testator wished that the defendant-appellant
should be paid a sum which he fixed at Rs. 10,000/-which she could receive in
lieu of her 1/3 share of the sale proceeds. Having considered that the
plaintiff-respondent had the advantage of occupying the entirety of the
Bungalow till a sale was effected, he provided for the defendant-appellant to
receive a sum of Rs. 30/- a month, though neither of them had any title to the
property but only a vested. right in the proceeds of sale in equal shares. The
testator in clauses 3, 4 and 6 provided for the devolution of the interests of
Irene, the defendant-appellant, on her dying without issue. Similarly in
clause 9 he contemplated that eventually, for reasons best known to him, by
providing that on her death without issue, her interests would devolve on the
plaintiff-respondent and her children. Considered in this way, it is possible
by sacrificing the inconsistent words in clause 9 to reconcile the testator's
implied intention in a manner warranted by the immediate context or general
scheme the testator had. in mind. Thus accepting that clause 8 indicated his
dominant intention, clause 9 could be given effect to as ancillary to it.  
  
However, the necessity to ignore or bypass the provisions' of clause 8 in
order to give effect to the implied intentions in clause 9 does not arise in
this case. The plaintiff-respondent and the defendant-appellant had elected to
take the `Ralston' House' in terms of clause 8. The Executor had in the
exercise of the trust or power given to him executed "after the lapse of 10
years from the date of the testator's death a conveyance- No. 570 dated 4th .
April 1939 attested by P. D. A. Mack, Notary Public, (P2) by which he had

**361**

purported to convey 'Ralston House' to Beatrice, the plaintiff respondent and
Irene, the defendant appellant, without specifying shares but expressly
'subject to the terms and conditions of the 8th and 9th clauses of-:.the Last
Will and Testament of Charles James Alexander Marshall. This deed-has been
incorrectly referred to as an Executor's Conveyance, but as any experienced
conveyance knows, this deed cannot fall into such a description. It is rather
as contended for the defendant-appellant. and accepted on behalf of the
plaintiff-respondent; a deed which the Executor as trustee could have.
lawfully executed in terms of section 58 of the Trust Ordinance (Chap. 87; Vol
III Revised Legislative Enactments) which provides as follows:  
  
"58\. The beneficiary is entitled to. have the intention of the author of the
trust specifically executed to the, extent of the beneficiary's interest."  
  
read along with  
  
"Illustration (c) A transfers certain property to B and directs him to sell or
invest it for the benefit of C, who is competent to contract. C may elect to
take the property in its original character."  
  
Thus here we have a clear election by Beatrice the plaintiff respondent and
Irene the defendant-appellant to take the entirety of 'Ralston House' instead
of the sale proceeds by a sale of it to outsiders. The parties have thereafter
acted on the footing of this conveyance giving effect to the intentions of the
testator as implied in clause 9. The plaintiff-respondent admittedly continued
in occupation till her death which occurred during the pendency of this
action.. She had paid the defendant-appellant Rs. 30/- a month for the use and
occupation up to a certain period prior to the action.  
  
In regard to the shares held by the parties in 'Ralston House' though the deed
is silent, the plaintiff-respondent and the defendant-appellant held the
shares in the proportions of two third (2/3) and one third (1/3) respectively.
Senior Attorney-at-Law for the defendant-appellant contended that each held an
undivided 1/2 share as the deed was silent in regard to shares. I cannot agree
with that `submission. The shares have to be on the basis of the provisions in
clause 8. It would be of interest to note that when persons obtain Crown
Grants in' respect of lands possessed by them in certain given proportions;
even though the Grants are silent in regard to shares,' our Courts have held
that there is no irrebuttable presumption that the Grants were made in equal
shares. (vide Sinno Appu v. Dingirihamy (15 N L R 259) (5) and Appu v. Silva
(24 NLR 428)(6).. The same principles will apply to Deed

**362**

570 of 1939 in favour of the parties to this dispute. In regard to Beatrice
the plaintiff-respondent, she gets an. 2/3 share as the maintenance and
education of her children was the motive of the specific devise in clause 8.
It is settled law that the parent who had maintained and educated the children
could take that share meant for that purpose absolutely (Theobald on Wills,
12th Edn., p. 1256). The. resultant position is that from 1939, the plaintiff
respondent and' the defendant-appellant were the owners of 'Ralston House' in
the proportion of an undivided 2/3 share and an undivided. 1/3 share
respectively subject to the provisions of clause 9-. in the said Last Will.
The pleadings in this case amply support the fact that the parties accepted
this position and acted on that basis:  
  
It -is of necessary to go into the questions of whether the . plaintiff-
respondent was given a right of habitatio or not because even if she had such
a right it has ceased on her death. But the rights of Irene, the defendant-
appellant; in regard to her undivided. 1/3 share of 'Ralston House' will have
to be, examined with reference to clause 9.  
  
It was contended on behalf of the plaintiff-respondent that the phrase that
Emaline the plaintiff-respondent. shall pay Rs. 30/- a month to Irene, the
defendant-appellant; "until such time as she is in a position to purchase the
said one third share which I value at Rs. 10,000/-" gave the plaintiff
respondent an option to purchase the defendant-appellant's 1/3 share for Rs.
10.,000/-. This claim was resisted on the ground that this alleged option is
vague in point of time and indefinite in all other respects. But this phrase
could be considered' in relation to the Fideicommissum imposed by the
testator, in clause 9 by which the testator provided that the defendant-
appellant's 1/3 share would if she died without issue become the absolute
property of Beatrice the plaintiff-respondent and- her children. In view of
this Fide commissum, the testator had clearly given the plaintiff-respondent
an option to purchase the 1/3 share at any time when she was in a position to
do so and in that event valued the 1/3 share at Rs. 10,000/-. If she did not
exercise the option on the death of Irene without issue the plaintiff-
respondent would have got that share. An option to buy is purely a personal
right and it placed no burden on the land. A breach of such a right could give
rise to an action for damages only and not to pursue the land in the hands of
strangers. But in this case' in view of the* Fideicommissum, she and her
children could have followed it in the hands of a purchaser from the defendant
appellant if Irene died without issue: This, option gave the plaintiff-
respondent the right to buy the fiduciary interests of the defendant-appellant
in 'Ralston House' for the sum of Rs. 10;000/-, the value which the testator
himself., placed on these fiduciary

**363**

interests. The option cannot be enlarged to any other interests as the
testator gave this right, being fully aware that he had granted the defendant-
appellant only such a fiduciary, interest fettered with certain conditions.  
  
This then was the position that existed up to the, 12th May 1972. The
defendant-appellant was entitled to an undivided 1/3 share of the house and
property called 'Ralston House' subject to a Fideicommissum that in the event
of her dying without issue, the share should devolve absolutely on the
plaintiff-respondent and her children coupled with. an option reserved to the
plaintiff respondent to buy the fiduciary interests in respect of that
undivided 1/3 share at any time before the Fideicommissum became operative for
Rs. 10,000/-.. The Abolition of Fidei commissa and. Entails Act No. 20 of 1972
came into operation on the 12th May 1972. By Section 4 of-this Act, the
defendant-appellant became vested with an absolute title to the said 1/3
share. By operation of law, she became vested with full and complete ownership
and her fiduciary right or interest ceased to exist. By virtue of Section 6 of
this Act, she was granted the absolute power to dispose of the 1/3 share which
she thus became vested with.  
  
The title of the defendant-appellant to 1/3 share of 'Ralston House' ceased to
be referable to' the title which devolved on `her under and by virtue of the
Last Will. This option if any which held good up to 1972, ceased to be
effective not on the basis that it was a limit or curtailment of her rights
contemplated by this law, but by reason of the fundamental and drastic
metamorphosis which came over the undivided one third (1/3) share held and
owned by the defendant-appellant. Under these circumstances when the
plaintiff-respondent alerted herself in 1974 to seek to enforce the right she
claimed, her right had been frustrated by the operation of the law and the
defendant-appellant had been clothed with a new absolute title to the
undivided one third share. The defendant-appellant did not retain the
fiduciary interest which alone the testator had in mind and valued at Rs.
10,000/- at the time he granted the option.  
  
I therefore direct that the judgment and decree of the. District Court be set
aside with costs. The appeal is allowed with. costs in the Court of Appeal
and' in this Court.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. - I** agree.  
  
**RATWATTE, J. -.I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.  **_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/1.html_  

