[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [2003](./) >> **[2003] LKSC 1**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+2003+1 or 2003+LKSC+1) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=2003+LKSC+1) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Transasia Trading Company v. D. B. S. Finance Limited (M.V. Meng Kiat) -
SLR - 105, Vol 2 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 1; (2003) 2 Sri LR 105 (29 July 2003)

**105**

**TRANSASIA TRADING COMPANY  
v.  
D.B.S.FINANCE LIMITED  
(M.V. MENG KIAT")**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
J.A.N. DE SILVA, J., AND  
WEERASURIYA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO 62/2002  
CA APPLICATION NO. 617/98 (REV.)  
H.C.COLOMBO ACTION IN REM NO. 69/97  
29TH JULY, 2003  
  
_Action in rem - Sale of ship by auction - Forfeiture of deposit of
"unsuccess­ful bidder" \- Interpretation of "unsuccessful bidder" \- Does it
apply only to the highest bidder who fails to complete purchase?  
_  
A vessel was sold by auction on 13.2.98 by the Marshall upon the order of the
High Court of Colombo, in the exercise of its admiralty jurisdiction, in an
action in rem against that ship.  
  
All prospective bidders were required to deposit with the Marshal US$ 50,000
each before the auction, to become eligible to make bids at the auction. A bid
will be accepted subject to the order of the Court which will normally be the
highest bid. The successful bidders deposit will be applied against the
pur­chase price and the balance has to be paid within 14 days from the
auction. If the highest bidder fails to complete the purchase, other bidders
in their respec­tive orders will be considered subject to the same procedure
applying to the deposit and payment of the full price less the deposit. The
deposits of the unsuccessful bidders will be refunded.  
  
There were two bids. The highest bid was US$ 775,000. The next bid by the
appellant was US$ 770,000.  
  
The highest bidder defaulted payment. Consequently the appellant suggested a
reduced offer of US$ 600,000. By his order on 17.3.1998 the High Court
accepted the appellant's original bid of US$ 770,000 and directed the payment
of the balance US$ 720,000. The appellant failed to make payment and moved
that his deposit of US$ 50,000 be refunded. The High Court rejected the claim.  
  
It was argued that the appellant was an "unsuccessful" bidder and hence
entitiled to the refund of his deposit.

**106**

**Held :  
  
**Even though the appellant was the 2nd highest bidder, he was a successful
bidder though not a successful purchaser. Thus he was not an unsuccessful
bidder who was entitled to the refund of the deposit.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Shibly Aziz, P.C._ with _R.S. Srikantha and S. Ahamed_ for appellant.  
  
K. Kanag-lswaran, P.C. with Chandaka Jayasundera and Shivan Kanag-Iswaran for
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

August 08.2003.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
This appeal involves the interpretation of the conditions upon which 01 a
vessel was sold by auction on 13.2.98 by the Marshal upon the order of the
High Court of Colombo, in the exercise of its admiralty jurisdiction, in an
action in rem against that vessel.  
  
The advertisement of the auction set out the following condi­tions of sale:  
  
"... All prospective bidders will be required to deposit with the Marshal a
sum of US Dollars 50,000.00 each before the com­mencement of the auction by
bank draft in favour of... in order to become eligible to take part and make
bids at the auction. 10 This deposit will be applied towards the amount of the
bid that is to be deposited by the successful bidder... The successful bidder
will be required to deposit the balance bid amount ...within 14 bank working
days of the date of auction in Sri Lanka Admiralty Account No. ... The deposit
of US Dollars 50,000 will be forfeited if the successful bidder fails to
deposit the balance bid amount as set forth above. Time is of the essence of
the contract and no extensions of time will be granted under any circumstances
whatsoever....

**107**

In the event of the first highest bidder failing to complete the purchase
within the stipulated time, then the next highest bid­ders in their respective
orders may be called upon to deposit the balance amount of their bids within
14 bank working days, from being called upon to do so, and complete the
purchase as set forth above if their bid is accepted by Court. Deposits of
unsuccessful bidders will be refunded within 30 days of the completion of the
sale of the vessel. All bids will be subject to the final approval of the
Court in the exercise of its absolute discretion. ..." [emphasis added]  
  
At the auction there were only two bids: the "first highest bidder" offered
US$ 775,000, while the petitioner-appellant company ("the appellant") offered
US$ 770,000. It was common ground that the sale was confirmed by the High
Court, and that the highest bid­der became obliged to deposit the balance sum
of US$ 725,000 on or before 6.3.98, but failed to do so.  
  
On 16.3.98 the appellant's agent in Sri Lanka sent the follow­ing fax message
to the plaintiff-respondent's attorneys-at-law:  
  
"We understand that the highest bidder... has defaulted pay­ment... and
therefore the second highest bidder... will auto­matically be entitled for the
purchase of the above vessel.  
  
This development has been advised to us by our principal.  
  
We wish to bring to your notice that it is more than (30) days from the date
of the auction... and that the condition of the ves­sel is rapidly
deteriorating.  
  
In order to resolve the sale of this vessel speedily we suggest a revised
price of US$ 600,000 for the vessel.  
  
On confirmation of your acceptance of our proposal, we can arrange for
remittance..."  
  
On 17.3.98. the High Court ordered the Registrar and the Marshal to inform the
appellant that the Court had accepted its bid, 4and had directed the deposit
of the balance sum of US$ 720,000 within the required period. The Marshal so
informed the appellant, which failed to make payment, and moved that the
deposit of US$ 50,000 be refunded.

**108**

The High Court rejected that claim, and ordered the forfeiture of the deposit.
The appellant filed an application in revision in the Court of Appeal, which
was dismissed. Against that order, the appellant now appeals to this Court
having obtained special leave to appeal. The Appellant also applied,
unsuccessfully, to the Court of Appeal for leave to appeal against the High
Court order, and now seeks special leave to appeal from this Court (in SC SLA
Application No 176/2002). Counsel agreed that the same questions of law are
involved, and that if this appeal succeeds the appellant will withdraw that
application; and that if this appeal fails, that appli­cation will be
dismissed.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant contended that the conditions of
sale only provide for the forfeiture of the deposit of "the successful
bidder", and not of an "unsuccessful bidder"; that the "first highest bidder"
was the only "successful bidder" contem­plated in the conditions of sale, and
that the appellant was an so "unsuccessful bidder"; that in the absence of any
specific provision for the forfeiture of the deposit of the "next highest
bidder", the con­ditions of sale ought not to be interpreted as authorising
forfeiture; and that, at the least, there was some ambiguity or doubt in the
conditions of sale, which ought therefore to be interpreted contra proferentem
and in favour of the appellant.  
  
The conditions of sale must be interpreted in their entirety, and not piece-
meal. In regard to the deposit, they made express provision: that the deposit
will be applied towards the amount of the bid that is to be deposited by the
successful bidder, that if the successful bidder fails to deposit the balance
the deposit will be forfeited, and that the deposits of the unsuccessful
bidders will be returned. Immediately upon the conclusion of the auction, the
"first highest bidder" would be (subject to High Court approval) the only
"successful" bidder. But it does not follow that all the other bidders would
immediately become "unsuccessful" bidders. Their status would be uncertain. If
the "first highest bidder" completes the purchase, then the other bidders
would be "unsuccessful" bidders. But if the "first highest bidder" defaults
and if the Court accepts the bid of the second (or failing him, the third)
highest bidder, that bidder so would then become a "successful" bidder, though
not yet a successful purchaser. The conditions of sale do not treat such a
bidder

**109**

as being an "unsuccessful" bidder at any stage thereafter. The consequence of
the Court order of 17.3.98 was that the appellant became a "successful"
bidder, and was thereupon not entitled to the refund of its deposit.  
  
Furthermore, when the Court decided to accept the bid of the appellant, and
notified the appellant, and called for payment within the required period, the
appellant became obliged to complete the purchase "as set forth above". That
made the preceding provisions 9o of the conditions of sale - in regard to the
completion of the pur­chase - binding upon the appellant. Those provisions as
to com­pletion of the purchase included, but were not restricted, to the bank
account to which payment had to be made. They included also other stipulations
regarding forfeiture, time, and extensions.  
  
The conditions of sale set out a mechanism for recovery of the purchase price,
in situations in which many bids would be received from persons outside the
jurisdiction. Providing for deposits and for forfeiture of deposits upon
default by bidders, despite acceptance of their bids, was part of that
mechanism - uniformly applicable to 100 all such bidders.  
  
I find no ambiguity or doubt in the conditions of sale, and accordingly the
contra proferentem rule is inapplicable.  
  
I therefore hold that the appellant's deposit was liable to forfeiture, and
was lawfully forfeited. The orders of the High Court and the Court of Appeal
are affirmed, and the appeal is dismissed with costs in a sum of Rs 50,000
payable by the appellant to the plaintiff-respondent. In terms of the
agreement between Counsel, SC SLA Application No 176/2002 is dismissed without
costs.  
  
**DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WEERASURIYA, J. -** I  agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/1.html_  

