[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)


##  Prof Priyani Soyza v. Rienzie Arsecularatne - SLR - 293, Vol 2 of 2001
[2000] LKSC 1; (2001) 2 Sri LR 293 (11 December 2000)

**293**

**PROF. PRIYANI SOYZA  
v.  
RIENZIE ARSECULARATNE**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC. APPEAL NO. 89/99  
C.A. APPEAL NO. 173/94 (F)  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 13035/MR  
3RD MAY 2000,  
21ST,24TH,25TH,26TH, 27TH, 28TH AND 31ST JULY 2000,  
1ST, 2ND, AND 3RD AUGUST 2000, 6TH, 7TH, 8TH AND 10TH NOVEMBER 2000.  
  
_Acquilian action - Father's claim for damages on account of death of child -
Patrimonial loss - Medical Negligence - Necessity of a nexus between
negligence and causation - standard of proof.  
  
_Suhani, the daughter of the plaintiff was four years of age and considered to
be a normal healthy child. She attended St. Bridget's Convent and was in
Nuwara Eliya in mid April 1992 during the school vacation with the plaintiff-
respondent (the plaintiff) and other members of the family where she appeared
to be dragging a leg whilst walking; whereupon, Suhani was brought to Colombo.
On 18.4.1992 she was committed to the care and treatment under the defendant -
appellant (the defendant) a paediatrician who made a provisional diagnosis of
her ailment as Rheumatic Chorea (R.C.) Thereafter she was treated at Nawaloka
Hospital. The defendant ordered three tests ASOT, ESR and TELECHEST and
prescribed valium, penicillin and multi-vitamin tablets. On 23rd April, the
plaintiff had Suhani examined by Dr. J.B. Peiris a senior neurologist who
confirmed that the symptoms showed some features of chorea but noted that
there were some symptoms which did not confirm that view. He also made certain
suggestions as to treatment which are not material to this case.  
  
During the entire period Suhani was under the defendant's care, viz until
20.05.1992, the defendant did not maintain a proper record of the illness in
the Bed Head Ticket (BHT). Most entries had been made by the house officer in
charge. No symptoms discovered by the defendant and no results of her clinical
examination of Suhani were reflected in the B.H.T. The defendant also failed
to' properly consult Dr. J.B. Peiris regarding the patient or the diagnosis of
the illness.  
  
On 20.05.1992 the plaintiff caused Suhani's treatment and care taken off from
the defendant and given to another senior paediatrician Professor
Lamabadusuriya. The same day he noted "clinical features suggestive of
rheumatic chorea **..........** " He prescribed epilin a drug in the same
class of

**294**

valium but stronger. On the 21st night he observed the child asleep and did
not disturb her. The parents thought she had improved. On the 22nd Professor
Lamabadusuriya wrote "unable to sit, tenden jerks brisk" On the 23rd he wrote
"More drowsy today Involuntary movements same **........** Continue epilin" On
the 24th he wrote "unable to sit up **........** tenden jerks **.......** poor
co-ordination" Dosage of epilin was increased. The same day he wrote to Dr.
Newton Jayaratne, inter alia, "tenden jerks are very brisk and there is ankle
clonus which is unusual for chorea." He, therefore, requested a CT scan to
exclude SOL (space occupying lesion). The CT scan was done on the 26th which
disclosed "enlargement of the brain stem from the pons down to the medula
DIAGNOSIS Brain stem Glioma' (BSG). Thereafter, on the request of Professor,
Lamabadusuriya, Dr. Gunasekera Consultant Neurosurgeon advised that the lesion
was in the middle of the brain stem and inaccessible for biopsy - no surgery
possible. He recommend Stereotactic Radiotherapy" available at Sheffield C/o
Dr. Sri Lal Dias.  
  
On 1st June Suhani was taken to U.K. and shown to Dr. Dias but no operation
was performed. On 12th June she was brought back and admitted to the
Neurosurgical Unit of the General Hospital under the care of Dr. J.B. Peiris.
On the 18th she was examined by Dr. R.S. Jayatillake oncologist of the Cancer
Hospital, Maharagama who found that BSG covered the entire brain stem from the
mid brain to the medulla and inaccessible for surgery. The following day the
child died.  
  
The plaintiff instituted action against the defendant claiming damages in 5
lakhs including for loss of care and companionship by Suhani's death on the
ground of the defendant's negligence to correctly diagnose Suhani's ailment.
However, both the Trial Court and the Court of Appeal answered in the
affirmative the following issues raised by the defendant :  
  
24(a) was the said child found to be suffering from a rapidly progressive
extremely malignant (cancerous) incurable tumour of the brain stem in an
inaccessible site as pleaded in para 2 13(g) of the answer ?  
  
(c) was the death of the child necessarily a part of the nature of the disease
which was never preventable at any stage with an inevitable fatal outcome ?  
  
That view was also supported by recognized medical writings on BSG.  
  
Until 201 May when Prof. Lamabadusuriya commenced investigations, medical
evidence regarding symptoms and signs in Suhani was indicative of both R.C.
and B.S.G.

**295**

According to settled principles of medical negligence, a deterioration in the
patient's condition is probably the most important indication to do a scan and
it would be negligent not to investigate a patient who is getting worse.  
  
**Held :  
  
**(1) Lex Acquilia permits the grant of patrimonial damage. If loss of care
and companionship as such should attract compensation it is for the
legislature to make necessary provision, particularly in view of the 1799
proclamation which permitted the administration of justice according to Roman
Dutch Law subject to deviations and alterations to be made by certain
authorities. That proclamation did not authorize deviations and alterations to
be made by the Courts of Law.  
  
_Per_ Dheeraratne, J  
  
"I think we are not entitled, as Judges, to change the material of the Roman
Dutch Law, but are only permitted to iron out its creases, whenever the
necessity arises. Effecting structural alterations to the common law should be
the exclusive preserve of the Legislature **............** "  
  
(2) The defendant owed a duty to the plaintiff, to treat Suhani, exercising
reasonable care and skill as a paediatrician, without causing patrimonial loss
to him. The ultimate question is whether the defendant's conduct conforms to
the standard of reasonable care demanded by the law. That is a question for
the court and the duty of deciding it cannot be delegated to any profession or
group in the community.  
  
(3) The defendant was remis in failing to record in the BHT any symptons
discovered by her and the results of her clinical examination of Suhani. But
it has not been established by a balance of probability that this remissness
had a nexus with the non diagnosis of the malady. The defendant also failed to
properly consult, Dr. J.B. Peiris. However, had she done so there was only a
possibility as opposed to a probability in Dr. Peiris ordering a C.T. scan to
be taken at that time.  
  
(4) The defendant was negligent just prior to 20th May, 1992, in failing to
order a CT scan which would have disclosed BSG. However, the plaintiff failed
to prove on a balance of probabilities, that such negligence of the defendant
caused or materially contrbuted to the death of Suhani on 19th June, 1992, and
thereby caused patrimonial loss to him.

**296**

**Cases referred to :  
  
**(1) _Mendis v. Dublin de Silva_ (1990)2 Sri L.R. 249.  
  
(2) _Innes v. Visser_ 1936 WLD 44 at 45.  
  
(3) _N v. T_ 1994(1) S.A. 862.  
  
(4) _Clinton - Parker Administrator, Transvasal Dawkings v. Administrator,
Transval_ 1996(2) SA 37.  
  
(5) _Bester v. Commercial Union Versekeringmaatskappy Van S A BPK_ 1973 (1) S
A 769.  
  
(6) _Gibson v. Berkowitz and Another_ 1996 (4) S A 1029.  
  
(7) _Alcock and Others v. Chief Constable of the Yorkshire Police_ 1991 (4)
ALL E.R. 907.  
  
(8) _Gafoor v. Wilson and Another_ (1990) 1 Sri L.R. 143.  
  
(9) _Union Government (Minister of Railways and Harbours) v. Warneke_ (1911)
SALR 657.  
  
(10) _Pauw v. African Guarantee and Indemnity Co. Ltd_. 1950 (2) SA (SWA) 132.  
  
(11) _De Costa v. Bank of Ceylon_ (1969) 72 NLR 457 at 461.  
  
(12) _Kodeeswaran v. The Attorney-General_ (1969) 72 NLR 337.  
  
(13) _Chissel v. Chapman_ (1954) 56 NLR 121 at 127.  
  
(14) _Wilsher v. Essex Area Health Authority_ (1986) 3 ALL E.R. 801; (1987)
Q.B. 730.  
  
(15) _Cassidy v. Ministry of Health_ (1951) 2 K.B. 348 at 359.  
  
(16) _Hall v. Brooklands Auto Racing Club_ (1933) 1 K.B. 205.  
  
(17) _Glasgow Corporation v. Muir_ (1943) AC 488 (HL) at 457.  
  
(18) _S v. Burger_ 1975 (4) 877 (A).  
  
(19) _Bolam v. Friern Hospital Management Committee_ (1957) 2 ALL E.R. 118.  
  
(20) _Maynard v. West Midlands Regional Health Authority_ (1985) 1 ALL E.R.
635.  
  
(21) _Sidaway v. Bethlem Royal Hospital Governor and Others_ (1985) 1 ALL E.R.
643.  
  
(22) _Administratrix of the estate of Bolitho-deceased v. City and Hackney
Health Authority_ (1997) 4 ALL E.R. 771.

**297**

(23) _Rogers v. Whitaker_ (1992) 67 ALJR 47.  
  
(24) _Van Wyk v. Lewis_ 1924 A D 438 at 447.  
  
(25) _F v. R_ (1983) 33 SASR 189 at 194.  
  
(26) _Whitehouse v. Jordan and Another_. (1981) 1 ALL E.R. 267.  
  
(27) _Fish v. Kapur_ (1948) 2 ALL E.R. 176.  
  
(28) _Barnett v. Chelsea of Kensington Hospital Management Committee_ (1968) 1
ALL E.R. 1068.  
  
(29) _Kay v. Ayrshire and Arran Health Board_ (1987) 2 ALL E.R. 417.  
  
(30) _Hoston v. East Birkshire Area Health Authority_ (1987) 2 ALL E.R. 907.  
  
(31) _Bonnington Castings Ltd v. Wardlaw_ (1956) 1 ALL E.R. 615.  
  
(32) _Mc Ghee v. National Coal Board_ (1972) 3 ALL E.R. 1008.  
  
(33) _Wilsher v. Essex Health Authority_ (1988) ALL E.R. 873.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal.  
  
H.L. de Silva, PC., R.K.W Goonesekera, S.C. Crossette Thambiah, Hugo Antony
and A. Aturupana for defendant-appellant.  
  
Romesh de Silva, PC., Palitha Kumarasinghe, Harsha Amarasekera and Sugath
Caldera for plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 11, 2000  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
  
**_Introduction  
_  
This case has attracted much publicity and public attention as it relates to
the unfortunate death of a child and everyone who hears or reads about it
cannot but be moved by the tragedy which befell on the plaintiff and his
family. This is not surprising, as in the eloquent words of Edmund Burke,
expressed many years ago, "Next to love, sympathy is the divinest passion of
the human heart." However, sympathy is not the valid basis for determination
of the important issues in this case and as judges it is our responsibility to
do justice between the parties according to law. The facts of the case are
briefly these. The plaintiff - respondent (the plaintiff) along with his wife
and two children,

**298**

was holidaying at Nuwara Eliya in April 1992; one of the children was the then
four year old Suhani, who was considered quite a normal and healthy child. She
attended St. Bridget's Convent till the school was closed for the April
vacation. After a few days stay at Nuwara Eliya, it was observed that Suhani
was dragging a leg while she walked and she was brought to Colombo by her
parents, to be shown to a paediatrician. On the 18th April 1992, she was taken
to Professor Priyani de Soysa, the defendant appellant (the defendant), a
well-known senior paediatrician, who examined the child at her consultation
room at St. Michael's Nursing Home, Kollupitiya. The defendant made a
provisional diagnosis of Suhani's malady as Rheumatic Chorea (RC) and she was
referred to the Nawaloka Private Hospital (Nawaloka). In her referral note to
the admitting medical officer at Nawaloka three tests, ASOT, ESR and TELECHEST
were ordered to be taken and penicillin, valium and multi-vitamin tablets were
prescribed to be given to Suhani. From 18th April to 19th May 1992, Suhani was
under the care of the defendant. On 23rd April, as arranged by the plaintiff,
Suhani was examined by Dr. J.B. Peiris, a senior neurologist. On 18th and 19th
May as the defendant was not available in Colombo, she aranged Dr. D.R.
Karunarathne, Director Lady Ridgeway Hospital, another senior paediatrician to
attend on Suhani in her absence. On the 20th May, the plaintiff caused
Suhani's treatment and care to be taken off from the defendant and given over
to another senior paediatrician Professor Lamabadusuriya. On the 24th a CT
scan was requested to be done by Professor Lamabadusuriya, which was done on
the 26th, and Suhani's malady was diagnosed as a Brainstem Glioma (BSG) by Dr.
N. Jayaratne, radiologist. On the 27th, Professor Lamabadusuriya wrote to Dr.
Lal Gunesekara, consultant neurosurgeon, seeking his surgical opinion about
further management of the malady. Dr. Gunesekara replied the same day to say
that the lesion in the middle of Suhani's brainstem was inaccessible even for
a biopsy and as such no surgery was possible. He suggested that Stereotactic .
Radiotherapy was best available at Sheffield, under the care of Dr. Sri Lal
Dias, a neurosurgeon. Suhani was then taken to the UK on 1st June and shown to
Dr. Sri Lal Dias, but no operation

**299**

was performed on her. On 12th June she was brought back to Sri Lanka and on
the 16th she was admitted to the Neurosurgical Unit of the General Hospital,
Colombo, under the care of Dr. J.B. Peiris. On the 18th, Suhani was examined
by Dr. R.S. Jayathilaka, oncologist and Director of the Department of Clinical
Oncology of the Cancer Institute, Maharagama, who found that the BSG covered
the entire brainstem extending from the mid brain to the medulla and
inaccessible for surgery. The child was then at the death's very door and the
following day she succumbed to her illness.  
  
On 17th August 1992, the plaintiff wrote to His Excellency the President,
complaining that the defendant's negligence and incompetence in the diagnosis
of his child's sickness brought about her untimely demise. He requested that
an inquiry be held into that matter. He also urged him to "give due
consideration to her (defendant's) actual competence and her fitness to be a
member of the noble profession in considering her for future appointments" and
"even consider appropriate to review the appointments already made because of
the danger of allowing such an irresponsible person to hold public office
discharging public functions." When the plaintiff received a letter asking him
to attend an inquiry on the 9th October in response to his request made to His
Excellency, he attended the inquiry but asked for a postponement of the same
on three grounds, one of which being, since sending the letter to His
Excellency, he had "decided to institute legal proceedings and wanted to seek
legal advice."  
  
In January 1993, the plaintiff filed this action against the defendant
claiming damages on the ground of medical negligence on her part. It was
alleged that Suhani was entrusted to the care of the defendant and that the
defendant owed a duty of care to the patient; that the defendant breached that
duty and was negligent in the discharge of her duties as a medical
practitioner. It was alleged that in consequence of the defendant's
negligence, there was no diagnosis of the actual sickness and the child was
not treated for the actual malady. It was alleged

**300**

that the child died at a point of time when she need not have died and the
death of the child was directly attributable to the breach of the duty of care
and negligence on the part of the defendant. The District Court awarded the
plaintiff a sum of Rs. 5,000,000. as damages. On appeal to the Court of
Appeal, heard before a bench of two judges, both judges agreed on the finding
of the trial judge on the question of medical negligence; but on the question
of damages they differed. One judge was of the view that the plaintiff was
only entitled to medical expenses amounting to a sum of Rs. 250,000, and the
other was of the view that the plaintiff was entitled in addition to medical
expenses, (1) damages on account of mental shock, (2) damages for loss of
future earnings and support and (3) damages for loss of the care and
companionship, all amounting to a sum of Rs. 5,000,000. Damages were not
quantified under the different heads and we do not have the benefit of knowing
what legal principles were applied to arrive at that figure. Learned counsel
for the plaintiff agreed to accept the smaller amount of damages, in order to
obviate the delay in bringing the case to a finality, which would have been
otherwise caused, by the case having had to be re-argued before a bench of
three judges of the Court of Appeal; learned counsel "reserved the right to
re-agitate the question of the quantum, in the event of the defendant
preferring an appeal to this Court," whatever he may have meant by that
expression. The defendant was granted special leave to appeal by this Court on
the following two questions; namely :-  
  
(1) Did the Court of Appeal err in its finding on professional negligence as
averred in paragraph 12 of the petition of appeal; and  
  
(2) Is the plaintiff - respondent entitled to be awarded damages other than
medical expenses.  
  
**Nature of the Plaintiff's action and the damages recoverable under the law.  
  
**It is convenient to deal with the second question relating damages
initially, by examining the nature of the plaintiff's action

**301**

alone and that requires no reference to the voluminous evidence led in the
case. The question is purely academic, as no appeal has been filed by the
plaintiff; he could not have appealed because he was no aggrieved party, his
counsel having consented to accept the smaller amount of damages. see re
aggrieved party, _Mendis Vs. Dublin de Silva_ (1). The action has been filed
by the plaintiff not in a representative capacity on behalf of the child's
estate, but as the father of the deceased child on account of damages suffered
by him. It is axiomatic that today the delict known as damnum injuria datum
created by The Lex Acquilia has become a general remedy for loss wrongfully
caused by a another under the Roman Dutch Law. In contrast, under the English
Law, the Common Law has developed a specific delict of negligence (See The
History of Negligence in the Law of Torts - Winfield 1926 42 LQR 184).
Requisites of an action under the Lex Aquilia, have been expressed by
different text writers in different ways; but substantially they are the same.
Wickramanayake, gives the requisites as (i). The plaintiff must show actual
pecuniary loss. An exception is the award of compensation for physical pain
suffered by a person injured through the negligence of another. (ii) He must
show that the loss was due to the unlawful act of the defendant or that the
defendant was acting in excess of his rights. (iii) He must show dolus or
culpa on the part of the defendant (The Law of Delict in Ceylon 1949). Mc
Kerron, states the essentials of liability in the Aquilian action are (i) a
wrongful act, (ii) pecuniary loss resulting to the plaintiff, and (iii) fault
on the part of the defendant (The Law of Delict 1965). Boberg, enumerates four
requirements, which are (a) wrongful act or omission; (b) fault, which may
consist in either intention or negligence; (c) causation, which must not be
too remote (unless this limitation is subsumed under the fault element); and
(d) patrimonial loss. (The Law of Delict Vol. 1. 1984). I am concerned here
with the nature of the loss, which the two authors call pecuniary, while the
other calls patrimonial. In the process of deciding what damages are legally
due to the plaintiff in the event of his succeeding in the action, I must
remind myself of the words of Greenberg J. in the case of _Innes Vs. Visser_
(2) said

**302**

of course in a different context, that "The figure of Justice carries a pair
of scales not a cornucopia."  
  
Damages claimed by the plaintiff under the head of mental shock, appear to be
recoverable under the Roman Dutch Law as well as the English Law (if the test
of reasonable for see ability is satisfied), only if that results in
psychiatric illness. Damages on account of emotional shock of short duration,
which has no substantial effect on the health of a person are not recoverable.
_See N Vs. T_ (3) _Clinton - Parker Vs. Administrator, Transvaal & Dawkins Vs.
Administrator Transvaal_(4) _Bester Vs. Commercial Union Versekeringmaatskappy
Van SA BPK_ (5) _Gibson Vs. Berkowitz and another_ (6) and _Alcock and Others
Vs. Chief Constable of the Yorkshire Police_ (7).  
  
As regards damages claimed on account of future earnings and support from the
deceased child, it is incumbent on the parent claiming such damages, to prove
his indigent circumstances warranting such support. " _Contrawise needy_
parents also must be maintained by their children"\- Voet XXV - 3 - 8.
Amerasinghe J. has exhaustively dealt with that aspect of the matter in the
case of _Gafoor Vs. Wilson and another_ (8) and it hardly requires any
labouring at my hands.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff strenuously contended that the
plaintiff is entitled to claim damages for loss of care and companionship of
the deceased child. He submitted that, firstly, if the principles of the Lex
Aquilia are properly applied, damages other than medical expenses are
recoverable by the plaintiff. Secondly, he contended that the resilient nature
of the Roman Dutch Law is such that it is within the power of this Court to
extend the application of that law to modern conditions and thereby grant the
plaintiff damages an account of loss of care and companionship of the child.
He contended that damnum within the meaning of the Lex Aquilia encompasses
every type of damage caused by the injurious act and that in the religious and
social context of Sri Lanka where

**303**

intra - family ties are treasured and cherished; loss of care and
companionship of a child should attract compensation today.  
  
What damages were recoverable in an action based on the Lex Aquilia was
carefully consisered in the case of _Union Government (Minister of Railways
and Harbours) V. Warneke_ (9) and it was held that the loss of the comfort and
society of the plaintiff's wife did not constitute calculable pecuniary loss.
At page 665 Innes J. said **..............** it becomes necessary to consider
the fundamental features of this form of action which have a bearing upon the
matter before us. And we are at once faced with the fact that it was essential
to a claim under Lex Aquilia that there should have been actual damnum in the
sense of loss to the property of the injured person by the act complained of
(Gruber, p. 233). In later Roman Law property came to mean _universitas_ of
the plaintiff's rights and duties, and the object of the action was to recover
the difference between that universitas as it was after the act of damage, and
as it would have been if the act had not been committed (Gruber, p. 269). Any
element of attachment or affection for. the thing damaged was rigorously
excluded. And this principle was fully recognised by the law of Holland. As
pointed out by Professor de Villiers (Injuries, p. 182), the compensation
recoverable under the Lex Aquilia was only for patrimonial damages, that is,
loss in respect of property, business, or prospective gains. He draws
attention to the clear cut distinction between actions of injuria (where the
intent was of the essence), and actions founded on culpa alone. In the former
case compensation might be awarded by way of satisfaction for injured
feelings. In the latter all that could be claimed was patrimonial damage,
which had to be explicitly and specifically proved. The difference between the
two forms of relief is emphasised by Voet (44.7.16), who states that where one
and the same act gives ground for both actions, the receiving of satisfaction
for the injuria does not bar the claim for patrimonial loss resulting from
culpa. The award of compensation for physical pain caused to a person injured
through negligence, which was recognised by the Law of Holland, constitutes a
notable exception to the rule in question. Professor

**304**

de Villiers has some interesting remarks upon this position, which was
probably the result of the influence of Germanic upon Roman Law. But however
that may be, there is no warrant for any such exception in the case of mental
distress or wounded feelings causing no physical injury. Damages calculated on
that basis were wholly outside the scope of the Aquilian procedure **......**
"  
  
Of course compensation for injured feelings arising out of and flowing
naturally from physical hurt done, could be claimed under the _Lex Aquilia.
See Pauw Vs. African Guarantee and Indemnity Co. Ltd_ (10).  
  
I find a further constraint on me to grant damages on account of loss of care
and companionship. That is, after the administration of the Island changed
from the Dutch to the British rule, on a settled principle of English Law and
policy, that colonies acquired by cession or conquest, retain their old law,
so long and so far as it remained unaltered by the new ruling power, the
system of law that prevailed in the Island at the time of the capitulation of
the maritime province to the British, was made to continue. This continuance
was later guaranteed by the Proclamation issued by the British Governor on
23rd September 1799, making the Common Law of the Island the Roman Dutch Law,
subject to such "deviations and alterations" as the specific authorities might
determine; but those authorities did not include the Courts. In _De Costa Vs.
Bank of Ceylon_ (1) at 461, H.N.G. Fernando CJ, having closely examined the
Proclamation of 1799, observed as follows;-  
  
"The Proclamation of 1799 thus declared that the Administration of Justice
shall be exercised by the Courts according to the Roman Dutch Law subject to
deviations and alterations;-  
  
(a) in consequence of emergencies, or absolutely necessary and unavoidable, or
evidently beneficial and desirable;  
  
(b) by the Court of Directors of the East India Company or the Secret
Committee thereof or the Governor of Fort William;

**305**

(c) by Proclamation of the Governor;  
  
(d) by lawful authority ordained.  
  
But the proclamation did not authorise any such deviations or alterations to
be made by the Courts of Law."  
  
Fernando CJ, having thereafter considered the repeal of the Proclamation of
1799 with certain exceptions by Ordinance No. 5 of 1835 stated at 462, "What
is important for the present purposes is that the Proclamation of 1799 and the
Ordinance of 1835 did not authorise the Courts to alter or deviate from the
Roman Dutch Law or to apply in Ceylon principles of English Law which conflict
with the Roman Dutch Law. From 1835 at least such deviations or alterations
could be effected only by Ordinance."  
  
Learned Presient's Counsel for the plaintiff drew our attention to the Dicta
of Lord Diplock in the Privy Council judgment in _Kodeeswaran Vs. The Attorney
General_ (12) where a different view was taken. Lord Diplock equated the
common law of this country to the common law of England and stated that it has
not remained static since 1799. Unfortunately, the text of the 1799
Proclamation referred to by Lord Diplock in Kodeeswaran's case (at page 339),
was that which was reproduced as the Adoption of Roman Dutch Law Ordinance
(Chapter 12) of the 1956 Revision of the Legislative Enactments and not the
text of the original 1799 Proclamation which judges in De Costa's case (at
page 461) referred to, having obtained it from Dr. G.C. Mendis work on the
Colebrooke - Cameron Papers. In the 1956 version of the 1799 Proclamation
referred to by Lord Diplock, in the Preamble cum the first Clause, the crucial
words " _subject to such directions, alterations, and improvements, as shall
be directed or approved by the Court of Directors of the United Company of
Merchants of England trading to the East Indies_ , or the Secret Committee
thereof, or by the Governor - General in Council of Fort William in Bengal",
were missing. For that reason I would respectfully adopt the

**306**

views expressed by Fenando CJ in De Costa's case (Supra) which have been
reached after a careful analysis of the complete provisions of the 1799
Proclamation.  
  
Much earlier Gratiaen J. in _Chissel Vs. Chapman_ (13) was constrained to
remark as follows:- "But those who administer the Roman Dutch Law cannot
disregard its basic principles although (on grounds of public policy or
expediency) we may cautiously attempt to adapt them to fresh situations
arising from the complex conditions of modern society. But we are powerless to
alter the basic principles themselves, to introduce by judicial legislation
fundamental changes in the established elements of an existing action."  
  
I think we are not entitled, as judges, to change the material of the Roman
Dutch Law, but are only permitted to iron out its creases, whenever the
necessity arises. Effecting structural alterations to the Common Law should be
the exclusive preserve of the Legislature and such alterations have been done
by the Legislature from time to time as the occasion arose, in several fields
like for instance, in landlord and tenant, inheritance and sale of goods. I
entirely agree with learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff that in the
socio - religious backdrop of Sri Lanka, loss of care and companionship should
attract compensation. The legislature should take such a policy decision and
lay down guideliness on which courts should calculate and assess the quantum
of compensation. Those guidelines should indicate, for example, in the case of
a death of a child attributable to a tortious act, whether compensation should
vary according to the age of a child; whether brother or sister could claim
compensation; whether the father or mother is entitled to claim more than the
brother or sister; or should loss of the only child attract more compensation;
and the like.  
  
**The Standard of Care  
**  
Admittedly, the defendant held herself out as a qualified paediatrician, to
whose care and treatment the plaintiff

**307**

entrusted his daughter Suhani; therefore, the defendant owed a duty to the
plaintiff, to treat Suhani, exercising reasonable care and skill as a
paediatrician, without causing patrimonial loss to him. Duty of care is not a
warranty of a perfect result Mustill J. in _Wilsher Vs. Essex Area Health
Authority_ (14). It transpired that the defendant has not charged any fee for
her professional services, but that does not affect her duty of care to the
patient, as that duty arises from the performance of the services. As stated
by Denning LJ. in the case of _Cassidy Vs. Ministry of Health_ (15) at 359 "if
a man goes to a doctor because he is ill, no one doubts that the doctor must
exercise reasonable care and skill in his treatment of him; and that is so
whether the doctor is paid for his services or not." When a person's conduct
falls short of the standard of care the law demands from him, his conduct
becomes negligent. The criterion of negligence is commonly described as the
standard conduct of a reasonable man or diligence paterfamilias placed in the
same circumstances as the person whose conduct is in question. In other words,
negligence is, doing or omitting to do something, what a reasonable man would
not do or would not omit to do, in a given situation. "The standard of
reasonableness is partly objective and partly subjective. In so far as the
actor is expected to conform to a standard that takes no account of his
individual ability, experience or temperament (his personal equation), it is
objective; in so far as the standard conduct of a reasonable man or diligence
paterfamilias placed in the same circumstances as the person whose conduct is
in question. In other words, negligence is, doing or omitting to do something,
what a reasonable man would not do or would not omit to do, in a given
situation. "The standard of reasonableness is partly objective and partly
subjective. In so far as the actor is expected to conform to a standard that
takes no account of his individual ability, experience or temperament (his
personal equation), it is objective; in so far as the standard takes account
of the circumstances in which the actor found himself, it is subjective."
(Boberg Vol. 1 269).

**308**

The fictional paragon called the reasonable man, was invented by the Roman Law
as well as by the English Common Law, to suit the requirements of the society.
He appears so real in the life of the law, perhaps just like his better known
fictional counterparts \- I am Fleming's flamboyant James Bond or Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle's discerning Sherlock Holmes. English judges described him as "the
ordinary man", "the average man" or "the man on Clapham ominibus." See _Hall
Vs. Brooklands Auto Racing Club_ (16).  
  
The attributes of the notional reasonable man have been the subject of many
interesting and vivid judicial descriptions. Lord Mc Millan in _Glasgow
Corporation Vs. Muir_ (17) at 457, said he treads the middle path being "free
from over - apprehension and from over - confidence." Holmes JA in S Vs.
Burger at 897 said of him "One does not expect of a diligens paterfamilias any
extremes such as Solomonic wisdom, prophetic foresight, chamelionic caution,
headlong haste, nervous timidity, or the trained reflexes of a racing driver.
In short, a diligens paterfamilias treads life's pathway with moderation and
prudent commonsense." (I may digress her to add that, while in the eyes of the
civil law, the reasonable man is a paragon, in the eyes of the criminal law,
he is a potential criminal, being prone to grave and sudden provocation - See
Justice E.F.N. Gratiean, KC. The reasonable Man, Law College Review 1950 Vol.
X1).  
  
Whenever a person engages himself voluntarily in rendering professional
services requiring a special skill, knowledge, or capacity for its proper
performance, he is required to manifest a reasonable degree of such skill,
knowledge, or capacity. When the conduct of a skilled professional is in
question, naturally, the standard of an ordinary reasonable man would be
illequipped and unsuited to judge his competence; thus the notional reasonable
man is substituted with the notional reasonable skilled professional. This is
not an exception to the general principle in Roman Dutch Law, but is merely an
application of it; for the reasonable prudent man will not

**309**

voluntarily undertake to perform a task for which he has not the requisite
knowledge, skill or capacity. The required standard will be that which, having
regard to the general level of skill in the profession or class which offers
the service, may reasonably be expected. Culpability or blameworthiness will
depend on either the want of skill on the part of the professional or a
deficient or ineffective exercise of that skill on his part: This is where the
standard and the practice of the peers of the skilled professional, whose
action is impugned, becomes relevant. However, in my view, this does not mean
that the Court should abdicate its determination of the standard of care
required of the skilled professional, in favour of the opinions expressed by
the peers of the skilled professional whose action is impugned.  
  
The accepted test currently applied in the English Law to determine the
standard of care of a skilled professional, commonly referred to as the Bolam
test, is based on the dicta of Mc Nair J. in his address to the jury, in
_Bolam Vs. Friern Hospital Management Committee_ (19). At page 121 he said
"but where you get a situation which involves the use of special skill or
competence, then the test whether there has been negligence or not is not the
test of the man on the Clapham omnibus, because he has not got this special
skill. The test is the standard of the ordinary skilled man exercising and
professing to have that special skill. A man need not possess the highest
expert skill at the risk of being found negligent. It is well-established law
that it is sufficient if he exercises the ordinary skill of an ordinary
competent man exercising that particular art." Again, at page 122 he explained
"A doctor is not guilty of negligence if he has acted in accordance with a
practice accepted as proper by a responsible body of medical men skilled in
that particular art **......** Putting it another way round, a doctor is not
negligent, if he is acting in accordance with such a practice, merely because
there is a body of opinion that takes a contrary view." The Bolam test is a
departure from the test of the hypothetical reasonable skilled professional.
The former places emphasis on the standards which are in fact adopted by the
profession, while the latter concerns itself with what ought to have been done
in the

**310**

circumstances. (For a critical discussion of the Bolam test, see Montrose - Is
negligence an Ethical or a Sociological concept 11958121 Modern Law Review
259). Certain glosses were added to the Bolam test by some subsequent
judgments of the House of Lords to which I shall refer.  
  
In _Maynard Vs. West Midlands Regional Health Authority_ (20) (decided in May
1983) the House of Lords having considered the Bolam test, held that it had to
be recognised that differences of opinion and practice existed in the medical
profession and that there was seldom any one answer exclusive of all others to
problems of professional judgment and therefore although the Court might
prefer one body of opinion to the other, that was not a basis for a conclusion
that there had been negligence on the part of the defendant doctor. In
_Sidaway Vs. Bethlem Royal Hospital Governor and others_ (21) (decided in
February 1985), while the Bolam test was approved by the House of Lords, it
was held by a majority, that it applied not only to diagnosis and treatment,
but also to the doctor's duty to warn his patient of the risks inherent in the
treatment recommended by him. Lord Scarman in his dissenting judgment
formulated the Bolam test to mean "a doctor is not negligent if he acts in
accordance with a practice accepted at that time as proper by a responsible
body of medical opinion even though other doctors adopt a different practice.
In short, the law imposes the duty of care; but the standard of care is a
matter of medical judgment." (emphasis added). A further important refinement
was added to the Bolam test by the House of Lords in the case of Bolitho
(administratrix of the estate of _Bolitho - deceased) Vs. City and Hackney
Health Authority_ (22). It was held that "a doctor could be liable for
negligence in respect of diagnosis and treatment despite a body of
professional opinion sanctioning his conduct, where it had not been
demonstrated to the judge's satisfaction that the body of opinion relied on
was reasonable or responsible. In the vast majority of the cases the fact that
distinguished experts in the field were of a particular opinion, would
demonstrate the reasonableness of the opinion. However, in a rare case, if it
could be demonstrated that the professional

**311**

opinion was not capable of withstanding logical analysis, the judge would be
entitled to hold that the body of opinion was not reasonable or responsible."  
  
In my view, Bolitho's case probably brings the Bolam test fairly close to the
test of the conduct of the notional reasonable ' skilled professional, in the
assessment of the standard of care, by its emphasis that the medical opinion
should not be solely determinative of the required standard.  
  
In Australia, in the case of _Rogers Vs. Whitaker_ (23) the High Court held,
at least in relation to cases of non-disclosure of medical risks, the Bolam
test should no longer be applied. The plaintiff in that case, decided to get
her right eye which was injured in her childhood, operated by the defendant
ophthalmic surgeon. There was no doubt that operation was performed with the
required skill and care, but the patient not only lost the vision of that eye,
she became almost totally blind as a result of a condition known as
sympathetic ophthalmia developing in her left eye. The question was whether
the defendant was negligent in that he failed to warn the plaintiff of such
risk of damage being caused to the left eye. If the Bolam principle was
applied, even if a patient asks a direct question about the possible risks or
complications, the making of that inquiry would be of little or no
significance, because medical opinion would determine whether the risk should
or should not be disclosed and the express desire of a particular patient for
information or advice does not alter that opinion or the legal significance of
that opinion.  
  
The principal criticism for the application of the Bolam test appears to be
that if a medical practitioner is able to get a responsible body of medical
opinion, however small that may be, to say that the practice adopted by him
was in their opinion, one which could be reasonably followed, then the court
should adjudicate the medical practitioner not negligent, even though a vast
body of medical opinion might take the opposite view. ( _See Disclosure of
Risks in Proposed Medical Treatment - F.A._

**312**

_Trindade_ (1993) _109 Law Quarterly Review, where a suggestion is made for
the abandonment the Bolam test in England_ ). In view of the matters
considered above, with regard to the determination of the standard of care, I
would prefer to follow the dicta of Innes J. in _Van Wyk Vs. Lewis_ (24) that
"The testimony of experienced members of the profession is of the greatest
value **......** But the decision of what is reasonable under the
circumstances is for the Court; it will pay high regard to the views of the
profession, but it is not bound to adopt them."  
  
The same idea was expressed more forcefully by King CJ, in the Full Court
decision of the _Supreme Court of South Australia in F Vs. R_ (25) when he
stated "The ultimate question, however, is not whether the defendant's conduct
accords with the practices of his profession or some part of it, but whether
it conforms to the standard of reasonable care demanded by the law. That is a
question for the court and the duty of deciding it cannot be delegated to any
profession or group in the community." I am in respectful agreement with that
proposition.  
  
_**Was the defendant negligent, in that her conduct did fall short of the
required standard of care ?  
  
**_It was alleged that the defendant was guilty of several acts of omission
and commission amounting to negligence, which caused the misdiagnosis of
Suhani's malady as RC and the non diagnosis as BSG, resulting in the
deterioration of her condition, and ultimately leading to her untimely death.
We were helpfully and carefully taken through for several days, the lengthy
mass of evidence led and the medical literature produced at the trial, by
learned President's Counsel who appeared for either side, to demonstrate that
the defendant was either negligent or not. The evidence for the plaintiff came
from the plaintiff himself, Dr. Sri Lal Dias, neurosurgeon, and M.G.G.
Amarasinghe, radiologist. For the defendant, Dr. J.B. Pieris, neurologist, Dr.
Shelton Cabral, neurosurgeon, Dr. Joseph Fernando, Secretary of the Ministry
of Health, Dr. R.S. Jayathillaka, oncologist, Dr. K.M. Velumylum, Director of
Health Services, Dr. Harendra de Silva, professor of

**313**

paediatrics, University of Ruhuna, and the defendant herself gave evidence.  
  
There is no doubt that the BSG was the cause of Suhani's death on 19.6.1992,
although she received treatment at the hands of the defendant for RC, which is
also a neurological disease. In the statement made by the defendant on
5.10.1992 to the inquiring officer of the Ministry of Health, in response to a
petition sent by the plaintiff to His Excellency the President, as well as in
her answer dated 15.1.1993, she stated that in the course of time she too
would have ordered a CT scan on Suhani and her BSG could have been diagnosed.
Her position when she gave evidence in the original court, was that Suhani was
suffering from both BSG and RC, but the medical opinion ruled out the
probability of the presence of both diseases simultaneously in one person. In
any event, I am mindful of the fact that mere misdiagnosis or non - diagnosis
of a disease, by itself does not amount to negligence. Attention of both the
original Court and the Court of Appeal appears to have been diverted to many
peripheral matters which had no nexus or relationship to the alleged culpable
act of negligence namely, non diagnosis of the BSG, like for instance, the
failure of the defendant to use the knee hammer or the ophthalmascope, for the
clinical examination of Suhani, when no different results were yielded when
other doctors used them on Suhani. For the sake of convenience and with a view
to avoid repetition, I shall examine several items of relevant evidence led on
behalf of the plaintiff to bring home the charge of negligence on the part of
the defendant, leading to non diagnosis of the BSG, under two broad heads;-
(A) was there a failure to properly attend on Suhani ? and (B) was there a
failure to properly investigate Suhani's illness ?  
  
(A) Was there a failure to properly attend on Suhani ?  
  
It was alleged that the defendant failed to elicit a full history of Suhani
and the medical opinion was unanimous in the importance of eliciting the
history of a patient as a precursor to

**314**

effective treatment. It is significant to note that Suhani was presented to
the defendant's examination as a child in normal good health who even attended
school on the last day of the term before the April recess. Much weight was
given to this allegation of not eliciting the history of the patient, because
of the fact that the plaintiff while giving the history of Suhani to the
Neurological Unit of General Hospital, on 16th June 1992, has stated that in
mid February 1992, he noticed in Suhani 'a funny way of looking'; 'once in a
way head bend to the right side' and end of February 'talking at night while
sleeping'; 'couldn't wear slippers', 'clumsiness of her limbs'; and `when
walks tendency to fall'. At the time this history was recorded, the BSG in
Suhani was diagnosed and admittedly the plaintiff had read medical literature
on Suhani's malady. The child was presented to the defendant for examination
as a girl in the pink of her health, except for the dragging of a foot. There
was no critical examination by the Courts below as to whether the plaintiff
gave that history to the Neurological Unit from hindsight or whether he was
confused due to over-anxiety as to when those symptoms manifested. There is no
evidence as to whether Dr. J.B. Peiris or Professor Lamabadusuriya elicited
those matters from the plaintiff after detailed questioning. I would consider
it too much to expect a specialist to do extensive questioning from parents
who bring a normally healthy child for examination, on all symptoms of
diseases in the book of paediatric pathology. Looking objectively, the
inability of a busy specialist to indulge in the time consuming exercise of
eliciting the history of a patient, must be viewed from the unfortunate Sri
Lankan context, where a patient is permitted to rush to a specialist, by-
passing his family general practitioner, and the specialist being licensed to
readily attend on a patient without even a referral note from a general
practitioner.  
  
The purpose of a Bed Head Ticket (BHT) is to keep a medical record of a
patient. Except for two entries, one calling the nurse to explain why her
order to give Valium was not carried out, and the other requesting Dr. D.R.
Karunaratne to look after the child in her absence, the defendant made no
entries in the BHT. Most

**315**

entries had been made by the house officer in charge and the defendant stated
that she did not even dictate anything to be written on the BHT by the house
officer. No symptoms discovered by the defendant and no results of her
clinical examination of Suhani were reflected in the BHT Although in the
statement of the defendant dated 5.10.1992, forwarded to the inquiring officer
of the Ministry of Health, regarding the death of Suhani, she stated
**.........** "on examination I found weakness, involuntary purposeless
movements and brisk tendon reflexes which led to a provisional diagnosis of
rheumatic chorea", none of those symptoms were recorded or were caused to be
recorded in the BHT by the defendant. Strangely, in that very statement to the
inquiring officer, in relation to Dr. Lamabadusuriya taking over the treatment
of Suhani, the defendant stated, "he had the advantage of taking over the
patient after my observations for a month in the same ward", whereas
absolutely no record of her observations whatsoever was available for the
benefit of others. Medical opinion was also unanimous that the proper record
of the illness should have been recorded in the BHT and it was clear that the
defendant was remiss in that matter. However, I am unable to say that it has
been proved by a balance of probability that this remissness had a nexus with
the non-diagnosis of the malady.  
  
It is alleged that the defendant failed to properly consult and follow Dr.
J.B. Peiris. The plaintiff arranged Dr. J.B. Peiris to examine Suhani on 18th
April and it is right to say that the defendant quite reluctantly agreed with
that arrangement. The house officer had to speak to the defendant over the
phone and write a note in the BHT requesting Dr. J.B. Peiris to see the
patient. Dr. Peiris having done a thorough neurological examination of Suhani,
wrote in the BHT as follows in respect of her.  
  
_Prof. Priyani Soyza - she has coarse multiplanar, non purposive movements of
legs which have the features of chorea, but there are no confirmatory
movements in arms or tongue. Knee Jerks brisk and pendular. Suggest Rivotril
0.5_

**316**

_Mg. EEG (Electro Encephalogram). X-ray Skull - posterior - lateral. Shall
review. Thanks'.  
_  
I shall refer again to the contents of this entry in the BHT later in another
connection. The EEG was taken and a note was addressed in the BHT to the
defendant again by Dr. J.B. Peiris to say that the EEG 'shows no significant
paroxysmal or focal abnormility'. Rivotril was not given and the skull X-ray
was not taken; those may not have mattered. But the significant fact is that
the defendant failed to have any dialogue whatsoever with Dr. J.B. Peiris
regarding the patient, particularly about the neurological symptoms noted by
him and the seeming reservations he had chosen to express; further no
opportunity was given to him to review the diagnosis. The skull X-ray would
have revealed nothing, as subsequently it was discovered that there was no
hydrocephalus which would lead to infra-cranial pressure. Therefore the Court
of Appeal was clearly wrong in concluding that the skull X-ray would have
shown infra-cranial pressure and finding fault with the defendant on that
score. All I could say is that on the evidence led, although the defendant
could be faulted for not properly consulting Dr. Peiris, only a possibility as
opposed to a probability existed in Dr. Peiris ordering a CT Scan being taken,
if he was properly consulted at that time.  
  
It was also alleged that the plaintiff persisted in requesting the defendant
to obtain a second opinion from another paediatrician but the defendant
refused to do so. The plaintiff's evidence on this matter was devoid in
detail. To the letter dated 17.8.1992 written by the plaintiff to His
Excellency, he appended marked "A' an "account pertaining to the death" of
Suhani. Although reference is made in that statement to plaintiffs making
arrangements to get Suhani examined by Dr. Peiris, not a word is mentioned
about the alleged persistent requests made to the defendant to obtain a second
opinion and the defendant's refusal to do so. The probabilities are that he
did not make such a request.

**317**

(B) _Was there a failure to properly investigate Suhani's illness?  
_  
Powers and Harris on Medical Negligence (1994), under the subtitle "Space
occupying lesion" at 778 states " _The commonest medico-legal problem in this
category results from delay in diagnosis; the subsequent management is rarely
a problem. Early cases of subdural haematoma or a glioma can be very difficult
to diagnose and it is not negligent to be unable to reach a diagnosis at the
initial consultation. However it is important to consider this diagnosis even
if it is only a remote possibility as it might be in the case of a patient
with a single attack of epilepcy. With modern CT scanning a moderate sized
tumour or subdural haematoma will be demonstrated but this does not follow for
small lesions which can be missed. The injection of contrast material during
the radiology increases the sensitivity of the test but does not make it fully
reliable. In the absense of definite focal signs a normal CT scan may occur in
the early stages of the lesion and therefore follow - up is important.
(Bouchez, Assaker, Hautefeuille, Combelles, Arnott 1986). CT scans may not be
quickly available and it can be important to judge the best time to do the
scan. A deterioration in the patient's condition is probably the most
important indication to do a scan or to repeat it and it would be negligent
not to investigate fully a patient who was getting worse_."  
  
Admittedly the only way of diagnosing the existence of a BSG is through a CT
scan and the evidence of the plaintiff at the trial was that he was aware of
this significant fact. One allegation made against the defendant was that she
failed to order a CT scan when she was expressly requested to do so by the
plaintiff. The Courts below have not considered in this connection, as to why
the plaintiff failed to mention this significant fact in the petition he sent
to His Excellency, and why he failed to make the same request to Dr. Peiris or
to Professor Lamabadusuriya, whose disposition towards him was quite friendly,
according to him. Viewed in the context of those circumstances, the
probabilities are that the plaintiff did not

**318**

make such a request, and the defendant cannot be faulted on that score.  
  
There appears to be no negligence on the part of the defendant in arriving at
the initial provisional diagnosis of Suhani's malady as RC. Chorea is
described in Nelson's Essentials of Paediatrics (1999) at 744 as "
_Hyperkinetic, rapid, unsustained, irregular, purposeless, no patterned
movement. Muscle tone is decreased. Choreiform movement abnormalities may be
congenital, familial, metabolic, vascular, toxic, infectious, or neoplastic in
origin. The movements may occur alone or as a part of more extensive disorder
(eg. Sydenham chorea, Huntington chorea, celebral palsy, Wilson disease,
reaction to toxins and drugs). Fidgety behavior, inability to sit still,
clumsiness, dysarthia, and an awkward gait may occur. The exact site of
disfunction within the extra pyramidal system is unknown._ " Medical opinion
is that it takes a minimum of six weeks for RC to run its course.  
  
There is no question that the controlling of the involuntary choreiform
movements required the patient to be sedated and rested and the defendant
prescribed Valium for Suhani. I am unable to agree with the finding of the
Court of Appeal, a conclusion unsupported by any medical opinion, that the
defendant was responsible for "masking" the symptoms of BSG by heavy sedation
of the child. Medical literature shows that the BSG is presented with an
insidious onset of symptoms and signs, therefore it is of utmost importance to
observe what symptoms and signs manifested in Suhani, when she was under the
care of the defendant. Both Courts below have proceeded to examine the
question of negligence of the defendant on the basis that the following
symptoms of the BSG were manifested in Suhani and they manifested almost
simultaneously and were staring in the face of the defendant, who most
callously overlooked them. As described by the Court of Appeal, they were:-  
  
(i) Brisk knee jerks (ii) Ankle clonus (iii) Choriform movements (iv)
Inability to walk - involving motor tract (v)

**319**

Inability to sit up - involving the motor tract (vi) Inability to use arms
(vii) Eyes becoming red - involving cranial nerves 4 and 6 (viii) Salivating -
involving cranial nerve 7 (ix) Inability to hold head up - involving the motor
tract (x) Slurred speech \- involving cranial nerve 7; and (xi) Response to
Babinski test.  
  
As regards (xi) referred to above there is no evidence of anyone having done
that test. Of the above symptoms, regarding (iv), (v), (vii), (viii) and (ix),
only the plaintiff spoke of them and no confirmation of the presence of those
symptoms came from the evidence of Dr. Peiris or from the notes of Professor
Lamabadusuriya or from any other source. The Plaintiff's evidence as to when
those signs he deposed to manifested, appears to be quite vague. Evidence
disclosed that Suhani did have red eyes and that she was treated by the
defendant for conjunctivitis. But, there was no evidence to show that the
redness of the eyes persisted. Suhani did not have red eyes even at the time
she was admitted to the Neurosurgical Unit of the General Hospital on 16th
June. The only witness who could have positively spoken of what symptoms
manifested at the time, Professor Lamabadusuriya took over the care and
treatment of Suhani on 20th May 1992, was Professor Lamabadusuriya himself and
the plaintiff has starved the case of that vital evidence by not calling him
to testify, although he was listed as his witness. It is right to presume,
that this evidence which could have been and was not produced, would if
produced be unfavourable to the party who withheld it, particularly, in
respect of the symptoms which the plaintiff alone deposed to. (See section 114
illustration {f} of the Evidence Ordinance). In this connection, I am unable
to subscribe to the view that generally, a member of the medical profession in
Sri Lanka, is reluctant to give truthful evidence before a Court of Law,
merely because such evidence, will conflict with the personal interests of a
colleague. To take such a view of professional camaraderie, would probably be
as unreasonable as to agree with George Bernard Shaw's hyperbole that "all
professions are conspiracies against the laity" (Sir Patrick in Doctor's
Dilemma \- 1906). At the same time I think it is my duty, in that connection,
to indicate the

**320**

same concern expressed by Lord Wilberforce in the case of _Whitehouse Vs.
Jordan and another_ (26) for the benefit of both the Medical and Legal
professions. Lord Wilberforce said at 276 "While some degree of consultation
between experts and legal advisers is entirely proper, it is necessary that
expert evidence presented to court should be, and should seen to be, the
independent product of the expert, uninfluenced as to the form or content by
the exigencies of litigation. To the extent that is not, the evidence is
likely to be not only incorrect but self defeating."  
  
The evidence unequivocally points to the presence of the following symptoms
and signs in Suhani, when she was under the care of the defendant (1) Brisk
Knee jerks (2) Ankle clonus (3) Choreiform movements which includes inability
to use arms and (4) slurred speech. As regards brisk knee jerks, both Dr.
Pieris and Professor Lamabadusuriya noted them, but Dr. Peiris did not think
they were inconsistent with RC. Dr. Cabral and Dr. Sri Lal Dias were however
of the view that they were indicative of the presence of a lesion in the
brain. With regard to ankle clonus, it was the evidence of Dr. Peiris, that
there was nothing diagnostic about clonus and at the same time its presence
was unusual for RC. The medical evidence regarding choreiform movements and
slurred speech \- dysarthia - is that they are symptomatic of both RC and BSG.  
  
In addition to the eleven matters mentioned above, the Court of Appeal was of
the view that there were several other features in Suhani's sickness which
were **inconsistent** with the diagnosis of RC. They were:- (a) the child
being four years and one month old; (b) the absence of a history of rheumatic
fever; (c) the ASOT being high; (d) sleeping pulse being high; (e) temperature
of the child being normal; and (f) absence of confirmatory movements in arms
and tongue as recorded by Dr. Peiris.  
  
(a) There was no expert evidence to indicate that a child of four was immune
from RC. According to the Oxford Text Book of Medicine (1988), RC affects
children and adolescent between

**321**

the ages of 3 and 20, (b) The Oxford Text book of Medicine again shows that
'rheumatic fever is rare in patients under four years of age, most cases
occurring in the 6 - 15 age group', (c) According to Dr. Peiris, the raised
ASOT was consistent with Suhani having had rheumatic fever as it was
indicative of an earlier streptococcal infection. The enlargement of the heart
shown in the Telechest was also according to him indicative of RC. However,
the defendant herself admitted that the raised ASOT was **unusual** for RC.
(d) The medical evidence regarding the raised sleeping pulse given by Dr.
Peiris is equivocal and it cannot be said with any degree of certainty that
his evidence supports that it was inconsistent with RC. But Professor Harendra
de Silva has testified to the fact that in RC the sleeping pulse is normal.
(e) The Oxford Textbook of Medicine states that in RC the child usually has no
fever, although Dr. Peiris has expressed the view that it is inconsistent with
RC. (f) As regards the absence of confirmatory movements in the hands and
tongue as observed by Dr. Peiris on 18th April, although evidence disclosed
that the child could not hold objects and her speech was slurred, there was no
indication as to what Dr. Peiris meant by those observations and that Dr.
Peiris was given an opportunity to review his diagnosis. At the most,
therefore, there appears to have had some features unusual with diagnosis of
RC, that being the raised sleeping pulse and raised ASOT; but there is no
justification for the Court of Appeal to have come to the conclusion that
there was evidence of the presence of several features **inconsistent** with
RC, and therefore bring home the charge of negligence on the defendant on the
basis that she overlooked them.  
  
I find it difficult to accept the submission made on behalf of the appellant
that Dr. Peiris confirmed the diagnosis of Suhani's malady as RC, firstly,
because of the reservations he had chosen to express in the BHT and secondly,
because he got no opportunity to review the diagnosis as suggested by him.
That accounts for why Dr. Peiris told the plaintiff that it was "probably
rheumatic chorea." As far as Dr. Karunaratne was concerned, he came to
medically look after the child, in the defendant's

**322**

short absence, at her request, with no observations of the symptoms of the
disease recorded by her on the BHT, but with the firm request "to look after
the child with rheumatic chorea." In those circumstances one can hardly
contend that Dr. Karunaratne too confirmed the diagnosis made by the
defendant.  
  
I shall now recount briefly the events leading to the discovery of the BSG in
Suhani. On 20th May 1992, the plaintiff wrote the letter produced marked P10,
to the sister-in-charge of the paediatric unit of Nawaloka, conveying his
decision to transfer the care of the child from the defendant to Professor
Lamabadusuriya since his daughter "has not made much progress since her
admission to Nawaloka on 18.4.92." Learned President's Counsel for the
defendant made a point of this plaintiff's statement, quite rightly, to submit
that the child's condition had not dramatically deteriorated, as it was
attempted to be made out by the plaintiff, warranting the defendant to order a
CT Scan. As observed earlier Professor Lamabadusuriya was not called as a
witness, nevertheless, what he did as regards the treatment and management of
Suhani from the 20th May, in my view assumes great significance in the
determination of the question of the defendant's negligence.  
  
I shall set out the important entries made by Professor Lamabadusuriya in the
BHT at Nawaloka from the 20th. On the 20th, he wrote " _Clinical features
suggestive of rheumatic chorea. All tendon jerks very brisk with ankle clonus.
" He prescribed Epilin, a drug in the same class as Valium, but stronger. On
the 21st night, when he saw the child, she was asleep and he did not want to
disturb her, but he wrote "Parents think involuntary movements are less and
speech is better." On the 22nd, he wrote "Condition same as yesterday.
Hypotonia + speech same, unable to sit. Tendon jerks brisk." On the 23rd, he
wrote "More drowsy today and less alert. Involuntary movements same. Pupils
(normal). Continue Epilin." On the 24th, he wrote "Involuntary movements less.
Speech same. Unable to sit up. Fundi - cannot visualise the optic discs._

**323**

_Tendon jerks - could not elicit knee jerks. Poor co-ordination. " Dosage of
Epilin was increased. On the same day Professor Lamabadusuriya wrote to Dr.
Newton Jayaratne, consultant radiologist to say that "This patient is under
treatment for Rheumatic Chorea since mid April 92. I took over the patient
only few days ago. Her tendon jerks are very brisk and there is ankle clonus
which is unusual for chorea. I cannot visualise the optic discs to see whether
there is papiledema. Could you please do a CT Scan of the brain to exclude the
possibility of a SOL (Space occupying lesion)._"  
  
The CT Scan was done on the 26th and according to the report sent by Dr.
Jayaratne addressed to Professor Lamabadusuriya " _The size, shape and
position of the ventricles are normal. There is enlargement of the brain stem
from the pons down to the medulla. An irregular enhancing mass is seen in the
brain stem. Appearances are most likely due to a brain stem glioma. The
possibility of a tuberculus infection is less likely. DIAGNOSIS, Brain Stem
Glioma. " On the _27th _Professor Lamabadusuriya wrote to Dr. Lal Gunasekara,
consultant neurosurgeon to say that "This patient who has been treated as a
case of rheumatic chorea for one month came under my care last week. In
addition to choreiform movements, I noticed that all tendon jerks were brisk
and there was ankle clonus. As the brisk jerks persisted and the response to
sodium valporate was not optimal a CT Scan was done yesterday, which revealed
a S.O.L. in the brainstem suggestive of a glioma. I would very much value your
surgical opinion about further management". The same day Dr. Gunasekera
replied "The lesion is in the middle of the brainstem and inaccessible for a
biopsy. No hydrocephalus. As such no surgery is possible **. . .** " He added
a postscript to say that "Stereotactic Radiotherapy which is the best is
available at Sheffield c/o Dr. Srilal Dias_".  
  
We are thus in possession, as to why Professor Lamabadusuriya, a senior
paediatrician himself ordered the CT Scan. True, he did not rush to order the
Scan to be taken on

**324**

the 20th itself or order that to be taken on the 24th "immediately", as he
could have done. He watched for the response to sodium valporate (Epilin) as
seen by his memorandum to Dr. Gunasekera. He belongs to the same class of
medical specialists to which the defendant belongs and in fact succeeded the
defendant as the professor of paediatrics at the Medical College. The reasons
why he ordered the Scan is specified in his letter addressed to Dr. Jayaratne
and that was to exclude the possibility of a SOL, because tendon jerks were
brisk and there was ankle clonus, which were unusual for RC. Although the
presence of ankle clonus is not recorded in the skimpy BHT at Nawaloka before
the 20th of May, that symptom could not have suddenly sprung up on the 20th
for the benefit of Professor Lamabadusuriya's examination of Suhani. I have
already held that the defendant was remiss in not setting out or causing to
set out symptoms of Suhani's illness in the BHT. Was the defendant negligent
in not ordering the Scan either to confirm her initial diagnosis or to arrive
at a differential diagnosis when those two symptoms were present in addition
to choreiform movements? In my view what Professor Lamabadusuriya did in the
circumstances was demonstrative of the standard of care and skill required of
an ordinary skilled person exercising and professing to have that special
skill namely that of a specialist paediatrician. Ordering a CT scan be taken
on Suhani was something reasonably required by a specialist paediatrician to
reach a differential diagnosis at that stage. In my view, the defendant's
conduct fell short of that standard of care and she was therefore negligent.  
  
_**Causation  
  
**_Nelson - Essentials of Paediatrics (1999) on Oncology gives the following
description at page 601;  
  
" **Tumor/Site -** Brain stem glioma  
  
**Manifestations -** Onset between 5 and 7 yr of age; triad of multiple
cranial nerve deficit (vii, ix, x, v, vi) pyramidal tract,

**325**

and cerebellar signs; skip lesions common; Increased Intracranial Pressure is
late.  
  
**Treatment -** Excision impossible; radiotherapy is palliative;
corticosteriods to reduce tumor edema; experimental chemotherapy.  
  
**Comments -** Small size but critical location makes the tumor highly
lethal".  
  
The mere proof of the fact that the defendant was negligent in not ordering a
CT scan on Suhani, (which led to the nondiagnosis of the BSG), does not make
the plaintiff become entitled to damages. The plaintiff must further prove
that such non-diagnosis caused or materially contributed to the deterioration
and death of Suhani which caused wrongful loss to him. If the death would have
occurred in any event unconnected with the defendant's breach of duty, the
defendant is not liable in damages. In other words, the plaintiff must prove
on a balance of probabilities the existence of the causal connection between
the defendant's breach of duty and the damages he suffered. In this
connection, there were certain specific issues raised at the trial on behalf
of the defendant, and they were:-  
  
24\. (a) Was the said child found to be suffering from a rapidly progressive
extremely malignant (cancerous) incurable tumour of the brain stem in an
inaccessible site as pleaded in para 2 13(g) of the answer?  
  
(b) Was the death of the child necessarily a part of the nature of the disease
which was never preventable at any stage and with an inevitable fatal outcome?  
  
(c) If either (a) or (b) is answered in the defendant's favour can the
plaintiff maintain this action against the defendant?  
  
Both Courts below answered the above mentioned issues 24(a) and (b) in the
affirmative in favour of the defendant, and

**326**

proceeded to answer the consequential issue 24(c) also in the affirmative, but
in favour of the plaintiff. Strangely, the Court of Appeal, having answered
the issue 24(b) in the affirmative (to the effect that the death of the child
was a necessarily a part of the nature of the disease which was never
preventable at any stage and with an inevitable fatal outcome) went on to add
contradicting that position - "With proper diagnosis and treatment it could
have been prevented or postponed".  
  
In respect of causation, I shall set out in full at this stage, all what the
Court of Appeal was pleased to express before answering the three issues in
the manner mentioned above. " The damages claimed in an action would be in
relation to the effect brought about by the act or omission of the defendant
and will have a direct relationship to the cause. In this instance the
negligence of the defendant which was caused by the no diagnosis of a brain
stem glioma in the child Suhani around 18. 04. 1992 and most probably the
wrong diagnosis of rheumatic chorea, both resulted in the child not being
treated in time for the brain stem glioma. If treated in the time the medical
evidence confirmed that there was a possibility of the child living for some
more time. The early death of the child on 19. 06. 92 therefore was a direct
result of the non-diagnosis of the defendant. The death of the child therefore
could be attributed to the negligence of the defendant. Thus negligence of the
defendant was the cause and the death of the child was the result"  
  
I shall now refer to a few decided cases that illustrate the principle of
causation. In the case of _Fish Vs. Kapur_ (27), it was held that there was no
loss which flowed from the defendant dentist's failure to diagnose a broken
jaw, because even if he diagnosed it, there was no treatment which could have
been given. There was no proof of any damage following on the failure to
diagnose. In _Barnett Vs. Chelsea & Kensington Hospital Management
Committee_(28), it was held that the hospital's casualty officer was negligent
in his failure to see and examine the deceased, but even if the deceased was
examined, medical evidence showed on the balance of probabilities, that he
would

**327**

still have died; and negligence was not the cause of death. In the more recent
case of _Kay Vs. Ayrshire and Arran Health Board_ (29) a child who suffered
from meningitis was negligently injected thirty times the correct dose of
penicillin. Immediately remedial treatment was given when the mistake was
realised. The child recovered from the short term toxic effects of the
overdose, but was subsequently found to be deaf. In the action brought against
the defendant for damages in respect of the deafness, evidence was led on
behalf of the defendant to the effect that in no recorded case, had an
overdose of penicillin caused deafness, while deafness was a common sequela of
meningitis. In appeal to the House of Lords, it was contended on behalf of the
child that the overdose had created an increased risk of neurological damage
which in fact resulted in deafness. It was further contended on the child's
behalf that the defendant was liable on the principle that if the defendant
engaged in a conduct which created or increased the risk of injury, and the
child was injured, the defendant was then to be taken as having caused the
child's injury, even though the existence and extent of the contribution by
the defendant's conduct to the child's injury, could not be ascertained. But
the House of Lords held that, where two competing causes of damage existed,
the law could not presume in favour of the patient that the tortious cause was
responsible for the damage, if it was not first proved that it was an accepted
fact that the tortious cause was capable of causing or aggravating such
damage.  
  
In _Hotson Vs. East Berkshire Area Health Authority_ (30), it was held that
the crucial question of fact which the judge had to determine, was whether the
cause of the plaintiff 13 year old boy's injury, was his fall or the Health
Authority's negligence in making an incorrect diagnosis and delaying
treatment, since if the fall had caused the injury the negligence of authority
was irrelevant in regard to the plaintiff's disability. That question was to
be decided on the balance of probabilities. Accordingly, since the judge had
held that on the balance of probabilities, given the plaintiff's condition
when he first arrived at the hospital, even correct diagnosis and treatment
would not have prevented

**328**

the disability from occurring, it followed that the plaintiff had failed on
the issue of causation. The issue of quantification considered by the judge
therefore never arose, because the question concerning the loss of a chance
could not arise where there had been a positive finding that before the duty
arose, the damage complained of had already been sustained or had become
inevitable.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that it was sufficient
if it was proved that the tortious act materially contributed to the damage or
materially contributed to the risk of damage. He relied on the judgements of
_Bonnington Castings Ltd. Vs. Wardlaw_ (31) and _Mc Ghee Vs. National Coal
Board_ (32). He submitted that although in _Wilsher Vs. Essex Health
Authority_ (33), it was held by the House of Lords, that Mc Ghee was wrongly
decided regarding the shifting of the burden of proof to the defendant, it is
still good law subject to the formal requirement that the burden of proof
remains with the plaintiff.  
  
If I may advert to the facts of those two cases, in Bonnington, (supra) the
plaintiff workman sued his employer for damages caused by negligence. He
worked for eight years for the employer in the dressing shop of a foundry,
producing steel castings and contacted the disease called pneumoconisis
through inhaling silica dust. The main source of this dust was from pneumatic
hammers, one of which the plaintiff operated. There was no known protection
against dust produced by this source. Part of the offending dust came from
operations conducted at swing grinders, as a result of ducts of the dust
extraction plant for those grinders not being kept free from obstruction by
the employer, as provided for by law. It was held that the proportion of
silica dust coming from the latter source and inhaled by the plaintiff, had
been shown on the evidence not to have been negligible and had contributed
materially for his contacting pneumoconisis. In Mc Ghee, the plaintiff workman
was employed by the defendant employer to clean out brick kilns and he
contacted the disease known as dermatitis. The plaintiff claimed damages on
the ground of

**329**

negligence on the part of the defendant. Medical evidence disclosed that
dermatitis had been caused by the working conditions in the brick kilns as the
workman was exposed to clouds of abrasive brick dust. The evidence was that as
the employer failed to provide the washing facilities, after work, the workman
had to exert himself further by bicycling home, with brick dust adhering to
his skin, which added materially to the risk of developing dermatitis. It was
held that the defendant was liable in damages as the breach of duty by it
materially contributed to the injury, notwithstanding that there were other
factors for which the defendant was not liable, which had contributed to the
injury. The principle laid down in both Bonnington and Mc Ghee was that if the
defendant's negligence is partly contributory to the injury caused to the
plaintiff, that part should materially contribute to the injury or the risk of
developing that injury, for the defendant to be liable. That is undoubtedly
good law, but the material contribution to the injury or the risk of injury
should nevertheless be proved on a balance of probabilities.  
  
It appears to me that neither the original Court nor the Court of Appeal gave
adequate consideration to the question of causation. In any event, the Court
of Appeal was clearly in error when it concluded that the defendant was
negligent in nondiagnosis of the BSG around 18th April. I have already given
my reasons for holding that the defendant was not negligent in her initial
non-diagnosis of the BSG. The negligence of the defendant in not ordering the
CT scan which would have led to the diagnosis of BSG, in all probability
occurred just prior to the 20th of May, when the choreiform movements, brisk
knee jerks and ankle clouds simultaneously manifested themselves. Neither
Court could have fallen to this error, if as observed by me earlier, a proper
evaluation of the evidence was made, as to what symptoms of the malady
manifested and when they did manifest.  
  
On the question of causation, the plaintiff relied on the testimony of Dr. Sri
Lal Dias, neurosurgeon, the important parts

**330**

of whose evidence on this crucial issue, I shall quote verbatim. It must be
borne in mind that he examined Suhani after the diagnosis of the BSG was made
and therefore at the time he gave evidence he had sufficient hindsight. Before
I deal with the evidence of Dr. Dias, I must refer to what the plaintiff chose
to set out in his Annex A sent along with his letter dated 17. 08. 1992 to His
Excellency, purpoting to be the view of Dr. Dias. "any form of interventional
therapy either surgery or radio therapy (conventional or stereo tactic) has
limited scope in any definitive treatment of the lesion, as the possible
benefits would be marginal and unlikely to provide any improvement of quality
of life".  
  
In examination-in-chief Dr. Dias testified as follows:-  
  
"Q. Why was surgery not done at that time?  
  
A. At the time the child was presented to me disability mostly in terms of
physical disability would certainly not have improved. Even if surgery had
been successful at that stage, she was extremely depressed and any attempt at
surgery would not have been an improvement at that time to the patient and in
view of that it was decided after discussion that any attempt of surgery would
not be carried out.  
  
Q. You decided that surgery should not be carried out at that time, because
even if surgery was successful there would not have been much improvement in
the condition of the child, but if surgery was contemplated at an earlier
point of time surgery may have been done with success?  
  
A. Yes.  
  
Q. If this child was presented to you at an earlier time when her condition
was better and the lesion less could surgery have been performed with a lesser
risk of success?  
  
A. Yes.

**331**

Q. If the child was presented to you earlier when she was in a better state
and the lesion less, if surgery was done you would have expected her to live
for a period of time thereafter?  
  
A. Yes."  
  
Some details of the quality of life the child would have led, like attending
school were elicited from Dr. Dias, on the hypothesis of the child being
operated on when her condition was 'better' and the lesion was 'less', and I
fail to see the force of the probative value such evidence would carry to
establish causation. Again the following question has been asked:  
  
"Q. If the child was presented to you earlier when the lesion was less and the
surgery was done" the child would have lived for a particular period of time?  
  
A. That is indeed true".  
  
This answer was again followed by the quality of life the child would have
led, if surgery was done under those imaginary circumstances and conditions.
Dr. Dias was rightly not cross examined on those matters, and the evidence if
any on causation, rested purely in the realm of conjecture. This is in all
probability, why the Court of Appeal observed 'If treated in time, the medical
evidence confirmed that there was a **possibility** of the child living for
some more time'.  
  
In view of this unsatisfactory evidence on causation, learned President's
Counsel for the appellant submitted, that the defendant's liability for
negligence should not be based on a mere possibility as distinct from
probability and that allegation has to be established upon a preponderance of
probability and not on a mere speculative theory. He is correct in that
submission. I hold that the plaintiff has failed to prove on a balance of
probabilities, that the negligence of the defendant just prior to 20th May
1992, caused or materially contributed to the death of Suhani on 19th June
1992, and thereby caused patrimonial loss to him.

**332**

**Conclusion  
**  
For the above reasons, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgements of both
Courts below and make order dismissing the plaintiff's action. The defendant
will be entitled to taxed costs of the action in all Courts.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/1.html_  

