[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1987](./) >> **[1987] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1987+10 or 1987+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1987+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Mowjood v. Pussadeniya and Another - SLR - 287, Vol 2 of 1987 [1987] LKSC
10; (1987) 2 Sri LR 287 (30 September 1987)

**

287

MOWJOOD** **  
v.** **  
PUSSADENIYA AND ANOTHER**  

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA,.C. J., ATUKORALE, J. AND SENEVIRATNE J.  
S.C. NOS. 57/86, 58/86, 59/86, 62/86, 72/86.  
C.A. NOS. 73/86,77/86,1,27/86, 81/86, and 48/86.  
D.C. MT. LAVINIA NOS. 1008/RE, 1286/RE, 1513/RE, 616/RE, 1368/RE.  
AUGUST 25, 26 and 27, 1987

_

Writs of certiorari, mandamus, prohibition-Abuse of power - Unreasonable use
of discretion-Right-Legitimate expectation.

Landlord and tenant-Premises whose standard rent does not exceed Rs.
100/-Ejectment on ground of reasonable requirement - Execution \- Notice -
S.347 CPC - Alternative accommodation - Notification by Commissioner of
National Housing - Requisites to which alternative accommodations offered by
Commissioner of National Housing should conform - Alternative accommodation on
hire - purchase - alternative accommodation not belonging to Commissioner of
National Housing - Interpretation - Section 22(1), 22(1) (bb), (22(1A), 22(1C,
22(1E) of Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 (amended by Act No. 10 of 1977 and Act No. 55
of 1980) - Restoration to possession of evicted tenant.

_

The Legislature has made it its special concern to protect tenants in
occupation of premises whose standard rent does not exceed Rs.100/-. Hence a
purposive interpretation of the statute to give effect to the intention of the
legislature should be adopted.

Where judgment for ejectment of the tenant had been entered in respect of
premises whose standard rent did not exceed Rs. 100/- on the ground that the
premises are reasonably required for occupation as a residence of the landlord
or a member of his family writ to issue only after the Commissioner of
National Housing has notified the Court that he is able to provide alternative
accommodation to the tenant, the alternative accommodation should, in view of
the social objective of the Act, have some relevance to the needs and
circumstances of the tenant so as not to render the offer of alternative
accommodation illusory and un meaningful the accommodation offered must be
habitable and appropriate to the tenant and the members of his family. It must
be roughly comparable with the existing accommodation in basic amenities,
rental and suited to the mode of life he is leading in the premises from which
he is to be rejected. The alternative accommodation must not be located in a
far off area where because of his religion, race or Caste etc., it is unsafe
for the tenant to dwell. The nature of the environment is a relevant
consideration.

The tenant cannot expect a better house than the one being occupied by him.

The Commissioner need not be the owner of the alternative accommodation but in
such case his statutory obligation is fulfilled only if he arranges the
alternative accommodation on terms finalised by him and upon his obligation
and responsibility to ensure the tenure of the accommodation.

**288**

The alternative accommodation should be on a tenancy basis only and not on a
rent purchase basis. It is not in keeping with the statute to oblige the
tenant to purchase the alternative accommodation. The alternative
accommodation provided must be for occupation in the character of a tenant.

In all the appeals the Commissioner of National Housing has provided
alternative accommodation on the basis of hire purchase with attendant risk of
cancellation of such agreements and forfeiture of instalments paid in case of
default. The Commissioner in doing so has not exercised his discretion
reasonably but in abuse of his powers. The notification is not in terms of the
Section. What he has offered is not in law alternative accommodation. Although
Section 22(1E) bars the Court from inquiring into the adequacy or the
suitability of the alternative accommodation it does not bar the Court from
inquiring or ascertaining whether what is offered is alternative accommodation
in terms of the law.

Hence certiorari must go but not mandamus. Mandamus will not issue where it
would be futile or not possible to obey.

Before execution was issued the Court should have issued notice on the tenant
judgment debtor as provided for by section 347, of the Civil Procedure Code.
In two cases the tenants have been already evicted. The Court has acted
without jurisdiction in issuing, these writs of execution and hence the
evicted tenants should be restored to possession.

**

Cases referred to:**

(1) _Associated Provincial Picture House Ltd v. Wednesbury Corporation_ [1947]
All ER 680 ; 1948 1 KB 223 _._  

(2) _Sirinivasa Thero v. Suddasi Thero_ (1960) 63 NLR 31.

**

APPEALS** , from the judgment of the Court of Appeal reported at [1987] 1 Sri
LR 63

_

Faiz Mustapha_ with _M. M. Saheed, M. S. M. Suhaid_ and _M. Withanachi_ for
appellants in S. C. 57/86, S. C. 58/86.  

_

Faiz Musthapha_ with _M. S. Yogendra, M. M. Saheed, M. S. M. Suhaid_ and _M.
Withanachi_ for appellant in S.C. 59/86.  

_

S. Mahenthiran_ for appellant in S.C. No. 62186.  

_

H. D. A. de Andrado_ for substituted defendant petitioner in S. C. No. 72/86:  

_

A. S. M. Perera_ for 1st respondent in S. C. 57/86 S. C. 57/86 and S. C. 62/86
and for 2nd respondent in S. C. 59/86:  

_

N. R. M. Daluwatte P. C._ with _Rohan Sahabandu for 2nd respondent in S. C.
57/86 Ikram Mohamed_ for 2nd respondent in S. C. 58/86. __  

_

H. L. de Silva P. C_. with, _P. A. D. Samarasekera P. C._ and _A. L.. M. de
Silva and Miss L. N. A. de Silva_ for 1st respondent S. C 59/86. __  

_

N. R. M. Daluwatte P. with Nimal Kuruwita Bandara_ for respondent in S. C.
72/86.

_

Cur. adv. vult_

**289**

September 30,1987.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J.**

Appeals S, C. Nos. 57/86, 58/86, 59/86, 62/86 and 72/86 were taken up together
for hearing as the question of law involved in the appeals was common to all.
These appeals, originated as applications for the issue of writs in the nature
of certiorari and/or mandamus and/or prohibition on the Commissioner of
National Housing (hereinafter referred to as Commissioner) to quash the
notifications made by him under section 22(1C) of the Rent Act No:7 of 1972 as
amended by Act No.10 of 1977 and 55 of 1980, to the District Court that he "is
able to provide alternative accommodation" for the tenant in each case. The
notifications were impugned on the ground that the premises, offered in each
case by the Commissioner, did not constitute "alternative accommodation"
within the meaning of the said term in section 22(1 C) of the Rent Act and
that the Commissioner had by misdirecting himself in law misconceived the
nature of alternative accommodation, and acted unreasonably in the Wednesbury
sense (Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation
(1).)

The Rent Restriction Ordinance No. 60 of 1942 and its successor the Rent
Restriction Act No. 29 of 1948 (Cap. 274) countenanced the right of the
landlord to institute proceedings for ejectment of his tenant from premises
governed by the Ordinance or Act, on the ground that the premnises were in the
opinion of the court, reasonably required for occupation as a residence for
the landlord or any member of the family of the landlord, or for the purpose
of the, trade or business of the landlord. The Amending Act No. 12 of 1966,
however took away this right of the landlord "to institute proceedings for
ejectment of the tenant on the ground that he reasonably required the said
premises for his occupation as a residence or for business, in the case of
premises, the standard rent of which for a month did not exceed one hundred
rupees." This amendment thus differentiated between premises, the standard
rent of which did not exceed one hundred rupees and premises the standard rent
of which exceeded that amount. Consequent to the amendment the landlord of
premises whose standard rent did not exceed one hundred rupees could no longer
institute an action for ejectment of the tenant on the ground that he or his
family reasonably required the premises for occupation as residence or for his
business. The distinction is referable to the imperatives of social justice
greater concern for the protection of

**290**

tenants of premises whose standard rent per month did not exceed one hundred
rupees than for the tenants of premises whose standard rent exceeded one
hundred rupees began to be exhibited on the assumption that tenants of the
former category were economically disadvantaged and would find it almost
impossible to, secure alternative accommodation if they were ejected. Provided
they fulfilled their contractual obligations and id not default in payment of
their rents or sublet the premises etc., they were secured in possession and
could not be evicted from the premises even though their landlords reasonably
required the premises for their own occupation. They thus acquired a status of
irremovability. This policy of preferential treatment to that category of
tenants was, in a certain measure, continued by the Rent Act No.7 of 1972. If
the tenancy commenced prior to the coming into operation of the Act viz: 1st
March 1972, the landlord could not institute action for ejectment of the
tenant of that class on the ground of his reasonable requirement for
occupation as a residence or for business. Section 22(1) of the Rent, Act
which provided for the ejectment of the tenant of premises whose standard rent
did not exceed one hundred rupees, was applicable only to cases where the
tenancy commenced on or after the date of commencement of the Act. This legal
position continued until September 1977 when the new Government by Act No.10
of 1977 amended section 22 of the Rent Act, by adding the following provisions

**

Section 22(1)

**

Notwithstanding anything in any other law, no action or proceedings for the
ejectment of the tenant of any premises the standard rent....of which for a
month does not exceed one, hundred rupees, shall be instituted in or
entertained by any court, unless where

**

Section 22(1) (bb)

**

Such premises, being premises which have been let to the tenant prior to the
date of commencement of this Act are in the opinion of he court, resonably
required for occupation as a residence for the landlord or any member of the
family of the landlord;

**

Section 22(1A)

**

Notwithstanding anything in section (1), the landlord of any premises referred
to in paragraph (bb) of that subsection shall not be entitled to institute,
any action or proceedings for the ejectment

**291**

of the tenant of such premises on the ground that such premises are required
for occupation as a residence for himself or any member of his family, if such
landlord is the owner of ore than one residential premises and unless such
landlord has caused notice of such action or proceedings to be served on the
Commissioner of National Housing

**

Section 22(1B).....................

Section 22(1C)

**

Where a decree for the ejectment of the tenant of any premises referred to in
paragraph (bb) of subsection (1) is entered by any court on the ground that
such premises are reasonably required for occupation as a residence for the
landlord or any member of the family of such landlord, no writ in execution of
such decree shall be issued by such court until after the Commissioner of
National Housing has notified to such court that he is able to provide
alternative accommodation for such tenant.

**

Section 22(1 D) ......... ........

**

This section was further amended by Act No. 55 of 1980 by the addition of the
following sub-section numbered as S. 22(1 E):-

"In any proceeding under sub-section (1C the court shall not inquire into the
adequacy or suitability of the alternative accommodation offered by the
Commissioner of National Housing."

It is against the above backdrop of legislative history that one has to view
the question that arises for determination in these appeals.

Except in Appeal No. 58/86 where judgment was given by the court after a
contest in favour of the landlord-in all the other appeals-judgment was
entered in favour of the landlord of consent. In all cases order was made that
writ of execution should not issue until the Commissioner notified the court
in terms of section 22(1C) that alternative accommodation had been found for
the tenant. In all the cases the Commissioner has notified the court and the
tenant that alternate accommodation has been found. It is these notifications,
the validity of which is being called in question.

**292**

The alternative accommodation that has been fond by the Commissioner in each
of the cases is a house belonging to the National Housing Development
Authority (hereinafter referred to as the Authority) In every case the
landlord had deposited large sums of money with the Authority in order to,
serve premises for the tenant. The Authority has reserved premises at the
Ranpokunawatte Housing Scheme in Nittambuwa upon a deposit of Rs.20,000 being
made by the landlord and at the Mattegoda Housing Scheme upon a deposit of
Rs.32,000 being made by the landlord. The Authority has informed the
Commissioner, with copies to the landlord and tenant, of the reservation so
made. The Commissioner had thereupon requested the appellants (tenants) in
writing to attend and finalise matters with the Authority and also notified
the court that he is able to provide "alternative accommodation" in the shape
of the house served by the Authority at the Mattegoda Housing
Scheme/Rbnpokunawatta Housing Scheme to the tenants.

The appellants then applied to the Court of Appeal for, a writ of certiorari
to quash the, aforesaid notification made by the Commissioner. The Court of
Appeal has refused their application. The appellants have preferred these
appeals to this Court against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

The appellants object to the notification in issue on the following grounds:

(a) that the Commissioner of National Housing is not offering a house from his
housing stock. The alternative accommodation is not offered by him, but by,
the National Housing Development Authority who is an independent statutory
authority, and not a delegate or agent of the Commissioner; the premises
belong to the Authority ex facie, the Commissioner is not able to provide
alternative accommodation;

(b) that what has been offered has been offered not on a contractual tenancy
basis, but upon a rent-purchase agreement. The alternative accommodation
should be on a rental basis and not on a Hire Purchase basis, attended with
the risk of cancellation of the agreement and forfeiture of all instalments
paid in default of regular payment of any instalment;

**293**

(c) that the offer by the National Housing Development Authority is contingent
and conditional. Unless the tenant entered into the, hire-purchase agreement
the alternative accommodation will not be available to him.

(d) while the standard rent for the premises from which the appellants are to
be ejected does not exceed one hundred rupees, the monthly instalments of the
rent purchase scheme of the National Housing Development Authority is very
much in

(e) the alternative accommodation that is offered does not take account of
the... circumstances of the tenant and is not appropriate accommodation to the
tenant. Accommodation, miles from the present location, in areas which are not
safe for the defendants to reside does not constitute alternative
accommodation.

(f) the Commissioner's determination that the accommodation, referred to in
his notification, constituted alternative accommodation" in terms of section
22(1 C) was unreasonable, arbitrary and capricious.

There is nothing in section 22(1C) which defines "alternative accommodation".
There is nothing in that section which relate to the quality or suitability of
the accommodation. Counsel for the landlord submitted that the court should
not add any qualification such as 'suitable' or 'adequate' to the words
'alternative accommodation'. According to his submission, so long as there is
a roof over the head of the tenant and his family, and no doubt four walls to
support that roof, it does not matter how unsuitable that accommodation is the
Commissioner of National Housing discharges his duty, under section 22(1C) by
making available by himself or by a third party accommodation, no matter what
the terms are, it would be an alternative accommodation to the tenant if what
is offered is accommodation even in a far off area with which the tenant has
no connection, beggars cannot be choosers the requirements and circumstances
of the tenant need not be given any consideration in determining the
appropriateness of the alternative accommodation that was the tenor of his
contention.

**294**

To treat the words 'alternative accommodation' as being totally unqualified
does not, in my view give effect to the intention of the legislature. The
solicitude shown by Parliament to tenants of premises whose standard rent does
not exceed one hundred rupees is manifest. In the case of a tenant of premises
whose standard rent exceeds one hundred rupees, the landlord may institute
action for the ejectment of the tenant on the ground of his reasonable
requirement and on obtaining a decree for ejectment can have him evicted and
thrown on the streets, regardless of whether any alternative accommodation is
available to him to shift to or not. Parliament, in the case of tenants of
premises of the other category has taken them under its protective wings, may
be in view of their economic circumstances and enjoined that such tenants
should not be rendered homeless, for no fault of theirs but should be offered
shelter by making available to them alternative accommodation before writ of
execution is issued.

In view of this social objective, the needs and circumstances of the tenant
ought to have some relevance if the offer of alternative accommodation is to
be meaningful and not be illusory. The accommodation offered to him must, be
habitable and appropriate to him and the members of his family. It must be
appropriate for a family of his, size and must have the elementary, amenities
enjoyed by him in the house occupied by him. It must not be located in a far
off area with which he has no local connection, an area where, because of his
religion, race or caste etc., it is unsafe for him to dwell. The nature of the
environment where the proposed accommodation is located is a relevant
consideration in determining whether the new accommodation can fairly be
described as "alternative". The alternative accommodation must be roughly
comparable with the existing accommodation in the matter of basic amenities,
rental, and appropriateness so that the tenant could continue to lead the mode
of life which he had led in the premises from which he is to be ejected. The
tenant however should not expect a better dwelling house than that from which
he is to be ejected. The facts disclosed show that the Commissioner had- not
addressed his mind to these relevant considerations in deciding on the
alternative accommodation that he was offering. He has exercised his power
unreasonably.

It was contended by counsel for the appellants that what the Commissioner has
offered is not a house from his stock, but a house belonging to the National
Housing Development Authority which is an

**295**

independent statutory Authority. It was submitted that the Commissioner has
himself not provided alternative accommodation and that hence his notification
does not satisfy the requirement of law that he should be able to provide
alternative accommodation to the tenant (section 22(1,C). I do not agree with
this submission that the Commissioner should be the owner of the proposed
alternative accommodation.

The Commissioner can provide alternative accommodation not only when he is the
proprietor of same, but also when he is able to arrange such accommodation
from some other source, the obligation and responsibility for making such
arrangement and warranting the tenure of the accommodation to the tenant
however resting with him. The Commissioner does not discharge his statutory
obligation by putting the tenant and the other party who owns such
accommodation in touch with each other and requesting the tenant to negotiate
with the other party the terms on which accommodation will be available to
him. It is only after he had finalised the terms and got the other party bound
to provide the accommodation for the tenant that the Commissioner can
truthfully notify that he, is able to provide alternative accommodation to the
tenant.

I agree with counsel for the appellants that section 22(1C) of the Rent Act
provides for the alternative accommodation to the tenant on a tenancy basis
only and not on a rent-purchase basis. This section has to be construed in the
background of the special concern shown by Parliament to tenants of premises
whose standard rent does not exceed one hundred rupees. Parliament was alive
to the fact that current market conditions do riot conduce to such tenants
finding alternative accommodation easily and that they would be rendered
homeless if ejected from the premises they were occupying. This state of
affairs prompted legitimate concern on the part of the State to provide
alternative accommodation to that class of tenants who are generally
impecunious; this concern cannot be satisfied by the Commissioner informing
the tenants that they could have alternative accommodation if they are ready
and willing to purchase such accommodation. This special concern which is
reflected in section 22(1C) would be rendered illusory, if the alternative
accommodation ensured by the State can be had only on such onerous terms.
Having regard to the social purpose of the legislation; a purposive approach
has to be adopted in construing section 22(1C). In my view the words provide
alternative accommodation for such tenant "must be liberally

**296**

construed to mean 'alternative accommodation for such tenant in the character
of tenant'. To interpret these words literally to mean 'alternative
accommodation' for such tenant as owner or quasi-owner will be to defeat the
obvious intention of the legislature and to produce wholly unreasonable
results. In such circumstances it is legitimate to adopt a construction which
will accord with the intention of Parliament, even at the cost of restricting
the wide scope which the words of the statute may lend themselves to
otherwise. In all these appeals what the Commissioner, has offered are
premises belonging to the National Housing Development Authority on terms of
Hire Purchase and not on tenancy basis. True the landlords have deposited
substantial sums with the National Housing. Development Authority to the
credit of the appellants, as initial payments. But that circumstance cannot
constrain the tenants to enter into Hire Purchase Agreements which involve
the-tenants paying as monthly instalments a much higher amount than the
monthly rental which they were paying.

A Hire Purchase Agreement is always attended with the risk of cancellation of
the agreement and forfeiture of the instalments paid on default of regular
payment of any instalment. Further the Agreement, will result in the tenant
being compelled to invest -his money: which he can ill afford in the
acquisition of premises in an area, not of his choice.

The alternative accommodation stipulated by section 22(1 C) of the Rent Act is
accommodation as tenant and not in any other capacity. The accommodation
offered on a Hire Purchase Agreement; is not the alternative accommodation
provided for by section 22(1C). In these cases the appellants have not been
offered alternative accommodation in terms of section 22(1C) by the
Commissioner. Hence his notifications were not in terms of the section and are
inoperative to authorise the District court to issue writ of execution of the
decree for ejectment of the tenants" In my view principles of fairness and
natural justice require the District' Court, before it issues writ of
execution, following on a notification purported to be made by the
Commissioner in terms of section 22(1C) of the Rent Act, which has the
potentiality of affecting the plaintiff and the defendant, to hear them on the
question whether the accommodation specified in the Commissioner's
notification is, in the circumstances of the case, alternative accommodation
as contemplated by that section. Sub-section 22(1E) contemplates such
procedure. The court should riot allow writ of execution automatically on
receipt of a notification

**297**

from the Commissioner. The court gets jurisdiction to issue writ of execution,
only after being satisfied that what is offered by the Commissioner is
alternative accommodation, meaningful to the particular tenant in the case
meaningful does not mean that it should be adequate or suitable to the tenant.
In fact the court. is prohibited by section 22(1E) from inquiring in any
proceeding under subsection (1C) into the adequacy or suitability of the
alternative accommodation offered by the Commissioner This prohibition does
not however render irrelevant the determination of the question whether what
is offered is basically alternative accommodation to the tenant or not, the
circumstances of the tenant, as stated earlier;

The notification of the Commissioner is clearly susceptible to judicial review
as it affects the legal rights of the appellants to continue in the occupation
of the premises until evicted by writ of execution on a proper notification by
the Commissioner. Further the appellants have a legitimate expectation that
they would not be evicted from their present premises except on a writ of
execution allowed by court after the issue by the Commissioner of a proper
notification in terms of section 22(1C). This right and expectation provide
them with sufficient interest to challenge the legality and propriety of the
notification made by the Commissioner. The ground on which the court reviews
the exercise of administrative discretion by public officers is abuse, of
power. The Commissioner has in these cases abused the power vested in him my
misconstruing the conditions and limits imposed on him by, section 22(,1 C) of
the Rent Act and by exercising his discretion unreasonably. His notification
is vitiated by the fact that what, he purported to offer as alternative
accommodation to the tenants was, not, in law alternative accommodation in
terms of that section. Counsel for the respondents referred to the prohibition
contained in section 22(1E) and submitted that the court cannot inquire into
the adequacy or the suitability of the alternative accommodation offered by
the Commissioner. But that section does not bar the court from inquiring or
ascertaining whether what is offered is "alternative accommodation" in terms
of the law, Since the notification made by the Commissioner is bad in law, the
District Court in each of these appeals, would have no jurisdiction to issue
writ of execution in terms of section 22(1 C) of the Rent Act.

**298**

I allow the application of the appellants for the issue of writs in the nature
of Writs of Certiorari and quash the notification made by the Commissioner of
National Housing (the 2nd respondent) in each case Under section 22(1C) of the
Rent Act.

The Appellants are not entitled to a Writ of Mandamus directing the
Commissioner to provide alternative accommodation in terms of section 22(1C).
A Mandamus will not issue when it would be futile in its result and where
there is no practical possibility of enforcing obedience to the order. Further
it may not be possible for the Commissioner to comply with the order.

I allow the appeals and set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal. In the
circumstances, parties will bear their own costs.

In appeal No. 62/86, C.A. Appln. 81/86, this court was informed that, acting
on the impugned notification, the District Court has issued writ of execution
of the Decree and the appellant had been ejected from the premises in suit.
Though the application for issue of writ was made after one year of the date
of the decree, the District Court," in breach of the mandatory provisions of
section 347 of the Civil Procedure Code requiring, notice of the application
for execution to be served on the judgment debtor and he be heard allowed
exparte the application for execution and the appellant was ejected. The
court, in issuing writ, acted without jurisdiction in breach of section 22(1C)
of the Rent Act and of section 347 of the, Civil Procedure Code. Inasmuch as
the court acted without jurisdiction in issuing the writ, the appellant who
was dispossessed of the premises in suit in consequence of the execution of
the writ is entitled to be restored to possession (Srinivasa Thero v. Suddasi
Thero, (2). Hence I direct the District Court to restore the appellant to
vacant possession of the premises in suit viz: No.5, Vaverset Place, Colombo.
6.

It has been brought to our notice that the term "alternate accommodation" is
used in section 22(1 C) of the Rent Act. In my view the word "alternative" has
been erroneously used for 'alternative'. The word 'alternative' should be
substituted for alternate in that section.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**SENEVIRATNE, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.  
  
Certiorari to go.  
  
Parties evicted to be restored to possession_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/10.html_  

