[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1986](./) >> **[1986] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1986+10 or 1986+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1986+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Manikkavasagar v. Kandasamy and Others - SLR - 8, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986]
LKSC 10; (1986) 2 Sri LR 8 (13 March 1986)

**

8

MANIKKAVASAGAR  
v.  
KANDASAMY AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 1 & 2/85-C.A. 517/78.  
D.C. COLOMBO-890/PO.  
JANUARY 29, 1986 AND FEBRUARY 6, 1986.

_

Thediathetam-Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance (Jaffna) Ordinance No. 11 of
1917 as amended by Ordinance No. 58 of 1947 (ss. 19 and 20)-Separate estate-
Burden of proof-Ownership and devolution of thediathetam-Succession.

_

Only property acquired by a spouse during the subsistence of the marriage for
valuable consideration, such consideration not forming or representing any
part of the separate estate of that spouse, and profits arising during the
subsistence of the marriage from the separate estate of that spouse should be
categorised as thediathetam. The separate property of a spouse is that which
he or she had brought to the marriage or acquired during the marriage by
conversion, inheritance or donation made to him or her. Property purchased out
of moneys of the separate estate of the spouse (mudusom or dowry) would
continue to be part of suchseparate estate.

The burden of proving that property acquired during wedlock is thediathetam is
on the party asserting it. Such party must prove that the consideration for
the acquisition did not form any part of the separate estate of the acquiring
spouse.

Money paid on a life insurance policy on death is not thediathetam because the
marriage had ceased to exist when the right to the money arose. The money has
to be paid in terms of the policy to the heirs of the insured or the nominee
of the insured, as the case may be.

Neither under Thesawalamai nor under the' Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance
Ordinance No. 11 of 1911, as amended by Ordinance No. 58 of 1947, is the
surviving spouse an heir of the deceased spouse. However, the amending
Ordinance No. 58 of 1947 provides statutorily that half of the undisposed
thediathetam belonging to the deceased spouse will devolve on the surviving
spouse.

Section 20 of the Jaffna Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance of 1911,
which sets out the incidents of thediathetam, was declaratory of the Law of
Thesawalamai. Since that section has been repealed by amending Ordinance No.
58 of 1947, one has to look for the incidents of 'thediathetam' to the
Thesawalamai.

It is basic to the concept of "thediathetam" that both spouses are equally
entitled to it from the moment of the acquisition. An undivided half of the
"thediathetam" vests automatically by operation of law on the non-acquiring
spouse from the moment of acquisition. Under no circumstances can a husband
donate the wife's half share of the

**9**

"thediathetam". However the half share of thediathetam to which a wife is
entitled is subject to the marital power of the husband to sell or mortgage it
for a consideration, such power being referable to his status as manager or
sole or irremovable attorney of the wife. On the death intestate of either
spouse one half of the "thediathetam", which belonged to the surviving spouse
and which had not been disposed of remains the property of the survivor and
the other half belonging to the deceased spouse devolves on the heirs of the
deceased spouse. In terms of section 20 of the amending Ordinance No. 58 of
1947 half of this half will in the event of the deceased spouse dying
intestate devolve on the surviving spouse so that the surviving spouse will
then become entitled to 3/4th share of the thediathetam.

Observations of Gratian, J. in Kumaraswamy v. Subramaniam 56 N.L.R. 44 at 47
dissented from.

**

Cases referred to:

**_

(1) Jivaratnam v. Murukesu-(1815) 1 N. L. R. 251.

(2) Avitchy Chettiar v. Rasamma-(1933) 35 N.L.R. 313.

(3) Nalliah v. Ponnammah-(1920) 22 N.L.R. 198.

(4) Akilandanayaki v. Sothinagaratnam-f 1952) 53 N.L.R. 385, 397 (DB).

(5) Ponnammah v. Kanagasuriyam-(1916) 19 N.L.R. 257.

(6) Poothuthamby v. Valupillai-2 Times 95

(7) Shanmugalingam v. Amirthalingam-41 C.L.W. 59.

(8) Parasathy Ammah v. Setupulle-(1872) 3 N.L.R.271.

(9) Seelachchy v. Visuvanathan Chetty-(1922) 23 N.L.R. 97, 121, 122.

(10) Sampasivam v. Manikkam-(1921) 23 N.L.R. 257.

(11) Ponnachchy v. Vallipuram-(1923) 25 N. L. R. 151.

(12) lya Mattayer v. Kanapathipillai-(1928) 29 N.L.R. 302.

(13) Seenivasagam v. Vaithylingam-(1944) 45 N.L.R. 409.

(14) Kumaraswamy v. Subramaniam-(1954) 56 N.L.R. 44, 47.

(15) Sangarapillai v. Devaraja Mudafiyar-(1936) 38 N. L. R. 1 (F. B).

(16) Attorney-General v. Hatford-12 Q.B.D. 224.

(17) Murugesu v. Kasinather-(1923) 25 N. L. R. 201.

(18) Subramaniam v. Kadirgamam-(1969) 72 N. L. R. 284 PC.

(19) Murugiah v. Jainudeen-(1954) 56 N.L.R. 176, 181 PC.

(20) Arunasalam v. Ayadurai-(1967) 70 N.L.R. 165.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

R. Manickavasagar with N. Mahendran for petitioner-appellant in S.C. 1/85 and
respondent-respondent in S.C. 2/85.

A. Mahendrarajah, P.C. with S. Mahenthiran for respondent-appellant in S.C.
2/85 and respondents-respondents in S.C. 1/85.

_

**10**

March 13, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C. J.

**

One Ramanathan Thuraiappah died on 29.6.1973, intestate and issueless and
leaving his widow, the petitioner-appellant in S.C. Appeal No. 1/85
(hereinafter referred to as petitioner). The 1-6th respondents-appellants in
S.C. appeal 2/85 (hereinafter referred to as respondents), are his sisters and
brothers and his deceased brother's two children. All parties in this case are
persons governed by the Thesavalamai.

The question that arises for determination in this appeal is the mode of
devolution of the estate of the deceased in terms of the Matrimonial Rights &
Inheritance Ordinance (Jaffna) No. 1 of 1911, as amended by Ordinance No. 58
of 1957.

The petitioner applied for and was granted Letters of Administration.
According to the petition filed the estate of the deceased consisted of the
following movable and immovable properties:

(1) An allotment of land at Clifford Place, valued at Rs. 19,000.00.

(2) A motor car valued at Rs. 10,000.00.

(3) A savings deposit in the Bank in a sum of Rs. 10,572.87.

(4) A life insurance policy of Rs. 10,000.00.

(5) A current account in the bank in a sum of Rs. 227.24.

The petitioner married the deceased on 21.1.1961. She claimed that the entire
estate of her husband was thediathetam or acquired property, and that she was
entitled to 3/4th share of the same. She conceded the balance 1 /4th to the
respondents, who are the intestate heirs of her deceased husband. The
respondents on the other hand claimed that the entirety of the deceased's
property was "separate property" of the deceased and hence the entirety of it
devolved on the respondent-appellants as intestate heirs and that no portion
of the property devolved on the petitioner-appellant. After inquiry the
District Judge held that all the assets disclosed in the petition were 'the
diathetam' and that the petitioner was entitled to 3/4th share of the same
whilst the respondents were entitled to the balance 1 /4th share. From this
order the respondents appealed to the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal
held that the District Judge was in error in holding that the petitioner was
entitled to 3/4th share of the estate of

**11**

the deceased and that the respondents only to a 1 /4th share of it. The Court
of Appeal concluded that 1/2 share of the estate of the deceased devolved on
the respondents. From the judgment of the Court of Appeal both petitioner and
the respondents have appealed to this court and both their appeals were heard
together.

At the hearing of the appeal both in this court and in the Court of Appeal the
respondents did not contest that the motor car, the savings deposit and the
money in the current account could be considered thediathetam property, but
maintained that the Clifford Place property and the money payable on the
Insurance Policy formed the deceased's separate property which according to
them, devolved on them without any co-sharing with the petitioner. Counsel for
the respondents also contended that in any event the widow was entitled to
only a 1/2 share of the thediathetam property and not to 3/4 share as held by
the District Judge.

The first question that arises for consideration is whether the Clifford Place
property and the proceeds of insurance are the diathetam property.
Thediathetam has been defined differently from time to time.

Under the old Thesawalamai property acquired during the marriage was
denominated thediathetam or acquired property. Thediathetam under the
Thesawalamai consisted of the profits arising from the mudusam property of the
husband and from the dowry of the wife and all properties acquired by either
of the spouses by their earnings during marriage. It was only profits derived
from the property of the spouses or property acquired by the earnings of
either spouse during marriage that could come within the concept of
thediathetam. The Thesawalamai restricts thediathetam to what was acquired
during wedlock. But property acquired subsequent to the marriage by one of the
spouses and paid for with money which formed part of his or her separate
estate, was regarded as a property of the spouse who purchased it and did not
constitute thediathetam property. The separate property of the spouse was that
which he or she had brought to the marriage or acquired during the marriage by
inheritance or donation made to him or her. If properties were purchased out
of moneys inherited by the husband, they did not form thediathetam property.
It was held in Jivaratnam v.. Murukesu (1) that money inherited by a husband
and invested by him in land did not form part of

**12**

thediathetam. Thus property acquired by a spouse out of funds which formed
part of his or her separate estate retained the character of the money
invested and was not regarded as thediathetam.

Thesawalamai also obligated the sons to bring into the common estate (and
there to let remain) all that they have gained or earned during the whole time
of their bachelorship; so that all the earnings that the sons had made prior
to their marriage were not regarded as their separate property but were
regarded as part of the thediathetam of their parents. It is only earnings or
profits made by them after marriage that would become their thediathetam
property -Thesawalamai 1.1.7.

Section 19 of the Matrimonial Rights & Inheritance (Jaffna)  ;, Ordinance No.
1 1 of 1911, defined thediathetam of any husband or wife as follows:

Section 19-

"The following property may be known as thediathetam of any husband or wife-

(a) Property acquired for valuable consideration by either husband or wife
during the subsistence of marriage,

(b) Profits arising during the subsistence of marriage from the property of
any husband or wife;"

The above section 19 defined what property should constitute thediathetam of
each spouse. This section included, in the category of thediathetam property
which was not designated thediathetam under the law of Thesawalamai.

In Avitchy Chettiar v. Rasamma (2) a Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court
ruled that in terms of ,the definition of thediathetam, property acquired by a
wife during the subsistence of the marriage out of money which formed part of
her dowry or separate estate is thediathetam property.

Thus while under the law as it obtained prior to the enactment of the
Ordinance No. 1 of 1911, property acquired during subsistence of such marriage
by one of the spouses and paid for with money which formed part of his or her
separate estate was regarded as property of the spouse who purchased it and
did not become thediathetam property, in view of the construction placed on
the statutory definition

**13**

set out in section 19 of Ordinance No. 1 of 1911 by the Supreme Court in
Avitchy Chettiar's case (supra), the law after the enactment was declared to
be that in the case of parties married subsequent to the coming into operation
of Ordinance No. 1 of 1911, even though the land is purchased in the name of
the wife with her dowry money, yet as the land had been acquired for valuable
consideration during the subsistence of the marriage, it would be stamped as
thediathetam of the spouse, common to both parties. This view of the law was
alien to the concept of thediathetam as conceived by the customary law of the
Tamils and there was agitation for the restoration of the old concept of the
law, as expounded by Sampayo, J. in Nalliah v. Ponnammah (3).

In this case Sampayo, J. stated that-

"It is well settled, I think that if the money by which acquisitions are made
during marriage can be earmarked or traced back to the mudusom of the husband
or the wife, the acquisition should not be considered part of the common
property, but would partake of the nature of the source from which they
sprang...... I think, therefore, that the money which the husband had saved
out of his earnings before his marriage belonged to him for his separate
estate, whether it is strictly called mudusom or not. The circumstance that it
was invested during marriage does not change its character. Even if he
invested it in the purchase of property during marriage and not on mere loans
I think, in view of the principle of the decision on this point, the property
would receive the character of the money invested and would not be regarded as
thediathetam." (pp. 198 and 204).

The amending Ordinance No. 58 of 1947 was enacted to restore the old concept
of thediathetam. The new definition of thediathetam

"restores for the future the more traditional conception of thediathetam,
which had unmistakably, even though carelessly, been altered by legislative
intervention In 1911." Akilanadanayaki v. Sothinagaratnam (4)-per Gratiaen, J.

The new section brought the concept of thediathetam in line with Sampayo's
exposition.

Section 5 of the Matrimonial Rights & Inheritance Amending Ordinance No. 58 of
1947, repealed section 19 of the principal ordinance and substituted the
following definition of thediathetam:

**14**

"No property other than the following shall be deemed to be thediathetam of a
spouse

(a) Property acquired by that spouse during the subsistence of the marriage
for valuable consideration, such consideration not forming or representing any
part of the separate estate of that spouse;

(b) Profits arising during the subsistence of the marriage from the separate
estate of that spouse."

See the Matrimonial Rights & Inheritance (Jaffna) Ordinance Chap. 58 of Vol. 3
of the Legislative Enactments.

The new section 19 involved an amendment of the concept of "separate estate"
of husband or wife as defined in sections 6 and 7 of the Matrimonial Rights
&\- Inheritance (Jaffna) Ordinance No. 1 of 1911. They were also amended by
Ordinance No. 58 of 1947. The amended sections read as follows:

Section 6

"All movable or immovable property to which any woman married after the
commencement of this Ordinance may be entitled at the time of her marriage, of
which she may during the subsistence of the marriage acquire or become
entitled to by way of gift or inheritance or by conversion of any property to
which she may have been so entitled or which she may so acquire or become
entitled to,

**15**

shall, subject and without prejudice to the trusts of any Will or settlement
affecting the same, belong to the woman for her separate estate, and shall not
be liable for the debts or engagements of her husband, unless incurred, for,
or in respect of the cultivation, upkeep, repairs, management, or improvement
of such property or. for or in regard to any charges, rates or taxes imposed
by law in respect thereof.....""

Section 7

"All movable or immovable property to which any husband married after the
commencement of this ordinance may be entitled at the time of his marriage,
or, which he may during the subsistence of the marriage acquire or become
entitled to by way of gift or inheritance or by conversion of any property to
which he may have been so entitled or which, he may so acquire or become
entitled to, shall, subject and without prejudice to the trusts or any MR or
settlement affecting the same, belong to the husband for his separate
estate.....'"

In the present case the land at Clifford Place was purchased by the deceased
on Deed of Transfer No. 1290 of 11th June 1973 (P3), for a sum of Rs. 28,875.
The deed says that the money was paid by the deceased Thuraiappah and that the
property was conveyed to him. In the attestation clause the notary certifies
that the consideration was paid in cash in his presence by the purchaser to
the vendor. Apart from the production of the Deed of Transfer (P3) no evidence
has been led by the petitioner or by the respondents as to how the
consideration came to be provided: whether the consideration came from the
separate estate of the deceased or from savings after his marriage. The
petitioner was the best person who could have testified to the source of the
consideration. Be that as it may, the question arises on whom the burden of
proof lies to establish that this land was or was not the thediathetam of the
deceased. The petitioner contended successfully in the lower courts that the
burden of proof rested on the respondents to prove that the consideration
formed or represented part of the separate estate of the deceased and that it
was not thediathetam. The respondents, on the other hand contend that the
burden lies on the petitioner to establish that the consideration for the
purchase of the land did not form or represent any part of the separate estate
of the deceased. The Court of Appeal states in its judgment that

"the petitioner-respondent has proved by the production of deed No. 1290 dated
10.3.73 that the Clifford Place property was purchased for valuable
consideration and that by the production of the marriage certificate of the
deceased and death certificate of the deceased, that this acquisition was
during the subsistence of their marriage. The respondents have not adduced any
evidence that the consideration for this purchase came from the separate
estate of the deceased. Further in the case of Ponnammah v. Kanagasuriyam (5)
it has been held that all property purchased during subsistence of the
marriage is presumed to be acquired property until the contrary is proved.
Therefore I hold that the Clifford Place property was thediathetam property.

I do not agree with this process of reasoning. The Court of Appeal was in
error in applying the ruling re burden of proof in Ponnammah v. Kanagasuriyam
(supra) to the facts of the present case. That was a

**16**

case decided under the original Thesawalamai An analysis of the relevant
sections of Thesawalamai tends to show that property purchased after the date
of marriage could be presumed to be acquired property until the contrary is
proved. This presumption stems from the provision in the Thesawalamai (Art I,
Section 1, Clause 7), that a son before marriage and during the lifetime of
the parents could not hold for himself any property gained or earned during
the time of his bachelorhood; it formed part of the common estate of his
parents So that at the time of marriage a husband would commence married life
only with mudusom as his separate property without being entitled to the
moneys earned by him prior to the marriage Hence apart from what could be
identified as such separate property, all that is acquired during the pendency
of the marriage could legitimately be presumed to have been bought out of the
profits of his separate property or earnings after marriage (In that era there
was no question of a woman earning prior to her marriage). The Jaffna
Matrimonial Rights & Inheritance Ordinance has by its definition of
thediathetam impliedly abrogated that provision of Thesawalamai, viz Part I,
Section 1 , Clause 7, which was the basis for such presumption The son's
earnings during his bachelorhood formed no more his parents' thediathetam but
remained his separate property. Sections 6 & 7 of the Ordinance include in the
concept of separate property

"all movable and immovable property to which any husband or woman married
after the commencement of this ordinance may be entitled at the time of his or
her marriage."

So that under the present. law it is possible for a spouse to enter on his/her
married life while being entitled to movable or immovable property by way of
mudusom/dowry and his/her earnings prior to marriage. In Nalliah v. Ponnammah
(supra) it was held that money which a husband had saved out of his earnings
before his marriage belonged to him for his separate estate.

According to the definition of thediathetam, in the new section 19, only such
property which has been established to have been acquired by the deceased
spouse during the subsistence of the marriage for valuable consideration, such
consideration not forming or representing any part of the separate estate of
the spouse, can be deemed to be thediathetam. Any person who claims any
property to be thediathetam has to establish that the property was acquired
for the kind of consideration which would qualify it to be categorised as

**17**

thediathetam property-such consideration not forming or representing any part
of the separate estate of that spouse-the negative allegation forms an
essential part of the petitioner's case. Hence the burden of proving that the
land is thediathetam rested on the petitioner who asserts it to be so. She had
to prove as part of the probanda that the consideration did not form or
represent any part of the separate estate of the deceased spouse who acquired
it in his name.

Section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance provides that

"whoever desires any court to give judgment as to any legal right dependant on
the existence of facts which he asserts, must prove that those facts exist."

In my view the Court of Appeal has misdirected itself in holding that the
burden of establishing that the land at Clifford Place, was not the
thediathetam of the deceased rested on the respondents. It was the petitioner
who asserted that the said land was thediathetam of the deceased. And it was
for her, in terms of section 101 of the Evidence Ordinance, to establish all
the elements of thediathetam to succeed in her claim. The petitioner has
failed to show that the land at Clifford Place was thediathetam property.
Hence in my view, it has to be held that it was part of the separate estate of
the deceased and as such the petitioner will not be entitled to any share
therein. The respondents inherit the entire land in accordance with the rules
of inheritance in part III of the Ordinance.

The second point to be, decided is whether the proceeds of insurance amounting
to Rs. 10,000 was thediathetam property or separate property of the deceased.
The policy has not been produced, but it has been described as a Life
Insurance Policy and hence the money on the policy would have become payable
either on maturity or on surrender or on the death of the insured. In this
case, as the money was paid into the estate of the deceased, it would appear
that the money did not become payable during the lifetime of the deceased. The
money on the Insurance Policy was not acquired by the deceased during the
subsistence of the marriage with the petitioner as the marriage had ceased to
exist with the death of the insured and hence it could not be deemed to be
thediathetam

The Court of Appeal has held that the premium paid on the insurance comprises
valuable consideration and therefore the money payable under the policy became
property acquired for valuable

**18**

consideration. I cannot agree. Life Insurance is a contract by which the
insurer agrees to pay a given amount upon the death of the person whose life
is insured or upon the maturity of the policy in consideration of the payment
of certain sums called premia. In terms of this contract a sum of Rs. 10,000
became payable to the deceased's estate under the insurance policy. Since it
had not become payable during the lifetime of the deceased but became payable
on the event of the death of the insured, it was not acquired by the deceased
during his lifetime. I hold that the sum of Rs. 10,000 representing the
proceeds of the life insurance was not thediathetam of the deceased.

I do not agree with the view of the law expressed in Ponnammah v.
Kanagasuriyam (supra) and Poothuthamby v. Valupillai (6) that the premium paid
on insurance policies should be considered thediathetam. Since insurance is a
matter of contract the destination of the proceeds of the insurance will have
to be decided in terms of the policy of insurance. The insurance monies were
paid on his death and form an asset of the estate of the deceased. Since the
policy did not mature in the life-time of the deceased the moneys due on the
policy became payable to the heirs of the deceased on the death of the
deceased. The judgment in Ponnammah's case (supra) and Valupillai's case
(supra) were based on the concession of parties that the totality of premium
paid should be regarded as thediathetam. These cases cannot be considered
authority for the contention that the premium paid should be considered
thediathetam. The insurance money is payable in terms of the policy to the
administrator on behalf of the heirs in proportion to their entitlement (See
Shanmugalingam v. Amirthalingam (7)). I therefore hold that the money payable
under the policy would not constitute thediathetam and the petitioner will not
be entitled to any share thereof on that basis. Then the question arises
whether she can claim a pro rata share as an intestate heir of the deceased.
Neither under the Thesawalamai nor under the Jaffna Matrimonial Rights and
Inheritance Ordinance No. 1 of 191 1 is the surviving spouse an intestate heir
of the deceased. The Amending Ordinance No. 58 of 1947 though it provides that
half of the undisposed of thediathetam belonging to the deceased spouse will
devolve on the surviving spouse, purposefully avoids describing that spouse as
an heir of the deceased. It is significant that it states that the other half
shall devolve on the heirs of the deceased spouse. The surviving spouse is not
granted the status of an heir of the deceased

**19**

by the law and hence the petitioner cannot claim to come into the category of
heirs entitled to share in the proceeds of the insurance policy.

For the determination of the claims of the petitioner on one hand and of the
respondents on the other hand, as to their share in the thediathetam property
of the deceased consisting of the motor car, savings deposit and money in the
current account, one has to consider the legal incidents attaching to
thediathetam and the devolution of thediathetam. According to the customary
law of Thesawalamai, thediathetam is common to both spouses; they are both co-
owners of the thediathetam. The concept that thediathetam is common estate of
the spouses to which both are equally entitled is basic to the customary law
of Thesawalamai. An undivided half of the property vests automatically by
operation of law on the non-acquiring spouse and under no circumstances can a
husband donate more than half the land acquired during the marriage-Parasathy
Ammah v. Setupulle (8). In Seelachchy v. Visuvanathan Chetty (9) Garvin, J.,
who was in a minority held that thediathetam property, at the time of
acquisition by the husband vested by operation of law, equally on his wife. He
followed Parasathy Ammah v. Setupulle (supra), and held that

"that the donor-husband would not have the right to gift the entirety of the
acquired property and the wife was not legally divested of her title to half
share of the thediathetam by her husband's death or gift."

This view of Garvin, J., that a husband could not donate more than his 1/2
share of the property acquired during the subsistence of his marriage has been
followed in Sampasivam v. Manikkam, (10).

In Ponnachchy v. Vallipuram (11) it was held that even though the property is
acquired by a wife during the marriage and the deed is executed in her favour
it vests by law in both spouses and that the husband as the non-acquiring
spouse could donate 1/2 share of the property.

Dalton, J. in lya Mattayer v. Kanapathipillai (12) expressly adopted with
approval the reasoning and conclusion of the dissenting judgment of Garvin,
J., Seelachchy's case (supra). Again in Seenivasagam v. Vaithyalingam (13),
the Supreme Court held that under the Thesawalamai the husband is not entitled
to donate more than 1/2 the

**20**

thediathetam property. The view that the non-acquiring spouse automatically
becomes entitled to 1/2 share of thediathetam was accepted in Kumaraswamy v.
Subramaniam (14). This view is founded on the basis that both spouses are
equally entitled to the thediathetam from the moment at which it was acquired
even though it was acquired by one spouse only.

The other legal incident of thediathetam is that the 112 share of thediathetam
to which a wife was entitled was subject to the marital power of her husband
to sell or mortgage it for consideration. This marital power is referable to
his status as the Manager or "sole or irremovable" attorney of the wife-Per
MacDonald, C. J. in Sangarapillai v. Devaraja Mudliyar (15). It is not correct
to state that this power of the husband proceeds from the enjoyment of
dominium of the wife's half share.

The Jaffna Matrimonial Rights & Inheritance Ordinance No. 1 of 1911, "which
represents the conclusions formed by the Committee specially appointed to
inquire into the body of customary law known as Thesawalamai" (Vide Garvin, A.
J., in Seelachchy v. Visuvanathan Chetty (supra)) declares the law relating to
thediathetam in section 20 as follows

Section 20 (1) "The thediathetam of each spouse shall be property common to
the two spouses, that is to say, although it is acquired by either spouse and
retained in his or her name, both shall be equally entitled thereto."

Section 20 (2) "Subject to the provisions of the Thesawalamai relating to
liability to be applied for payment or liquidation of debts contracted by the
spouses or either of them on the death intestate of either spouse one half of
the joint property shall remain the property of the survivor and the other
half shall vest in the heirs of the deceased; and on the dissolution of
marriage or separation a mensa et thoro, each shall take for his or her own
separate use one half of the joint property aforesaid.'"

Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the aforesaid section 20 is
declaratory of the customary law of Thesawalamai and that this section enacted
in statutory language the fundamental concept of Thesawalamai that
thediathetam of each spouse shall be property common to the spouses and they
both shall be equally entitled thereto. This section does not change or alter
the incidents attaching to thediathetam as found in the Thesawalamai.  -

**21**

An Act is said by Blackstone to be declaratory

"where the old custom of the realm is almost fallen into disuse or become
disputable, in which case Parliament has thought proper, in perpetuum rei
testimonium and for avoiding all doubts and difficulties to declare what the
law is and ever hath been (1 cumm. 86).""

It was held in the case of Attorney General v. Hatford (16), that if an Act is
in its nature a declaratory Act, the argument that it must not he construed,
so as to take away previous right is not applicable. Where an Act is in its
nature declaratory, the presumption against construing it retrospectively is
inapplicable for the reason that the Act does not create a new right or
obligation or alter existing rights or obligations. The Act states what the
law has always been.

I agree with Counsel for the petitioner that on this test, section 20 does not
enact any new law, it renders in a statutory form what has always been
conceived to be the customary law. It re-states the law relating to
thediathetam It does not effect any alteration or amendment respecting the
nature of thediathetam.

Garvin, J in Seelachchy v. Visuvanathan Chetty (supra) described the aforesaid
section 20 as

"An explicit declaration of the law in the sense in which it was, so far as I
am able to judge, always understood."

In Murugesu v. Kasinather (17) Garvin, A. J. with whom Jayawardena, A J.
"entirely agreed" applied the provisions of section 20 to determine the rights
of parties where property was acquired by the husband prior to the death of
the wife, in 1908 prior to the enactment of the Jaffna Matrimonial Rights &
Inheritance Ordinance of 1911. He held that by operation of law the title to
one half of the property became vested in her heirs. This course was adopted
as section 20 was declaratory of existing customary law and hence was
retrospective in operation.

The Amending Ordinance No. 48 of 1947 repealed the aforesaid section 20 and
substituted a new section in its place in the following terms

Section 20, "On the death of either spouse one half of the thediathetam
belonging to the deceased spouse and has not been disposed of by Last Will or
otherwise shall devolve on the surviving spouse and the other half shall
devolve on the heirs of the deceased."

**22**

The Privy Council in Subramaniam v. Kadirgamam (18) observed at 291

"The new section 20, in contrast to the former section 20 of the Principal
Ordinance does not deal with any legal incidents which were thereafter to
attach to thediathetam as newly defined, other than its devolution upon the
death of a spouse intestate "

Since section 20 of the principal ordinance has been repealed and the new
substituted section does not deal with the incidents of thediathetam, one has
to look for the incidents which attach to thediathetam outside the amended
Ordinance It was contended by Counsel for the respondents that since the
original section 20 has been repealed one cannot look back in to the customary
law of Thesawalamai or to the repealed section 20 for the nature of
thediathetam but one has to decide the rights of parties on the basis that the
new section 20 is exhaustive of the law relating to thediathetam. His process
of reasoning was based on the assumption that the original section 20 repealed
the relevant provisions of the Thesawalamai and that, since that section 20
has now been repealed by the amending ordinance, section 6( 1) of the
Interpretation Ordinance stood in the way of revival of the customary law
Section 6(1 ) of the Interpretation Ordinance (Cap. 2) provides:

Section 6(1): "'Whenever any written law repealing either in whole or part a
former written law is itself repealed. such repeal shall not, in the absence
of any express provision to that effect, revive or be deemed to have revived
the repealed written law."

Counsel urged that in view of the rule of interpretation contained in section
6(1), one cannot fall back on the Thesawalamai and apply the rule of equal
entitlement of the spouses to the thediathetam. I cannot agree with this
submission that the repeal of the original section 20 has the effect of
obliterating the customary law of Thesawalamai.

I agree with the Counsel for the petitioner that the original section 20 was
declaratory of the law. It had not enacted a new law nor repealed the relevant
provisions of the Thesawalamai. It only elucidated or clarified the law
relating to thediathetam.

Section 6(1) of the Interpretation Ordinance to which Counsel for the
respondent made reference would apply only if the said section 20 had repealed
the relevant provisions of Thesawalamai and that section, in turn, is
repealed.

**23**

Since, in my view, the original section 20 which has been repealed by the
amending ordinance did not repeal the Thesawalamai but declared the customary
law and did not change or alter the law, the rule of interpretation contained
in the aforesaid section 6(1) will not apply.

"While the repeal of a statute which abrogates the former statute does not
revive the former statute, the repeal of a statute that was declaratory of the
common law does not necessarily abolish the common law." Crawford-Statutory
Construction at page 655 footnote.

In this perspective the customary law survives the repeal of the declaratory
provision.

Section 40 of the Jaffna Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance No. 1 of
1911 provides

"So much of the provisions of the collection of customary law known as
Thesawalamai......... as are inconsistent with the provisions of the ordinance
are hererby repealed."

Thus provisions of the Thesawalamai as are not inconsistent with the
provisions of the Ordinance survive to supplement the latter.

Since the new section 20 has not referred to or dealt with the incidents of
thediathetam, the provision of Thesawalamai which postulated that thediathetam
of each spouse shall be property common to the two spouses, both being equally
entitled thereto therefore continues to be operative in spite of the repeal of
the old section 20, as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of the
amended Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance of Jaffna.

Old section 20 is not inconsistent with any provisions of Thesawalamai. In
fact, it adopts and incorporates the relevant rule of Thesawalamai.

Though original section 20 has been repealed by the amending ordinance, it has
not been substituted theretofore by some new provision dealing with the
subject matter of the repealed section. The new section 20 provides for the
devolution of thediathetam which belonged to the deceased spouse It does not
declare and regulate the rights inter vivos of the spouses in regard to
thediathetam. It states

**24**

that "one half of the thediathetam belonging to the deceased spouse and has
not been disposed of by Last Will or otherwise, shall devolve on the surviving
spouse and the other half shall devolve on the heirs of the deceased spouse'".
It does not demarcate what is the thediathetam which belonged to the deceased
spouse. Under the law of Thesawalamai the surviving spouse was not an
intestate heir of the deceased spouse. The new section 20 represents a
departure in this respect from the customary law of Thesawalamai. It expressly
provides that one half of the thediathetam belonging to the deceased spouse
"shall devolve" on the surviving spouse

Though the new section 19 substitutes a new definition of the ""thediathetam
of a spouse" for the definition of "thediathetam of any husband or wife" in
the repealed section 19, like the repealed section it does not spell the
rights of the spouses in relation to the thediathetam. The repealed section 20
meted the entitlement of the spouses to the thediathetam defined by old
section 19. The new section 20, without apportioning the shares of the spouses
to the thediathetam as defined by section 19, deals with the devolution of the
thediathetam which belonged to the deceased spouse. It is to be noted that
while section 19 refers to "thediathetam of a spouse"" section 20 speaks of
""thediathetam belonging to a deceased spouse.' The distinction in language is
significant It reflects a conceptual difference. It supports the argument that
the basic attribute of thediathetam, viz: common ownership of the spouses
inheres in the thediathetam as defined by new section 19. "Belonging" denotes
entitlement. Under Thesawalamai, as stated earlier thediathetam of a spouse
meant thediathetam acquired by the spouse to which by operation of law both
spouses became equally entitied-half share of it belonging to the acquiring
spouse and the other half belonging to the non-acquiring spouse-from the
moment of acquisition. Even though the property was acquired by one spouse one
half of it vested automatically on the other spouse. In my view, though the
old section 20 has been repealed, the incidents of thediathetam referred to
therein have not been abrogated but continue to attach to the thediathetam as
defined by new section 19. That part of the customary law of Thesawalamai
dealing with the incidents of thediathetam are not affected by the repeal of
old section 20.

The presumption against radical alteration of the law also militates against
the proposition contended for by counsel for the respondents. The concept that
thediathetam of a spouse is property common to

**25**

both spouses is far too firmly entrenched in the jurisprudence of the law of
Thesawalamai to be jettisoned except by unequivocal express legislation and
not by a side wind. The following passage in Maxwell's Interpretation of
Statutes, 12th Ed. page 78-79, which was quoted with approval by the Privy
Council in Murugiah v. Jainudeen (19), tends to support the submission that
the new sections 19 and 20 were not intended to make and do not make the
fundamental alteration in the customary law of Thesawalamai that would be
involved in the acceptance of the proposition that under the new sections 19
and 20 the thediathetam would belong in its entirety to the acquiring spouse.

"One of these presumptions is that the legislature does not intend to make any
substantial alteration in the law beyond what it explicitly declares either in
express terms or by clear implication..... It is in the last degree improbable
that the legislature would overthrow fundamental principles, infringe rights
or depart from the general system of law, without expressing its intention
with irresistible clearness.

I do not agree with the following obiter dictum of Gratiaen, J. in Kumaraswamy
v. Subramaniam (supra) that

"The repeal of the old section and the substitution of the new section 20 have
the following effect -

(a) If either spouse acquires thediathetam on or after the 4th July 1947, no
share in its vests by operation of law in the non-acquiring spouse during the
subsistence of the marriage.

(b) If the acquiring spouse predeceases the non-acquiring spouse without
having previously disposed of such property, the new section 20 applies;
accordingly, half the property devolves on the survivor and the other half on
the deceased's heirs.

(c) If the non-acquiring spouse predeceases the acquiring spouse, the
thediathetam property of the acquiring spouse continues to vest exclusively in
the acquiring spouse, the new section 20 has no application because the
thediathetam of the acquiring spouse never belonged to the non-acquiring
spouse ""

**26**

This enunciation was not necessary for the decision of the case as Gratiaen,
J., himself states "the new sections 19 and 20 have no bearing on the present
problem." With all respect to that eminent Judge, I would state that the above
propositions do not represent the law. In that case Gratiaen, J. had no
occasion to examine the law on the question in issue in the present case

Thus on the above construction of the law a non-acquiring spouse becomes
vested with title to half the acquisition from the moment of the acquisition
and also inherits half of the other half which belonged to the deceased spouse
if the latter dies intestate, without having disposed of his or her half
share. On the basis of the above analysis of the law it has to be held that
half of the items of the deceased's thediathetam i.e., motor car, savings
deposit of Rs 10,572 87 and half of Rs. 227.24 lying in the current account,
did not fall into the estate of the deceased, as they belonged by operation of
law to the petitioner, the widow, and of the half that belonged to the
deceased, half of it devolved on the surviving spouse. Accordingly the
petitioner is entitled to half of the deceased husband's half share in
addition to her own half-share of the above items of thediathetam I note that
Sivasubramaniam, J., in Arunaslam v. Ayadurai (20), has held that after the
amendment of 1947, title to 3/4th share of thediathetam property was in the
surviving spouse and title to the balance quarter was in the intestate heirs
of the deceased spouse. He appears to have computed the extent of shares in
the thediathetam belonging to the spouses on the same basis as I have done.

I therefore, declare that the petitioner is entitled to three fourth of the
items, viz. the motor car, savings deposit and money lying in current account,
and that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents who are the sisters of the deceased
and the 4th respondent who is the brother of the deceased and the 5th and 6th
respondents who are the children of the deceased brother Poothathamby
Thuraippa, inherit the balance quarter share of the said items. I also declare
that the respondents are entitled by way of inheritance of the separate estate
of the deceased to the entirety of the land No. 37, Clifford Place to which
the deceased became entitled on Deed No. 1 290 dated 1 1.6.1973 and that the
petitioner is not entitled to any share therein. The respondents are also
entitled to the sum of Rs. 10,000 representing the proceeds of insurance.
Though the 2nd respondent has not appealed from the judgment of the District
Court she will be entitled to the benefit of these declarations

**27**

I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and of the District Court and
allow the appeals of both petitioner-appellant in S.C. No. 1/85 and of the
respondent-appellants in S.C. No. 2/85 to the extent involved in the above
declaration.

In the circumstances of this case parties will bear their own costs in all the
courts.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** -I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** -I agree.

_Appeals allowed as indicated in judgment._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/10.html_  

