[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1984](./) >> **[1984] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1984+10 or 1984+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1984+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Arumugam v. The Attorney General and Another - SLR - 138, Vol 1 of 1992
[1984] LKSC 10; (1992) 1 Sri LR 138 (11 October 1984)

**138**

**ARUMUGAM** **  
v.** **  
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT,  
COLIN-THOME, J.,  
RANASINGHE, J. AND  
RODRIGO, J.  
RE-ENROLMENT NO. A 8189,  
11 OCTOBER 1984

_     Attorney-at-Law- Application for re-enrolment - Conditions necessary. _

**Held:**

A petitioner who seeks re-enrolment must adduce cogent proof that he has
redeemed his character which he had once lost. The period of good character
preceding application must be long enough. An application prematurely made
will not be allowed.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. In Re Monerasinghe 4 CWR 370.  
_  
_2\. In the matter of an application of C. J. J. Seneviratne for re-admission
as an Advocate 30 NLR 209.  
_  
_3\. In re S. V. Ranasinghe 45 CLW 26,27._

**APPLICATION** for re-admission and re-enrolment as an Attorney-at-Law.

_S. Sinnatamby with M. Wimalaswaram for petitioner.  
_  
_K. M. M. B. Kulatunga, P.C. Solicitor-General with Sarath Silva D.S.G. for
Attorney-General.  
_  
_Eric Amerasinghe, P.C. with W. P Gunatilake for Bar Association._

_Cur adv vult._

139

26th October, 1984.  
**COLIN-THOME, J.**

This is an application by the petitioner for re-admission and re-enrolment as
an Attorney-at-Law.

N. Sivaguru by petition dated 27th January 1967 complained to the Magistrate
of Vavuniya that he had retained the petitioner in June, 1964 for the purpose
of filing an action to exercise his right of preemption in regard to an
undivided portion of land co-owned by him and his sister of which the
undivided share of the sister had been sold by her to another, and that he had
for the purpose of making a deposit in that action for pre-emption handed over
to the petitioner a sum of Rs. 5000/- on the 20th of June, 1964 for which the
petitioner gave him a receipt but that the petitioner had not deposited that
sum of money or any part thereof in the action.

The Disciplinary Committee of the Law Society held an inquiry into this
allegation under section 17A of the Courts Ordinance and held that the
petitioner had misappropriated and converted the sum of Rs. 5000/- to his own
use and that he was guilty of an offence and/or malpractice. The Committee
recommended to the Supreme Court that disciplinary action be taken against the
petitioner. The Supreme Court granted the petitioner time to refund this money
but the petitioner did not avail himself of the opportunity of refunding this
money in full.

When this case came up before the Supreme Court on the 14th of June 1977
Counsel appearing for the petitioner informed Court that he was not contesting
the facts as found by the Disciplinary Committee and he asked for two months
time to pay the balance due.

When this matter came up before the Supreme Court again on the 31st March of
1978 Learned Counsel for the petitioner resiled from his earlier position and
submitted that the facts as found by the Disciplinary Committee did not
warrant disciplinary action. This submission was rejected by the Supreme Court
and the Learned Chief Justice in his judgment dated 31st March 1978, with
which the other two judges agreed, held that the Disciplinary Committee came

140

to a correct finding. The Learned Chief Justice took a serious view of this
case and ordered that the petitioner be removed from office and his name be
struck off the roll of Attorneys-at-Law of this Court.

In the present application by the petitioner he has attached an affidavit (P4)
of the complainant N. Sivaguru, who avers that on the 31st March of 1978 the
petitioner paid him the balance amount of the principal sum and that on the
same date the petitioner gave him a cheque dated 3rd July 1978 for the sum of
Rs. 2000% which was due to him as interest on the principal of Rs. 5000/-. On
1st July 1978 the petitioner paid him in cash a sum of Rs. 2000% and he
returned the cheque to the petitioner.

In support of his application for re-admission the petitioner filed two
certificates, one from Mr. S. R. Kanaganayagam, President of the Bar
Association of Jaffna and another from Mr. C. C. Somasegeram, Attorney-at-Law,
Jaffna.

Mr. S. R. Kanaganayagam, stated in his certificate dated 7th January 1984 that
during the last five years the petitioner was actively interested in social
work and that he was a Trustee of the Kokuvil Nanthavil Katpulathu Manonmany
Amman Temple and Patron of the Rural Development Society of Kokuvil and that
he also helps junior practitioners. Mr. Somasegeram in his undated certificate
has stated that there was a misunderstanding between the petitioner and his
client and that as the petitioner lost the sight of both eyes there was a
delay in refunding the sum of Rs. 5000/-. The petitioner however in his
affidavit has stated that he lost the sight of one eye and had a cataract
operation on the other eye and was disabled for six months. In the opinion of
Mr. Somasegeram the petitioner would conduct himself with professional
propriety if re-enrolled.

A long line of decisions of the Supreme Court in applications for re-enrolment
has followed the dicta in In Re Monerasinghe "' where Wood Renton, CA held
that:

"The view has been adopted that a Court which has the right to remove the name
of a solicitor from the Rolls has also an inherent discretionary power to re-
admit him, where he has

141

subsequently expiated the offence of which he may have been guilty and
redeemed his character . . . The material now before us shows that Mr.
Monerasinghe has atoned for any errors that he may have committed in 1897 by
an unbroken subsequent career of honesty and industry."

In this case the application for re-enrolment was made twenty years after the
applicant was struck off the Rolls. It was allowed.

In the matter of an application of C. C. J. Seneviratne to be admitted and
enrolled an Advocate of the S _upreme Court_ (2) the petitioner was convicted
and sentenced for cheating. On 22nd February 1922 he was struck off the Rolls.
His application for readmission was made in December 1929, only six years
later. He annexed twelve certificates to his petition testifying that he
devoted himself to social service work and had reconstructed his life. It was
held that the application was premature. Although his conviction might have
had the salutary effect of awakening in the applicant a higher sense of honour
or duty, the period during which his conduct was testified to by the
certificates as being irreproachable was not long enough to be deemed to be a
guarantee sufficient for him to be safely entrusted again with the affairs of
clients and admitted to an honourable profession without that profession
suffering degradation.

In re _S. V. Ranasinghe_ (3) Gratiaen, J. observed that:

"All of them (judicial decisions) remind us that this Court, in dealing with
these applications, must not be influenced either by punitive or by
sympathetic considerations. Our duty must be measured by the rights of
litigants who may seek advice from a professional man admitted or re-admitted
to the Bar by the sanction of the Judges of the Supreme Court. It is also
measured by the right of the profession, whose trustees we are, to claim that
we should satisfy ourselves that re-enrolment will not involve some further
risk of degradation to the reputation of the Bar."

142

It was also held in this case that the petitioner had to offer cogent proof
that he had redeemed his character which he had once lost.

Bearing these principles in mind and applying them to the circumstances of
this case, I hold that this application is premature. I also hold that the
material placed before this Court that the petitioner has redeemed his
character is inadequate. The petitioner has taken nearly fourteen years to
refund the sum of Rs. 5000/- in full. The material before this Court falls far
short of the cogent proof necessary to support an application for re-
enrolment.

The application is refused.

**RANASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**RODRIGO, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/10.html_  

