[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1981](./) >> **[1981] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1981+10 or 1981+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1981+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Amarasinghe Attorney At Law,In Re - SLR - 384, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC
10; (1981) 1 Sri LR 384 (11 December 1981)

**384**

**IN RE AMARASINGHE  
ATTORNEY-AT-LAW**

**SUPREME COURT,  
WEERARATNE, J., SHARVANANDA, J. AND  
VICTOR PERERA, J.,  
S. C. RULE NO. 3/81,  
NOVEMBER 3, 1981.  
**  
_Attorney-at-law - Malpractice or deceit - 42(2) of Judicature Act-Removal of
page from record when acting as judicial officer - Was record falsified ? -
Doctrine of nunc pro tune - Standard of proof.  
_  
It was clear that the respondent had not falsified the record but only
amplified it and that he had acted honestly.  
  
The writing of a page on one date and attributing it to another date is not a
falsification or malpractice, or deceit where there was no dishonesty. Such
action is justified by the doctrine of nunc pro tune. This doctrine applies to
acts done after the time when they should be done with a retrospective effect.
Nunc pro tune is an entry made now of something actually previously done to
have effect of a former date, not to supply omitted action, but to supply
omission in record of action really had, but omitted through inadvertence.  
  
Both malpractice or deceit import an element of dishonesty which was absent in
this case. There was no material to show dishonesty. The standard of proof
required is proof beyond reasonable doubt.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
_(1) Sinnatangam v. Sinnen (1895) 1 NLR 220.  
  
(2) In the Matter of an Attorney / L. R. 41 Cal, 113.  
  
(3) Bhandari v. Advocates Committee 1958 3 All. E. R. 742.  
_  
In the matter of a Rule under s. 42(2) of the Judicature Act.  
  
_A Mampitiya with N. Jacolyn Seneviratne, N. Devendra, G. G. Mendis and Gamini
Iriyagolle for Respondent.  
  
S. N. de Silva, Deputy Solicitor-General with S. Marsoof, State Counsel for
Attorney General.  
  
George Candappa with Everard Ratnayake for the Bar Association of Sri Lanka._

_**Cur. adv. vult.**_

December 11, 1981.  
**WEERARATNE, J.  
**  
This is a proceeding by way of a Rule under Section 42(2) of the Judicature
Act No. 2 of 1978 for the suspension or removal from office, of the Respondent
-- an Attorney-at-Law who, at the relevant times held judicial office, on the
ground that he has been guilty of conduct which makes him liable to be dealt
with under the provisions of the said Act.

**385**

This Rule sets out that the Respondent, when functioning as the District Judge
and Magistrate of Homagama on the 12th February 1981, in respect of the
accused in case No. 43866 M.C. Homagama, when the latter appeared for sentence
on a verdict of guilty being entered against him, imposed a sentence of six
months rigorous imprisonment after a plea in mitigation by Mr. P. Gunawardena,
his Attorney-at-Law. Then after the Court adjourned for the day Mr. U.
Senaratne, Attorney-at-Law met the Respondent in Chambers and the Respondent
varied the sentence already imposed to one year's imprisonment, suspended for
five years, and a fine of Rs. 500/-, by making an alteration in the Journal
Entry of that date. On the 17th February 1981, the Supreme Court called for
the record of the case by telegram and on the Respondent making an order that
the record be sent, it was prepared for despatch to the Supreme Court. On that
same day, after the proceedings were adjourned, the record was brought to the
Respondent's residence by the Interpreter, accompanied by the Binder, attached
to the said Court, in a Motor Car driven by Mr. U. Senaratne, Attorney-at-Law;
whereupon the Respondent caused the page of the said record which contained
the Journal Entry of 12th February 1981 to be removed, and substituted in its
place, a fresh page purporting to contain the Journal Entry of 12th February
1981.  
  
It is stated that by such act he has thereby sought to represent to the
Supreme Court that the entry made by him on the 17th February 1981 at his
residence was a Journal Entry made in Court on the 12th February 1981, thus
causing the said record to be falsified and forwarded to the Supreme Court,
and that he is thereby guilty of malpractice or deceit within 'the meaning of
Section 42(2) of the Judicature Act.  
  
There is, annexed to the Rule inter alia, the record in M.C. Homagama case No.
43866, a page of the original case record contained in the Journal Entry of
3.2.81 and 12.2.81, and a letter dated 25.2.81 sent by the Respondent to the
Chairman of the Judicial Service Commission.  
  
The Respondent appeared before us to show cause and submitted an affidavit
sworn by him which substantially sets out the facts relevant to his defence.
Senior Counsel for the Respondent at the very outset, stated that the recitals
of the facts in the Rule are substantially admitted by the Respondent in the
affidavit filed before the Court, and in his letter of resignation dated
25.2.81 to the Judicial Service Commission. Counsel submitted that the
gravamen of the charge is that the Respondent had

**386**

removed a page from the record containing the Journal Entry of the 12th
February 1981 and substituted in its place, a fresh page purporting to contain
the Journal Entry of 12th February 1981, but which Journal Entry was in fact
made on the 17th February 1981 and that he thereby falsified the record.
Counsel submitted that the removal of the page and the substitution of another
are admitted in the affidavit and letter of resignation, but that the
allegation of falsification of the record is denied. Counsel stated that the
substituted page and the page extracted, both contain the altered sentence
which the Respondent imposed on the accused in the Homagama case No. 43866.  
  
Counsel submitted that the essence of the charge is whether the Respondent has
falsified the record, and that the facts contained in the affidavit and in the
letter of resignation aforesaid clearly reveals that he had no intention of
falsifying the record, in which event there could be no malpractice or deceit
within the meaning of Section 42(2) of the. Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978.  
  
In the circumstances, it would be necessary to set out in some detail, the
relevant facts pleaded in the affidavit and in the letter of resignation. The
petitioner stated that on the 20th January 1981, the first date of trial, the
accused was charged on two counts of criminal breach of trust and retention of
stolen property valued at Rs. 12,000/- and that the prosecution conducted by
the police as well as the defence, represented by Mr. U. Senaratne, Attorney-
at-Law, wished to compound the case having the charge altered to one of
criminal misappropriation. The Respondent states that he indicated to the
parties that following his normal policy in the matter of sentence, if the
accused admits his guilt, and if he had no previous convictions, he would
impose a suspended sentence on him. The accused pleaded guilty on both counts
and the case was put off for identification and sentence. Then on the 12th
February 1981, the case came up before the Respondent on the roll of calling
cases and, although Attorney-at-Law Mr. P. Gunawardene appeared for the
accused, he did not advert to the circumstances in which the plea of guilt was
tendered, and the Respondent sentenced- the accused to six months rigorous
imprisonment on each count. On this day itself, when the Respondent was in
Chambers, Mr. U. Senaratne, having explained his absence from Court earlier,
stating that he was held up in another Court, and had asked Mr. P. Gunawardene
to look after the case, reminded the Respondent of the circumstances in which
his client had tendered his plea, Then, since the accused was a young man with
no previous convictions, and as the complainant admitted that he had recovered
the property in full, the Respondent states

**387**

that he varied the sentence to one year's imprisonment on each count, the
sentences to run concurrently, and suspended the punishment for five years and
imposed a fine of Rs. 500/-.  
  
On the 17th February 1981 when the Respondent received a telegram from the
Supreme Court calling for the record of this case, he made order that it
should be despatched. It then occurred to him that the Supreme Court may have
called for the record to revise the sentence and examine the propriety of his
order and he thought it better that a reviewing. Court should be in full
possession of all the facts that led him to vary the order. As his car was not
available, he sent word to the Interpreter of the Court to bring the record to
his bungalow, if it had not been despatched earlier. Later, both the
Interpreter and the Binder attached to the Court came to his residence. He
then had the folio which contained the Entry of that date taken out and wrote
out a fresh page containing further details of all that transpired on the 12th
February 1981 and inserted this folio in the record which was despatched.  
  
The Respondent states that what he recorded on that new page was in
amplification and not in suppression of the scanty order he had made which
would have been of little assistance to a reviewing Court. He retained in his
custody, the folio which he had removed. The Respondent states that when he
learnt that the Judicial Service Commission was investigating this matter, he
submitted his resignation together with the original folio, since it was
embarrassing to him to continue in the circumstances as a Judge. The
Respondent, in denying that he has falsified the record states that he had not
prepared a new document containing false information, and that the information
supplied in the new document is truthful and is in accordance with the
information available in the original folio on the material points. He further
states that he had, at no time made a false statement of an existing fact and
that he never had an intention to practise a deceit or any malpractice.  
  
What is attributed to the Respondent in the Rule as involving a falsification
or deceit is the act of causing the Journal Entry of 12th February 1981 and
the substitution of a fresh page purporting to contain the Journal Entry of
12th February 1981 and representing thereby that the entry made on 17th
February 1981 at his residence was a Journal Entry made to Court on 12th
February 1981. An examination of the record reveals that the Judicial Acts of
the Respondent on 20.1.81, 3.2.81 as well as 12.2.81, up to the point when he
imposed a sentence of six months rigorous imprisonment for each charge to run
concurrently, bear no irregularity. In regard to what is recorded under the
word "Later", on 12.2.81,

**388**

where the Respondent refers to the Attorney-at-Law Mr. Senaratne drawing his
attention to the assurance given by the Respondent that a suspended sentence
would be imposed in the event of the accused tendering a plea of guilt,
provided he had no previous convictions, cannot also be found fault with even
though he varied the sentence to fall in line with the earlier assurance given
by him. A close scrutiny of the record, which is a production in the case, in
the Journal Entry (in Sinhala) of the 12th February 1981 shows an alteration
from six months rigorous imprisonment for each count to run concurrently to
one year's rigorous imprisonment on each count to run concurrently "sentence
suspended for five years. Impose a fine of Rs. 500/- on the accused." I n this
connection, Counsel submitted that the Respondent sought to do justice by the
accused in regard to whom he had already given an assurance of a suspended
sentence in the event of his having no previous convictions. A perusal of the
substituted page and the extracted page does reveal that the substituted page
was written in amplification and not in suppression of the scanty order which
the Respondent made on the 12th February 1981\. The Respondent has given in
his affidavit, the reason for amplifying the said order.  
  
Falsify means "to render false." Consequently a new document containing false
information is correctly described as a false document, and the act of
preparing such a document is called the falsification of the document.  
  
Counsel submitted that in any event the writing of the page on 17th February
1981, but attributing it to 12th February 1981 was not a falsification,
malpractice, or a deceit in that such a writing on the 17th February 1981, and
attributing it to 12th February 1981, was justified under the well-known
doctrine of nunc pro tune. He referred to Black's Law Dictionary at page 1218
which defines it as a phrase applied to acts allowed to be done after the time
when they should be done, with a retroactive effect i.e., with the same effect
as if regularly done. Nunc pro tunc is an entry made now of something actually
previously done to have effect of a former date, not to supply omitted action,
but to supply omission in record of action really had, but omitted through
inadvertence.  
  
In the case of Sinnatangam v. Sinnen 1 NLR 220(1) where after a Revision
Application the case was called for by the Supreme Court and after the perusal
of the record, the Supreme . Court sent the case back for an explanation by
the Magistrate, and in forwarding it again to the Supreme Court the Magistrate
had

**389**

made certain alterations in the original Journal Entries, which charges were
alluded to by Withers, J.' in his judgment, Bonser, C. J. remarks (at page
222)  
  
" . . Certainly there are interpolations in the record in different coloured
ink. The Magistrate should be called upon for an explanation as to whether he
did make any alterations in the record, for if he did, that act, his act, Was
quite irregular. If he did make any alteration, he should have a note in the
margin initialed by him to show when the alterations or addition was made."  
  
It will be observed that even in a case such as the one detailed above, the
Supreme Court was not prepared to call the alteration of the record anything
more than an irregularity. In the present matter the Respondent in his
affidavit has stated that by inadvertence he has failed in the course of his
judicial functions to authenticate the substituted page as having been made on
17th February 1981\. Both malpractice or deceit import an element of
dishonesty.  
  
The question does arise as to what standard of proof is required in a case of
this nature.. *in the Matter of an Attorney I.L.R. 41 Calcutta. 113(2)
Jenkins, C. J. stated:  
  
"It is a strange story that the Attorney tells; even a strong case of
suspicion is not enough to justify disciplinary action especially when there
is a positive sworn denial and repudiation of the misconduct imputed. Moreover
there is a more than bare denial. There is an explanation of the transaction
by the Attorney and it is an old rule that where this is so, an adverse order
should not be made on a summary proceeding unless the Attorney's story is
highly incredible."  
  
In the case of *Bhandari v. Advocates Committee (1956) 3 AE R 742(3) with
regard to the onus of proof Lord Tucker said:  
  
"We agree that in every allegation of professional misconduct, involving an
element of deceit or moral turpitude a high standard of proof is called for,
and we cannot envisage anybody of professional men sitting in judgment on a
colleague who would be content to condemn on a mere balance of probabilities."  
  
"This seems to their Lordships an adequate description of the duty of a
tribunal such as the Advocates Committee, and

**390**

there is no reason to think that either the Committee or the Supreme Court
applied any lower standard of proof."  
  
Counsel for the State in the course of his submissions, made a detailed
analysis of the recitals in the Rule and in answer to the Court, frankly
conceded that there was no material to show that the Respondent had a
dishonest motive having regard to the explanation given by him in his
affidavit to the effect that he acted honestly.  
  
Counsel appearing on behalf of the Bar Association submitted that the
Respondent is on trial as an Attorney-at-Law, not as a Judicial Officer. He
stated that the question is whether he is a fit and proper person to be kept
on the Roll. Counsel submitted that at the most, the conduct of the Respondent
amounted to a lapse of judicial standards. He further stated that whatever was
done, should have been in Court or in Chambers. He submitted that the action
of the Respondent does not amount to conduct of a nature which warrants his
being dealt with under Section 42 of the Judicature Act.  
  
On a consideration. of the material placed before us and having heard the
submissions of Learned Counsel, we are satisfied that the Respondent must be
absolved from an intent to commit a malpractice or deceit by falsifying a
Record.  
  
The Rule is accordingly discharged.  
  
Before we part with this matter, we must state that it is unfortunate that the
Respondent acted in the manner he admits he had done. The correct course he
should have followed in order to put the record straight is to have amended it
in open Court or in Chambers, and as stated by Bonser, C. J. in a similar
matter, to have initialled and dated it, without resorting to the course he
adopted.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**VICTOR PERERA, J**. I agree.  
  
**_Rule discharged._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/10.html_  

