[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1998](./) >> **[1998] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1998+10 or 1998+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1998+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Kampane Gunaratna Thero v. Mawadawila Pannasena Thero - SLR - 196, Vol 2
of 1998 [1998] LKSC 10; (1998) 2 Sri LR 196 (30 June 1998)

**196**

**KAMPANE GUNARATNA THERO  
v.  
MAWADAWILA PANNASENA THERO**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 3/97  
C.A. NO. 18189 (F)  
D.C. COLOMBO CASE NO. 4975/ZL  
6TH AND 18TH MAY AND 12TH JUNE, 1998.  
  
_Buddhist Temporalities - Claim of Viharadhipathi to a temple - Temple
property not dedicated to Sangha according to vinaya - Deed 'of dedication "
not accompanied by the requisite religious ceremony-Maintainability of the
action.  
  
_The plaintiff sued the defendants for a declaration that he is the lawful
Vharadhipathi of the temple known as Mahajana Rajaramaya, for ejectment of the
defendants from the temple premises and for recovery of possession of the
same. The temple was constructed on an allotment of crown land which had been
leased to the Trustees of a Buddhist Association for the purpose of
constructing a Buddhist temple and dedicating it to the Sangha after which it
was stipulated that the lessor will issue a fresh lease of the land for 99
years in favour of the trustee or the controlling Vharadhipathi of the temple.
The temple was constructed and a deed .of dedication' was executed with the
approval of the Government Agent and the Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs. The
deed appointed the plaintiff as the Vharadhipathi of the temple.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The fact that a deed 'of dedication' was executed with the full authority
of the state did not by itself, render the temple a Sanghika Viharaya which
was the basis of the plaintiff's action. A mere claim to the office of
Viharadhipathi independently of the title to the temple and temporalities is
untenable.  
  
2\. As the deed "of dedication' had not been accompanied by a solemn ceremony
in the presence. of 4 or more monks representing the 'Sarva Sangha" or "entire
priesthood", as prescribed in vinaya, the temple and its property did not
become Sanghika property. The title to the property remains with the State. In
other words, the property remains "Gihi Santhaka'.

**197**

**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Wickramasinghe v. Unnanse_ 22 N.LR. 236 at 239, 242.  
  
2\. _Wijewardena v. Buddharakkita Thero_ 59 N.L.R. 121 at 125.  
  
3\. _Mapalane Dhammadaja Thero v. Rotumba Wimalajothi Thero_ 79 N.L.R. (Vol.
1) 145 at 163 and 164.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P. A. D. Samarasekera, PC., with G. L. Geethananda_ for the plaintiff-
appellant.  
  
_T. B. Dissanayake, PC., with B. Coswatte and Nihal Samarasinghe_ for the 1st
defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 30, 1998  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.  
**  
The plaintiff instituted these proceedings in June, 1985 and prayed for the
following reliefs: (a) a declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of
the temple known as Mahajana Rajaramaya, Rajagiriya; (b) that the defendants
be ejected from the temple and premises described in the schedule to the
plaint and the plaintiff be placed in possession thereof. The schedule to the
plaint sets out an allotment of Crown land depicted as parts of lots 20, 22
and 47 in P. P. 20394.  
  
After trial, the District Court held that the plaintiff was entitled to a
declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple and to a decree
in ejectment against the 1st defendant (The 2nd defendant had already left the
temple). Upon an appeal preferred by the 1st defendant, the Court of Appeal
allowed the appeal and set aside the judgment of the District Court. The
finding of the Court of Appeal was that there was no valid dedication of the
temple to the Maha Sangha, that the absolute title to the land remained with
the State, and therefore the plaintiff could not have and maintain this
action.  
  
Against the judgment of the Court of Appeal, the plaintiff has lodged the
present appeal. Special leave to appeal was granted by this court upon the
following principal question. "Whether there was a valid dedication of the
temple constructed on the land leased by the State, although (a) such
dedication was by the lessees acting with the authority of the State, and (b)
the contemplated future lease was for 99 years only.

**198**

Mr. Samarasekera for the plaintiff-appellant submitted, (1) that the question
whether the temple is a "Sanghika" temple is completely irrelevant to the
decision of this case; (2) the crucial issues were whether a temple called the
Mahajana Rajaramaya was constructed by the trustees on the land admittedly
leased by the State and, if so, who is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple
(i.e. is it the plaintiff or the 1st defendant?); (3) that the plaintiff never
sought a declaration of title to the land; he sought a declaration only to the
office of Viharadhipathi.  
  
On the other hand, Mr. T. B. Dissanayake for the 1st defendant respondent
contended (a) that on a consideration of the averments in the plaint, the
documents relied on by the plaintiff, and the oral evidence of the plaintiff,
it is clear that the case for the plaintiff is that he is the _Viharadhipathi
of a Sanghika temple_ ; (b) that there was no dedication in **terms of the
Vinaya** and the temple remained "Gihi Santake" (lay property); (c) this
action necessarily involved a claim of title to property although this was not
expressly averred in the plaint; (d) the action as framed was misconceived in
law.  
  
In order to consider the rival contentions, it is necessary to set out in
detail the averments in the plaint.  
  
Paragraphs in the plaint  
  
"(2) By Indenture of Lease dated 17th October, 1960, the Government of Ceylon
granted a lease of a parcel of Crown land in extent two roods (AO. R2. PO)
more fully described in the schedule to the plaint to Rev. Wadhibasinghe
Balapitiye Dhammananda, Manameldura Piyadasa de Zoysa and Edward Bandula
Abeysekera, the Trustees of the Association called Bauddha Sanskarna
Samwardhana Society on a rental of Rs. 37.50 per annum. (Indenture of lease
was marked as P2 at the trial).  
  
(3) Inter alia the said lease contained the conditions that the land demised
was to be used for the purpose of building a Buddhist Temple to be dedicated
to the Sangha and a Bhikku will be in charge and control of the Temple,
subject to the approval by the Public Trustee of Ceylon or any other Officer
who may be entrusted with the supervision of Buddhist Temporalities.

**199**

(4) In accordance with the terms and conditions of the said lease which is
produced herewith marked "A" and pleaded as part and parcel of the plaint the
Trustees of the said Society, the lessees, constructed the buildings on the
leased property which is now known and referred to as "MAHAJANA RAJARAMAYA
RAJAGIRIYA".  
  
(5) The Government Agent of Colombo by his letter dated 25th May, 1982,
requested the Secretary of the Bauddha Sanskarana Samwardhana Society to
forward a letter addressed to the Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs expressing
the consent of the Trustees to dedicate the temple to the Mahasangha and name
a person as Viharadhipathi.  
  
(6) Further the Government Agent of Colombo by the said letter requested the
Secretary of the said society to forward to him three copies of a draft of a
Deed of Dedication duly completed as indicated by him. A copy of the said
draft of the Deed of Dedication is annexed hereto marked "B" and is pleaded as
part and parcel of this plaint. (The draft Deed of Dedication was produced at
the trial marked P3).  
  
(7) On 15th September, 1982, the Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs approved the
draft of the Deed of Dedication and instructed the Secretary to get a Notary
to attest the Deed of Dedication in triplicate and get it registered.  
  
(9) In compliance with the directions of the Commissioner of Buddhist Affairs
and in terms of the condition 3 (c) of the lease marked "A" the Deed of
Dedication No. 2022 of 4th December 1983 was executed by the Trustees of the
Society. (The Deed of Dedication was marked P4 at the trial).  
  
(10) By the said deed the temple known and called Mahajana Rajaramaya **was**
**dedicated to the Mahasangha** and the plaintiff was duly and lawfully
appointed as the first Viharadhipathi thereof.  
  
(12) From about September, 1982, the two defendants jointly and severally
disputed the rights and title to the Viharadhipathiship of the temple by not
allowing the plaintiff to enter the temple to perform his duties and functions
as the lawful Viharadhipathi.

**200**

(15) This temple is exempted from the operation of s. 4 (1) of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance, Chapter 318, L.E.C."  
  
It is to be noted that paragraph 3 of the plaint speaks of a Buddhist temple
to be constructed on the land (taken on lease from the State) and it is to be
dedicated to the Sangha. Further, there is the averment that there will be a
Bhikku "in charge and control of the temple". Section 20 of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance provides that "all property, movable and immovable,
belonging or in anywise appertaining to or appropriated to the use of any
temple . . . shall vest in the trustee or the controlling Viharadhipathi for
the time being of such temple . . .". It seems to me that the submission of
Mr. Dissanayake that the averments in paragraph 3 attract the provisions of
section 20 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance is well-founded. Mr.
Dissanayake further pointed out that the exemption from the operation of
section 4 (1) of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance pleaded in paragraph 15
is the usual pleading in a straight forward "Viharadhipathiship case".
Although Mr. Samarasekera submitted that the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance
does not necessarily deal only with Sanghika property, yet the view taken in
the decisions of this Court are to the contrary. As far back as 1920, Shaw,
A.C.J. in Wickremasinghe v. Unnanse(1) observed ". . . I do not think that the
ordinance is intended to apply to premises that are private property". Again,
His Lordship Chief Justice Basnayake in Wijewardena v. Buddharakkita Thera (2)
stated: "The Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance deals with Sanghika property
which has been dedicated to the Sangha of a particular Vihare. It declares
that such property is vested in the trustee or controlling Viharadhipathi of
the Vihare".  
  
Similarly paragraphs 5 and 6 speak of dedication to the Maha Sangha and
paragraph 10 explicitly avers that: "By the said deed (i.e. the Deed of
Dedication P4) the temple known and called Mahajana Rajaramaya was **dedicated
to the Maha Sangha** and the plaintiff was duly and lawfully appointed as the
first Viharadhipathi thereof."  
  
Turning now to the documents, it seems to me that the documents too are on the
basis that the temple is dedicated to the Maha Sangha. This is evident from
the definition of the expressions "trustee" and "Viharadhipathi" in clauses 3
(b) and (c) of the lease P2. Trustee is defined as "a trustee of the temple
**appointed under the provisions of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance** ".
The term Viharadhipathi

**201**

in P2 is also defined in terms similar to the concept of the "Controlling
Viharadhipathi" referred to in section 4 (2) of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance. In the draft Deed of Dedication P3 there are several references to
the fact of dedication to the "Maha Sangha" and the deed itself is on the
basis that the dedication of the temple is to the Maha Sangha. The Deed of
Dedication P4 is in the same terms and it clearly states that the "dedication"
of the temple is accepted by the plaintiff on his own behalf and on behalf of
the Maha Sangha.  
  
Upon a consideration of the oral evidence of the plaintiff himself it is clear
that his position too is that the temple is a Sanghika temple. The material
part of his evidence in examination in chief reads as follows (as translated)  
  
Q. Is this place (i.e. temple) Sanghika?  
  
A. Now it is Sanghika.  
  
Q. Since when is it Sanghika?  
  
A. Since the date of the dedication to me. . . .  
  
Q. This was given to you as a Sanghika gift?  
  
A. As a Sanghika gift.  
  
Q. You say you are the Adhipathi of Sanghika property?  
  
A. Yes.  
  
Q. How was it rendered Sanghika?  
  
A. It was the intention of the Dayaka Sabha. It was so declared.  
  
Having regard to the averments in the plaint, the documents P2, P3 and P4 and
the oral testimony of the plaintiff himself, I hold that the plaintiff has
instituted this action on the basis that the temple called Mahajana Rajaramaya
is a Sanghika temple. "It is by a gift that a temple or any other property can
become Sanghika, and the very conception of a gift requires that there should
be an offering or dedication ... until a dedication takes place the temple
remains 'gihi santhaka' (lay property). This dedication may take the form of a
writing or may be verbal but in either case it is a formal act, accompanied by
a solemn ceremony in the presence of 4 or more priests who apparently
represent the 'Sarva Sangha' or entire priesthood' "per De Sampayo, J. in
Wickremasinghe v. Unnanse (supra). His Lordship Chief Justice Basnayake cited
Wickremasinghe's case (supra) in Wijewardena v. Buddharakkita (supra) and
stated: "No property can become Sanghika without such a ceremony . . . A
temple or any

**202**

other property given to the Sangha must be dedicated in the manner prescribed
in the Vinaya. Then and then only can it become Sanghika property". (at pages
124 and 125). In the present case there is no proof of a "dedication" in the
manner prescribed in the Vinaya. The fact that the State validly leased the
property to the "Trustees" in terms of the Crown Lands Ordinance for the
purpose of constructing a temple and that a deed "of dedication" (P4) was
executed with the full authority of the State do not render the temple a
Sanghika Vihara. The contemplated lease for a period of 99 years would make no
difference at all, for the title to the property still remains with the State.
In other words, the property remains "Gihi Santhaka". The essence of a valid
dedication is that the property must cease to be "Gihi Santhaka"; the
dedication must be in terms of the Vinaya.  
  
Finally, Mr. Samarasekera's contention that the present action was only for a
declaration to the office of Viharadhipathi is not acceptable. As stated
earlier the relief prayed for included ejectment and an order for restoration
of possession. These reliefs attract a claim to property. As submitted by Mr.
Dissanayake, the rights attached to the office of Viharadhipathi necessarily
involve rights to immovable property. Mr. Dissanayake very relevantly cited
the following passage from the judgment of Pathirana, J. in Mapalane
Dhammadaja Thero v. Rotumba Wimalajothi Thero(3). "The temple which is the
symbol of the office of Viharadhipathi and its appurtenances which include the
residential quarters of bhikkus all stand on immovable property. The question
of title to all these is involved in an action for the Viharadhipathiship of a
temple, not to mention that the title to its temporalities all of which by
operation of law after the Ordinance of 1931 vests in the lawful
Viharadhipathi. . . Two concepts are therefore associated with the office of
Viharadhipathi of a temple. First, there is the holder of such an office.
Secondly, by virtue of the office there are interests which are attached to
such office by operation of law . . . An action for declaration of title to
the office of Viharadhipathi though in form it may appear to be an action for
an office or status is in substance an action for the temple and all its
temporalities:" Referring to the relief in ejectment, Pathirana, J. stated:
"To eject means to oust the defendant from the temple and its temporalities
and put the plaintiff in possession thereof. Ejectment of the defendant cannot
therefore be said to be purely incidental to the claim to be incumbent. The
temple and the office of Viharadhipathi are so inextricably interwoven that it
is almost impossible to visualize one without the other."

**203**

(at page 164). Thus the submission advanced on behalf of the plaintiff-
appellant that the action was purely for a declaration in respect of the
office of Viharadhipathi and not for a declaration of title to the land is
untenable. The view taken by the Court of Appeal is relevant to the decision
of the case and is correct. The plaintiffs action is clearly misconceived in
law.  
  
For these reasons the appeal fails and is dismissed, but in all the
circumstances, without costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
**  
**GUNASEKERA, J.**  
  
Whilst I agree with the judgment of my Lord the Chief Justice with whom my
brother Wijetunga, J. has agreed in which the facts relating to this appeal
are fully set out I am of the view that the plaintiff-appellant's action
cannot be maintained for the following reasons as well.  
  
Special leave to appeal had been granted in this case upon the following
principal question. "Whether there was a valid dedication of the temple
constructed on the land leased by the State, although  
  
(a) such dedication was by the lessees acting with the authority of the State,
and  
  
(b) the contemplated future lease was for 99 years only".  
  
The evidence relating to this aspect of the matter appears at pages 169
onwards of the Court of Appeal brief. According to the evidence of the
plaintiff Kampane Gunaratna Thero, although he claims that the temple in
question has become Sanghika property from the day it was bestowed on him and
that the Dayaka Sabha had the intention of dedicating it to the Maha Sangha,
there is no evidence on record to establish that the formalities and the
ceremonies that have to be complied with for a dedication to the Maha Sangha
for the said property to become Sanghika property as referred to by Shaw,
A.C.J. in Wickramasinghe v. Unnanse 22 NLR 236 have been fulfilled.

**204**

Further, according to the lease agreement 'P2' the lessees were to hold the
land until the dedication of the temple in the manner provided for in clause
11 of its 6th schedule (vide the 3rd schedule at page 61), and according to
clause 14, 'upon the dedication of the temple in the manner provided in clause
11 the lessor was to issue a fresh lease of the land for 99 years in favour of
the trustee or the controlling Viharadhipathy, in trust for the temple so
dedicated'. From the above clauses it appears that title to the temple in
question was to remain in the State.  
  
In my view not only has there been no dedication as required by the Vinaya
rules but also the intention has been that the title to the property was to
remain in the State. In these circumstances, I answer the question upon which
leave was granted in the negative. The appeal is therefore dismissed but
without costs.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.**

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/10.html_  

