[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [2005](./) >> **[2005] LKSC 11**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+2005+11 or 2005+LKSC+11) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=2005+LKSC+11) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Welgama v. Wijesundera And Another - SLR - 110, Vol 1 of 2006 [2005] LKSC
11; (2006) 1 Sri LR 110 (1 April 2005)

**110**

**WELGAMA**

**VS.**

**WIJESUNDERA AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ,  
BANDARANAYAKE,J AND  
JAYASINGHE, J  
SC APPEAL 2/2003  
CA L. A. 24397  
D. C. COLOMBO NO. 31166/T  
MAY 20, JUNE 17, JULY 11, AUGUST 29 AND NOVEMBER 3, 2003  
AND FEBRUARY 17, 2004

_Testamentary Action - Determining the date of death for purpose of deciding.
date when estate passed to heirs and for grant of letters of administration
Â­Presumption of life - Evidence Ordinance, section 107 - Presumption of death
- Evidence Ordinance, section 108 \- Interpretation Act, No. 10 of 1988
amending the period for presumption of death from "seven years" to "one year'
\- How may court decide the date of death as a fact - Does the amendment date
back to the day deceased disappeared, viz. 13.02.1983 or should one year be
counted from the date of the amending Act, viz. 02.04. 1988? - Intermeddling
with the estate on the basis of deceased's power of attorney - Effect of
intermeddling on the date of death._

**111**

The appellant is the widow and the respondents are the two sisters of Upali
Wijewardena who disappeared on his way to Colombo from Kuala Lumpur in his
private lear jet on 13.02.1983. Neither the air craft nor the remains of
Wijewardena were traced. At the time of his disappearance neither the
appellant nor the respondents sought to institute testamentary proceedings,
but on 07.10.1987 the respondents filed DC Colombo Case No. 30927/T. They
complained that the appellants acting on the power of attorney issued by
Wijewardena (deceased) intermeddled with the estate "while he was alive"  and
sought letters of administration _pendente lite_ under section 539A of the
Civil Procedure Code (then in force) on the basis that Wijewardena died on
13.02.1983. The court did not publish order nisi but ordered that the
appellant's objections be issued to the respondents.  
  
When the matter was taken to the Court of Appeal by the respondents, the
appellant explained that the respondents were estopped from pleading death on
13.02.1983 and that as on the date of his disappearance the deceased's
liabilities exceed his assets. He owed Rs. 50 million to the Revenue
Department and Rs. 200 million to the People's Bank; steps were taken to
settle these debts on the basis of the power of attorney and the respondents
acquiesced in restructuring the companies and in fact accepted office as
directors of separate companies.  
  
In the meantime on 21.04.1988, section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance was
amended by Act, No. 10 of 1988 substituting the words "seven years" with " one
year" for the purpose of reducing the period of presumption of death.
Consequently the Court of Appeal litigation in DC Colombo No. 30927/T was
withdrawn by the respondents who also consented to letters of administration
being granted to the appellant in DC Colombo No. 31166/T filed on 28.04.1988.
In that action court ordered final accounts to be filed on 08.03.1993.  
  
Notwithstanding the settlement reached regarding DC Colombo No. 309271/ T
which was withdrawn of consent, respondents insisted in Case No. 31166/ T that
the court should hear the matter as if Wijewardena died on 13.02.1983. The
appellant contends that she filed action on the basis that the decreased died
on 21.04.1988, the date of the amending Act, No.10 of 1988. The District Judge
held that on the basis of the evidence and documents the date of the death was
13.02.1983. The Court of Appeal affirmed the order of the District Judge that
the date of death has to be established on evidence and not in terms of
section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance, as amended.  
  
**HELD:  
**  
(Bandaranayake, J. dissenting)

**112**

The date of the death for purpose of the estate should be taken as 21.04.1988.  
  
**_Per_ S. N. SILVA, CJ**  
  
"......................... The question is from which date the period of one
year should be computed? Is it one year immediately preceding 21.04.1988 as
contended by the President's Counsel for the appellant or one year from the
date of disappearance as contended in particular by Counsel for the 2nd
respondent.? I am inclined to agree with the President's Counsel for the
appellant for two reasons.  
  
Firstly the amendment to the Evidence Ordinance is procedural in nature. It
applies prospectively and a party could avail of it only after it comes into
force. Therefore, the earliest date on which a party could establish the fact
of death on the basis of the presumption is the date on which the law comes
into operation. A fortiori the relevant period within which it should be
proved that the person was not heard is the period of one year immediately
preceding that year.  
  
Secondly, if the presumption of death is to relate back to one year after
13.02.1983 as contended by Counsel for the 2nd respondent or to 13.02.1983 as
contended by President's Counsel for the 1st respondent, it would lead to the
incongruous result as noted above, in which the person will be presumed to be
alive as well as dead during the same period.".  
  
_Per_ **BANDARANAYAKE, J.** (dissenting)  
  
1\. "Section 107 of the Evidence Ordinance could be regarded as a provision
which considers the burden of proof of the death of a person known to have
been alive within thirty years and section 108 refers to the burden of proof
regarding a person who is alive and had not been heard of for seven years".  
  
2\. "It would be necessary according to Pulle, J (in _Davoodbhay v. Faraak_ )
(1959) 63 NLR 97) to prove such death in terms of section 101 of the Evidence
Ordinance".  
  
3\. "The period of seven years referred to in section 108 was amended by Act,
No. 10 of 1988 by reducing the period of seven years to one year."  
  
4\. "That section (108) does not create a presumption as to the time of death
of a person in question".

**113**

5 "Although the deceased was not seen after 13.02.1983, the appellant had
dealt with his property as he was alive and living elsewhere."  
  
" The respondents have continued to state that the appellant was last seen or
heard on 13.02.1983. The appellant has not disputed this fact nor has taken
any steps to prove anything to the contrary. Therefore there could not be any
dispute between the parties that the deceased was last seen or heard on
13.02.1983.".  
  
6\. "I cannot see any basis for the date of the amended section 108, which
came into force to be regarded as the date of the death of the deceased and in
my view the contention that the date is to be presumed as at 21.04.1988 is not
only contradictory and untenable, but also is an attempt to give an artificial
and baseless interpretation to the amended section ."  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Silva v. Silva_ 10 NLR 234 (FB)  
  
2\. _Amalgamated Investment and Property Company Ltd. v. Texas Commerce
International Bank Ltd._ 1984 OB 84 at 122  
  
3. _Doe v. Nepeani(1833)_ Reports of cases of the Court of Kings Bench Vol. lIP. 219 at P226  
  
4\. Re Benham's Trusts (1867) Law Times Reports Vol. XVI P349  
  
5\. Re Phenes Trust (1870) Law Time Reports Vol. Xxi - P 107 (1870)5CH App.139  
  
6\. _Re Rhodes vs. Rhodes_ (1888) Law Times Reports Vol. LVII p. 652  
  
7\. _Rex v. Taylor_ (1950) Kings Bench Division P. 368  
  
8\. _Warkins v. Warkins_ (1953) 2 AER P. 1113  
  
9\. _Thompson v. Thompason_ (1956) 1 AER P.603  
  
10\. _Davoodbhoy v. Farook_ (1959) 63 NLR 97  
  
11. _Pattison v. Kalutara Special Criminal Investigation Bureau_ (1970) 73NLR 399  
  
12\. _Assistant Government Agent v. Fernando_ (1909) 12 NLR 83  
  
13. _Doe v. Nepean_ (1833) 5 B & Ad 86  
  
14. _Nepean v. Doe_ (1837) 2 M & W 894  
  
15\. _Re Rhodes_ (1887) 36 Ch.D. 586  
  
16\. _Hamy Vel Muladeniya v. Siyatu_ (1945) 46 NLR 95  
  
17\. _Tikiri Banda v. Ratwatte_ (1894) 3 CLR 70

**114**

18\. _Prins v. Peiris_ (1901)4 NLR 353  
  
19\. _Silva v. Salman_ (1916) 19 NLR 305  
  
20\. _Lal Chand Matwari v. Mahant Ramrup Gir and Another_ TLR Vol XUI 1925-26
P159  
  
21\. Re Green's Settlement (1865) LR 1 p. 288  
  
22\. _Dowley v. Winfield_ (1844) 14 sim 277  
  
23\. _Wing v. Angrave_ (1860) 8 HLC 183  
  
24\. _Hickman v. Upsali_ (1876) 4 CH. D. 145  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Nihal Jayamanne P. C. with Ronald Perera, V. Choksy, Noorani Amarasinghe,
Uditha CoIIure and Dilan de Silva_ for appellant.  
  
_Wijeyadasa Rajapakse_ , PC with _Navin Marapana_ for respondents.

_Cur.adv. vult._

April 1st 2005  
**SARATH N. SILVA, C. J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the Judgment dated 11.01.1999 of the Court of Appeal.
By that Judgment the Court of Appeal dismissed the application f the appellant
for leave to appeal from order dated 28.11.1997 of the District Court.  
  
The hearing of the application for Special Leave to Appeal before this Court
and of this appeal were adjourned for considerable periods of time to enable
the parties to arrive at a settlement of the dispute. Upon the failure to
arrive at a settlement, Counsel made submissions and thereafter tendered
extensive written submissions.  
  
The dispute relates to the administration of the estate of the late Philip
Upali Wijewardena, leading public figure and a businessman. He embarked from
the Kuala Lumpur International Airport in his private Lear Jet on 13.02.1983
with the recorded destination being Colombo. The aircraft failed to give a
position report overhead Medan to the Kuala Lumpur Air Traffic Control Centre
and did not regain contact with any Ground Control Center, thereafter. Neither
the remains of Wijewardena nor of any of the passengers have been found. It is
reported that some fishermen in

**115**

Indonesia have found a wheel of an aircraft and a part which could be related
to that aircraft. The heirs are his widow, the present appellant and his two
sisters, being the Respondents. Although, Wijewardena disappeared in the
circumstances stated above on 13.02.1983, neither the Appellant nor any of the
Respondents sought to institute Testamentary proceedings for Letters of
Administration in terms of Section 530(1) of the Civil Procedure Code (which
was then applicable) on the basis that he died on 13.02.1983 being the day on
which the aircraft he was in disappeared. Wijewardena had appointed one
Ramalingam Murugiah as his Attorney and his affairs were carried out on the
basis of the said Power of Attorney. Subsequently, the said Murugiah gave a
substituted Power of Attorney in favour of the Appellant.  
  
On 07.10.1987, the two Respondents filed a petition in the District Court of
Colombo (No. 30927/T), seeking Letters of Administration in respect of the
estate of Wijewardena. It was pleaded in the petition (paragraph 7) that the
Petitioners have reason to believe that the Respondent (the present appellant)
has been willfully asserting that the deceased is still alive for the unlawful
and illegal purpose of administering wrongfully, intermeddling and to do what
she solely wishes with the considerable assets of the deceased, without any
authority or supervision from this Court. They also pleaded that the action
taken by Murugiah and the Appellant on the power of attorney referred to above
is unlawful. They applied to administer the estate on the basis that
Wijewardena died on 13.02.83 and sought inter alia Letters of Administration
pendente lite in terms of Section 539A of the Civil Procedure Code (which was
then applicable). The District Court refused to grand Letters of
Administration _pendente lite._ However, the Court issued Order Nisi on
08.10.1987. On 19.10.1987 the Appellant filed papers and made an application
to recall the Order Nisi that had been issued. The District Court then noted
that the Order Nisi had not been signed and made order that no Order Nisi be
published. It was further directed that Notice of objection be issued on the
present Respondents. The Respondents filed an application for Leave to Appeal
to the Court of Appeal from the order made by the District Court on
19.10.1987. They also filed an application in Revision and a Final Appeal from
the same Order.  
  
On 28.04.1988, the Appellant filed petition in the District Court (Case No.
31166/T) seeking Letters of Administration. The application was filed on the
basis of the amendment to Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance

**116**

made by Act, NO.10 of 1988, which came into force on 21.04.1988. The District
Court issued Order Nisi on the basis of this application, in terms of Section
531 of the Civil Procedure Code and directed service on the Respondents.  
  
At this juncture, when cases were pending in the District Court and Court of
Appeal as aforesaid, the parties entered into a settlement on 18.01.1989. The
settlement has been signed by the appellant and the Respondents on the basis
of which the Respondents withdrew the Applications for Leave to Appeal,
Revision, and the Final Appeal referred to above. A schedule to the Settlement
Agreement specifies the Companies in respect of which the deceased had
interests and the Appellant agreed on her part to the appointment of the
Respondents and their children to positions in the Boards of Directors of
specified Companies and to make certain payments as fees. It is specifically
provided that subsequent to the execution of the agreement and the appointment
of Directors, as referred to, the Respondents will consent to Letters of
Administration in respect of the estate of the deceased being issued to the
Appellant in the District Court case No. 31166/T, as the widow of the deceased
without her providing any security for this purpose other than a personal
bond. The Respondents also agreed to withdraw the testamentary action No.
30927/T filed by them in the District Court. It was specifically agreed that
the Respondents will withdraw the allegations made against the Appellant in
paragraph 7 of the petition filed in that action, the contents of which
paragraph have been referred to above.  
  
On the basis of the foregoing settlement Appellant was issued with Letters of
Administration.  
  
On 26.11.1992 the Letters of Administration were signed by the Addl. District
Judge who directed that the inventory and the final account be filed on
08.03.1993. In clause 3 of the settlement Agreement it is specifically stated
that the Appellant, "undertakes to furnish accounts in respect of each and
every year of her administration of the said Estate of the deceased to the
Parties of the First Part (Respondents) before the Thirty First day of
December in each and every year commencing from 31st March, 1990"  
  
The dispute was rekindled by the failure on the part of the Appellant to file
the inventory and final account as directed by Court or to render accounts as
agreed to in clause 3 of the Agreement referred above. The Respondents

**117**

filed a petition and affidavit on 02.04.1997 in case No. 31166/T (being the
application filed by the Appellant in which Letters of Administration had been
issued.), alleging inter alia, that the deceased died on 13.02.1983 and the
Appellant intermeddled and/or dealt with the assets of the deceased for her
own benefit on the basis of a Power of Attorney which was null and void, for
her own benefit in fraud of the Respondents. They sought an order against the
Appellant from the District Court to file a further inventory and valuation of
the deceased's property at the date of his death, namely 13.02.1983 and a
final account of the administration of the estate on or before a Date to be
fixed by Court.  
  
The Appellant filed objections on 29.07.1997 stating that the Respondents are
estopped from asserting that the deceased died on 13.02.1983 after they
withdrew case No. 30927/T filed by them and consented to Letters being granted
to her in case No. 31166/T filed by her on the basis that death took place on
21.04.1988 being the date on which the amendment to the Evidence Ordinance
came into force. She further stated that as at the date of disappearance the
liabilities of Mr. Wijewardena exceeded his assets, with about Rs. 50 Million
due to the Inland Revenue Department and nearly Rs. 200 Million due to the
People's Bank on debts of his companies covered by personal guarantees. That,
action was taken on the Power of Attorney to avoid a bankruptcy situation in
which the Peoples Bank would have taken over the assets. The debts were
settled and the assets were restructured. That, the Respondents acquiesced in
such restructuring which was done on the basis that Wijewardena was alive and
on the authority of the power of attorney by accepting Directorship in
Companies that came into existence after 13.02.1983, in terms of Settlement
Agreement referred to above.  
  
The Additional District Judge, in the first part of his Order dated
28.11.1997, came to a finding that the Appellant has delayed in filing the
final account and inventory. In the second part of his Order the Judge has
noted that for the purpose of filing the final account and inventory it is
necessary to decide on the date of death and on the documentary evidence
adduced as to the disappearance of the aircraft he held that the date of death
was 13.02.1983. The Appellant was accordingly directed to file the inventory
and final account within 6 months on the basis that the death took place on
13.02.1983. The Court of Appeal dismissed the application for Leave to Appeal
on the basis that the date of death cannot be decided

**118**

in terms of Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance. That, the date of death
should be established on evidence and on the documentary evidence the District
Court correctly held that death took place on 13.02.1983.  
  
At the stage of granting Special Leave both parties were permitted to raise
questions on which the appeal will be considered. The questions raised by the
Appellant are based on the premise that the direction made by the District
Court to file the inventory and final account with effect from 13.02.1983 is
erroneous and that the date of the inventory and commencement of the
accounting should be taken as one of the following.:  
  
(i) in view of section 553 of the Civil Procedure Code which requires a final
account of the "executor ship or administration", the point of commencement
should be the date on which an order was made to issue Letters of
Administration to the Appellant being 24.04.1989;  
  
(ii) in view of the Settlement Agreement which requires the Appellant' to
furnish an account of her administration of the estate, commencing 31st March
1990, (clause 3), that should be taken as the date operative between the
parties,  
  
(iii) in view of the Appellants application for Letters of Administration
being filed on 28.04.1988 on the basis of the amendment to Section 108 of the
Evidence Ordinance which came into force on 21.04.1988, that date should be
taken as the date on which the estate came into being and the operative date
for the inventory and the accounting.  
  
Submissions of President's Counsel for the Appellant relate mainly to the
premise formulated in (iii) above.  
  
The Respondents raised the question that the Appellant should account from the
date she began to intermeddle with the estate of the deceased being the date
of disappearance of the deceased and that the presumption operative in terms
of Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance and/or that Letters of Administration
issued, should relate back to that date. Initially, only one set of
submissions were filed on behalf of both Respondents. Later, a separate
submission was filed on behalf of the 2nd Respondent in which it has been
contended that even assuming that the Amendment to

**119**

Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance applies, the date of death should be
taken as one year after the date of disappearance viz. 13.02.1984. In the
joint submission made on behalf of the Respondents it was contended that the
Settlement Agreement was void.

The question raised by the parties relate to the principal fact in issue,
being the date of death of Wijewardena, which has been addressed from
different aspects of fact and the application of principles of Law. It is to
be borne in mind that we have to examine the issue solely from the perspective
of a testamentary action. We are here, not concerned with the circumstances
relevant to the disappearance of the ill-fated aircraft but, with the estate
of Wijewardena. The dispute is, to state it plainly, as to the property of Mr.
Wijewardena and the manner in which it should be accounted for; if as at
13.02.1983, being the date of disappearance, Mr. Wijewardena owned no
property, there would have been no dispute.  
  
From the perspective of the Law, property is identified only with reference to
rights and obligations in relation to such property. I use the words rights
and obligations to include all the jural co-relatives identified in
jurisprudence that may relate to property. For example, if we take an
immovable property such as a block of land, from the perspective of the Law,
we are not concerned whether it is fertile or infertile, flat of steep but,
only with the rights of ownership, possession, use enjoyment and so on. These
rights are identified in relation to property, as being vested with a person
or other legal entity that can hold such rights. The same applies to all forms
of movable property and legally recognized relationships, be it in contract or
otherwise. Since property and legal relationships are identified with
reference. to persons who are vested with rights and obligations, it is
essential for the legal system that such persons be clearly identified, at any
given point of time.  
  
The death of a person, in physical or material terms means, the cessation of
life, In legal terms, it means the passing of the dead persons rights and
obligations that survive, to the heirs or the persons who inherit his
property.  
  
For the purpose of testamentary proceedings, at the moment of death the
property of the deceased (the bundle of rights and obligations) become the
estate and pass without interval to the heirs. This basic premise

**120**

of the law has been clearly stated in a decision of the Full Bench of the
Supreme Court in the case of Silva vs. Silva (1) Grenier A. J. stated as
follows:  
  
" ..............On the death of a person his estate, in the absence of a will,
passes at once by operation of law to his heirs, and the dominium vests in
them. Once it so vests they cannot be divested of it except by the several
well-known modes recognized by law."  
  
The Law does not and cannot recognize an interval between the death and the
passing of property, since rights and obligations, from which perspective
only, property and legal relationships are identified in law, have to be, at
any given point of time vested or reposed in a person or a legal entity.  
  
Moving from the general propositions stated above, to the specific facts of
the case; when the aircraft in which Wijewardena was travelling disappeared on
13.02.1983, and he was not heard of thereafter; the obvious question that
arose in relation to his property rights and obligations was whether they
could be dealt with on the basis Wijewardena was alive or on the basis he was
dead. The preceding analysis reveals that from a legal perspective as to
property rights and obligations, there could be no intermediate situation.  
  
The question whether a person is dead or alive, is one of fact and in this
instance the fact in issue is the date of death since the estate for purpose
of Testamentary proceedings came into existence on that date and the property
rights and obligations thereupon pass to the heirs. There is no direct
evidence as to the death of Mr. Wijewardena. However, this does preclude the
proof of that fact with circumstantial evidence. Although, a basic premise of
our Law of Evidence, it is relevant to state here the standard of proof that
would apply. Section 3 of the Evidence Ordinance states as follows:  
  
" A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters before it,
the court either believes it to exist or considers its existence so probable
that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to
act upon the supposition that it exists."

**121**

Documentary evidence was adduced by the Respondents with their petition dated
02.04.1997 filed in the District Court seeking an accounting from 13.02.1983,
alleging that on a balance of probability that Mr. Wijewardena died on that
date. Upon an acceptance of the evidence the impugned orders have been made by
District Court and the Court of Appeal. However, it is obvious that this
evidence was available to them as far back as 1983. The significant matter is
that neither the Respondents, nor the Appellant nor any of the persons who had
claims against Mr. Wijewardena, sought to assert that the death took place on
12.02.1983 and to institute Testamentary proceedings, at that stage, on this
material. They all chose to go along with what is generally described as the
"presumption as to life and death" as contained in Section 107 and 108 of the
Evidence Ordinance. These two sections that appear in the part dealing with
the burden of proof, prior to the amendment to Section 108 effected by Act,
No.10 of 1988 read as follows :-  
  
107\. "When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown
that he was alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead
is on the person who affirms it" ..  
  
108\. Provided that when the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and
it is proved that he has not been heard of for seven years by those who would
naturally have heard of him if he had been alive, the burden of proving that
he is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it."  
  
Coomaraswamy in his book on the Law of Evidence (Vol. II book I at page 429)
describes the operation of the presumption of life thus:  
  
"When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he
was alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the
person who affirms it. In other words, the court has to presume that the man
is alive until the contrary is proved by those who affirm that he is dead. If
not so proved, those who affirm that he is alive will succeed. This is known
in English Law as the presumption as to continuance of life. It derives its
authority from the presumption of continuance recognized in Section 114(c),
but it appears to be obligatory, whereas Section 114(c) is discretionary. It
is a reputable presumption."  
  
These two sections do not lay down inflexible principles of law. They are only
rules of evidence that state the burden in a proceeding before any

**122**

Court in which the fact in issue is whether a person is dead or alive. In
terms of Section 107 where it is shown that the person was alive within thirty
years, it is presumed for evidentiary purposes that the person continues to be
alive and the fact of death has to be proved by the person who alleges it, on
a balance of probability as noted above. Section 108 is a proviso which comes
into operation in the background of the presumption of life as contained in
Section 107. The manner in which the proviso works, could be stated in
practical terms as follows:  
  
The presumption of life continues to apply since the person has been alive
within thirty years and a party not being possessed of evidence to prove the
fact of death, adduces evidence short of that by proving that the person has
not been heard for seven years (prior to the amendment) by those who would
naturally have heard of him if he had been alive, then the presumption shifts
and it is presumed that the person is dead. In such circumstances the party
who alleges that the person is alive has to prove that fact on a balance of
probability. The presumption of life is no longer operative.  
  
It is now necessary to apply these presumptions to the facts of this case.  
  
As at 13.02.1983 being the date of disappearance of Wijewardena had been alive
within thirty years. Therefore, Mr. he is presumed to be alive. The Appellant
and others who dealt with his property, rights and obligations functioned on
the premise that he was alive and the Appellant acted for and on his behalf.
Section 107 which lays down the presumption of life does not debar any person
from adducing evidence and proving the fact of death. The Respondents did not
avail of this option. By Act, No. 10 of 1988, Section 108 was amended by
substituting a period one year in place of the period of seven years. The
amendment was certified on 21.04.1988 and within one week on 28.04.1988 the
Appellant filed the present case for Letters of Administration pleading
specifically that Wijewardena should be presumed to be dead in terms of
Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance as amended. The present Respondents who
were cited in that application accepted that basis and agreed to the grant of
Letters of Administration.  
  
The question to be considered is whether in this state of things, the
Respondents could nearly nine years later, in April 1997 file papers alleging

**123**

that, Mr. Wijewardena died on 13.02.1983. To my mind the following points
militate against this belated change of position on the part of the
Respondents, which found favour with the District Court and the Court of
Appeal. They are:  
  
(i) After the disappearance of Mr. Wijewardena on 13.02.1983 the Appellant
acting on the presumption of life dealt with his affairs in terms of the power
of Attorney as stated above. The Respondents who knew of this course of
action, did not seek to stop it by instituting a Testamentary proceeding on
the . documentary evidence as to the disappearance which according to them
establish on a balance or probability that Mr. Wijewardena, died on
13.02.1983.  
  
(ii) On 07.10.1987 the Respondents filed case No. 30927/T for Letters of
Administration on the premise that Mr Wijewardena died on 13.02.1983. It is
significant that they relied on the same documentary evidence adduced with the
petition dated 02.04.1997 to prove the fact of death and also made the same
allegation that the Appellant fraudulently and wrongfully dealt with the
affairs on the basis of the Power of Attorney. The Respondents later withdrew
this application and all proceeding in the court of Appeal, filed from the
order of the Additional District Judge refusing to sign the Order Nisi in
their favour, without any reservation of their right to reagitate the same
matter;  
  
(iii) In the Settlement Agreement, the Respondents specifically withdrew the
allegation in paragraph 7 of their petition dated 07.10.1987 filed in case No.
30927/T which reads as follows:  
  
"The Petitioners (present Respondent) have reasons to believe that the
Respondent (present Appellant) has been willfully asserting that the said
deceased is still alive for the unlawfully and illegal purpose of
administering wrongfully intermeddling and to do what she solely wishes with
the considerable assets of the deceased without any authority or supervision
from this Court and also completely disregarding the rights and interests of
the Petitioners who are the sisters of the late Upali Wijewardena (deceased)"
Thereby, they accepted the validity of the action taken by the

**124**

Appellant on the basis of that Wijewardena was alive by virtue of the power of
attorney. Their acquiescence in the course of action taken by the Appellant is
confirmed by the acceptance of Directorships in companies formed after
13.02.1983 in terms of that Power of Attorney.  
  
(iv) The Respondents consented to Letters of Administration being granted to
the Appellant in her application in which the fact of death is asserted in
terms of Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance, as amended. The Respondents
did not contest this position at that stage and seek to establish that the
death took place on 13.02.1983. On the contrary, they withdrew their
application for Letters filed on that basis as noted in (ii) above.  
  
The Respondents have thus acquiesced in the course of action taken by the
Appellant after 13.02.1983 in attending the affairs of Mr. Wijewardena in
terms of the Power of Attorney. On the basis of their conduct itemized above
including the Settlement Agreement and the two Testamentary cases, they are
estopped in law from asserting in 1997 that Mr. Wijewardena's date of death,
for the purpose of the administration of his estate, should be taken as
13.02.1983. The operation of the doctrine of estoppel is stated in Section 115
of the Evidence Ordinance as follows:  
  
_" When one person has by his declaration, act, or omission intentionally
caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act
upon such belief, neither he nor his representative shall be allowed in any
suit. or proceeding between himself and such person or his representative to
deny the truth of that thing. "  
_  
In England the doctrine of estoppel has been stated as a general principle by
Lord Denning M. R. in the following statement made in Amalgamated Investment
and Property Co. Ltd., vs. Texas Commerce International Bank Ltd. (2)

_" The doctrine of estoppel is one of the most flexible and useful in the
armoury of the law. But it has become over loaded with cases. That is why I
have not gone through them all in this judgment. It has evolved during the
last 150 years in a sequence of separate developments: proprietary estoppel,
estoppel by representation of fact, estoppel by acquiescence, and promissory
estoppel. At the same time it has been_

**125**

_sought to be limited by a series of maxims: estoppel is only a rule of
evidence, estoppel cannot give rise to a cause of action, estoppel cannot do
away with the need for consideration, and so forth, All these can now be seen
to merge into one general principle shorn of limitations. When the parties to
a transaction proceed on the basis of an underlying assumption-either of fact
or of law \- whether due to misrepresentation or mistake makes no difference -
on which they have conducted the dealings between them - neither of them will
be allowed to go back on that assumption when it would be unfair or unjust to
allow him to do so. lf one of them does seek to go back on it, the courts will
give the other such remedy as the equity of the case demands. "  
_  
Although, certain doubts have been expressed in England or to the Application
of a unified doctrine of estoppel, the statement of Lord Denning could be read
in harmony with the principle in Section 115 of our Evidence Ordinance.  
  
The Appellant applied for Letters of Administration on the basis of the
presumption in Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance, as amended. The
Respondents who had previously applied for Letters on the basis of
circumstantial evidence that the death took place on 13.02.1983 dropped that
premise and acquiesced in the position taken by the Appellant. The Court has
to decide the fact in issue as to date of death in relation to the parties and
then apply it to property, obligations and so on, as noted above. There is no
question of the date of death being decided as a matter of general or public
importance, in which event different considerations may have to be taken into
account. Between the parties, based on their conduct, as analysed above, the
date of death must necessarily be decided on the basis of the application of
the presumption in Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance, as amended. This
process of reasoning may not be amenable to common sense or logic but, from
the perspective of the Law, the reasoning has to be applied so that at any
given point of time, it produces a clear and unambiguous answer as to whether
a person is considered as alive or dead. There cannot be any intermediate
period of doubt or ambiguity. The preceding analysis shows that rights and
obligations  in relation to property and transactions are workable only on a
clearly defined line of demarcation in which a person is considered to be
alive upto a specified date and dead thereafter. As at the date of death thus
determined, the estate comes into being and the rights and obligations in

**126**

relation to property and transactions that survive after death, pass to the
heirs or persons to whom they are devised or bequeathed.  
  
he presumption of death in Section 108 is a proviso to the general presumption
of continuity as contained in Section 107. The general presumption as to
continuity of life is couched in wide terms for obvious reasons. In the
absence of specific evidence as to the fact of death, the law has to presume
that the person who was alive continues to be alive. In this background of a
presumption of continuity of life, the presumption of death as contained in
the proviso operates only where it is "proved" that the person "has not been
head of for seven years (prior to the amendment) by those who would have
naturally heard of him, if he had been alive." On the reasoning set out above,
the question can now be narrowed down to its core. On what date does the
presumption of death begin to operate? Does it relate back to the date the
person was not heard of as contended by the Respondents? Or, is it at the end
of the period as contended by the Appellant?  
  
If the answer is based on the principle of relation back as contended by the
Respondents, the person will now be presumed to be dead during the period he
was presumed to be alive in terms of Section 107. As noted above, for rights
and obligations in relation to property and transactions to be worked, there
has to be a clear dividing line, A person cannot be presumed to be alive and
dead during the same period. If so, all transactions entered on the basis that
the person is alive would be put asunder and there would be uncertainty as to
their validity. Furthermore, in terms of Section 108, the presumption arises
only when it is "proved that he has not been heard of for seven years (prior
to the amendment) by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had
been alive ...." The fact could be said to be 'proved' only at the end of the
period.  
  
The conclusion arrived at pursuant to the preceding analysis, flowing from the
Law of Property, to succession and the application of Section 107 and 108 of
the Evidence Ordinance is supported by the series of judgments in England
which relate to trusts, legacies, prescription and bigamy cited by President's
Counsel for the Appellant. In all these cases the evidence was that the person
in question disappeared and it has been consistently held that the absence of
evidence as to the date of death, the fact of death has to be presumed at the
end of the period of seven years.

**127**

In a chronological order the cases are as follows:  
  
1\. Doe vs. Nepean (3) Judgment of Denman C. J.  
2\. Re. Benham's Trusts (4)  
3\. Re. Phenes Trust (5)  
4\. Re. Rhodes; Rhodes vs. Rhodes (6)  
5\. Rex vs. Taylor (7)  
6\. Warkins vs. Warkins (8)  
7\. Thompson vs. Thompson (9)  
  
A further complication arises in this case from the amendments to section 108
of the Evidence Ordinance effected by Act, No.10 of 1989 certified on
21.04.1988. The amendment simply substitutes three words "for one year" in
place of the words "for seven years" in Section 108. I would reproduce the
comment made by Coomaraswamy with regard to this amendment with which I am in
entire agreement:  
  
_" Prior to the 21st April, 1988, when Amendment Act, No. 10 of 1988 was
certified, the Ordinance, following the wisdom of more mature systems like the
English Law very properly fixed this period at seven years. But the Amendment
drastically reduced the period to one year. It is submitted that this is a
retrograde step which will lead to many complicated and anomalous situations
and should be rectified forthwith. To depart from a provision which has worked
satisfactorily and which was based on the wisdom of the ages and to amend the
law in this way, perhaps in order to benefit one individual or more, is not in
the best interests of justice and can do violence to the symmetry of the law.
It imposes an unnecessary heavy burden on those who seek to show that the
person is alive. It will also result in the fouling of title to property. It
certainly shows the wisdom of the legislature in a very poor light. "(Vol. II
Book 1, P.430)  
_  
When the amendment came into force on 21.04.1988 a period of 5 years and 2
months had elapsed from the date of disappearance. Therefore, the presumption
of life was operative. With the amendment the fact of death could be presumed
after one year. The question is from which date should the period of one year
be computed. Is it one year immediately preceding 21.04.1988 as contended by
President's Counsel for the Appellant or one year from the date of
disappearance as contended in

**128**

particular by Counsel for the 2nd Respondent. I am inclined to agree with the
submission of President's Counsel for the Appellant for two reasons:  
  
Firstly, the amendment is to the Evidence Ordinance is procedural in nature.
It applies prospectively and a party could avail of its provisions and
institute proceedings only after it comes into force. Therefore, the earliest
date on which a party could establish the fact of death on the basis of the
presumption is the date on which the law came into operation. A fortiori, the
relevant period within which it should be proved that the person was not heard
is the period of one year immediately preceding that date.  
  
Secondly, if the presumption of death is to relate back to one year after
13.02.1983, as contended by Counsel for the 2nd Respondent or to 13.02.1983
itself as contended by Presidents Counsel for the 1st Respondent, it would
lead to a incongruous result, as noted above, in which the person would be
presumed to be alive as well as be dead during the same period.  
  
For these reasons I uphold the submission of President's Counsel for the
Appellant that the date of death for the purpose of the estate should be taken
as 21.04.1988 as being the earliest date on which it could be established in
terms of Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance that the presumption of death
applies.  
  
President's Counsel for the 1st Respondent has submitted that the Appellant
should be considered as an Executor de son _tort_ from the date on which she
started to intermeddle with the estate of the deceased being the date of
disappearance. He cited the following passage from Wharton's Lexicon and from
Executors and Administrators by N. E. Mustoe:  
  
_" Executor de son tort,.............. If a stranger takes upon himself to act
as executor or administrator (see. 14 Halsbury's L of E, 2nd edn. Para 282),
without any just authority (as by intermeddling with the goods of the
deceased, and any other transactions), he is called in law an executor of his
own wrong, de son tort, and is liable to the extent of the assets which have
come to him and to all the trouble of an executor ship without any of the
profits or advantages .... "  
_  
An executor de son tort can discharge his liability by obtaining probate if he
is entitled, or by accounting to the personal representative, or to the Court,
in an administration by the Court."  
  
(Wharton's Lexicon 14th edition page 390)

**129**

_" Any person who is not an executor or an administrator, but who intermeddles
with the deceased's property, may make himself liable to the obligations of an
executor de son tort (by his own wrong). Very slight acts on intermeddling,
will make a person an executor de son tort, e.g. advertising for claims,
paying or receiving payment of debts, or carrying on the deceased's business."
(Executors and Administrators by N. E. Mustoe 4th Ed. page 6)  
_  
The preceding analysis reveals that from the perspective of the Law the
property of a person has to be dealt with on the basis that he is alive or
dead with a clear dividing line. As at the date of disappearance, the
presumption of life was operative and the affairs of Mr. Wijewardena were
carried on, on the basis he was alive. The finding stated above is that, the
presumption of death operates from 21.04.1988 being the earliest date on which
the matter could have been established in Court. It is a sine qua non for a
person to be considered an Executor de son tort, that it be established in the
first instance that the person is dead and there is an estate. Therefore the
liability of an _Executor de son tort_ cannot be attributed to the Appellant
in the manner contended for by Counsel. If at all, the Appellant could be
considered an Executor de son tort from 21.04.1988. This would be unnecessary
since the doctrine of relation back relied on by the Respondents would apply
and the letters granted subsequently would relate to the date of death as
determined. In this connection I would cite the following passage from
Whartons Law Lexicon - 4th Edn. - Page 858 relied on by the Respondents -  
  
_" Relation, where two different times or things are accounted as one, and by
some act done the thing subsequent is said to take effect 'by relation' from
the time preceding. Thus letters of administration relate back to the
intestate's death, and not to the time when they were granted."  
  
_Accordingly I allow the appeal and set aside the order dated 28.11.1997 of
the District Court and the judgment dated 11.01.1999 of the Court of Appeal.
The Appellant being the Administratrix of the Estate is directed to file the
inventory and final account on the basis of that the Estate of the deceased
came into being on 21.04.1988. Since the Administratrix has failed to file any
account either in compliance of the Settlement Agreement

**130**

or in compliance with the order made by the District Court, she is directed to
file the said inventory and account finally within 3 months of the date of
this Judgement.  
  
No costs.  
  
**JAYASINGHE, J.** ,-I agree.,  
  
_Appeal allowed.  
_  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J. (Dissenting)  
  
**I have had the benefit of reading, in draft, the judgment of His Lordship
the Chief Justice. Whilst I am in agreement with the factual position
considered in the said draft, I regret very much that I am unable to agree
with His Lordship's answer to the question as to the exact date of the
presumption of death begins to operate, in connection to the estate of the
deceased coming into being to the appellant for the purpose of inventing and
accounting. The reasons for my inability to agree with the draft judgment are
as follows:  
  
At the stage of granting Special Leave to Appeal, both parties were permitted
to raise questions on which the appeal was to be considered and consequently
three questions were so raised. However, learned President's Counsel for the
appellant made submissions mainly on question No.3, which was in the following
terms:  
  
"In view of the appellant's application for letters of administration being
tiled on 28.04.1988 on the basis of the amendment to section 108 of the
Evidence Ordinance, which came into force on 21.04.1988, that date should be
taken as the date on which the estate came into being and the operative date
for the inventing and the accounting.".  
  
Having considered the aforementioned question, it has been narrowed down in
the draft judgment to read as follows:

**131**

"On what date does the presumption of death begin to operate? Does it relate
back to the date of the person was not heard of as contended by the
respondents? Or is it at the end of the period as contended by the appellant?"  
  
The appeal was chiefly considered on the basis pf Sections 107 and 108 of the
Evidence Ordinance. These two sections are contained in Part III, which deals
with the burden of proof. Section 107 of the Evidence Ordinance could be
regarded as a provision which considers the burden of proof of the death of a
person known to have been alive within thirty years and Section 108 refers to
the burden of proof regarding a person who is alive and has not been heard of
for seven years. Having said that, it is also necessary to be borne in mind
that both these sections are also referred to as sections dealing with the
presumption of death and the presumption of continuance of life. Considering
this aspect, E. R. S. R. Coomaraswamy, (The Law of Evidence, Vol. II, Book I,
pp. 428-429) is of the view that,  
  
"The fact is that rules as to burden of proof and presumptions are so involved
together that it is artificial to separate a given situation and to state that
it is a pure rule of the burden of proof and not of a presumption. Every
rebuttable presumption in favour of one party necessarily involves a rule as
to burden of proof in the other and _vice versa_. It is, therefore, proposed
to consider the rules in sections 107, 108, 109, 110 and 111 as giving rise to
the contrary presumptions which a court shall draw.".  
  
At the same time it would be necessary to be borne in mind that there is a
school of thought that Sections 107 and 108 of the Evidence Ordinance do not
enact a presumption of law or fact, but enact rules governing the burden of
proof. In fact Basnayake, C.J.  in _Davoodbhoy v. Farook_ (10) observed that,  
  
"It is essential to bear in mind that Sections 107 and 108 do not enact a
presumption of law or fact, but enact rules governing the burden of proof like
anyone of the other rules that precede them.".  
  
A similar view was taken by Pulle, J., in the same decision to the effect
that,  
  
"A rule of evidence as to burden of proof does not generate a presumption of
fact."

**132**

The view that has been taken by Pulle, J., thus emphasizes the fact that one
cannot always discharge the burden that the person in question is dead by
leading evidence to indicate that the said person had not been heard of for
seven years by those who would naturally have heard from him. It would be
necessary according to Pulle, J., to prove such death in terms of Section 101
of the Evidence Ordinance. In Pulle, J.,'s words:  
  
"In my view there is nothing in section 108, which compels a Court to hold,
upon proof that a person has not been heard of for seven years by those who
would naturally have heard of him if he had been alive, that the fact of that
person's death has been established by him on whom the burden lies under
Section 101 to prove such death.".  
  
Sections 107 and 108 of the Evidence Ordinance, No. 14 of 1895 reads as
follows:  
  
"Section 107-  
When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he
was alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the
person who affirms it.  
  
Section 108 -  
Provided that, when the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is
proved that he is not being heard of for seven years by those who would
naturally have head of him if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he
is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it.".  
  
The Period of seven years referred to in Section 108 was amended by Act, No.10
of 1988 by reducing the period of seven years to one year. This amendment was
certified on 21.04.1988.  
  
According to Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance, when the question as to
whether a person is alive or dead is taken into consideration, and it is
proved that the person referred to has not been seen or heard of for, earlier
seven years and since April 1988, for one year, by those who would have
naturally have heard from him, in the event if he was alive, the burden of
proving that the said person is alive is shifted to the person who relies on
it.  
  
A careful consideration of the contents in sections 107 and 108, indicate that
both sections should be read together as the latter is a proviso to the

**133**

earlier Section. Whilst section 107 creates a legal presumption, of
continuance of life if nothing is shown to the contrary, section 108 provides
for the burden of proving that a person to be alive by shifting it to the
person asserting it by denying the death. Considering the operation of section
108 of the Evidence Ordinance, H. N. G. Fernando, C. J., in _Pattison v.
Kalutara Special Criminal Investigation Bureau_ (11) stated that,  
  
"Section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance provides that when a person has not
been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him
if he had been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to
them who affirm that he is alive."  
  
However, it is to be borne in mind that section 107 does not create a
presumption as to the time of death of a person in question. Therefore this
section will not be applicable to a case where the question is not whether a
person is alive or dead, but whether a person died on a specific date.
Considering this position, E.R. S.R. Coomaraswamy is of the view that,  
  
"A party who asserts that a person was alive at a certain date must prove such
fact."  
  
In fact in Assistant Government _Agent v. Fernando_ (12) Wendt J., considering
the provision in section 107 stated that, there is no presumption as to the
continuance of life or of an admitted marriage. A party who asserts that a
person was alive at a particular date must prove it. In Wendt, J.'s words:  
  
"Section 107 of the Evidence Ordinance is not applicable, because, as pointed
out by Lascelles, A. C. J. on October 11, 1906, in the case No. 4,365, C. R.
Kalutara brought by Siman Perera's widow, the question here is not whether
Justina is alive or dead, but whether she (known to have been dead in 1855)
died before or after July, 1852."  
  
Wharton's Law Lexicon, (4th Edition pg. 796) defines the presumption of life
or death and the details are given in the following form:  
  
"When a person is once shown to have been living, the law will in general
presume that he is still alive, unless after a lapse of time considerably
exceeding the ordinary duration of human life; but if there be evidence of his
continued unexplained absence from home and if

**134**

the non-receipt of intelligence concerning him for a period of seven years,
the presumption of life ceases and he is presumed to be dead at the end of
seven years. **But the law raises no presumption as to the time of his
death**. And therefore, if anyone has to establish the precise time during
those seven years at which such person died, he must do so by evidence."  
  
In support of this position law lexicon refers to the decisions in Doe v.
Nepean (13) Nepean v. Doe (14) and Re Rhodes (15).  
  
The appellant's contention is that she conducted the affairs of the business
and properties of the deceased until after the expiry of the period applicable
for the presumption in terms of section 108 and thereafter filed the
testamentary action. Her submission was that the estate of the deceased came
into existence on the day where the period of 7 years is expired. Therefore
although the deceased was not seen after 13.02.1983, the appellant had dealt
with his property as if he was alive or living elsewhere. According to
Coomaraswamy (Supra, Pg. 429-430) there is no presumption of law in favour of
or against the continuance of life for any given period unless contained in a
particular enactment.  
  
The respondents have continued to state that the deceased was last seen or
heard on 13.02.1983. The appellant has not disputed this fact nor has she
taken any steps to prove anything to the contrary. Therefore there could not
be any dispute between the parties that the deceased was last seen or heard on
13.02.1983 .  
  
Considering sections 107 and 108 of the Evidence Ordinance, it is abundantly
clear that in terms of section 108 if a person has not been heard of for seven
years (presently one year) by those who would normally have heard of him, had
he been alive, the presumption of continuance would cease and the burden of
proving the person to be alive shifts to the person who asserts the said
presumption by denying death. This position was taken in _Re Phene's Trusts_
(Supra) where it was stated that,  
  
"If a person has not been heard of for seven years, there is a presumption of
law that he is dead, but at what time within that period he died is not a
matter of presumption, but of evidence and the onus of proving that the death
took place at any particular time within the seven

**135**

years lies upon the person who claims a right to the establishment of which
that fact is essential".  
  
The question that arises at this juncture is whether it is necessary to
ascertain the exact date of death of the deceased. The answer to this question
is that the need would depend on the circumstances of each instance and
therefore it would vary from case to case. For instance in a case where the
court has to adjudicate a claim of prescription by a third party, the date of
death may become important. Similarly, in an instance where letters of
administration or probate is granted the need to know the exact date of the
death of the deceased could arise. In fact it appears that one of the most
important situations that could arise along with the circumstances under
consideration would be with regard to matters pertaining to the deceased
person's estate.  
  
In _Hamy Vel Muladeniyav. Siyatu_ (16) the Court held that when a person is
presumed to be dead in accordance with the provisions of section 108, his
property has to be divided among his heirs. Further, it is to be borne in mind
that there cannot be an interval between the death of a person and passing of
his property to the heirs. In fact in _Silva v. Silva_ (Supra) a full Bench
held that on the death of a person, his estate, in the absence of a will,
passes at once by operation of law to his heirs, and that the dominium vests
in them. This has been an accepted principle and that in _Tikiri Banda v.
Ratwatte_ (17) a case decided in 1894, Lawrie, J. and Withers, J. had held
that the succession of the estate of an intestate, devolved immediately upon
his death. Accordingly as a safeguard and chiefly to prevent any injury
occurring to the deceased person's estate, the English Courts have adopted the
doctrine of relation back in testamentary proceedings.  
  
Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edition, Vol. 17(2), Pg. 26 Para. 35) refers
to the doctrine of relation back. With regard to the relation back of
administrator's title, it is stated that,  
  
"In order to prevent injury being done to deceased person's estate without
remedy, the courts have adopted the doctrine that on the grant being made the
administrator's title relates back to the time of death. This doctrine has
been consistently applied in aid of an administrator seeking to recover
against a person who has dealt wrongfully with the deceased's chattles or
chattles real. It is also applicable against a person dealing wrongfully with
the deceased's real estate. ".  

**136**

Wharton's Law of Lexicon (Supra, at Pg. 858) also refers to the doctrine of
relation back and defines the said doctrine in the following terms:  
  
"Relation, where two different times or other things are accounted as one, and
by some act done the thing subsequent is said to take effect 'by relation'
from the time preceding. **Thus letters of administration relate back to the
intestate's death, and not to the time when they were granted** (See _Re
Pryse_ 1904 Pg. 301. _Foster v. Bates_ (1843) 12 M & W 226) (emphasis added)".  
  
As referred to earlier there is no such presumption as to the date or time of
a person's death. If the question in issue is the date and/or the time of the
death that is to be taken up as a matter that has to be proved by evidence.
The respondents had contended that the deceased died on 13.02.1983 and this
has not been challenged by the appellant. In fact the appellant concedes that
she had last heard from him on 13.02.1983.  
  
In such circumstances, the estate of the deceased, in the absence of a will,
have to pass at once by operation of law to his heirs and no one other than
the executor or an administrator could intermeddle with such property. Infact
N. E. Mustoe (Executors and Administrators, 4th Edition, Pg. 6) observed that,  
  
"Any person, who is not an executor or an administrator, but who intermeddles
with the deceased's property, may make himself liable to the obligations of an
executor de son tort (by his own wrong). Very slight acts of intermeddling
will make a person an executor de son tort, e.g.- advertising for claim,
paying or receiving payment of debts' or carrying on the deceased's business.
".  
  
Actions based on the English Law as to an executor de _son tort_ , has been
recognised by our Courts, as Bonser, C. J., as far back as in 1901 had stated
in Prins v. Peiris (18) that-  
  
"Then, Mr. Walter Pereira argued, as I understand him, that the English Law as
to an executor de son tort was not in force in this island. It seems to me
rather late in the day to argue that: there have been numerous cases in which
such actions have been recognized by this Court."

**137**

This position is applicable to the estate of a spouse. In _Silva v. Salman_
(19) Wood Renton, C. J., had clearly stated that,  
  
"Had she applied for administration of her husband's estate, she was the
natural person to have obtained it; not having and done so and having
intermeddled with the estate by paying off the debts, she is in the position
of an executrix _de son tort_ ,".  
  
There are two other matters I wish to consider in connection with the matter
in issue. Firstly, it was the contention of the learned President's Counsel
for the appellant that the appellant is liable to account on the basis of an
Administratrix only from the date on which the estate came into being, namely
21.04.1988. The significance of the date is that the amendment to the Evidence
Ordinance, which amended section 108 of the Evidence Ordinance came into force
on that day. Therefore the date suggested is not a date, which was arrived at,
either according to the provisions of the Evidence Ordinance, or in terms of
the provisions of the amended section. It is also important to be borne in
mind that, the appellant did not wait for a period of one year from the date
of the amendment, but filed her action seven days after the amendment Act came
into operation. In the circumstances, I cannot see any basis for the date of
the amended section 108, which came into force to be regarded as the date of
the death of the deceased and in my view the contention that the death is to
be presumed as at on 21.04.1988, is not only contradictory and untenable, but
also is an attempt to give an artificial and baseless interpretation to the
amended section.  
  
Secondly, seeking the advantage of the presumption in terms of sections 107
and 108 could be for a variety of reasons. A sudden disappearance of a person
may bring in numerous kinds of issues that would have to be looked into. The
complexities could be on the basis of marriage, retirement benefits, payments
on an insurance policy or as in this appeal the question of administering the
estate, which includes the accounting and inventing. As has been stated
earlier, there is noÂ· presumption as to the time of a person's death, which
has to be proved by evidence and clearly the presumption of death does not
extend to the date of death. In English Law, as Coomaraswamy points out (Supra
Pg. 431) the presumption of death has been used to repel a charge of bigamy,
to justify remarriage and to justify a divorce.

**138**

Considering the totality of the aforementioned circumstances and the legality
of the situation, it would appear that in a situation where as in the present
case, the following aspects would have to be taken into account:  
  
a. when there is a situation arising out of a disappearance of a person, there
is no presumption as to the date or the time of the death of a person;  
  
b. on the death of a person, who had died intestate, his estate passes at
once, by operation of law, to his heirs;  
  
c. any person who is not an executor or an administrator, but intermeddles
with the deceased's property, may make himself liable to the obligations of an
executor de son tort ;  
  
d. as has been referred to in Halsbury's Laws of England (Volume 17(2), 4th
Edition, Pg. 38) referring to the effects of acts of executor de son tort, the
lawful acts done in the professed administration of the estate by a person
purporting to act as personal representative which a rightful executor would
have been bound to perform in due course of administration would bind the
estate; and  
  
e. considering the injuries that could be done to a deceased person's estate
without remedy, the English Law recognizes the doctrine of relation back that
would apply to testamentary proceedings. Thereby when the grant is made, the
administrator's title relates back to the time of death.  
  
In a series of cases _(Lal Chand Marwari v. Mahant Ramrup Gir and another(20)
Re Green's Settlement (21) Dawley v. Winfield (22) Wing v. Angrave_ (23) the
courts have taken the view that if a person has not been heard of for a term
of not less than seven years, there is a presumption of law that he is dead,
but the onus of proving the death of a person at any particular date must rest
with the person to whose title that fact is essential.  
  
On the question of the time of the death based on the presumption an example
was cited in _Hickman v. Upsall_ (24) where circumstantial evidence of the
time of the death was taken into consideration. The example

**139**

"Suppose a person intending to return home at ten o'clock at night does not
appear, there is no presumption that he is dead. But if after a week he is
found with his skull broken in a wood, you can then conclude that he was
killed before ten o'clock on the night on which he disappeared.".  
  
The respondent's position was that the aircraft in which the deceased was a
passenger disappeared after it left Kuala Lumpur at 21.09 Hrs. on 13.02.1983.
Later it was reported that some fishermen in Indonesia had found a wheel of an
aircraft and a part of a plane, which could be related to the ill-fated
aircraft. None of these had been challenged by the appellant and she had not
taken any steps to discharge the burden of establishing any other date other
than 13.02.1983, the date suggested by the respondents on which the death of
the deceased to have occurred. In fact the appellant contended that the
deceased was in Malaysia on 13.02.1983 and he boarded his aircraft to fly back
to Sri Lanka; but he never arrived in the country.  
  
It is therefore not disputed that the deceased was expected to return to Sri
Lanka after 21.09 Hrs. on 13.02.1983 and considering the aforementioned
circumstances on the basis of the example given in _Hickman v. Upsall_ (supra)
the conclusion should be that the deceased met his death in or around the said
time en route from Kuala Lumpur to Sri Lanka.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, I am of the view that 21.04.1988 cannot be
taken as the date on which the estate of the deceased came into being as on
the disappearance and the death of the deceased which apparently had occurred
on 13.02.1983, in the absence of a will, the deceased person's estate passed
at once by operation of law to his heirs on 13.02.1983, and such date should
be taken into consideration as the date for the inventory . and the
accounting.  
  
This appeal is accordingly dismissed and the order of the District Court dated
28.11.1997 and the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 11.01.1999 are
affirmed. The appellant being the administratrix of the estate is directed to
file the inventory and final account on the basis of that the estate of the
deceased came into being on 13.02.1983, within three months from today. There
would be no costs.  
  
_Appeal dismissed.  
  
By majority decision appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/11.html_  

