[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1992](./) >> **[1992] LKSC 11**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1992+11 or 1992+LKSC+11) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1992+LKSC+11) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Dawson Silva v. Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka and
Another - SLR - 344, Vol 1 of 1995 [1992] LKSC 11; (1995) 1 Sri LR 344 (30
June 1992)

**344**

**DAWSON SILVA** **  
v.** **  
MONETARY BOARD OF THE CENTRAL BANK  
OF SRI LANKA AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. SPL. 6/93  
DECEMBER 15 AND 17, 1993 AND  
FEBRUARY 13, AND APRIL 6, 1995

_Writ of Certiorari- Direction by Monetary Board of Central Bank of Sri Lanka
directing the Director in charge of Finance Companies to apply for winding up
of Mercantile Credit Ltd., a finance company - Sections 12, 18, 20(2) and
43(2)(a) of the Finance Companies Act No. 78 of 1988._

The Finance Companies Act, No. 78 of 1988 provides for the control and
supervision of Finance Companies by the Central Bank. The main object of the
Act appears to be to safeguard the interests of depositors.

Faced with a lack of funds to carry on its current business Mr. N. U.
Jayawardena, President of Mercantile Credit Ltd. ( 2nd respondent ) had
applied on 28.11.90 for a re-financing facility through the Central Bank. On
22.05.91 the Cabinet decide to provide financial assistance to the company
subject to conditions. The Articles of Association were amended on 5.07.91
after which six nominee directors representing. the funding Banks were
included in the Board of Directors. On 23.07.91 the new Board decided that A.
N. U. Jayawardena son of N. U. Jayawardena will continue. as Chairman of the
Board but will cease to be Managing Director. This post was taken over by J.
A. R. Felix who thus became . Chairman of the Management Committee. N. U.
Jayawardena was to be present on the premises to advise Felix.

Notwithstanding the above arrangements the relationship between the share
owning Directors and the Management Committee deteriorated very early and on
05.02.92 all the share owning Directors resigned. Consequently on 06.02.92 the
Board took over the administration and management of the company under Section
20 of the Act. On 30.06.92 there was a change of Governors and on 25.07.92 the
Central Bank called for competitive offers from banking and financial
institutions to take over the company on a management contract but no offers
were forthcoming and the Bank decided to direct the Director to apply for a
court winding-up of the company as it could not be made solvent and viable.

345

The petitioner does not seriously challenge the above state of affairs in the
company but alleges that this was due to mismanagement by the 1st respondent.
(monetary Board of the Central Bank in particular by its failure to invest
monies recovered on loans in new revenue generating businesses.) The
petitioner seeks to quash the impugned decision to apply for a winding-up on
the basis -

**firstly** it was male fide;

**secondly** it was made for a collateral purpose namely to shield the
situation created by the 1st respondent by mismanaging the affairs of the
company;

**thirdly** it was contrary to Section 12A of the Act which required the 1st
Respondent to furnish to the company a copy of the report made under Section
18 and to give the company an opportunity to state its position and therefore
contrary to the principles of natural justice.

**Held:**

(1) The question of re-organisation of the Company was discussed at length
with the share owning Directors before the decision to apply for winding-up
was made. Hence the decision was intra vires and not vitiated by mala fides.

(2) Action which may be taken by the Board is prescribed by Section (2) of the
Act as there was no person or institution who was prepared to collaborate
with: the Board in reviving the company. The decision was not unlawful.

**APPLICATION** for a writ of certiorari.

**Case referred to:**

_(1) Durayappah v. Fernando 69 N.L.R. 265 (P.C.)_

_E. D. Wickremanayake for petitioner._  
_A. S. M. Perera D.S.G. for 1st respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 02, 1995.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

This is an application in terms of Section 43(2) (a) of the Finance. Companies
Act; No. 78 of 1988 for a writ of certiorari to quash a decision of the 1st
respondent (Monetary Board of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka) directing the
Director in charge of Finance Companies to apply to Court for a winding-up of
the 2nd respondent (Mercantile Credit Ltd.). The 2nd respondent is a public
company which is registered as a finance company under Section 2(5) of the Act
The petitioner is a shareholder of the said company having 463 shares.

346

The Act provides for the control and supervision of finance companies. The
main object of the Act appears to be to safeguard the interests of depositors.
Thus, Section 4 provides-

"A finance company shall of all times conduct its business in such manner so
as to safeguard its deposits and shall take all such measures as are
reasonably necessary to ensure that deposits and interest on deposits, are
payable to depositors on the due dates"

Section 27 of the Act provides for the establishment of schemes for insuring
deposits held by finance companies and empowers the Central Bank to require
finance companies to insure deposits held by them. Appreciation of the object
of the Act as is evidenced by these provisions is of some relevance in
resolving the dispute before us regarding which the contending parties have
taken up diametrically opposite positions. It is also appropriate at this
point to refer briefly to the provisions which contain the scheme., of the Act
in terms of which the impugned decision was made.

Sections 9 and 10 empowers the Monetary Board to give directions to finance
companies on a wide range of matters. Sections 11 and 12 empowers the Director
to examine books and accounts of a finance company. Sections 13 to 16 provide
for the maintenance of accounts and the auditing of accounts of a finance
company. Section 18(1) empowers the Board to take steps for the winding-up of
a finance company where "it is insolvent or is likely to become unable to meet
the demands of the depositors or that its continuance in business is likely to
involve loss to its depositors or creditors".

Where winding-up is contemplated, the Board may direct the finance company to
suspend its business and order the Director to take over its books, records
and assets. Next, the Board is required, as soon as practicable to notify the
finance company that it intends to direct the Director to apply to a competent
Court for the winding-up. In the absence of an application to the Supreme
Court under Section 43, the Director shall apply to a competent Court for the
winding-up. The Court may order the winding-up, in which event the provisions
of the Companies Act relating to winding-up subject to the supervision of
Court shall mutatis mutandis, apply. The Director or any person

347

authorised in that behalf by the Board shall be appointed to be the liquidator
(S. 18 (4)(b), S. 18(5), S. 18(7), S. and 18(9).)

If, after inquiry, the Court is of the opinion that the company is not
insolvent, it may make a declaration permitting the finance company to resume
business unconditionally or subject to such conditions as the Court may
consider necessary in the public interest or in the interest of depositors and
other creditors of the company (S.18(11) (b)).

Every order made by a competent Court under Section 18 is subject to an appeal
to the Supreme Court (S.18(12)).

S. 20(1) empowers the Board to take over the administration and management of
a finance company where the Board is of the opinion that the company may be
made solvent and viable by action provided for therein. Some of the measures
provided are -

(a) entering into an agreement with any person or body of persons for the
management of the finance company;

(b) amalgamation of the finance company with any other finance company;

(c) re-organisation of the finance company by increasing its capital and
arranging for new shareholders.

Where the Board takes over the administration and management of a finance
company, the Board may exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and
functions of the Board of Directors of such company; whereupon every Director,
Manager and Secretary of such company shall, unless expressly authorised to do
so by the Board, cease to exercise, perform and discharge any powers, duties
and functions with respect to such company (S. 20(2) (a) And S.20(3)).

However, if it appears to the Board that the company cannot be made viable and
solvent within a reasonable period the Board may direct the Director to apply
to a competent Court to wind-up the company in which event, the provisions of
Section 18 shall apply (Proviso to S. 20 (4)).

348

Section 21 enables the Monetary Board to arrange for temporary financial
accommodation to a finance company where it would be in the interest of
depositors to provide such assistance on d the Board may grant a loan or
advance to a Commercial. bank from the Fund established under Section 88(E) of
the Monetary Law Act, for the purpose of lending to such finance company on
such terms or conditions as may be determined by the Board.

As regards the facts, the starting point is a letter dated 28.11 .90 addressed
by N. U. Jayawardena President of the 2nd respondent company to the then
President of the Republic (exhibit 'A'). The letter states that the company
has a deposit base of Rs. 1,984 million with 31,700 depositors; that its
business had broken down due to the insurgency; that there were also
delinquent loans amounting to Rs. 1,232 million, that depositor confidence had
also been affected by the collapse of the HPT Ltd. and an "episode at Sampath
Bank" (an Associated Company); that in the result, deposits being redeemed
exceeded new deposits; and hence there was a lack of funds to carry on its
current business. In the circumstances N. U. Jayawardena applied for a re-
financing facility through the Central Bank in a sum of Rs. 759 million
"exclusively for encashment of maturing deposits".

On 22.05.91 the Cabinet decided to provide financial assistance to the company
subject to conditions including the following:

(1) The funding banks to be given a majority number of Directors in the Boards
of Company and its subsidiaries.

(2) The management of the company should be irrevocably vested in a Management
Committee to be nominated by the funding banks.

(3) The entire sum of Rs. 750 million will be used only to pay off the
depositors. (exhibit YB).

The Articles of Association were accordingly amended after which, on 05.07.91
six nominee directors representing the funding banks, namely the Bank of
Ceylon and the People's Bank were included in the Board of Directors of the
Company. On 23.07.91 the

349

 new Board decided that A. N. U. Jayawardena (son of N. U. Jayawardena) will
continue as Chairman but will cease to be Managing Director, which post will
be taken over by J. A. R. Felix, Chairman of the Management Committee. It was
agreed that N. U. Jayawardena will be present in the premises so that he could
guide and offer his advice to Felix as Managing Director who would however
have the final decision making power subject to the control of the Board of
Directors (exhibit Y17).

Notwithstanding the above arrangements, the relationship between the share
owning Directors and the Management Committee appears to have deteriorated
very early. Thus on 24.12.91 the Director, Bank Supervision addressed a letter
to the Chairman, Management Committee that the Management Committee will be
given instructions from time to time by the Governor of the Central Bank and
the Monetary Board; hence the Committee should "completely ignore instructions
of any other party, given orally or in writing" (exhibit 'D'). This was
followed by a letter dated 27.12.91 addressed to A. N. U. Jayawardena,
Chairman, by the Managing Director requesting him to release the office area
allocated to the Chairman as his functions were then limited to attending
Board meetings and associated matters (exhibit 21).

The petitioner alleges that the relationship between share-owning Directors
and the Management Committee became strained due to ill Will on the part of
the then Governor of the Central Bank towards N. U. Jayawardena. Learned
Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the Governor by a series of press
statements (some of which contained disparaging remarks against the original
Directors) caused, further loss of depositor confidence, leading to the
collapse of the company. The relevant newspaper reports which have been
produced without contradiction show that there is substance in the allegation
that the then Governor was motivated by ill will.

The culmination of the above situation was that on 05.02.92 all; the share
owning Directors resigned. Consequently, on 06.02.92 the Board took over the
administration and management of the company under Section 20 of the Act
(exhibit 'F'). This was not challenged before this Court by an application
under Section 43. As at that date; the deposit liability of the company was
Rs. 1331.1 million. On

**350**

30.06.92 the former Governor ceased to hold office and the present Governor
was appointed.

Next, we, find the progressive reduction of deposit" liability. By 31.12.92 it
was reduced to: Rs. 627.8 million. On 31.10.93, it was Rs. 440 million. By
06.01.94 it was further reduced to Rs. 425 million. In the process financial
assistance provided to the company by the banks up to 15.09.93 totalled Rs.
965.6 million.

Although the deposit liability was so reduced, as at 31.03.92 unrecovered
loans granted by the company to its subsidiaries was Rs. 348;022,153/-whilst
its liability to the banking sector, as at 31.12.92 was Rs. 1647 million.

According to a press statement by the new Governor on 25.07.92, the Central
Bank intended to call for competitive offers from banking and financial
institutions to take over the company on a management contract, as the Central
Bank does not have the expertise to manage finance companies. He explained
that Bank control of companies is a temporary phase intended to make them
viable so that they will be able to settle their depositors and manage on
their own (exhibit 'H'). However, there was no statutory body or institution
prepared to take over the company; and the Bank, acting on a report of the
Director was of the opinion that the company could not be made viable and
solvent and hence decided to direct the Director to apply to a competent Court
to wind-up the company. This was communicated to the company by letter dated
28.10.93 (exhibit 'J').

The petitioner does not seriously challenge the above state of affairs in the
company but alleges that this was due to mismanagement on the part of the 1st
respondent, in particular by its failure to invest monies recovered on loans
in new revenue generating businesses. The petitioner seeks to quash the
impugned decision on the basis that firstly, it was mala fide; secondly it was
made for a collateral purpose, namely, to shield the situation created by the
1st respondent by mismanaging the affairs of the company; thirdly it was
contrary to Section 12A of the Act which required the 1st respondent to
furnish to the company a copy of the report made u Section 18 and to give the
company an opportunity to state its position; hence it was also contrary to
the principles of Natural justice.

351

Learned, Counsel for the petitioner argued that if the 1st respondent has
settled deposit liabilities winding-up is not justified. In any event, the 1st
respondent's decision should be quashed mala fide. Counsel added that on the
other hand, if winding-up is absolutely necessary, it is open to the Central
Bank, the Bank of Ceylon or the People's Bank to apply for a winding-up by
Court, in their capacity as creditors of the company.

Learned Deputy Solicitor General for the 1st respondent submitted that even
assuming that the former Governor of the Central Bank was actuated by mala
fides it has no relevance to the decision to apply for a winding-up; that in
making the said decision the 1st respondent acted within its statutory power;
and that there is no nexus between the conduct of the former Governor and the
impugned decision which was made long after he had ceased to hold office. He
also submitted that as the evidence shows; the said decision was taken after
long and protracted discussions with the share owning Directors led by N. U.
Jayawardena regarding the affairs of the company. Hence, there is no breach of
the principles of Natural Justice. He submitted that in all the circumstances,
it should be left to the competent Court to make the decision on the winding-
up of the company.

The D.S.G. also made the point that the company which is the party most
affected by the impugned decision has not challenged the proposed winding-up.
Hence, this Court should not entertain the application of the petitioner who
is only a minority share holder. This raises the question of the status of the
petitioner as in the case of _Durayappah v. Fernando_ (1). However, I do not
propose to consider this question particularly in view of the fact that by
reason of the take over of the administration and management of the company by
the Board, every Director, Manager and Secretary-of the company ceased to
exercise, perform and discharge any powers, duties and functions in respect of
the company.

As regards the failure of the 1st respondent to furnish to the company a copy
of the Director's report and to allow it to state its position, it is to be
noted that in terms of Section 12A relied upon by the petitioner, the Board is
permitted to act without allowing such

352

opportunity where it is necessary to take immediate action, in the interest of
the depositors and the finance company. In any event, as the D.S.G. submitted,
the evidence shows that the question of reorganisation of the company was
discussed at length with the share owning Directors, before the decision to
apply for winding-up was made. I therefore, hold that the said decision was
intra vires. it is also not vitiated by mala fides.

As regards the complaint that the 1st respondent mismanaged the affairs of the
company by failing to invest monies recovered on loans in new businesses, I am
of the view that action which may be taken by the Board is prescribed by
Section 20(2), which is what the new Governor explained in his press statement
(exhibit 'H'). That section does not appear to contemplate the kind of action
contemplated by the petitioner. What is relevant here is the fact that there
was no person; or institution who was prepared to collaborate with the Board
in reviving the company. This is understandably due to the fact that the
company which had a deposit base of Rs. 1,984 million had developed serious
liquidity problems. Nobody in the business world would possibly agree to take
over the management of such a company which had lost depositor confidence and
was without funds to carry on its current business, as early as 28.11.90, as
evidenced by N. U. Jayawardena's letter 'A'.

I am of the view that in the circumstances it is not a matter for this Court
to consider whether the company maybe wound up because that is essentially a
decision for the competent Court, subject to an appeal to this Court. Suffice
it to hold that the impugned decision was not unlawful. The petitioner has
failed to establish sufficient cause for quashing that decision. I
accordingly, dismiss the application. In all the circumstances, l make no
order as to costs.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/11.html_  

