[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1986](./) >> **[1986] LKSC 11**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1986+11 or 1986+LKSC+11) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1986+LKSC+11) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiar - SLR - 219, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986] LKSC
11; (1986) 2 Sri LR 219 (7 May 1986)

**

219

THEIVANDRAN  
v.  
RAMANATHAN CHETTIAR

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, CJ, COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. No. 40/83.  
C.A. No. 485/74 (F).  
D.C. COLOMBO 13560/L.  
MARCH 17, 18 AND 21, 1986.

_

Landlord and Tenant - Vindicatory suit - Title not disputed by defendant -
Sub-tenant or licensee - Claim for ejectment resisted by defendant claiming
possession as partner of tenant - Tenancy not terminated - Burden of proof.

_

The occupation by a sub-tenant or licensee of the tenant is not, in law,
unlawful occupation. The statutory protection afforded to a tenant can always
be availed of by his sub-tenant or licensee except of course where such
protection had ceased to exist by the tenant surrendering possession to the
landlord or by eviction of the tenant by decree of a competent court.

When the legal title to the premises is admitted or proved to be in the
plaintiff the burden of proof is on the defendant to show he is in lawful
possession. But where the premises have been let out if the landlord qua owner
of the premises chooses to sue for ejectment a third party in occupation, the
burden will then be on the plaintiff to show that the right of the tenant to
be in possession had come to an end and that the right of possession had
reverted to him and that he is thus entitled to sue for recovery of possession
from such third party. As here the tenancy was admitted the burden was on the
plaintiff to show that the defendant had got into possession and was remaining
in unlawful possession of the premises without the consent, acquiescence or
licence of the tenant and was questioning his title to the premises in suit.
Until the tenancy is terminated and decree of ejectment obtained against the
tenant the plaintiff cannot reach the defendant. The defendant was carrying on
business in partnership with the tenant in the premises and the partnership
had not ceased. Hence it cannot be said the defendant was in unlawful
occupation

**

Cases referred to :

**_

(1) Ibrahim Saibo v. Mansoor - (1953) 54 N.L.R.,217, 224.

(2) Zubair v. Sultan Kannu-Sri Kantha "s Law Reports Vol. 1 1-p. 87.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_

K. N. Choksy, P.C. with S. Mahenthiran, V Thevasenathipathy, Britto
Muthunayagam and Miss J. Rodrigo for defendant-appellant

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q.C. with N. R. M. Daluwatte, P.C. and Miss T.
Keenawinne for plaintiff-respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**220**

May 7, 1986 **  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

The plaintiff-respondent an Indian citizen instituted by his attorney, this
action, for a declaration of title to, and, for ejectment of the defendant
from premises No. 142, Sea Street, Colombo 11. In his plaint he stated that
the defendant is estopped from denying and disputing the title of the
plaintiff to the said premises, as the defendant was falsely claiming to be
the tenant thereof. The defendant filed answer denying that he had at any time
claimed to be a tenant under the plaintiff in respect of the premises in suit.
The defendant further stated that one Sri Renganathan "had been for several
years and still is a tenant of the premises in suit under the plaintiff and
the said tenancy is still in force and no grounds exist for its termination."
The defendant stated that he was in occupation of the premises in suit under
an agreement entered into with the said Sri Renganathan by Deed No. 67 dated
21.1.1972 and attested by C. Sri Kanthan, Notary Public.

The defendant specifically pleaded that the plaintiff had chosen to file this
rei vindicatio action to evade the provisions of the Rent Act. The case
proceeded to trial on the following issues:

1\. Is the plaintiff the owner of the premises described in the schedule to
the plaint?

2\. Is the defendant in wrongful and unlawful occupation of the said premises
from 1.4.1972? (both parties agree that the damages per month is Rs. 150).

3. If issues 1 and 2 are answered in favour of the plaintiff, is the plaintiff entitled for judgment as prayed for in the plaint?

After trial the District Judge dismissed the plaintiff's action. The plaintiff
appealed to the Court of Appeal against the said judgment. The Court of Appeal
allowed the appeal preferred by the plaintiff The defendant has appealed to
this Court from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

The case of the plaintiff that he was the owner of the premises was never
disputed by the defendant. The defendant resisted only the prayer for
ejectment.

The only witness for the plaintiff was one Letchuman Chettiar who was
plaintiff's attorney for over thirteen years Though, in the plaint, the
plaintiff had stated that the defendant was claiming to be the tenant of the
premises and this allegation was denied by the

**221**

defendant, the plaintiff's attorney did not seek to substantiate the
allegation that the defendant was claiming to be the tenant of the premises.
The evidence does not support the allegation that the defendant was claiming
to be the tenant of the premises in suit. The allegation that the defendant
was claiming to be a tenant of the premises is a false allegation, falsely
made for the purpose of founding the action for ejectment on the ground that
the defendant was claiming to be the tenant to the exclusion of the actual
tenant, in competition with him. The attorney's evidence in examination-in-
chief was that Sri Renganathan was the tenant of the premises from 1958, and
that he was running a hotel called "Komathi Vilas" in the premises. There is
no evidence to suggest that Sri Renganathan"s tenancy has been terminated by
surrender of possession or that the defendant was claiming adversely to Sri
Renganathan The attorney stated that the rents were paid by the defendant in
the name of Sri Renganathan. He further stated that "Komathi Vilas", was still
being run in the premises in suit. The attorney had in the declaration 'D1'
dated 28.7.1972, made under the provisions of the Rent Act, declared that Sri
Renganathan was the tenant of the premises He further stated that before
Renganathan left for good in April 1972, for India, he had sent a notice
asking Sri Renganathan to quit, but the notice was not complied with. This
notice has not been marked in evidence and has not been relied on by the
plaintiff. The plaintiff's attorney further testified that the defendant had,
after April 1972, remitted to him in the name of Sri Renganathan the rents
through the Rent Control Board. The defendant in evidence testified that prior
to his departure to India, Sri Renganathan had appointed him as his attorney,
by power of attorney marked D7 dated 21 1.1972 This power of attorney
authorises the defendant to act "'for me and on my behalf and in the name of
me in respect of my firms "Komathi Vilas" and "Kalyani Corporation" and
tenancy of premises No 142, Sea Street, Colombo 11, and to act for me in
connection with the tenancy of No. 142, Sea Street, Colombo, remit rent to the
landlord and doing all things connected therewith."

The premises in question are business premises governed by the Rent Act No. 7
of 1972.

It is not the case of the plaintiff that the tenancy of Sri Renganathan had
been terminated and a decree for eviction entered against him in terms of the
provisions of the Rent Act. Sri Renganathan continues to enjoy the statutory
protection of the Rent Act, even if his tenancy had

**222**

been terminated by notice to quit as alleged by the plaintiff's attorney. As
stated by the Divisional Court in Ibrahim Saibo v. Mansoor (1) 'The only two
ways in which the statutory protection comes to an end are ....

1\. By the handing back of the premises to the landlord.

2\. By the order of a competent court that is to say a court acting with
jurisdiction."

It is in the backdrop of Sri Renganathan's continued tenancy of the premises
in suit that one has to examine the plaintiff's complaint that the defendant
is in unlawful occupation of the premises from 1st April 1972.

The occupation by a sub-tenant or licensee of the tenant is not, in law,
unlawful occupation. The statutory protection afforded to a tenant can always
be availed of by his sub-tenant or licensee except of course where such
protection has ceased to exist. An owner of a land has the right to possession
of it and hence is entitled to sue for the ejectment of a trespasser. In a
vindicatory action the claimant need merely prove two facts; namely, that he
is the owner of the thing and that the thing to which he is entitled to
possession by virtue of his ownership is in the possession of the defendant.
Basing his claim on his ownership, which entitles him to possession, he may
sue for the ejectment of any person in possession of it without his consent.
Hence when the legal title to the premises is admitted or proved to be in the
plaintiff, the burden of proof is on the defendant to show that he is in
lawful possession. But, where the evidence shows that the plaintiff has let
out the property to a tenant and that it is the tenant who is entitled to the
possession of the premises, it is the tenant who may institute action to
recover possession of the premises from persons who are in unlawful possession
as against him. Vide Zubair v. Sultan Kannu (2). A contractual or statutory
tenant, has the locus standi to sue for the ejectment of any person who
disturbs his possession. A landlord who has parted with the possession of the
property to the tenant, cannot therefore sue for the ejectment of a third
party in occupation if such third party entered into possession of the
premises with the consent or licence of the tenant. A tenant may be in
occupation of the premises by himself, his agent, his licensee or his sub-
tenant. Hence in the case of premises which have been let out if the landlord
qua owner of the premises, chooses to sue for ejectment a third party in
occupation, the burden will then be on him to

**223**

show that the right of the tenant to be in possession had come to an end and
that the right of possession has revested in him and that he is thus entitled
to sue for recovery of possession from such third party. Had Sri Renganathan,
the tenant, abandoned or surrendered possession of the premises when he left
for India, the plaintiff might then have treated the tenancy of Sri
Renganathan as determined and thus having become entitled to possession sued
for the ejectment of the defendant, the defendant cannot remain in occupation
after the expiration of the main tenancy. The plaintiff had appeared to have
had such a situation in mind when he falsely alleged that the defendant was
claiming to be the tenant of the premises. Though the plaintiff had not
disclosed the fact in his plaint that the premises is suit had been let by him
to Sri Renganathan and that the tenancy was still in subsistence at the time
of the suit, yet on the evidence in examination-in-chief of the plaintiff's
attorney itself it transpired that the premises had, at the time the present
action was filed, been let to Sri Renganathan and the statutory protection
given to the tenant had not come to an end and that Sri Renganathan had not
surrendered possession of the premises to the plaintiff. In that state of
facts the burden of proof is, in my view, on the plaintiff to show that the
defendant had got into possession and was remaining in unlawful possession of
the premises without the consent, acquiescence or licence of the tenant, Sri
Renganathan and was questioning his title to the premises in suit. In such a
context the ordinary rule applicable in a rei vindicatio action that once
title is proved or admitted the defendant has to justify his possession to
resist ejectment does not apply. In the instant case it is not contested by
the plaintiff that the defendant got into occupation of the premises with the
consent, acquiescence or licence of Sri Renganathan, the tenant. The plaintiff
does not dispute that the defendant got into possession of the premises as
partner of Sri Renganathan of the business of "Komathi Vilas" with the consent
of Sri Renganathan but he states that as the partnership had terminated on
1.4.1972, the defendant has no more any right to remain in possession of the
premises after that date. But even assuming, as opposed to the finding of fact
(infra) that the partnership had on that date been terminated, it does not
follow that the plaintiff will be able to sue the defendant over the head of
the tenant who let the defendant into the premises. The only person who could
have sued the defendant in ejectment on the expiration of the partnership was
Sri Renganathan, who as tenant, was entitled to be in possession of the
premises at that relevant time. It is only after the plaintiff had
successfully sued Sri

**224**

Renganathan in ejectment under the provisions of the Rent Act and brought to
an end the statutory protection of the tenant that he could have proceeded
against this defendant on the ground of his being in unlawful possession of
the premises as against him. The present action against the defendant by the
plaintiff is therefore misconceived. The plaintiff cannot reach the defendant
without first getting a decree of ejectment against Sri Renganathan.

The Court of Appeal has not addressed its mind to this preliminary legal
question which arises in the case. In view of the admitted fact that the
premises in question had been let to Sri Renganathan and that his tenancy has
not been terminated by decree of a competent court" I hold that the plaintiff
cannot in law maintain the action for the ejectment of the defendant. In the
circumstances disclosed, there is no legal basis for a decree for the
ejectment of the defendant.

The defendant in his answer stated that on and after 21.1 .1972, he has been
in occupation of the premises in suit under Deed No. 67 dated 21.1.1972,
marked D2 entered into with Sri Renganathan. The District Judge has held that
the defendant is in lawful occupation of the premises by virtue of the
partnership agreement D2 with Sri Renganathan, who, although he has left this
country and gone back to India, still continues to remain the tenant of the
plaintiff and carry on hotel business in partnership with the defendant.

Sri Renganathan is an Indian citizen, who was in the island on a visa which
expired on 2.2.1972. He was arrested and deported on 13.4.1972.

It would appear from the Certificate of Registration of the firm of "Komathi
Vilas" dated 18.1.1956 (P3) issued under the Business Names Ordinance, Sri
Renganathan had been carrying on the business of an eating house (hotel)
called "Komathi Vilas" and of "Kalyani Corporation" in the premises in suit
from 5.7.1943 in partnership with one Kandasamy Pillai. According to the
Certificate of Business Registration dated 24.1.1972 a change was effected in
the partners in the business as from 1.1.1972. S. Kandasamy Pillai retired
from the partnership and a new partner S. Thevendran (the defendant) was
admitted to the firm. The Certificate of Business Registration Name dated
17.3.1972 (P4A) discloses the name of the partners of the firm as M. Sri
Renganathan and S. Thevendran. The change referred to in P2 is consequent to
the Partnership Agreement No. 67 dated 21.1.1972, marked D5. This agreement
was entered into by Sri

**225**

Renganathan and Theivendran (defendant) and one Vythialingam to carry on the
two businesses of "Komathi Vilas" and "Kalyani Corporation" in partnership in
the premises in suit. Clause 5 of the Agreement provides as follows

"Hereinafter the business shall be registered with the Registrar of Business
Names in the name of the party of the first part (defendant) only who shall
hold the said business in trust for himself and the parties of the 2nd and 3rd
part"

Clause 16 of the Agreement provides:

'' that the tenancy of premises No. 142, Sea Street, Pettah, in Colombo, shall
continue in the name of the party of the third part (Sri Renganathan) during
the continuance of the partnership, but such tenancy shall be the property of
all three partners."

Thereafter on 1.4.1972, the defendant and Sri Renganathan, jointly informed
the Registrar of Business Names, of a change viz: that Sri Renganathan had
ceased to be a partner and S. Theivendran (the defendant) was the sole
proprietor of the Business of "Komathi Vilas" and "Kalyani Corporation" as
from 1.4.1972. The Certificate of Registration, P 5 A dated 14.4.1972, issued
pursuant to the statement of change dated 1.4.1972 (P5) shows that the sole
proprietor of the business of "Komathi Vilas" was S. Theivendran (the
defendant). The evidence on record shows that Sri Renganathan had left the
island on 13.4.1972. Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the documents P5
and P5A unequivocally show that the earlier partnership between Sri
Renganathan and the defendant had ceased to exist by 1.4.1972 and that the
partnership agreement evidenced by. Deed No. 67 (D5) had come to an end and
hence the defendant was from 1.4.1972 in occupation of the premises not as a
partner of "Komathi Vilas" along with Sri Renganathan but as sole proprietor
of "Komathi Vilas" and "Kalyani Corporation" and that the ground on which the
defendant sought to justify his occupation of the premises in suit namely,
partner with Sri Renganathan of the business of "Komathi Vilas" run in the
premises in suit has ceased to be valid.

The defendant stated in evidence that P5 and P5A do not represent the true
facts and that his partnership with Sri Renganathan continued to subsist even
after the declarations in P5 and P5A. He gave a tenable explanation for the
declaration in P5 and P5A by him and Sri Renganathan viz: that he had become
the sole proprietor of the partnership business from 1.4.1972. He said that he
was a Jaffna

**226**

Tamil, while Sri Renganathan and Vythialingam were Indians and that for the
sake of obtaining quotas of rice and flour from the Government they agreed to
register the business in his name only. This was embodied in clause 5 of
Agreement D5 which also provides that he should hold the business in trust for
all the three partners.

The Court of Appeal has come to the conclusion that the partnership referred
to in D5 has ceased to exist by 1.4.1972 on the basis of P 5 and P 5 A. On the
other hand the trial judge has addressed his mind to the question whether the
business registered under D5 by the defendant and Sri Renganathan was a
genuine business or a fraudulent business and has after examing the oral and
documentary evidence led in the case come to the conclusion that the
partnership business was a genuine one and that the defendant was carrying on
the business along with Sri Rerganathan even after 1.4.1972. Counsel for the
plaintiff sought to demonstrate that the statement of change P5 was not
consequential to clause 5 of the partnership Agreement P5. The trial judge had
on the evidence come to the conclusion that Sri Renganathan continued after
1st April 1972 to have interest over the business of "Komathi Vilas" and had
accepted the defendant's explanation as to how the declarations in P5 and P5A
came to be made. Though I appreciate the force of counsel's argument it cannot
be stated that the trial judge erred in accepting the defendant's evidence and
holding that the defendant is in fact continuing to carry on business in
partnership with Sri Renganathan even after 1st April 1972. Apart from the
aforesaid declarations in P5 and P5A, the plaintiff led no evidence to show
that Sri Renganathan and the defendant had ceased to be partners. In terms of
section 109 of the Evidence Ordinance, the burden of proof was on the
plaintiff to establish that Sri Renganathan and the defendant had from
1.4.1972 ceased to stand in the relationship of partners. It is to be noted
that by letter D2, dated 14.4.1972, the plaintiff's attorney returned the
cheque for Rs. 149.50 representing rent of the premises on the ground that
"the cheque had been drawn by a partner of Komathi Vilas". This supports the
defendant's evidence that the firm of "Komathi Vilas" continued to function,
to plaintiff's knowledge, even after the departure of Sri Renganathan to India
and that the plaintiff's attorney was aware of that fact.

In the statement of particulars required to be furnished under section 37 of
the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 (D1), dated 28th July 1972, the plaintiff through
his attorney has stated that the tenant of

**227**

the premises was Sri Renganathan. This is significant, as Sri Renganathan had
admittedly been deported or left the country on or about 13.4.1972, and the
plaintiff's attorney who was residing a few yards away from the premises in
suit, must have been fully aware of fact. This declaration militates against
the suggestion that Sri Renganathan had surrendered possession of the premises
before he left for India.

Since the information given in R5 and P5A that the defendant has become the
sole proprietor of the business of "Komathi Vilas" and "Kalyani Corporation"
is not factually correct, it does not affect the continuance of the
partnership. Counsel submitted that clause 5 of D5 should not be given effect
to, as it is illegal. Even assuming that the clause is illegal, it is
severable and does not vitiate the partnership.

The trial judge has answered issue 2 in the negative. Sufficient reason did
not exist to justify the Court of Appeal to reverse the finding of fact by the
trial judge that the defendant continued to carry on the business of "Komathi
Vilas" and "Kalyani Corporation" in the premises in suit with the tenant Sri
Renganathan even after the latter's departure to India and that the
partnership had not come to an end on 1st April 1972. In view of this finding
of fact, it cannot be said that the defendant is in unlawful occupation of the
premises from 1st April 1972, as contended by plaintiff.

I allow the appeal. of the defendant-appellant and set aside the judgment of
the Court of Appeal and restore the judgment of the District Judge. Subject to
the declaration that the plaintiff is the owner of the premises in suit, the
plaintiff's action is dismissed with costs. The defendant-appellant is
entitled to costs in all three courts.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/11.html_  

