[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1993](./) >> **[1993] LKSC 1**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1993+1 or 1993+LKSC+1) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1993+LKSC+1) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Kularatne and Another v. Gunatilleke - SLR - 258, Vol 2 of 1994 [1993]
LKSC 1; (1994) 2 Sri LR 258 (20 August 1993)

**  258**

**KULARATNE AND ANOTHER**

**v.**

### GUNATILLEKE

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL 63/92.

C.A. NO. 589/82.

D.C. GAMPAHA N0. 21411/L.

AUGUST 20TH , 1993.



Fideicommissum - Last Will - Abolition of Fideicommissa and Entails Act, No.
20 of 1972 - Devolution of title.



One Don Abraham was married to Podinona Hamine but the couple had no children.
Don Abraham made a Last Will dated 14.01.64 bequeathing his property to his
nephews and nieces. Among the beneficiaries were the two plaintiffs who were
the children of a brother. To the two plaintiffs the testator bequeathed the
land called Gonnagahalanda in equal shares and the two buildings standing
thereon exclusively to the 1st plaintiff. To the 2nd plaintiff the bequest was
as follows: the property bequeathed was to vest in the beneficiary "after our
deaths" or "after our deaths or after the death of any one of us who
survives". It would also appear from the above terms that in the event of
Podinona Hamine surviving the testator, the Will gave her an interest in the
property. The testator died on 08 May 1965. By her Last Will dated 21.06.65
Podinona devised her estate to Wijepala, the defendant's husband. Podinona
died on 23.02.1979. The dispute was whether Don Abraham's Will created a valid
fideicommissum, whether the property passed into the absolute ownership of
Podinona Hamine on the enactment of the Abolition of Fideicommissa and Entails
Act, No. 20 of 1972 and whether if so the property devolved on Wijepala in
terms of Podinona Hamine's Last Will and accordingly whether Wijepala's wife
the defendant is in lawful possession and finally whether in any event the
defendant was entitled to compensation.



Held:



(1)        On a reasonable construction, the Will gave only a life interest to
the testator's wife and did not give her dominium of the property as the first
beneficiary. The Will did not create a fideicommissum.



(2)        Accordingly the Last Will of Podinona Hamine did not pass any
ownership to Wijepala as the Abolition of Fideicommissa and Entails Act, No.
20 of 1972 did not serve to give her absolute title.

**  259**

(3)        The plaintiff-appellants were entitled to claim the property on the
death of Podinona Hamine.



(4)        The defendant and her husband had been brought to the premises to
attend to the testator during his last illness and been permitted to reside
there after his death. Hence defendant is not entitled to compensation.



Cases referred to:



1\.         _Uansanden v. Mark_ 1 NLR 311.

2\.         _Ibanu Agen v. Abeysekera_ 6 NLR 344.

3\.         _Seneviratne v. Candappapulle_ 16 NLR 150.

4\.         _Hendrick v. Fernando_ 9 NLR 77.



**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



_T. B. Dissanayake P.C._ with _Bimal Rajapakse and T. C. Weerasinghe_ for

            plaintiffappellants.



_P. A. D. Samarasekera P.C._ with _Keerthi Sri Gunawardena_ for defendant
respondent.

_Cur, adv. vult._

 September 14, 1993.

**KULATUNGA, J.**



            The question for decision in this appeal is whether the last will of the late Don Abraham created a usufruct or a fideicommissum. It is common ground that if it is the former the plaintiffs are entitled to the land in dispute and to have the defendant ejected therefrom. If it is the latter, the defendant is in lawful occupation of the said land.



            Abraham had no children and hence nominated his nephews and nieces to be beneficiaries under his will No. 44621 dated 14.01.64 (P2). The plaintiffs are two such beneficiaries (being the children of his brother Karolis). The testator bequeathed the land called Gonnagahalanda to them in equal shares and two buildings standing thereon exclusively to the 1st  plaintiff. The bequest in favour of the 2nd  plaintiff is in the following terms:



              
(The reference being to the testator and his wife Podinona Hamine)



**  260**

In respect of the 1st plaintiff it states;  



According to the English version of the co operative words of the will, the
testator bequeathed the property to "vest" in the beneficiary "after our
deaths" or "after our deaths or after the death of any one of us who
survives". It would also appear from the above terms that in the event of
Podinona Hamine surviving the testator, the will gave her an interest in the
property.



            On behalf of the plaintiffs it was contended that Podinona Hamine had only a life interest in the property. The defendant's case is that under the will Podinona Hamine was the fiduciary owner of the property subject to a fideicommissum in favour of the plaintiffs; that the testator died on 08.05.65. Thereafter, by her last will No. 176 dated 21.05.65 (V3) Podinona Hamine devised her estate to Wijepala, the defendant's husband; that in terms of the provisions of the Abolition of Fideicommissa and Entails Act. No. 20 of 1972, Podinona Hamine became the absolute owner of the property with the result that her will became effective; that upon her demise on 23.02.79, the said property devolved on Wijepala; and that the defendant is in lawful occupation thereof as the wife of Wijepala.



            The learned District Judge held in favour of the defendant and dismissed the plaintiffs' action. The plaintiffs appealed to the Court of Appeal which dismissed the appeal and affirmed the judgment of the District Court. The plaintiffs now appeal to this Court.



            Learned President's Counsel for the plaintiffs-appellants made the following submissions:-



1\. In interpreting the will, the only true criterion is the intention of the
testator to be gathered from the terms of the will and from the surrounding
circumstances. _Vansanden v. Mark_ (1); _Ibanu Agen v. Abeysekera (2);
Seneviratne v. Candappapulle (3)._

_  _

2\. In terms of Abraham's will, the property was vested in the     plaintiffs
but the fulfilment of the legacy was postponed until

**  261**

after the death of Podinona Hamine subject to a usufruct in her favour.
Counsel cited _Hendrick v. Fernando_ (4) where clause 5 of the joint will of
spouses provided:



"The remaining land of, the Kandy land is to be divided into three portions,
and after the respective death of both of us two shares is to go
to............. and 1/6 of the rest of the land to our adopted sons Elias
Fernando and Andiris Fernando".



            It was held that the intention of the testators was that the legatees should take the property, subject to the usufruct of the surviving testator. In the opinion of the Court, the words of futurity contained in the will were not inserted for the purpose of postponing the vesting, but for merely deferring the fulfilment of the legacy.



3\. Alternatively, the vesting (in the plaintiffs) was itself postponed until
Podinona Hamine's death and dominium in the interval vested in the testator's
estate. However, the presumption in favour of immediate vesting in the
reversioner after a usufruct is a strong one. Fideicommissa, Prof. T. Nadaraja
p. 287. On the question whether the will creates a usufruct or a
fideicommissum, Nadaraja (p. 288) expresses the opinion that it is preferable
in deciding that question to have regard to the nature of the interest
acquired on the testator's death by the first beneficiary rather than the
nature of the interest acquired by the person who is to succeed him in the
enjoyment of the property.



            Counsel drew our attention to the fact that in the absence of children the testator selected his brother's children as beneficiaries under his will and made no devise in favour of his wife; and that in terms of the will the devise is to the plaintiffs. On these facts he submitted that the intention was to devise the property absolutely to the plaintiffs as heirs (and not as fideicommissaries), subject to a life interest in favour of his wife. In any event, the correct inference to be drawn from the absence of a devise in favour of Podinona Hamine is, not that she was given ownership of the property but that pending the vesting of the legacy in the plaintiffs the dominium vested in the testator's estate. 

**  262**

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant‑respondent argued that according
to the plain meaning of the terms of the will, the vesting of the legacy in
favour of the plaintiffs was to take place upon the death of Podinona Hamine
and hence, by necessary implication, Podinona Hamine had the ownership during
her life time. As such, the will created a fideicommissum and not a usufruct.
Counsel submitted that even if there be doubt, this Court should not interfere
with the decision of the District Court unless there is an error.



The following facts are relevant to the construction of the will:‑



(a)        The fact that the testator selected his nephews to bequeath his
estate. This, however, was without prejudice to the interests of his wife in
the event of her surviving him. He also named one of his nephews who was a
beneficiary under the will to be executor.



(b)        The fact that the testator refrained from making a devise in favour
of his wife.



(c)        The use by the testator of language employed in making joint wills
of spouses whereby a usufruct is created in favour of the surviving spouse.



In effect, the submission of Counsel for the defendant‑respondents is that the
will should be construed as though it provided "I bequeath  my estate to my
wife and upon her death to 'X' and 'Y' ". If the testator intended to give his
wife the dominium in the property as the first beneficiary, he might have used
more specific language. This he failed to do; and the facts indicate, that he
was not interested in nominating fideicommissaries with inchoate rights but
heirs to take over his estate except that the fulfilment of the legacy was
deferred in order to provide for the needs of his wife during her life time.
On this basis, the reasonable construction is that the will gave only a life
interest to the testator's wife. In fact, both the defendant‑respondent and
her son who gave evidence said that Podinona Hamine had a life interest in the
property. That evidence by itself is not a criterion for deciding that the
will created a usufruct. However, I think that the fact that the parties had
so understood it throughout is of some relevance.

**  263**

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the last will P2 gave only a life
interest to Podinona Hamine and that she was therefore not competent to
bequeath the ownership of the property by her last will V3. Consequently, the
plaintiffs‑appellants were entitled to claim the property upon her death and
the defendant‑respondent had no right to remain in occupation thereof.



Both the Courts below have assumed that the words of futurity contained in the
will were inserted for the purpose of postponing the vesting and thereby
failed to consider the will as a whole, in the light of the surrounding
circumstances. I therefore, allow the appeal, set aside the judgments of the
Court of Appeal and the District Court. I enter judgment for the
plaintiffs‑appellants as prayed for except that they will not be entitled to
damages. In their answer the defendant­-respondent claimed compensation for
improvements to the property. The defendant‑respondent and her husband
Wijepala had been brought there to attend to the testator during his last
illness. They appear to have been permitted to reside there, after the
testator's death. In all the circumstances, the defendant‑respondent is not
entitled to compensation.



            The plaintiffs‑appellants will be entitled to the costs of this appeal and the costs in both Courts below. I direct that the writ of ejectment should not issue till 31st  March, 1994.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, CA.** ‑ I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/1.html_  

