[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1996](./) >> **[1996] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1996+12 or 1996+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1996+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Ameer v. Kulatunge - SLR - 398, Vol 2 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 12; (1996) 2 Sri
LR 398 (20 August 1996)

**398**

**AMEER  
****v** **.  
KULATUNGE**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
WIJETUNGE, J.  
S.C. 93/95.  
C.A. REV 3/95.  
DC COLOMBO 7919/RE.  
AUGUST 20, 1996.

_Rent and Ejectment - Rent Act 7 of 1972 - Civil Procedure Code S 36.
Misjoinder of causes of action - Termination of Tenancy - Notice to quit -
Sinhala copy of plaint different from English copy._

The Plaintiff Appellant instituted action to eject the Defendant - Respondent
from four premises bearing Assest. Nos. 65, 63 1/1, 63 1/2 and 71.The District
Court decided to try the issues on misjoinder of causes of action as
preliminary Issues. The District Court answered these issues in favour of the
Plaintiff and made order setting down the case for Trial on the remaining
issues.

The Defendant moved in Revision and submitted that there has been no
termination of the Tenancy in respect of premises No. 71, as para 9 of the
Sinhala copy of the plaint it is averred that on or about 9.7.92, the
Plaintiff by his Attorney-at-Law gave the Defendant notice to quit the
premises 65, 63 1/1, 63 1/2 and there was no reference to premises No. 71 in
para 9 of the Sinhala copy.

Although this matter was not raised before the District Court, the learned
District Judge in his order noted the fact that in the English copy of the
Plaint para 9 refers to premises No. 71 as well.

The Court of Appeal took the view that there is no provision in law for the
District Judge to refer to the English copy of the Plaint to supplement the
ommision in the plaint in Sinhala, and the Plaintiff cannot eject the
Defendant from Premises No. 71 as prayed for without terminating the Tenancy
in respect of the premises; that there is a misjoinder of causes of action.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the Plaintiffs action, on appeal.

**Held:**

(1)  On reading of the entirety of the plaint in Sinhala it is clear that the

**399**

omission in para 9 to refer to premises No. 71 is only a typographical error.

(2) The Court of Appeal had overlooked the fact that the Notice to quit refers
not only to premises No. 65, 63 1/1, 63 1/2 but also to No. 71.

(3) Reference to the English copy of the Plaint (by the District Judge) would
merely confirm, if confirmation was necessary, the conclusion arrived at by a
scrutiny of all the averments in the Sinhala plaint.

(4) Section 36 of the Civil Procedure Code permits the Plaintiff to unite
several causes of Action against the same Defendant.

(5) Court cannot dismiss an action merely on the ground of misjoinder of
Causes of Action.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Morais_ _v. Victoria_ \- 73 NLR 409 at 413.

2 _Dingiri_ _Appuhamy v. Pagnananda Thero_ 67 NLR 89 at 90.

_A. K. Premadasa, P.C._ with _G. H. A. Suraweera_ and _C. E. de Silva_ for the

Plaintiff-Appellant.

_Rohan_ _Sahabandu_ for Defendant-Respondent.

_Cur._ _adv. vult_.

September 06, 1996.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.**

The Plaintiff instituted these proceedings seeking, _inter alia_ , the
ejectment of the Defendant from four premises bearing assessment Nos. 65, 63
1/1, 63 1/2 and 71, Jayantha Weerasekera Mawatha,  Colombo 10\. In his plaint
the Plaintiff averred that the premises in suit are "excepted" premises and
accordingly the provisions of the Rent Act have no application. The Defendant
in his answer pleaded _inter alia_ , that the premises are governed by the
provisions of the Rent Act.

The District Court decided to try issue Nos. 10, 11 and 12 as preliminary
issues of law. These issues read as follows:

**400**

Issue No. 10 - Is there a misjoinder of causes of action as pleaded in the
plaint?

Issue No. 11 - If the above issue is answered in the affirmative, can the
Plaintiff have and maintain this action?

Issue No. 12 - Does the plaint conform to the imperative provisions of the
Civil Procedure Code?

The District Court having considered the submissions made by Counsel for both
parties delivered its order answering all three issues in favour of the
Plaintiff and made order setting down the case for trial on the remaining
issues. The Defendant thereupon moved the Court of Appeal by way of an
application in revision to have the order of the District Court set aside. The
Court of Appeal set aside the order of the District Court and answered the
preliminary issues in favour of the Defendant. Hence the present appeal
preferred to this court by the Plaintiff.

At the hearing before the Court of Appeal, Counsel for the Defendant
Petitioner submitted that there has been no termination of the tenancy in
respect of the premises bearing assessment No. 71\. Counsel relied on
paragraph 9 of the Sinhala copy of the plaint, wherein it is averred that on
or about 9th July 1992, the Plaintiff by his Attorney-at-Law gave the
Defendant notice to quit the premises Nos. 65, 63 1/1, 63 1/2 Jayantha
Weerasekea Mawatha, Colombo 10, on or before 31st August 1992.

The contention was that in paragraph 9 of the plaint in Sinhala there was no
reference whatsoever to premises bearing assessment No. 71. The omission to
refer to premises No. 71 in paragraph 9 of the Sinhala copy of the plaint
filed of record was discovered by the District Judge on his own; it was not a
matter which was raised before the District Court by Counsel for the
Defendant. The District Judge, however, in his order noted the fact that in
the English copy of the plaint filed of record paragraph 9 refers to premises
bearing assessment No. 71 as well. The Court of Appeal took the view that
there was no provision in law for the District Judge to refer to the English
copy of the plaint to supplement the omission in the plaint in Sinhala.

**401**

Mr. Premadasa for the Plaintiff Appellant submitted that on a reading of the
entirety of the plaint in Sinhala it is clear that the omission in paragraph 9
to refer to premises bearing assessment No. 71 is only a typographical error.
With this submission I agree. Paragraph 2 of the plaint avers that the
Plaintiff let to the Defendant and the Defendant took on rent from the
Plaintiff on terms of a monthly tenancy premises Nos. 65, 63 1/1, 63 1/2 and
71 Jayantha Weerasekera Mawatha, Colombo 10. In paragraph 3 of the plaint it
is averred, Inter alia, that premises bearing assessment No. 71 is more fully
described in the 3rd schedule to the plaint. In paragraph 7 it is averred that
premises No. 71 are excepted premises, in terms of regulation 3 of the
schedule to the Rent Act. Paragraph 10 of the plaint further avers that a
cause of action has accrued to the Plaintiff to sue the Defendant for
ejectment from premises bearing assessment No. 71. In paragraph (c) of the
prayer to the plaint the Plaintiff prays for ejectment of the Defendant from
premises No. 71. It is thus manifest on a careful reading of the plaint in
Sinhala as a whole that the omission to refer to premises No. 71 in paragraph
9 is no more than a typographical error.

More importantly, the Court of Appeal has overlooked the fact that with the
statement of objections filed on behalf of the Plaintiff the copy of the
notice to quit served on the Defendant was produced marked "A". At the hearing
before us, Mr. Rohan Sahabandu for the Defendant Respondent very properly did
not challenge the receipt of the notice to quit. (At the trial, the notice to
quit was not marked as the leading of evidence had not commenced). Now, the
notice to quit refers not only to premises Nos. 65, 63 1/1, 63 1/2 but also to
premises bearing assessment No. 71, Jayantha Weerasekera Mawatha, Colombo 10.
If the Court of Appeal had considered the terms of the notice to quit then it
would have been clear beyond doubt firstly, that the tenancy in respect of
premises No. 71, has been terminated and secondly, that the omission to refer
to premises No. 71 in paragraph 9 was merely a typographical error and nothing
turns upon that omission. Reference to the English copy of the plaint would
merely confirm, if confirmation was necessary, the conclusion arrived at by a
scrutiny of all the averments in the plaint in Sinhala. In this view of the
matter, the Court of Appeal was in error in holding that, ". . . when the
Respondent sought to eject the petitioner from premises No. 71

**402**

as prayed for in paragraph 11 (c) of the plaint without first terminating the
tenancy in respect of the premises, there has been a misjoinder of causes of
action."

What I have stated above is sufficient to dispose of the appeal, but I would
like to make the observation that section 36 of the Civil Procedure Code
permits the Plaintiff to unite several causes of action against the same
Defendant. (In this case there was only one Defendant ) "There is . . . no
objection to the Plaintiff uniting in one action several different causes of
action against the same Defendant in accordance with section 36 of our code .
. ." _per A. L. S. Sirimanne J., in Morals v. Victoria_.(1) In any event, a
Court cannot dismiss an action merely on the ground of misjoinder of causes of
action. _Dingiri_ _Appuhamy v. Pagnananda Thero_.(2)

For these reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of then Court of Appeal
is set aside and the order of the District Court dated 25.11.94 is restored.
The Defendant-Respondent must pay the Plaintiff-Appellant a sum Rs. 1000/- as
costs of appeal.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J. -** I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/12.html_  

