[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1995](./) >> **[1995] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1995+12 or 1995+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1995+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Atukorale v. Attorney General - SLR - 238, Vol 1 of 1996 [1995] LKSC 12;
(1996) 1 Sri LR 238 (28 December 1995)

**238**

**ATUKORALE  
****v** **.  
ATTORNEY GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT  
G.P.S de SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. (S. D) NO. 2 of 1995.  
28 DECEMBER, 1995.

_Constitutional Law ‑Bill to amend Pradeshiya Sabhas Act ‑ Power to vary
limits of and number of members of and dissolve a Pradeshiya Sabha
‑Constitution ‑ Articles 3, 4 (e) and 12 (1) ‑ Citizen's Petition._

Article 3 of the Constitution vests sovereignty in the people and proceeds to
enlarge the concept of sovereignty by adding to it fundamental rights and the
franchise. But by Article 4(e) of the Constitution, the Parliament in
pre­scribing the manner of exercising the franchise has limited the franchise
to its exercise at the election of the President of the Republic, members of
Parliament and at every Referendum by every citizen who has attained the age
of 18 years and being qualified to be an elector has his name entered in the
register of electors. It does not cover exercise of the franchise at elections
to Pradeshiya Sabhawas. If Parliament desires expansion of Article 4(e) by
including the franchise exercisable at elections not specified therein, it can
be appropriately amended but it is significant that no such amendment has been
effected. Hence the proposed amendment is not inconsistent with Article 3 of
the Constitution. Accordingly the Bill will not require approval by the People
at a Referendum.

(2) In enacting legislation Parliament is bound to ensure equality before the
law and equal protection of the law for persons or classes of persons who are
similarly circumstanced. The proposed legislation did not carry appro­priate
guidelines for the exercise of the powers of the Minister and the absence of
appropriate guidelines would result in discrimination and thereby deprive the
persons affected, equaly before the law and equal protection of the law. Hence
the impugned clause is inconsistent with Article 12(1) and it can only be
passed with the special majority required under paragraph 2 of Article 84. If
the impugned clause (2) of the Bill is amended as specified at paragraphs A, B
and C (of the determination) it will cease to be inconsistent with Article
12(1) of the Constitution.

**Cases referred to:**

**239**

1. _Minister of Home Affairs v. Fisher_ **(** 1979) 3 All ER 21 (PC).

2\. _Re The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution_ (1987) 2 Sri L. R. 324.

**PETITION** under Article 121(1) of the Constitution against Bill to amend
the Pradeshiya Sabhas Act.

_K. N. Choksy PC with Daya Pelpola, D. H. N. Jayamaha, Luxman Perera, A. L. B.
Brito Mutunayagam and Anil Rajapakse _for Petitioner.

_Shibley_ _Aziz PC Attorney‑General with S. Sri Skandarajah S.S.C. and Uditha
Egalahewa S.C.  _ for State **.** ****

_Cur. adv_ _. vult._ __

28 December, 1995.

The Court delivered its unanimous determination as follows:

A Bill titled "A Bill to amend the Pradeshiya Sabhas Act" was pre­sented to
this Court along with citizen's petition SC (SD) No. 2 of 1995.

Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to add two new sections to the principal enactment.
Of them, the proposed section reads:

_" 9A. The Minister may at any time by Order published in the Gazette: ‑_

_(a) vary the limits of any Pradeshiya Sabha area:_

_(b) vary the number of members determined under section 4 for any Pradeshiya
Sabha:_

_(c) dissolve any existing Pradeshiya Sabha and direct that it shall be
replaced by a new Pradeshiya Sabha to be constituted in lieu of such existing
Sabha, whenever it appears to him to be expedient so to do upon any variation
of the limits of the Pradeshiya Sabha area for which the existing Sabha was
constituted:_

_(d) dissolve any Pradeshiya Sabha for the purpose of constitut­ing any other
local authority in its place. "_

**240**

The proposed Section 9B makes the new Sabha the successor of the dissolved
Sabha; transfers the property, rights, powers, duties, debts, liabilities and
obligations of such dissolved Sabha to the new Sabha so far as such property
is situated within the administrative limits of the new Sabha or rights etc.
So far as the same relate to any area within administrative limits of the new
Sabha; and requires refer­ences in any enactment, order, rule, regulation or
law etc. to such dissolved Sabha for the purpose of any area within the
administrative limits of such dissolved Sabha, which shall be included within
the ad­ministrative limits of the new Sabha.

The petitioner avers that the power vested in the Minister to vary the limits
of Pradeshiya Sabhas declared under Section 2 of the Act and to vary the
number of members determined under section 4 of the Act affects the franchise
and hence Clause 2 of the Bill is inconsistent with Article 3, that there are
no guidelines for the exercise of such powers or to regulate the power to
dissolve a Pradeshiya Sabha hence Clause 2 is inconsistent with Article 12(1).
The Petitioner further com­plains that the provisions of Article 154 G (3)
which requires the Presi­dent to obtain the views in respect of this Bill
before placing it on the Order Paper has not been complied with.

The Petitioner avers that for the foregoing reasons, the Bill is in­consistent
with the Constitution and cannot be passed except with the special majority
required by Article 84 (2) and approved by the people at a referendum in terms
of Article 83.

Pradeshiya Sabhas were constituted in terms of section 2(1) of the Act which
requires that the limits of every Pradeshiya Sabha area correspond, as far as
possible, to the limits of an Assistant Govern­ment Agent's division excluding
any area comprised in a Municipal Council or a town (within the meaning of the
Urban Councils Ordinance). It would seem, therefore, that Pradeshiya Sabhas
were substituted in the place of Village Councils and Town Councils. In terms
of section 4, the Minister determines the number of elected members of a
Pradeshiya Sabha, having regard to the extent, population and the level of
eco­nomic development of the Pradeshiya Sabha area.

Under section 5, the term of office of each member of a Pradeshiya Sabha
shall, unless such member vacates office earlier by resignation

**241**

or removal be for a period of 48 months. Section 5(2) empowers the Minister to
curtail or to extend the term of office of members so however, that such
curtailment or extension shall not exceed one year.

The term of office of each member of a Pradeshiya Sabha shall, in the case of
a first General Election, commence from the date speci­fied by the Minister
under section 6, which section empowers the Min­ister to appoint the date of
commencement of the term of office of each Pradeshiya Sabha by Order published
in the Gazette which date shall also be deemed to be the date of the
Constitution of such Pradeshiya Sabha.

At the hearing before us, Mr. Choksy PC. for the petitioner informed us that
he would limit the objections to the Bill by confining himself to the
submissions based on Articles 3 and 12(1) of the Constitution.

Mr. Choksy's principal submission was that Clause 2 of the Bill, which seeks
to enact a new section 9A is inconsistent with Article 3 of the Constitution
in that the exercise of the powers thereby conferred on the Minister would
adversely affect the franchise of the voters who elected the existing
Pradeshiya Sabhas or who will be voting at future elections. He argued that
the expression "franchise" should not be limited to voting at the election of
the President and of Members of Parliament and at a Referendum (which are the
occasions when fran­chise is exercisable in terms of Article 4(e) of the
Constitution). Mr. Choksy submitted that the Constitution should be liberally
interpreted in the context of contemporary circumstances. Vide Jain "Indian
Con­stitution" 4th Ed. p. 834; _Minister of Home Affairs v. Fisher;_ (1) __
and that this Court should give the expression 'franchise' in Article 3 a
wider construction in view of the preamble to the Constitution which _inter
alia ratifies_ "the immutable republican principles of REPRESENTATIVE
DEMOCRACY" and specially in view of the directive principles of State policy,
Article 27(4) which reads:

"The State shall strengthen and broaden the democratic struc­ture of
government and the democratic rights of the People by decentralising the
administration and by affording all possible opportunities to the people to
participate at every level in national life and in government".

**242**

Article 3 contains provisions relating to the sovereignty of the people. It
reads:

"In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the People and is inalienable.
Sovereignty includes the powers of government, fun­damental rights and the
franchise".

This Article vests sovereignty in the People and proceeds to en­large the
concept of sovereignty by adding to it fundamental rights and the franchise.
Article 4 provides for the manner of exercising sover­eignty. Article 4(e)
states:

"The franchise shall be exercisable at the election of the President of the
Republic and of the Members of Parliament, and at every Referendum by every
citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years, and who, being qualified
to be an elector as hereinafter provided, has his name entered in the register
of electors".

It would appear from the above provisions that having extended the concept of
sovereignty by adding fundamental rights and the franchise, Parliament in
prescribing the manner of exercising the franchise, limited it to voting at
the occasions referred to in Article 4(e). The wider meaning of franchise
which would include voting at other elections such as election of local bodies
or Provincial Councils has not been adopted.

It was held in _Re The Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution_ (2) __ that
Article 4 is not entrenched and is open to amendment provided that such
amendment has no prejudicial impact on the sovereignty of the People.
Therefore, if Parliament desires an expansion of Article 4(e) by including the
franchise exercisable at elections not specified therein, it can be
appropriately amended. It is significant that no such amendment has been
effected.

Mr. Choksy strongly urged that Article 4(e) is not exhaustive of the manner in
which the franchise is exercisable and that the franchise is mentioned in
Article 3 without any limitation. In support, he relied on the _dicta_ of
Wanasundera, J. in the **Thirteenth Amedment **case (p.

**243**

339) where he said " ............................ _it should be noted that
fundamental rights and the franchise are specifically mentioned in Article 3
without any limitation ". _It should be noted that Wanasundera, J. was there
considering the extent to which Article 4 is linked to Article 3 and the
possible situations in which any amendments to Article 4 may im­pinge on
Article 3. He has not attempted to extend the manner of exer­cising the
franchise.

For the foregoing reasons, we hold that Clause 2 of the Bill is not
inconsistent with Article 3 of the Constitution. Accordingly, the Bill will
not require the approval by the People at a Referendum.

Mr. Choksy next submitted that Clause 2 of the Bill is inconsistent with
Article 12(1) in that the exercise of the powers vested in the Minister by the
proposed new section 9A would, in the absence of appropriate guidelines,
result in discrimination and thereby deprive the persons affected equally
before the law and equal protection of the law. It is settled law that in
enacting legislation Parliament is bound to ensure equality before the law and
equal protection of the law for per­sons or classes of persons who are
similarly circumstanced.

The Attorney General submitted that the amending Bill has be­come necessary in
consequence of a revision of the administrative limits of the Assistant
Government Agent's divisions and that from about 1989 the Cabinet of Ministers
had been considering the question of redefining the boundaries of existing
Pradeshiya Sabhas to make them co‑ terminus with the revised administrative
limits of the AGA divisions. This as well as the other changes indicated in
the Bill have not been possible due to the absence of appropriate provision in
the Pradadeshiya Sabhas Act.

The Attorney‑General does not deny the need for adequate guidelines for the
exercise of the powers vested in the Minister. He informed us that the
intention is to exercise the powers under the proposed section 9A(a) and (b)
subject to the guidelines contained in sections 2 and 4 respectively and to
exercise the powers under section 9A (d) subject to the relevant guidelines
found in the Urban Councils Ordinance and the Municipal Councils Ordinance, as
the case may be. He also informed us that it is intended that any orders that
may be made

**244**

under the proposed Section 9A will take effect upon the expiry of the term of
office of existing Pradeshiya Sabhas and hence there is no intention to
interfere with existing rights; and that such intention is implicit in the
proposed new section 9A.

We appreciate the submissions made by the Attorney‑General but note that as
the Bill is presently worded the guidelines referred to by him are not evident
in the proposed new section. There is no provision for suspending the
operation of any order that may be made under the proposed new section 9A. We
are of the view that the guidelines and the date on which any Order under the
proposed new section 9A shall come into operation should be expressly set out.
It is not sufficient for such matters to be implicit. Hence, we are of the
opinion, and deter­mine that Clause 2 of the Bill is inconsistent with Article
12 (1) and can only be passed with the special majority required under
paragraph 2 of Article 84.

The Attorney‑General, however, informed us that if this Court were to take the
view that Clause 2 of the Bill is inconsistent with Article 12 (1), the
proposed new section 9A will be amended so as to **expressly** provide for:

(A) that as regards Orders that may be made in terms of paragraphs (a) and (b)
of that section, such Orders shall be made in accordance with the principles
set out in section 2 and 4 of the Pradeshiya Sabhas Act, as the case may be,
and the provisions of the said sections 2 and 4 shall _mutatis mutandis,_
apply;

(B) that as regards any order that may be made under paragraph (d) of that
section, the Minister shall in the event of constituting an Urban Council,
comply with the principles contained in section 2 of the Urban Councils
Ordinance; in the event of constituting a Municipal Council the Minister shall
comply with the provisions of section 2 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance
and shall also have regard to the development of the amenities of the area for
which such Municipal Council is constituted.

As regards the date on which any order under the proposed new section 9A will
come into operation, the Attorney‑General assured us

**245**

that provision will be included to the effect that no such Order will come
into effect until the expiration of the terms of office of the members of any
existing Pradeshiya Sabha which may be affected by such Order. Mr. Choksy
suggested that no such Order should come into effect until the expiration of
the term of office of any existing Pradeshiya Sabha which may be affected by
such Order.

(C) We are of the opinion that it is necessary to include provision to the
effect that no Order made under the proposed new section 9A shall come into
effect during the term of office of any existing Pradeshiya Sabha which may be
affected by such Order.

If Clause 2 of the Bill is amended in the manner specified at (A), (B) and (C)
above, Clause 2 of the Bill will cease to be inconsistent with Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution.

We wish to place on record our deep appreciation of the assist­ance given by
the Attorney‑General and Mr. Choksy in the considera­tion of the Bill.

_**Bill not inconsistent with Article 3 but inconsistent with Article 12
(1)**_ _ **of the Constitution.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/12.html_  

