[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1992](./) >> **[1992] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1992+12 or 1992+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1992+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  The Surveyors' Institute of Sri Lanka v. The Surveyor General An Another -
SLR - 319, Vol 2 of 1994 [1992] LKSC 12; (1994) 2 Sri LR 319 (5 February 1992)

**319  **

### THE SURVEYORS' INSTITUTE OF SRI LANKA

**v.**

**THE SURVEYOR ‑GENERAL AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 60/94.

C.A. NO. 336/92.

AUGUST 31, SEPTEMBER 03 AND 14, 1994.



_Certiorari and Prohibition ‑ Field Circular No. 05/92 of 05.02.1992 ‑
Surveyors' Ordinance, sections 2(1) (c), 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 17 and 18._



The __ effect of section 18 of the Surveyors' Ordinance is clearly to confine
the persons exempted by section 6 from the requirement of having to pass the
examination, to persons mentioned in paragraph 9 of the Schedule who have
ceased to hold office in the Survey Department. The Surveyor‑General is not
empowered to grant annual licences to Government surveyors to practise as land
surveyors in their private capacity.



The Surveyor‑General Field Staff Circular No. 05/92 dated 05.02.92 calling for
applications from Surveyors attached to the Survey Department for the issue of
annual licences under the Surveyors Ordinance to practice as private surveyors

**320**  

is _ultra vires_ and its implementation is in excess of the Surveyor‑General's
power to grant annual licences to land surveyors under the Ordinance.
Certiorari will lie to quash the Circular and Prohibition to prohibit the
issue of annual licences to Government surveyors.



**APPLICATION** for a writ of Certiorari to quash Circular No. 05/92 of
05.02.92 and a writ of Prohibition prohibiting the issue of annual licences to
government surveyors.



_H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _W. P. Gunatilleke and Elmore Perera_ for
petitioner.

_K. G. Kamalasabayson, D.S.G._ with _P. G. Dep, S.S.C._ for 1st and 2nd
respondents.

_Faisz Musthapha, P.C._ with _H. Vithanachchi_ for intervenient‑respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

 October 05, 1994.

**KULATUNGA, J.**



The appellant (The Surveyors' Institute of Sri Lanka) applied to the Court of
Appeal for writs of certiorari and prohibition in respect of the Field Staff
Circular No. 05/92 dated 05.02.92 issued by the 1st respondent (the
Surveyor‑General) calling for applications from Surveyors attached to the
Survey Department for the issue of annual licences under the Surveyors'
Ordinance (Cap. 108) to practise as private surveyors, subject, however, to
certain limitations and the conditions set out in the said Circular. In other
words, Government Surveyors are being offered the right to engage in limited
private practice. According to the circular, this offer is made pursuant to a
Cabinet decision.



The appellant is a body incorporated by Act No. 22 of 1982. Under section 3 of
the Act, private surveyors holding licences granted by the Surveyor‑General as
well as government surveyors referred to in paragraph 9 of the Schedule to the
Surveyors Ordinance are its members. In terms of section 4, one of the objects
of the appellant Institute is "generally to protect and promote the interests,
welfare,

**321**  

rights and privileges of the land surveying profession in Sri Lanka". The
appellant contended that the decision contained in the impugned Circular is
contrary to law in that the 1st respondent has no power under the Surveyors'
Ordinance to issue annual licences to Government Surveyors to practise as land
surveyors particularly in view of section 18 of the Ordinance. On that basis
the petitioner prayed for a writ of certiorari to quash the said decision and
a writ of prohibition prohibiting the 1st respondent from issuing any such
licences. The petitioner's application was dismissed by the Court of Appeal.
Hence this appeal.



The appeal to this Court was resisted by the 1st respondent and the
intervenient respondent, the latter being a Government Surveyor who had
applied for a licence in terms of the impugned Circular. It was submitted on
their behalf that in terms of section 6 of the Ordinance read with paragraph 9
of the schedule thereto, Government Surveyors currently in service are
eligible to apply for annual licences to practice as land surveyors in their
private capacity and that section 18 relied upon by the appellant constitutes
no bar against the grant of such licences by the 1st respondent.



This Court is thus called upon to decide whether, notwithstanding the decision
of the Government to permit private practice to Government Surveyors, the 1st
respondent is empowered to grant them annual licences for that purpose in
terms of section 4 of the Ordinance. Section 2(1), _inter alia,_ provides that
no person shall practice as a Surveyor unless he is the holder of an annual
licence to practice as land surveyor, granted by the Surveyor‑General. Whether
the 1st respondent is so empowered to grant annual licences to Government
Surveyors to practise as land surveyors in their private capacity has to be
determined by interpreting the relevant provisions of the Surveyors'
Ordinance. I shall, now summarise those provisions, so far as they are
applicable to the case before us.



Section 2(1) (c) prohibits any person practising as a land surveyor without
the requisite licence. Section 4 empowers the Surveyor‑

**322**  

General to grant annual licences to persons of good character who have passed
the prescribed examination in surveying. Section 6 provides‑



"persons possessing the qualifications mentioned in Schedule A shall be
entitled on production of evidence of good character and on payment of the
prescribed fee, to annual licences, **without passing the examination ".**



One class of persons so exempted from the examination is to be found in
paragraph 9 of Schedule A; it refers to‑



"Any person who **has served** in the **** Survey Department as



(1)        Surveyor‑General, or

(2)        Deputy Surveyor‑General, or

(3)        Assistant Surveyor‑General, or

(4)        A Superintendent of Surveys, or

(5)        An Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, or

(6)        A Senior Survey Assistant, or

(7)        A First Grade Surveyor, or

(8)        A Second Grade Surveyor, or

(9)        A Third Grade Surveyor for a period of more than fifteen years, or

(10)      A Third Grade Surveyor for a period of more than ten years and
passed the junior examination of the Survey Department".



The reason for the exemption of the above persons is that under the
regulations made under S. 7 (Vide Subsidiary Legislation (Cap. 108) Vol. II
1956) every person who wishes to obtain an annual licence in surveying has to
complete a course of studies conducted by the Surveyor‑General and pass the
prescribed examination. It is only persons who have so qualified who are
eligible for appointments in the Survey Department.



Section 8 of the Surveyors' Ordinance provides for the power of the
Surveyor‑General to cancel or refuse renewal of a licence.

**323**  

Section 9 provides for cancellation or suspension of a licence by the District
Court on the ground of gross misconduct or incompetence or carelessness of a
Surveyor in the discharge of his duties, as a Surveyor, section 10 provides
for inquiries by the Surveyor‑General into irregularities, errors and
omissions in surveys etc., section 11 provides for the penalty for the offence
of practising as a surveyor without a licence.



It is apparent that the provisions of sections 2‑17 of the Ordinance are
essentially applicable to the licensing and regulation of private surveyors;
and section 18 provides ‑



"Nothing hereinbefore contained shall apply to any land surveyor for the time
being in the service of the Ceylon Survey Department..."



The Court of appeal held that a surveyor currently serving in the Survey
Department is entitled to obtain an annual licence for private surveying under
section 4 read with section 6(1) of the Ordinance on the basis that the words
"any person who **has served** in the Survey Department" in paragraph 9 of the
Schedule may not be limited to persons who had previously served and ceased to
hold office there. The Court was of the view that the expression "has served"
can include a person who is in service at the time he makes an application for
a licence.



Learned Deputy Solicitor‑General for the respondents, defending the judgment
of the Court of Appeal, argued that the object of section 18 is to make the
preceding sections inapplicable to land surveyors in the Survey Department
_qua_ government Surveyors and that it does not have the effect of depriving
them the right to an annual licence to engage in private practice as land
surveyors. Learned President's Counsel for the intervenient respondent also
urged the same view.



Learned President's Counsel for the appellant argued that the Court of Appeal
based its judgment on the Schedule to the Ordinance reading it independently
of section 6; that the Schedule is



**324**  

a part of the statute and hence integral to section 6 which precedes section
18. He submitted that the effect of section 18 is to exclude persons holding
office in the Survey Department from the ambit of section 6. As such, the
expression "has served" (though ambiguous) should be interpreted to refer to a
person who has terminated his services. Counsel also submitted that the
Surveyor‑General is one of the persons referred to in paragraph 9 of the
Schedule. Admittedly, he cannot grant a licence to himself. If so, the
reference there is to a person who has ceased to hold office. Hence, the same
interpretation should be given to the other categories referred to therein.



Learned D.S.G. submitted that the reference to the Surveyor-­General in
paragraph 9 of the schedule has to be confined to a person who has ceased  to
hold that office since a wider interpretation would lead to absurdity; but the
other persons therein mentioned, can reasonably include persons in service at
the time of making an application for a licence. Learned President's Counsel
for the appellant submitted that this submission is untenable; and that the
legislature contemplated only private individuals as being entitled to the
exemption provided by section 6 of the Ordinance read with the Schedule.



After giving consideration to the submissions of parties, I am satisfied that
the effect of section 18 is clearly to confine the persons exempted by section
6 from the requirement of having to pass the examination to persons mentioned
in paragraph 9 of the Schedule who have ceased to hold office in the Survey
Department. I agree that the Court below has misdirected itself by
interpreting the Schedule independently of section 6; in the result, it failed
to consider the impact of section 18 on section 6. As regards the appellant's
submission that the Surveyor‑General holding office for the time being is
clearly without power to grant a licence to himself in view of the anomaly
which would result if he could do so, the Court considered it irrelevant in
ascertaining the intention of the legislature. This too is a misdirection.



I hold that the Field Staff Circular No. 05/92 dated 05.02.92 is _ultra vires_
and its implementation is in excess of the 1st respondent's

**325**  

power to grant annual licences to land surveyors under the Ordinance. In the
result, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
issue a writ of certiorari quashing the said circular. I also issue a writ of
prohibition prohibiting the 1st respondent from issuing any licences under the
said Circular. In all the circumstances, I make no order as to costs.



**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J. ‑ I ** agree.



**RAMANATHAN,** J. ‑ I agree.



Writs of certiorari and prohibition issued.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/12.html_  

