[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1989](./) >> **[1989] LKSC 12**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1989+12 or 1989+LKSC+12) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1989+LKSC+12) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  In Re Dematagodage Don Harry Wilbert - SLR - 18, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC
12; (1989) 2 Sri LR 18 (26 July 1989)

**18**

**

IN RE DEMATAGODAGE DON HARRY WILBERT

**

SUPREME COURT  
ATUKORALE, J., BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND MARK FERNANDO, J.  
S.C. RULE NO. 1 OF 1988  
JUNE 30, AND JULY 4, 1988

_

Attorney-at-Law - Rule against attorney-at-law - Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978
ss. 40, 42 - Article 136(1) of the Constitution -Jurisdiction under section
42(2) of Judicature Act regarding acts committed before enrolment - Nature of
jurisdiction under s. 42(2) - Deceit committed before enrolment - Inherent
jurisdiction - Standard of proof Failure to refer to inherent jurisdiction in
Rule - Prejudice \- Article 136 (1)(g) of the Constitution.

_

In adducing documentation to establish his educational qualifications for
entry to the Ceylon Law College the respondent now an attorney-at-law
submitted a G.C.E. (O/L) certificate which bore several erasures and
alterations which were not done in the Department of Examinations which issued
the certificate. The respondent used that certificate as genuine and correct
although he had reason to believe that it had been-materially altered and
thereby induced the Ceylon Law College to admit him as a student He his
committed a deceit.

**

Held-

**

1\. The Supreme Court has jurisdiction under section 42(2) of the Judicature
Act, in regard to acts of deceit committed prior to enrolment, but the Court
will be slow to se that jurisdiction in regard to matters long past or of
trifling relevance to the interests for the protection of which that
jurisdiction exists.

2. Any supposed ambiguity in regard to the extent of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court which is a superior court and a court of last resort must be resolved in favour of the wider rather than the narrower interpretation, as the jurisdiction relates

to the protection of the public, the litigants and the legal profession,

3. The jurisdiction under section 42(2) does not involve considerations of punishment, or penalty, or stigma; but the protection of the interests of the public and the litigants, and the honour and reputation of the legal profession.

4. There was a total lack of qualification for entry to the Law College. The entry of respondent's name on the Roll of Attorneys-at-Law has been induced by misrepresentation or mistake, if not worse.

5\. The conduct of the respondent amounts to deceit within the meaning of
section 42(2).

6. Even if a narrow interpretation is given to section 42(2) the court has an inherent jurisdiction to deal with the respondent's act of deceit although it was committed before his enrolment.

7\. The traditional jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to attorneys-
at law is recognised by implication in Article 136(1)(g) of the Constitution;
section 42(2) of the Judicature Act does not purport to restrict that
jurisdiction. If the court were powerless to remove from office an attorney-
at-law whose admission and enrolment was obtained in these circumstances,
undoubtedly the administration of justice would be brought into disrepute
among right-thinking people. The court has in any event an inherent-
jurisdiction to deaf with this act of deceit.

**19**

8\. The only facts and charges relied on are those set out in the Rule; the
omission to refer to the inherent jurisdiction of the Supreme Court has not in
any way prejudiced the respondent in showing cause.

_Per_ **Fernando J:

**

"The inherent jurisdiction of a court springs from its very nature; the grant
of a statutory power to deal with a particular act, in a particular manner,
does not necessarily execute such inherent jurisdiction, -nor are the
boundaries thereof immutable or circumscribed. Such inherent jurisdiction
exists, and is exercised, because it is essential for the administration of
justice."

9. Though proof beyond reasonable doubt is not necessary yet proof on a preponderance of probability will not suffice. A degree of proof commensurate with the subject matter is necessary, for in proportion as the offence is grave so ought the proof to be clear. Every allegation of professional misconduct involving an element of deceit or moral turpitude requires a high standard of proof.

**

Cases referred to:

**

1. _Solicitor-General v. Ariyaratne_ 1 CLW 400

2. _Re a Proctor_ 39 NLR 517

3. _Re Ranasinghe_ 52 NLR 559; 43 CLW 26

4. _Bater v. Bater_ [1951] P. 35

5. _Blyth v. Blyth_ [1966] AC 643

6. _Bhandari v. Advocates' Committee_ [1956] 3 AH ER 742

7. _In re Kandiah_ 25 CLW 87

8. _Attorney-General v. Senaratne_ 60 NLR 77

9. _ Hunter v. Chief Constable, West Midlands Police _[1982] AC 529

10. _Peiris v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue_ 65 NLR 457

**IN THE MATTER OF A RULE** issued on the respondent attorney-at-law in terms
of section 42 of the Judicature Act.

_Eardley Perera P.C._ with _E.D. Wikramanayake, W. P. Gunatillake_ and _J.
Udawatte_ for the respondent.

_K. C. Kamalasabayson, Deputy Solicitor-General_ with _A. F. T. Fernando,
S.C._ for the Attorney-General.

_E. S. Amerasinghe P.C_. with _M. B. Peramuna_ for the Bar Association of Sri
Lanka.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 26, 1989. **  
  
FERNANDO, J.

**

The Respondent entered the Ceylon Law College as a Proctor student on or about
4.1.73, and was admitted and enrolled as an

**20**

Attorney-at-law on 18.9.78. Many years later, it was brought to the notice of
this Court that there were serious discrepancies between the G.C.E. (Ordinary
Level) Certificate submitted by him with his application dated 11.8.72 to the
Law College, and the records maintained by the Department of Examinations.
Consequently, this Rule was issued calling upon the Respondent to how cause
why he should not be suspended from practice, or removed from office, as an
Attorney-at-law, in terms of section 42 (2) of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of
1978, for having -

(1) fraudulently or dishonestly used as genuine G.C.E. (Ordinary Level)
certificate No. 63310 dated 18.5.67, which he knew or had reason to believe to
be a forged document, and thereby committed an offence;

(2) committed deceit, within the ambit of section 42(2) of the

Judicature Act.

The Respondent first sat for the G.C.E. (Ordinary Level) Examination in
December 1963, but no evidence has been led as to his results; he sat again in
August 1964, December 1966 and December 1967, and his results were as follows:

subject |

August **1964** |  **

December 1966 ** |  **

December 1967**  
---|---|---|---  
  
|

Principal's |

Law College |

Examinations |

Examinations  
  
|

Certificate |

Application |

Dept. Register |

Dept. Register  
  
Biology |

|

[Credit] |

Credit |

failed  
  
Health Science |

|

(Ordinary Pass] |

Ordinary Pass |

Credit  
  
Sinhala Language |

|

|

|  
  
'A" syllabus) |

Credit |

[Ordinary Pass] |

Ordinary Pass |

Ordinary Pass  
  
Chemistry |

|

[Credit] |

Failed |

Failed  
  
English Language |

|

|

|  
  
B" syllabus |

|

[Credit] |

Failed |

Failed  
  
Christianity (R.C.) |

Ordinary Pass |

[Credit] |

Failed |

Credit  
  
Arithmetic |

|

[Credit] |

Failed |  
  
Pure Mathematics |

|

- | 

|

Failed  
  
Civics |

|

[Credit] |

- | 

-  
  
Physics |

|

- | 

Failed |

Failed  
  
Total: Credit Passes |

One |

[Six] |

One |

Two  
  
Ordinary Passes |

One |

[TWO] |

Two |

One  
  
According to the Respondent's affidavit filed in response to the Rule, he was
doubtful whether he would be suited to the legal

**21**

profession and whether he would have the financial resources necessary to
complete his studies at the Law College; he requested that Certificate No.
63310 be returned to him, to enable him to submit it with applications for
employment; in December 1972, that Certificate was returned to him. He
testified that in 1987 he was questioned by the Police, in connection with the
suspected forgery of this Certificate; he was requested to produce the
Certificate, but did not do so, as he could not find it. In early 1989, after
this Rule was served on him, the Certificate was traced, and was tendered to
this Court by his Counsel, who joined learned Deputy Solicitor-General in
requesting this Court to obtain a report from the Examiner of Questioned
Documents; this was done.

In 1972, the Rules of the Council of Legal Education required that a person
seeking admission as a Proctor student should have obtained five credits at
the G.C.E. (Ordinary Level) Examination, including credit passes in English
Language and Sinhala (or Tamil) Language; either five credit passes obtained
at one sitting, or four credit passes at one sitting and the fifth at another.
As the Respondent had obtained a credit pass in Sinhala Language at the
December 1964 examination, he satisfied these requirements if Certificate
63310 was authentic and accurate. The practice at the Law College was to seek
verification of results from the Department of Examinations, except where an
original certificate was tendered; accordingly, verification was sought in
respect of a certificate issued by the Principal of a School in regard to the
Respondent's August 1964 results, but not in respect of the December 1966
results. This practice may well have to be reconsidered. The Respondent's
application to the Law College, made in his own handwriting, and the
certificate refer to six credit passes in the same subjects, and hence there
is no possibility of the certificate having been tampered with after it was
submitted to the Law College.

The relevant portions of the Department of Examinations, Examination Results
Registers relating to the December 1966 and 1967 examinations were produced.
The Examiner of Questioned Documents, in his report submitted upon an order
made by this Court, and his oral evidence, stated that an examination of the
entries relating to the Respondent has not revealed any evidence of erasures,
alterations or interpolations; this has not been challenged,

**22**

and after perusing the entries ourselves, we are completely satisfied that
they have been made in the ordinary course of business and have not been
tampered with.

This evidence _prima facie_ establishes that -

(1)The Respondent's results at the December 1966 examination were as set out
earlier in this judgment; and

(2) The Respondent sat again in December 1967 for almost the identical
subjects, obtaining similar results to the 1966 results; (but completely
different to the results shown in Certificate No." 63310).

A.C.M. Ibrahim, Deputy Commissioner of Examinations (Certificates and Records)
produced these Registers and explained how they were prepared; the Register
for 1966, relating to private candidates (the Respondent having been a private
candidate on that occasion) consists of several loose sheets bound together;
each sheet had several vertical columns, one for each subject, and columns for
certain other entries; and several horizontal columns, to record the names and
other particulars of the candidates. These sheets were entered by officers of
the Department from the information contained in the applications submitted by
private candidates; initially the subjects for which each candidate had
entered were recorded, by means of a horizontal line written in the
appropriate column; after the answer scripts were marked, the results are
entered in the appropriate column, by writing the grade obtained (i.e. "D",
"C", "S" or "F" as appropriate) above the said horizontal line. Thereafter a
results sheet is sent to every candidate; some time later, a certificate is
sent, as a matter of course, to every candidate who has passed in five or more
subjects, but not to others (who would receive a certificate only if they made
a specific request. One vertical column, headed "G.C.E. (Ord. Level)
Certificate Number", contains the serial numbers of the certificates issued to
candidates who have passed in five or more subjects; these numbers are
consecutive, and in the same order as the index numbers of these candidates,
thus indicating that these certificates were

**23**

issued as part of one process, and more or less contemporaneously. There is no
certificate number entered against the Respondent's name in that column,
indicating that no certificate was issued to him on the basis that he had
passed in five subjects. In another column, headed "Remarks", are entered the
serial numbers of the results sheet issued to ail candidates, as well as the
serial numbers of the certificates issued, on request, to candidates obtaining
less than five passes; in this column, against the Respondent's name, appears
the serial number (63310) of the certificate issued to the Respondent; this
certificate is not in the same sequence as the certificates in the other
column, but is more than 5,000 numbers later. This confirms Ibrahim's evidence
as to the practice followed in sending certificates to candidates in the
latter category.

He also produced the relevant portion of the Register for December 1967
relating to school candidates {the Respondent having been a school candidate
from Pembroke Academy); this was not in the identical format, although quite
similar The sheet relating to the December 1967 examination contains the
signature of each candidate on the reverse, in the appropriate horizontal
column, confirming the correctness of the subjects entered for; according to
Ibrahim, the relevant entries are made in the school, and signed by each
candidate; there can thus be no doubt as to the subjects which the Respondent
entered for at that examination, which are identical to the subjects entered
for in December 1966, (with one difference, namely that he offered Pure
Mathematics instead of Arithmetic) according to the sheet for that
examination. In the case of private candidates, the sheet is prepared in the
Department, and hence the signatures of the candidates do not appear.

The Respondent has admitted in his evidence before us that he did not sit for
Civics in December 1966; that he was aware that the results" sheet received by
him and Certificate No. 63310 were wrong, in that they purported to show that
he had sat for and passed in Civics; that he stated in his application to the
Law College that he had obtained a Credit pass in Civics although he was
conscious that this was incorrect, as he had not sat for that subject; and
that averments in his affidavit, claiming that he had sat for Civics, were
incorrect. The Respondent admitted that he received a results sheet by post,
which he did not produce; he was unable to trace it, although he did not make
much effort to do so. He denies that he applied for the certificate, and
states that it arrived by post, and was then in the same form as now.

Ibrahim's evidence is that the Results Register is entered from the marks
sheet; the marks sheets are entered from the answer scripts. In cross-
examination he stated that he had not checked upon the

**24**

availability of twenty-year-old answer scripts and mark sheets, but this is
irrelevant in this case, for it was his further evidence that both the results
sheet and the certificate issued to the candidate are entered by reference to
the Results Register. In determining whether Certificate No. 63310 was
altered, the question that arises is not whether the entries therein are
consistent with the answer scripts or mark sheets, but when, how and why they
became inconsistent with the Results Registers.

Ibrahim was questioned as to the procedure to be followed if a mistake was
made in the preparation of certificates: as to whether such entry was erased,
or altered, or a fresh certificate form used. He testified that a specific
number of certificate forms, bearing printed serial numbers, were handed to
each typist for the purpose of entering results; if any error was made, the
typist was not expected to erase or alter such entry, but to treat that
certificate form as cancelled, and to enter a fresh form; all the forms issued
to each typist, consisting of those duly entered, those not used, and those
which were cancelled, had to be accounted for and returned by him. He also
testified that for security reasons, certificates were typed using a purple
ribbon. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that typists may, in some
cases, have typed entries over erasures, contrary to these instructions.

The report of the Examiner of Questioned Documents together with his oral
evidence, establishes that there were numerous erasures and alterations in the
Certificate No. 63310. The cross-examination did not disclose any
inconsistency or infirmity in his investigations or evidence. The only defect
in his report, which transpired in answer to a question from the Bench, was
that it did not state whether (in the case of two entries) one particular
letter had been altered, or typed over an erasure; and even this omission was
promptly supplied by him, after reference to his notes. He explained the
methods used by him for his investigation, and in every instance was able to
explain the basis of his conclusions. I have no hesitation in accepting his
evidence as to the erasures, alterations and double typing appearing on the
document. The following matters are established by his evidence:

1\. The printed portions of the certificate, including the serial number and
the signature, are genuine;

2\. Vertical lines are drawn in a certificate, against the subjects in

 **25**

which the candidate was unsuccessful (or did not sit); this is obviously
intended to prevent any entry being added to a genuine certificate. There is,
evidence of the erasure of such vertical lines, except in the case of the
three subjects in which the Respondent was successful according to the Results
Register, From the indentations that remained on the document, it is clear
that what was erased were vertical lines;

  3. In five places, where there had previously been vertical lines, a new entry (credit pass) had been made over the erasure; this included Civics, for which the Respondent had not sat;  


  4. The certificate contains a space to record (in words) the number of subjects passed; the Sinhala word for "eight" now appears over an erasure; had the certificate been originally entered so as to conform to the Results Register, the word "three" would have appeared here.

Certain other matters were referred to in his evidence -

  1. The Respondent's index number is typed in black, without any erasure, alteration or superimposition (or re-typing);  


  2. The first three Setters of the Respondent's name are typed in purple, over an erasure. The rest of his name, except for one "halkirima" which is in black, has been typed twice, once in black and once in purple; so also the Sinhala word for "credit" in respect of Biology. Four hyphens, immediately before and again immediately after the Respondent's name, are typed in black;  


  3. In respect of Sinhala Language and Health Science, the first two letters of the Sinhala word for "ordinary pass" are in purple, over erasures, the third letter in purple and black, and the last letter in black; Ibrahim's evidence is that the certificates are typed in purple; if that practice was followed, there is no explanation as to how any part of the certificate could be in black (without any erasure). Ibrahim had not been in that branch of the Examinations Department in 1967, and it may be that this was not the invariable practice. However, this does not in any way affect the other evidence as to the erasure of vertical lines and substitution of "credits". Likewise, there is no explanation as to the alterations, and double typing in purple and black, in respect of subjects in which the Respondent had passed; it may be

**26**

that in the process of erasing the original vertical lines some of these
entries too were affected, Here again this feature does not affect the
evidence regarding the five additional credits.

The certificate, at the time it was submitted to the Law College was not
consistent with the entries in the relevant Register; it then showed the
Respondent to have obtained credit passes in four subjects, in which he had
actually failed, and in another for which he had not sat. These alterations
could have been made at the time it was originally typed; or after it was
originally typed, but before it was posted to the Respondent; or after it was
received by the Respondent and before submission to the Law College.

In view of Ibrahim's evidence, while it is possible that, contrary to
instructions, a typist may have made one or two erasures and retyped entries,
to save himself the labour of re-typing an entire certificate, it is not
likely that any typist would have made so many erasures, in virtually every
entry in the certificate, instead of re-typing _''he_ certificate, which would
have been very much easier. It is also unlikely that any such re-typing would
have been in a different colour.

It is also possible that these alterations were made in the Department of
Examinations, after the certificate was checked but prior to being posted to
the Respondent. Either an unknown benefactor in that Department, intending to
benefit the Respondent, _or_ an unknown enemy hoping to put him into trouble
at a later date, could have tampered with the certificate. There is only a
suggestion, but no evidence, to the latter effect.

In considering these two possibilities, the Respondent's conduct has to be
considered. He testified that he sat as a school candidate in December 1963,
but did not suggest that his results were any better than in 1964 or in 1967.
In August 1964 he obtained only a credit pass in Sinhala and an ordinary pass
in Christianity. He left school in January 1965 and joined Pembroke Academy,
to start afresh a two-year course for the same examination; however, in
December 1966 he did not sit as a school candidate from Pembroke; he could not
recall whether Pembroke had a Withdrawal test, to weed out unsuitable
candidates; he sat as a private candidate. Having received his results sheet,
and certificate, both showing (according to him) six credits and two passes,
he nevertheless sat again in

**27**

December 1967; he did so, he says, because he had not obtained a credit in
Sinhala. When it was pointed out that he had already obtained a credit in
Sinhala in 1964, he could not give a satisfactory explanation: at one time, he
seemed to suggest that he sat because his fellow-students were sitting, and at
another stage he implied that he wanted to have five or six credits, including
Sinhala, at one sitting. However, he also testified that after the December
1966 examination, he left Pembroke and commenced working as a proof-reader at
the Colombo Catholic Press, with the idea of later becoming a journalist. If
so, the fatter suggestion cannot be accepted, for this would have made it
difficult to get the results he hoped for. If he did leave Pembroke early in
1967, it is difficult to see how he could have entered as a school candidate
from Pembroke. He has thus failed to give a plausible explanation for making a
further attempt, despite results (in 1966) far better than in 1963 or 1964. In
his application to the Law College, while giving full details, as required, of
"Schools and Universities in order, giving dates of entry and leaving", of
three schools attended prior to December 1964, and of another institution
attended in 1970-71, he has omitted Pembroke Academy which he was attending
when he obtained the results on which he relied for admission; no satisfactory
explanation was forthcoming for this omission. Further, the hypothesis that
erasures and alterations took place in the Department must also be examined in
relation to the results sheet: prior to the certificate being sent to the
Respondent, a results sheet was admittedly received by him; if the results
sheet was in conformity with the official Results Register, then the
discrepancies between the results sheet and the certificate would have been
obvious to the Respondent. If the results sheet was in conformity with the
altered certificate, then it would mean that the results sheets too was
deliberately entered in a manner inconsistent with the Results Register: but
there is no reason whatever to think that the results sheet was incorrect.
Finally, the manner in which the Respondent treated the obvious error in
regard to Civics is also relevant: he asserted that candidates were often
credited with passes in subjects for which they had not sat, and, like them,
had no hesitation in taking the benefit of such errors, without query or
qualms of conscience.

The Respondent's evidence in these proceedings did not impress me at all; his
readiness to reap the benefit of the error in regard to the credit pass in
Civics weighs against his credibility; he had no scruples about declaring in
his application to Law College that he had

**28**

obtained a credit in Civics; nor even about swearing in his affidavit in these
proceedings that he had sat for Civics. In giving evidence he was evasive and
inconsistent on crucial matters; as to his reasons for sitting for the
December 1967 examination, as to his employment between 1967 and 1972, and as
to his reasons for waiting until 1972 to commence his legal studies, although
from 1967 he was qualified to do so, if Certificate No. 63310 was authentic.

In these circumstances, I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the
alterations to the certificate did not take place in the Department of
Examination.

In proceedings of this nature, it is not necessary that the acts alleged be
proved beyond reasonable doubt; these proceedings are not criminal or penal in
nature, but are intended to protect the public, litigants, and the legal
profession itself. Over half a century ago, it was observed in _Solicitor-
General vs. Ariyaratne_ (1), that these proceedings involve not the question
of punishing a man, but quite a different question, ought a person against
whom such offences are proved remain on the Roll of an honourable profession?
The same principles have been re-iterated in regard to re-enrolment: thus in
_Re a Proctor,_ (2).

"In the case of _In Re Pool_ it was said that their presence on the roll is an
indication _prima facie_ at least that they are worthy to stand in the ranks
of an honourable profession to whose members ignorant people are frequently
obliged to resort for assistance in the conduct and management of their
affairs and in whom they are in the habit of reposing unbounded, confidence;
and ........in restoring this person to the roll we should be sanctioning the
conclusion that he is in our judgment a fit and proper person to be so
trusted."  
  
and again in _Re Ranasinqhe,_ (3):

" this Court, in dealing with these applications, must not be influenced
either by punitive or sympathetic cosiderations. Our duty must be measured by
the rights of litigants who seek advice from a professional man admitted or
re-admitted to the Bar by the sanction of the Judges of the Supreme Court. It
is also measured by the right of the profession, whose trustees we are, to
claim that we should satisfy ourselves that re-enrolment will not involve some
further risk of degradation to the reputation of the Bar."

**29**

However, proof on a preponderance of probability will not suffice; a degree of
proof commensurate with the subject-matter is necessary, for in proportion as
the offence is grave so ought the proof to be clear; Safer vs. Safer (4);
Blyth vs. Blyth (5). In Bhandari vs. Advocates Committee (6), the Privy
Council approved the following statement of the law:

"We agree that in every allegation of professional misconduct involving an
element of deceit or moral turpitude a high standard of proof is called for,
and we cannot envisage any body of professional men sitting in judgment on a
colleague who would be content to condemn on a mere balance of probabilities."

Applying that standard, I am satisfied, and hold, that the Respondent used as
genuine and correct Certificate No. 63310 (a) which he knew to be incorrect,
and (b) which he had reason to believe to have been materially altered;
thereby inducing the Ceylon Law College to admit him as a Proctor student. If
these facts had then been known, I am quite certain that the Respondent would
not have been admitted and enrolled as an Attorney-at-law by this Court in
September 1978. It transpired that criminal proceedings are contemplated
against the Respondent for forgery; although not obliged to do so, in view of
our order in this matter, we refrain from making any finding in respect of the
charge of fraudulently or dishonestly using as genuine a certificate known to
be forged.

It remains to consider whether this act of deceit, committed before the
Respondent was enrolled as an Attorney-at-law, amounts to "deceit" within the
meaning of section 42(2) of the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978. The relevant
provisions of the Judicature Act are as follows:

40(1): The Supreme Court may in accordance with rules for the time being in
force admit and enroll as attorneys-at-law persons of good repute and of
competent knowledge and ability.

42(2): Every person admitted and enrolled as an attorney-at-law who shall be
guilty of any deceit, malpractice, crime or offence may be suspended from
practice or removed from office by any three Judges of the Supreme Court
sitting together.

43(3): Before any such attorney-at-law shall be suspended or removed as herein
provided, a notice containing a copy of the

**30**

charge or charges against him and calling upon him to show cause within a
reasonable time why he should not be suspended or removed, as the case may be,
shall be personally served on him........../P>

42(4): It shall to the duty of the presiding officer of any court or other
tribunes administering justice before which any attorney-al-law is found
guilty of any crime or offence which may be prescribed to forthwith report
such fact to the Supreme Court, which may if it thinks fit suspend such
attorney-at-law from practice pending the final determination of any appeal
from such finding of guilty or a proceeding under sub-section (3) whichever is
later.

Mr. Eric Amerasinghe, P.C., on behalf of the Bar Association of Sri Lanka
submitted that the Association was interested only in the question of
principle involved, whether disciplinary action under section 42(2) could be
'taken in respect of acts committed prior to enrolment. He submitted that
there ought to be no exhumation of misconduct buried in the distant past, no
hunting for skeletons, unknown or forgotten, in income cupboards. If that were
to be permitted, he said, the Association might be inundated with complaints
seeking to rake up the past; but we do not take so dismal a view of the
antecedents of the members of the legal profession. He conceded one exception,
that Shies Court had jurisdiction to remove an Attorney-at-law convicted of an
odious, committed prior to enrolment, and reported under section 42(4); he
sought to explain this anomaly on the basis that there was a stigma attaching
to such a conviction, which he said was of itself a good ground for the
removal of an Attorney-a Haw The jurisdiction under section 42(2) does not
involve considerations of punishment or penalty, or stigma; but the protection
of the interests of the public and litigants, and the honour and reputation of
the legal profession. Such a conviction may be reported by the presiding
officer of a court, without having She means of ascertaining whether the
offence was committed prior to enrolment; if the jurisdiction conferred you
section 42(2) is confined to acts committed after enrolment, the procedure for
reporting provided by section 42(4) cannot extend mat jurisdiction. When a
matter is reported, shies Court must determine whether ii fails within the
scope of section 42(2) If it does not, me jurisdiction under section 42(2) win
not be exercised. Section 42(2) must therefore be interpreted without treating
a conviction as an exception.

**31**

All Counsel were agreed that this Court has an inherent jurisdiction to take
disciplinary action in respect of an act of deceit committed prior to
enrolment, at least where such deceit relates to or is connected with the
process of enrolment. Mr. Eardley Perera, P.C., for the Respondent, submitted
that this Rule had been issued under and in terms of section 42(2), that this
Court did not have jurisdiction to deal with the Respondent under that
section, and accordingly no action for suspension or removal could be taken in
these proceedings. The learned Deputy Solicitor-Genera! contended that this
Court did have jurisdiction under section 42(2); further, as no acts, other
than those set out in the Rule, were involved, an order could be made in these
proceedings even in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of this Court,
without the need for fresh proceedings.

Before considering the scope of section 42(2), it needs to be emphasised that
the existence of jurisdiction must be distinguished from its exercise. That an
Act was committed before enrolment, or that a considerable period has elapsed
since its commission, may well justify this Court in declining to suspend or
remove a practitioner after inquiry, or even in declining to issue a Rule in
the first instance: but it would not follow that this Court does not have
jurisdiction in those circumstances.

Turning to section 42(2), Mr. Amerasinghe submitted that "malpractice"
necessarily referred to an act after enrolment, as that term must refer to
conduct contrary to the standards accepted in the legal profession. Mr.
Amerasinghe contended that the nocturne a social rule of interpretation was
applicable, and that the other terms - deceit, crime, offence must be
interpreted with the like restriction. "Where two or more words which are
susceptible of analogous meaning are coupled together .... they are understood
to be used in their cognate sense. They take, as it were, color from each
other, the meaning of the more general being restricted to a sense analogous
to that of the less general." (Maxwell, Interpretation of Statutes, 12th ed.
p. 289). Maxwell's comment that this maxim is always a treacherous one "unless
you know the societies to which the social belong" is apposite; "deceit",
"crime" and "offence" can hardly be regarded as words "which are susceptible
of analogous meaning", and certainly not of the same societies, as
"malpractice". Further, "malpractice" appears to be the more general word -
for

**32**

offences may all be malpractices, but most malpractices would not be offences;
and the rule cannot be applied to place a restriction on the less general
words. In any event, we are doubtful whether "malpractice" is confined to acts
committed after enrolment: for it may well include an act of corruption or
breach of confidentiality committed by an attorney-at-law, during his period
of apprenticeship, in relation to such apprenticeship.

The phrase "who shall be guilty of" in section 42(2) points to the future: but
does it mean "who shall commit any deceit " or "who shall be found guilty of
any deceit "? It is clear from section 42(3) that "guilty" refers to a finding
by the Supreme Court, for that section requires the service of charges and an
opportunity to show cause. Had section 42(2) used the expression "who shall be
found guilty", it might well have been argued that an Attorney-at-law "found
guilty", and reported, under section 42(4) was liable to be removed without
the need for a further finding by the Supreme Court. I am of the View that
section 42(2) requires in every case a finding of guilt by the Supreme Court -
whether such finding be upon evidence, or upon an admission, or by way of
presumption, or by estoppel. The proof of a conviction by another Court would
facilitate, but not dispense with, such a finding; the conviction cannot be
re-argued on the evidence upon which it was based, but other evidence can
(exceptionally) be adduced: Re Kandiah (7) - despite a doubt expressed in
Seneratne's case (8). The words in question thus refer to a finding of guilty,
and not to the commission of the act of deceit or other misconduct. This
interpretation of section 42(2) is confirmed upon a consideration of the
nature of the jurisdiction thereby conferred: whereas a strict construction is
required where a statutory provision empowers the infliction of punishments
and penalties, the decisions cited earlier demonstrate that this jurisdiction
relates to the protection of the public, litigants, and the legal profession.
Had there been any ambiguity, therefore, section 42(2) must be given a wider,
rather than a narrower, construction. Likewise, we are not dealing with the
limited jurisdiction conferred on a tribunal created by statute, where a
narrow construction is sometimes proper, but with the jurisdiction of a
Superior Court, the Court of last resort; with a jurisdiction possessed since
1801, in relation to persons always regarded as standing in a special
relationship to the Court. Any supposed ambiguity in regard to the extent of
that jurisdiction must be resolved in favour of the wider, rather than the
narrower, interpretation. I am of the view that this

**33**

court has jurisdiction under section 42(2) in regard to acts of deceit
committed prior to enrolment, white recognising that this Court will be slow
to exercise that jurisdiction in regard to matters long past, or of trifling
relevance to the interests for the protection of which that jurisdiction
exists. I hold that the conduct of the Respondent amounts to deceit, within
the meaning of section 42 (2).

Even if a narrow interpretation be given to section 42 (2), nevertheless this
Court has an inherent jurisdiction to deal with the Respondent's act of
deceit. That deceit did not impinge directly on the very act of enrolment (as,
for instance, the submission of a forged Law College final examination
certificate would have); however it was not a merely collateral matter, or a
disputed question of interpretation of the relevant Rules, or a defect which
was curable (such as the omission to furnish a character certificate or being
a few months under-age), but a total lack of qualification for entry to the
Law College. Had these facts been known, the Respondent would not have been
considered to be a person of good repute, or of competent knowledge and
ability. It is not that I take a different view as to his knowledge, ability
or reputation, but rather that the act of enrolment, and of the formal entry
of his name on the Roll of Attorneys-at-law, has been induced by
misrepresentation or mistake., if not worse. The inherent jurisdiction of a
court springs from its very nature; the grant of a statutory power to deal
with a particular act, in a particular manner, does not necessarily exclude
such inherent jurisdiction, nor are the boundaries thereof immutable or
circumscribed. Such inherent jurisdiction exists, and is exercised, because it
is essential for the administration of justice. Thus in _Hunter vs. Chief
Constable, West Midlands Police_ (9) this jurisdiction in relation to abuse of
procedure was referred to as:

" the inherent power which any court of justice must possess to prevent misuse
of its procedure in a way which, although not inconsistent with the literal
application of its procedural rules, would nevertheless be manifestly unfair
to a party to litigation before it, or would otherwise bring the
administration of justice into disrepute among right-thinking people.

The traditional jurisdiction of this Court in regard to Attorneys-at-law is
recognised, by implication, in Article 136(1)(g) of the Constitution; section
42(2) of the Judicature Act does not purport to restrict that jurisdiction If
this Court were powerless to remove from office an

**34**

Attorney-at-law whose admission and enrolment was obtained in these
circumstances, undoubtedly the administration of justice would be brought into
disrepute among right-thinking people. This Court has in any event an inherent
jurisdiction to deal with this act of deceit.

In _Peiris vs. Commissioner of Inland Revenue_ (10), Sansoni, J,, as he then
was, observed -

"it is well settled that an exercise of a power will be referable to a
jurisdiction which confers validity upon it and not a jurisdiction under which
it will be nugatory- This principle has been applied even to cases where a
Statute which confers no power has been quoted as authority for a particular
act, and there was in force another Statute which conferred that power."

The only facts and charges relied on are those set out in the Rule; the
omission to refer to the inherent jurisdiction of this Court has not in any
way prejudiced the Respondent in showing cause. I therefore hold that, in any
event, the conduct of the Respondent amounts to deceit, in respect of which
disciplinary action may be taken against him under the inherent powers of this
Court.

The Respondent's conduct, particularly in relation to the affidavit filed in
these proceedings and his unrepentant attitude in respect of the use of a
certificate admittedly known by him to be incorrect in material respects,
makes it clear that there is neither an acknowledgment of wrongdoing nor
repentance. It is therefore unnecessary to consider whether an order for
suspension from practice would be sufficient. The Rule is made absolute, and I
direct that the Respondent be removed from office as an Attorney-at-law, and
that his name be struck off the Roll of Attorneys-at-law.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree

**

BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree

_Rule made absolute.  
Name struck off Roll of Attorneys at-law._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/12.html_  

