[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [2003](./) >> **[2003] LKSC 16**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+2003+16 or 2003+LKSC+16) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=2003+LKSC+16) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  General Sales Company Ltd v. Sri Krishna Corporation Ltd - SLR - 1, Vol 1
of 2005 [2003] LKSC 16; (2005) 1 Sri LR 1 (14 November 2003)

**1**

**GENERAL SALES COMPANY LTD  
V  
SRI KRISHNA CORPORATION LTD**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
DE SILVA. J. AND  
JAYASINGHE. J  
S. C. (CHC) APPEAL NO. 25/99  
H.C. (CIVIL) NO. 47/96(1)  
28th MARCH, 16th JUNE, 9th JULY AND 8th AUGUST, 2003

_Landlord and Tenant - Landlord's action for damages on the ground of defects
of the premises let - Defendant's counter claim.  
_  
The plaintiff took on rent a building from the defendant at a monthly rental
of Rs. 248,000/- for storage of rice expected to arrive in the Port of
Colombo. The plaintiff also paid a deposit of Rs. 1,488,000/- for the
warehouse. The plaintiff caused his agent to inspect the premises and later
made suggestions for alternations including for entry of lorries, carrying
rice to enter the building, and for partitions and cubicles. The said
alterations were effected in consequence by agreement between parties.  
  
Rice was brought into the warehouse in 30 ton lorries. Allegedly as a result
the floor cracked and at the defendant's suggestion lorries weighing 20 tons
only were used thereafter although this was not a condition of the agreement
between the parties. Next, the plaintiff requested the defendant to fill up
and cover cracks on the floor which does not appear to have been done. In
fact, the plaintiff had notified the defendant that in the event of
transporting rice into the warehouse being interrupted plaintiff had to pay
demurrage on the ship at U$$ 5000 a day.  
  
The aforesaid dispute led to the plaintiff filing action for damages in a sum
of Rs. 7,000,000/- and the deposit of Rs. 1,488,000/-. The defendant alleged
that the plaintiff vacated the premises on 31.03.1994; also that the defendant
incurred expenses for making several alterations to the warehouse at the
plaintiff's request.  
  
The High Court took the view that since the plaintiff inspected the premises
and satisfied himself that the premises were suitable for the storage of rice,
he cannot now claim damages from the defendant.

**2**

**Held** :  
  
1\. The inspection of the premises by the plaintiff was only a visual
inspection, but the evidence established that the premises were required for
storage of rice to be brought in heavy lorries. This was the understanding of
parties.  
  
2\. The plaintiff is entitled to have his appeal allowed subject to a
direction to the High Court to assess the damages based on the plaintiff's
claim as well as the defendant's counter claim of the rent and to enter decree
accordingly.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P. C_. with _Geethaka Goonawardane_ for plaintiff -
appellant.  
  
_S. L. Gunasekera_ with _Kushan de Alwis_ for defendant - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

November 14,2003  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.**  
  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the High Court dated 12.05.1999. By
that judgment the plaintiff-appellant's action (hereinafter referred to as the
plaintiff) against the defendant-respondent (hereinafter referred to as
defendant) was dismissed. The plaintiff preferred an appeal against that order
to this Court.  
  
The facts of this appeal, in brief, are as follows :  
  
The plaintiff instituted action against the defendant, praying inter alia for
the recovery of a sum of Rs. 8,488,000/- together with legal interest thereon
from the plaint till date of decree and thereafter on the aggregate amount of
the decree till payment in full. In his plaint, the plaintiff had pleaded the
following;  
  
(a) the defendant was the owner of a warehouse;  
  
(b) the defendant was aware that the plaintiff wanted to rent a warehouse for
the sole purpose of storage of rice;  
  
(c) all negotiations between the parties were on the express knowledge and
undertaking that the stores would be used for the purpose of storing rice;

**3**

(d) the defendant held out to the plaintiff that the premises were suitable
for the storage of rice;  
  
(e) the plaintiff on or about 01 st November, 1993 took on rent from the
defendant the said warehouse for the purpose of storing rice and paid a
deposit of Rs. 1,488,000/.;  
  
(f) the plaintiff thereafter stored rice in the warehouse;  
  
(g) the said warehouse was not suitable for the storage of rice;  
  
(h) in the premises aforesaid, the plaintiff suffered loss and damage which
the plaintiff estimated at Rs. 7,000,000/-;  
  
(i) the defendant has failed and neglected to pay the said sum of Rs.
7,000,000/- or any part thereof or return the deposit of Rs. 1,488,000/-
though thereto obliged to and though thereto demanded.  
  
The plaintiff based his claim on documents filed with the plaint and
thereafter produced in evidence.  
  
The defendant had admitted that he was the owner of the warehouse in question
and the plaintiff stored rice in the said premises. He has also admitted that
the plaintiff paid a sum of Rs. 1,488,000/- as a deposit at the commencement
of the said tenancy.  
  
The defendant in his answer took up the position that the plaintiff after
inspecting a newly constructed warehouse of the defendant found it suitable
for its purpose and took it on rent at a monthly rental of Rs. 248,000/- on
the terms and conditions which were set out in the tenancy agreement dated
01st November, 1993 (P6). The defendant further submitted that at the request
of the plaintiff, the defendant constructed office partitions/cubicles,
security tower etc. at a cost of Rs. 205,700/-and installed additional lights
at a cost of Rs. 28,000/-. The defendant also stated that the petitioner had
vacated the premises in question on 31.03.1994 without notice to the defendant
and/or without paying the defendant a month's rent in lieu of notice and that
the plaintiff failed and neglected to pay the defendant rent for the months of
December 1993 to March 1994.

**4**

Two questions were taken as main issues for determination by the learned
District Judge as well as the learned Judge of the High Court, which were as
follows : "  
  
(a) Whether the defendant was well aware when the premises were taken on rent
that the premises were used for the storage of  
rice ;  
  
(b) Whether the defendant was well aware that the plaintiff would drive
lorries into the premises.  
  
The defendant took up the view that he has never dealt in rice or stored rice
and is ignorant of the practices of the trade in the storage of rice. His
position is that he could have been held liable for the loss, if any, caused
to the plaintiff by reason of the premises having been unsuitable for the
storage of rice only if the defendant had represented to the plaintiff that
the said premises were suitable for such purpose.  
  
Be that as it may, on an examination of the correspondence between the
plaintiff and the defendant it appears quite clearly that the defendant was
aware from the outset that the plaintiff needed a warehouse for the purpose of
storage of rice. A fax message sent by Bala Emmanuel, who was the Sales
Manager of the plaintiff Company at the time material to this action, to Sri
Kantha, the Business Development Manager of the defendant Company dated
09.10.1993, refers to the purpose of using the said warehouse by the plaintiff
(P2). The relevant portion of that message reads as follows:-  
  
"We refer to the discussions we had with you and the subsequent visit the
undersigned made to your warehouse complex at Wattala. As advised to you on
telecom yesterday we are pleased to confirm our interest to enter into an
agreement with your Company for renting of 31,500 sq. ft. of warehousing
located at your factory complex at No. 102, Sri Wickrama Mawatha, Wattala.  
**  
We wish to take occupancy of the warehouse by the 1st of October in order to
store a shipment of rice expected to arrive in the Port of Colombo between
15/17 October 93.**

> (emphasis added)".

**5**

The defendant on 01 st November, 1993, wrote to the plaintiff informing him of
the tenancy agreement and informed the plaintiff that,

> > "We are now pleased to inform you that we are prepared to lease the above
> premises..........on the under mentioned terms and conditions"

Clause II of the said agreement stated as follows :

> > "You shall use the said premises for your business and trade purposes
> including the storage of rice".

On an examination of the contents of the aforementioned letters it is clear
that the plaintiff's intention was to rent out storage space for storing of
rice and the defendant was aware of the plaintiff's requirement. Learned Judge
of the High Court, has taken the view that since the plaintiff inspected the
premises and satisfied himself that the premises were suitable for the storage
of rice, he cannot now claim damages from the defendant.  
  
Notwithstanding the above, the following issuse raised at the High Court on
the contrary relate to the purpose of renting out the premises in question by
the plaintiff, which clearly shows that such renting out was for the purpose
of storing rice. All these have been answered by learned Judge of the High
Court in the affirmative.  
  
"Issue 1 (a) during the period material to the action did the defendant know
that the plaintiff wanted to take the said premises on rent for the purpose of
storage of rice ?  
  
Answer: Yes  
  
(b) were all the transactions between the defendant and the plaintiff
conducted on the basis that the said premises would be used for the storage of
rice ?  
  
Answer: Yes."  
  
Sri Kantha, the Business Development Manager, of the defendant Company, giving
evidence stated that, before the plaintiff came into occupation of the stores,
the defendant was aware that the plaintiff's

**6**

intention was to store rice (pg. 314 of the brief) and that the said warehouse
was rented out to the plaintiff with the clear knowledge that the plaintiff
would be using the premises for storage of rice. Bala Emmanuel, the Sales
Manager of the plaintiff Company, who had apparently inspected the premises
stated in evidence that it was only a visual inspection and that the question
whether the warehouse was not suitable for storing rice could not be decided
on a visual inspection.  
  
The documents placed before the High Court indicate quite clearly that the
defendants were aware that the plaintiff intended to use the said warehouse
for storage of bagged rice. This is further confirmed by the letter written by
Sri Kantha as the Business Development Manager of the defendant Company to the
Director General of Customs, which is as follows  
  
"Ref.: SKC/G/282/93  
  
4th October, 1993.  
  
The Director General of Customs,  
  
**WAREHOUSE COMPLEX AT WATTALA  
**  
This is to confirm that the warehouse complex at Wattala 31,000 sq. ft. in
extent has been leased to M/s. ITC Ltd., of 6-3-1110, Arumuthmall, Begumpt,
Hyderabad 500 016, India through M/s. General Sales Co. Ltd., 7, Station Road,
Colombo 03 to be used as a bonded warehouse under the Customs **Bonded scheme
for storage and sale of bagged rice** for a period of 12 months, commencing
from 01st November, 1993, as per the terms and conditions of the agreement
(emphasis added)."  
  
In such circumstances it is evident that the defendant was well aware that
their warehouse was taken on rent for the storage of rice. However, this does
not mean that the defendant is solely responsible for the damages caused to
the stored rice.  
  
The next question that has to be considered is as to whether the defendant
knew that the plaintiff would drive into the premises. Learned Judge of the
High Court, at the commencement of the conclusion of his judgment states that,  
  
"It is my conclusion that at the very commencement of the

**7**

offer on P2 being made, the defendant was aware that trucks will be taken
inside the warehouse."  
  
Having said that, the High Court had proceeded to examine whether the
defendant was aware of the weight of the lorries. However the defendant's case
was that they were not aware that vehicles were to be driven into the premises
and what was necessary at the High Court was to examine the correctness of the
position taken up by the defendant.  
  
In one of their initial correspondence, dated 09.10.1993 (P2) Bala Emmanuel in
his letter to Sri Kantha, informed their needs, which clearly indicated not
only that the trucks would be driven into the warehouse, but also that certain
modifications will have to be carried out in order to accommodate such
requirements. These requests were in the following terms :  
  
"We wish to take occupancy of the warehouse by the 15th of October in order to
store a shipment of rice expected to arrive in the Port of Colombo between
15/17 October 93.  
  
As discussed and agreed you will take steps to effect the following
modifications to the warehouse prior to occupancy:  
  
**All six doors of the warehouse to be modified to permit access by truck for
which purpose door heights will have to be raised accordingly.  
**  
**Suitable ramps to be constructed for each doorway to permit trucks to be
driven into the warehouse for unloading** (emphasis added)".  
  
In response to this request Sri Kantha informed Bala Emmanuel on 14.10.1993
that the **" Modifications and additions referred to in Emmanuel's communique
of 09.10.1993 would be attended to".  
**  
In such circumstances it is abundantly clear that the defendant, from the very
outset of entering into an agreement, was aware that there would be vehicles
driven into the premises. As referred to earlier the warehouse was taken on
rent for storage of rice and therefore the defendant

**8**

should have been aware that the vehicles which were to be driven in were to
carry heavy weights. Accordingly it should have been the responsibility of the
defendant, being aware of the type of vehicles that would be driving into
their warehouse, to make such arrangements in order to accommodate the
requirements of the plaintiff. In fact the Sales Manager of the plaintiff's
Company had informed the defendant on 12.11.1993 a date prior to the
commencement of cargo being brought into the warehouse, as to the
deterioration of the floor of the warehouse, in the following terms (P11):  
  
"The most serious problem however is the cracking up of the floor within the
warehouse. The floor is deteriorating at a very fast rate and we feel that
with operations ongoing this would develop into a very serious problem as the
major portion of the warehouse floor area will become unusable. Please discuss
with your engineers an immediate solution to this problem as any disruption to
smooth receipt of cargo into the warehouse will result in our incurring
demurrage on the ship which is payable **@ US $ 5000** a day. We might be
compelled to seek relief from you for any demurrage incurred on A/C of
warehouse deficiencies"  
  
The communications between the plaintiff and the defendant since 12.11.1993
show that the plaintiff was complaining of the defective floor and requesting
the defendant to attend to the matter urgently.  
  
It is apparent on a perusal of the documents before this Court, that the
warehouse was not designed to sustain the weight of moving trucks with a heavy
cargo. The letter of the Managing Director of Elemech Engineers (Pvt.) Ltd.,
of 6th November 1993 clearly reveals the said position. Elemech Engineers
appears to be the construction engineers who had attended to the said
warehouse. The said letter (P12) is in the following terms :  
  
_" Warehouse at 102. Sri Wickrama Mawatha. Wattala - Stage I_  
  
We write to confirm of having handed over to you the above completed premises
in perfect condition and to the agreed specifications to you on 01 st October,
1993.  
  
Subsequently as per your request we had to increase the size of the doorways
and replace the existing shutters with larger

**9**

shutters. This work is in hand and will be completed by end of this week. We
have now been advised that your client's lorries each  
weighing around 30 tons have been plying within the premises as against our
advice that it was designed only up to a moving load  
of forklift................. "  
  
As a result of this letter, the defendant informed the plaintiff to curtail
the movement of lorries with a load in excess of 20 tons within the warehouse.
Restrictions of load per truck, it is to be noted, was not a part of the
agreement entered into between the plaintiff and the defendant (P13). By
letter P14 dated 17.11.1993, Bala Emmanuel informed Sri Kantha that the
plaintiff had reduced the load of rice per truck to 20 tons or less and
requested the defendant to fill up and cover the crackings on the floor with
1/4" thick steel plates.  
  
Considering the aforementioned circumstances, it is apparent that at the time
the plaintiff and defendant entered into an agreement (P2), the defendant was
fully aware that the warehouse would be used for the purpose of storage of
rice and for this purpose vehicles carrying bags of rice would be moving
through the warehouse. When the warehouse was given on rent for such purposes,
later the defendant cannot be heard to say that he was not aware that lorries
carrying heavy loads would be driven into the warehouse damaging his property.
After all, when the chief purpose of renting out the premises was for storage
of rice and when such rice were brought inside the warehouse in trucks, the
defendant should have examined the capacity of the building's floor to see
whether it would sustain the weight of such cargo, prior to entering into an
agreement.  
  
For the aforesaid reasons both questions which were taken as main issues are
answered in the affirmative. This appeal is accordingly allowed and the
judgement of the High Court dated 12.05.1999 is set aside.  
  
The plaintiff also claimed that the defendant did not return the balance
amount from the deposit he kept with the defendant amounting to Rs.
1,488,000/-. The defendant contended that the plaintiff did not pay him the
rents for the month of December 1993 and January, February and March 1994.
Moreover, he claims that the plaintiff did not give the defendant one

**10**

month's notice in writing of the termination of the agreement. Accordingly the
defendant claims that he is entitled to retain 5 months rent, viz. a sum of
Rs. 1,240,000/- out of the said deposit in respect of four months rent and as
one month's rent in terms of notice.  
  
No evidence was led in the High Court with regard to the damages claimed by
the plaintiff as well as the claim made by the defendant on the rent for the
warehouse. Therefore, the High Court is directed to assess the damages based
on the plaintiff's claim as well as the defendant's counter claim on the rent
and enter decree accordingly.

> There will be no costs.

**DE SILVA, J**. -I agree.  
  
**JAYASINGHE, J**. -I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed with a direction to High Court to assess damages.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/16.html_  

