

##  Goonathilaka And Another v. Thollappan - SLR - 394, Vol 2 of 2007 [2006]
LKSC 16; (2007) 2 Sri LR 394 (25 August 2006)

**394**

**GOONATHILAKA AND ANOTHER  
V  
THOLLAPPAN**

SUPREME COURT.  
SARATH N. SILVA, CJ.  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMARATUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 19/2005, S.C. (SPL.) LA NO. 211/2004  
C.A. NO. 211/2004  
AUGUST 25, 2006  
  
_State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act NO.7 of 1979 as amended by Act No. 58
of 1981, Section 18, - What is State land in terms of Section 18? - Land is
taken to include buildings? - Evidence Ordinance- Section 114.- Conversion of
Public Corporations or Government Owned Business Undertakings into Public
Companies Act No. 23 of 1987.  
_  
Bagawantalawa Plantations Ltd., was an estate vested in the Land Reform
Commission and later in the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation (SLPC).
The respondent was an employee of the SLPC and was permitted to occupy the
land in question on the payment of a sum of Rs.50/- per month as rent.
Subsequently the estates vested in the SLPC was leased out to companies
established in terms of the Conversion of Public Corporations or Government
Owned Business Undertakings into Public Companies Act. Bogawantalawa
Plantations Ltd. was incorporated in terms of the said Act, the estate within
which the land occupied by the respondent is situated was leased by SLPC to
Bogawantalawa Plantations Ltd.

The Court of Appeal issued a writ of certiorari on the basis that the
respondent had been given on rent a building and that the land is mere
appurtenant to the building. The notice to quit was issued by the original
respondent-appellant as the Competent Authority for the purpose of the State
Land (Recovery of Possession) Act on the basis that the respondent (V.N.
Thollappan) is in unauthorized occupation of state land. The land described in
the schedule to the notice to quit is a portion of field 4 of the
Bogawantalawa Estate.

**395**

**Held:**  
  
        The purpose of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act as amended is to recover possession of the state lands from persons in unauthorized possession or occupation of such land. Section 18 makes it abundantly clear that land is taken to include buildings standing thereon. The specific reference in the definition that land includes any building standing thereon has been ignored in the judgment of the Court of Appeal. The fact that there is a building on the land and that a person is in occupation of that building cannot remove such land from the operation of the Act.  
  
        In terms of section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance a Court may presume inter alia "that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed". In this case the respondent has produced the letter by which he is appointed as the Competent Authority in respect of the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation. As the petitioner has not disputed that averment, no further proof is required in regard to the authority of the appellant to perform his official functions under the Act.   
  
**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
Gomin Dayasiri with Manoli Jinadasa for petitioner. S. Mandaleswaranwith S.
Shanthisan and Tharanga  Aluthge for the  respondent.

Cur.adv. vult.

August 25, 2006 **  
SARATH N. SILVA, CJ.**  
  
        This is an appeal from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 6.7.2004. By that Judgment the Court of Appeal issued a writ of certiorari to quash the quit notice produced marked X13. The Notice was issued by the original respondent-appellant as the Competent Authority for the purpose of the State Land (Recovery of Possession) Act, stating that the petitioner respondent (V.V. Thollappan) is in unauthorized occupation of state land described in the schedule to the Notice and requiring him to vacate the land together with dependents, if any, on or before 31.12.2001. The land described in the schedule to the Notice is a portion of field NO.4 of the Bogawantalawa estate of which the boundaries are given containing an extent of 57ft x 65 ft. 

**396**

It is not disputed in this case that Bogawantalawa Plantations Ltd., was an
estate vested in the Land Reform Commission and later in the Sri Lanka State
Plantations Corporation (SLPC). According to the documents the respondent ,was
an employee of the SLPC and was permitted to occupy the land in question on
the payment of a sum of Rs. 50/-per month as rent. Subsequently the estates
vested in the SLPC were leased to Companies established in terms of the
Conversion of Public Corporations or Government Owned Business Undertakings
into Public Companies Act No. 23 of 1987.  
  
Bogawantalawa Plantations Ltd., was thus incorporated by an order dated
22.6.1992 made in terms of the said Act. The Bogawantalawa estate within which
the land Occupied by the petitioner is admittedly situated was leased by the
SLPC to Bogawantalawa Plantations Ltd., by Lease bearing No. 83 dated
18.1.1994 attested by J.  Kottage, Notary Public.  
  
The lease is for a period of 99 years and contains a provision for prior
termination. Therefore the land remains vested in the Sri Lanka State
Plantations Corporation.

 In terms of section 18 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, as
amended by Act No. 58 of 1981, "State   land includes ...any land vested in or
owned by or under the control of .. the Sri Lanka State Plantations
Corporation". Thus the provisions of the Act, as amended would apply in
respect of the land and premises in question.

Although the Court of Appeal also arrived at the conclusion stated above as to
the application of the Act in respect of the Bogawantalawa Estate, the Court
of Appeal issued the writ of certiorari on the basis that the petitioner had
been given on rent a building and that the land is mere appurtenant to the
building. On that reasoning it was held that the provisions of the Act cannot
be invoked to evict a person from a building. On that reasoning it was held
that the provisions of the Act cannot be invoked to evict a person from a
building under the guise of an eviction from land. It is specifically stated
in the judgment that the impugned notice to quit is an abuse of the process of

**397**

the special law meant to evict those who are in unauthorized and unlawful
occupation of the State land.  
  
It was further held that the respondent has not adduced any proof of his
authority to issue the impugned notice to quit as a Competent Authority in
terms of the said Act.  
  
        Counsel for the appellant contended that the Court of Appeal has misdirected itself as to the meaning to be attached to the phrase "State Land" and has failed to take into account its definition as given in section 18 of the Act. The operative portion of the definition of the phrase "State Land" in the Act, as amended by Act No. 58 of  1981 reads as follows:  
  
_             "State land means land to which the State is lawfully entitled
or which may be disposed of by the State together with any building standing
thereon and with all rights, interests and privileges attached or appertaining
thereto "_  
  
The latter part of this definition referred to above extends it to the SLPC.  
  
According to the long title of the main Act, it is intended to make provision
for the "Recovery of possession of State land from persons in unauthorized or
unlawful occupation thereof."

         The purpose of the Act is therefore to recover possession of the state land from persons in unauthorized possession of such land. The definition in Section 18 makes it abundantly clear that land is taken to include buildings standing thereon. The Court  of Appeal has failed to give effect to the manifest purpose of the Act, which is the recovery of possession of land from persons in unauthorized or unlawful occupation. The fact that that there is a building on the land and that a person is in occupation of such building cannot remove such land from the operation of the Act.  
  
        The interpretation given by the Court of Appeal imposes into the Act a restriction which is not warranted by its provisions. The interpretation would result in a curtailment of its provisions, wherever there is a building on such land. The specific  reference in the definition that land includes any building

**398**

standing thereon has been ignored in the judgment of the Court of Appeal.
Furthermore in reference to the particular facts of this case it is revealed
from the documents produced by the respondent himself that he was permitted to
occupy an extent of 15 perches situated in the Bogawantalawa estate. Letter
dated 9.4.1986 (X2) states as follows:  
_  
            "This is to certify that Mr. V.N. Thollappan, an employee of the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation Board " is resident on Bogawantalawa State Plantations. He is living  in a temporary shed of wattle and daub which is not inventorized in the plantation. This temporary shed is close to the cemetery and has about 15 perches of vegetable garden attached to it. "  
_  
        The extent described in the notice to quit is approximately 15 perches and significantly one boundary is the cemetery referred to in document X2. If the Court of Appeal had given sufficient heed to document X2, the conclusion would not have  been drawn that the petitioner was in occupation of a building with some appurtenant land. The contrary appears to be the correct position where the respondent was permitted to occupy  an extent of about 15 perches of land with a temporary shed that was standing thereon.  
  
        For the reasons stated above I am of the view that the land as described in the notice to quit comes within the definition of  state land in section 18 of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, as amended by Act No. 58 of 1981.

 The next matter to be considered is in respect of the authority of the
respondent to function as the  Competent Authority in terms of the Act. The
definition of phrase "Competent Authority" as contained in the Act as amended
No.  58 of 1981 includes

        &nbsp ; _    "(h) an officer generally or specially authorized by a corporate body, where such land is vested in or owned by  or under the control of such corporate body"._

 The respondent produced in evidence document "R1"dated 25.8.1999 issued by
the Ministry of Plantation Industries, which

**399**

specifically states that the respondent is appointed as Competent Authority
for the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation in respect of the State Land
(Recovery of possession) Act NO.7 of 1979. The petitioner has not denied this
averment in the respondent's affidavit filed in the Court of Appeal. Therefore
the Court of Appeal is clearly in error when it held that the respondent did
not adduce any proof of his,  appointment as "Competent Authority."  
  
        In terms of section 114 of the Evidence Ordinance a Court may presume inter alia "that judicial and official acts have been regularly performed". In this case the respondent has produced the letter by which he is appointed as the Competent Authority in respect of the Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation. The petitioner has not disputed that averment. Therefore no further  proof is required in regard to the authority of the appellant to perform his official functions under the Act.  
  
For the reasons stated above the appeal is allowed and the judgment of the
Court of Appeal dated 6.7.2004 is set aside. No  costs.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.** **    ****I** agree. **  
AMARATUNGA,J.   I** agree.  
  
Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2006/16.html_  

