[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1995](./) >> **[1995] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1995+10 or 1995+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1995+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Fernando and Others v. Land Reform Commission and Another - SLR - 122, Vol
2 of 1997 [1995] LKSC 10; (1997) 2 Sri LR 122 (15 June 1995)

122



FERNANDO AND OTHERS  

**v.  **

**LAND REFORM COMMISSION AND ANOTHER  **

** **

SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 145/94.

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 553/93.

MARCH 28, 1995.



_Writ of Certiorari - Land Reform Commission - Lease of land - Jurisdiction to
grant the lease._

_ _

The land which was the subject-matter of the disputed lease by the Land Reform
Commission of which the appellants claimed to be the owners was identified to
be a portion of a land which had vested in the Commission. The land claimed by
the appellants was in fact situated outside, to the south of the vested land.



**Held:**

** **

The appellants failed to establish that the Commission acted in excess of its
power in leasing the land.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_ _

_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _J. C. Weliamuna_ for appellants.

_ _

_Asoka de Silva, D.S.G._ with _Ku mar Paul S.C._ for 1st respondent.



J K. Kanag-lswaran, P.C. with Dinal Philips, Harsha Cabral, M. A. Sumanthiran
and A. Paranagama for 2nd respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



June 15, 1995.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

The 1st and 2nd appellants who are mother and son respectively together with
the 3rd and 4th appellants (who also appear to be



**123**



members of the same family) unsuccessfully applied to the Court of Appeal for
a writ of Prohibition prohibiting the 1st respondent (the Land Reform
Commission) from leasing or otherwise alienating any portion of the land
called "Tillawilawatte" other than a portion in extent 38 1/2 acres from and
out of the Northern portion of Lot 2 in Preliminary Plan PU 754. Hence this
appeal.



The appellants state that the total extent of the land is 238 acres and that
this includes an extent of 138 1/2 acres which was owned by "Blom Family".
There were two claimants to that extent namely, Oawald Thomas Blom and Orville
Thomas Anthony Blom, each of them being entitled to 50 acres under the Land
Reform Law. The excess land owned by them, in extent 38 1/2 acres, vested in
the Commission. By a statutory determination made in terms of section 19 of
the Law and published in Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 16514 dated 28.05.1975
each of them was allowed to retain an undivided 50 acres from and out of Lot 1
in Plan PU 754.



The dispute in the case arose from action taken by the 1st respondent to grant
the 2nd respondent company a renewal of a lease of two contiguous allotments
of land in extent 50 acres and 30A.1 13.15P. respectively, which constitutes
Lot 2 in Plan PU 754. The said lease was initially granted for a period of 10
years. In terms of Clause 4(c) of the lease, the lessee is entitled at its
option to the renewal of the lease for a further period of 10 years upon the
lessee giving three months notice in writing of its intention for a renewal.
Accordingly, the 2nd respondent has on 30.03.92 applied for a renewal of the
lease.



The leased land was used by the 2nd respondent for a prawn culture project.



The appellants claim to have purchased, between 1987 and 1992, undivided
shares of this land totalling 40 acres. On the strength of such claim, the 2nd
appellant entered the Southern portion of Lot 2 in the aforesaid plan and
himself commenced prawn farming there. Consequently, on 03.04.92 the 2nd
respondent instituted D.C. Marawila case No. 537/1- against the 2nd appellant
for ejectment and

**124**



a permanent and/or interim injunction, restraining him from interfering with
the 2nd respondent's possession of the lands which had been leased to the 2nd
respondent.



On 25.05.93 the Court refused an interim injunction as the defendant was in
possession of a part of the land in suit. However, the Court proceeded to
permit the addition of the Land Reform Commission for effectual adjudication
of the questions involved in the action. That action is pending.



In the meantime, on 08.06.92 the appellants instituted D.C. Marawila case No.
543/L against the Land Reform Commission praying for an order on the defendant
to release 40 acres of land on the southern side of the lands leased to the
2nd respondent, for a prohibition on the defendant leasing the said extent of
40 acres and for an interim injunction to the same effect. The appellants did
not pray for a declaration of title to the said extent of land.



On 20.07.93 the Court refused the application for an interim injunction for
the reason that the appellants had suppressed facts relating to the connected
case No. 537/L. An application for leave to appeal against that order was
refused by the Court of Appeal; whereupon the appellants withdrew the action,
with liberty to file a fresh action. Immediately thereafter, on 29.07.93 they
filed the writ application before the Court of Appeal complaining that the
land which had been leased to the 2nd respondent is not a land which was
vested in the 1st respondent; hence the 1st respondent is acting in excess of
its power under the Land Reform Law in seeking to renew the lease.



The Court of Appeal held that the appellant's claim was to an undivided share
of the land, the total extent of which is 238 acres; that they have failed to
establish, with reference to proper metes and bounds, that they are entitled
to claim an extent of 40 acres on the side of 80 acres leased out to the 2nd
respondent; and that should apriority be determined before a Civil Court. The
Court was of the view that the appellants had failed to show that proprietary
rights would be adversely affected by the lease of the land and hence the
application.

**125**



Arising from the above decision, the appellants obtained special leave to
appeal on three questions namely, (1) whether the petitioners have locus
standing to apply for a writ of prohibition (2) whether the 1st respondent has
the power to acquire title by prescription (3) if the above two questions are
answered in favour of the appellants, whether they were entitled to the writ
of prohibition sought by them.



On the 1st question, the submission of the learned Counsel for the appellants
is to the effect that what is relevant is not whether the appellants had shown
that their proprietary rights are adversely affected, but whether the 1st
respondent would be acting in excess of its jurisdiction by leasing land not
vested in it; and whether in the circumstances of this case where the
appellants have shown that they do have some interest in the land, any of them
can be treated as a mere busy body. Counsel submits that upon such
consideration, the answer to question No. 1 should be in favour of the
appellants.



The 2nd question has been raised because in D.C. Case No. 543/L and in the
Court of Appeal the 1st respondent is said to have admitted that the excess
land vested from Blom family is only 38 112 acres and that the 1st respondent
acquired prescriptive title to the balance land leased to the 2nd respondent.
However, in opposing special leave to appeal, the Deputy Solicitor-General had
submitted that the said balance land had also vested in the 1st respondent but
that they were unable to trace the relevant statutory declaration. Counsel for
the appellants submits that having regard to the object of the Land Reform
Law, the Land Reform Commission cannot claim the power to acquire title by
prescription.



It appears that the presentation of the case for the parties has led to
considerable confusion. Thus it has been said that the extent of the entire
land is 238 acres. The relevant averments might give the impression that the
entirety of the land is depicted in Plan PU 754\. However, according to the
tenement list, the extent included therein is only 180A.1 R.15P. This is made
up of Lot 1, in extent 100 acres, given to Blom brothers, and Lot 2,
80A.1R.15P. claimed by the Land Reform Commission. The plan also shows that
the boundaries of the land depicted therein were shown by the "owners" O.T.A.
Blom and

**126**



B.T. Blom. In the remarks column, it is noted against Lot 1 that O.T.A. Blom
and O.T. Blom were each allowed to retain an undivided 50 acres, being the
maximum entitlement under the Law. Against Lot 2, it is noted that the extent
of 80A.1 R.15P. has vested in the Land Reform Commission from the "original
owners" namely, O.T.A. Blom and O.T. Blom.



Thus according to the plan produced by the appellants themselves, prima facie,
Blom brothers owned 180A.1A.15P. and the excess land, in extent 80A.1 R. 15P.
vested in the 1sst respondent. If the entire extent of "Tillawilawatta" is 238
acres then an extent of 58 acres lies outside the Plan PU 754. In fact, the
plan shows that a part of this land, owned by Marshall Tissera, lies to the
south of the plan. According to the appellants' plaint in case No. 543/L, the
original owners of the land out of which the appellants claim to have acquired
an undivided 40 acres were Tisseras including Marshal Tissera. This shows that
the interests which the appellants claim to have acquired are interests in the
said portion of "Tillawilawatta" originally owned by Tisseras and situated
outside, to the south of the plan.



In the circumstances, the appellants have failed to establish that the 1st
respondent has acted in excess of its power in leasing the land to the 2nd
respondent. Hence the question of locus standi and the question as to the
power of the Land Reform Commission to acquire title by prescription do not
arise. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment of the Court
below. The appellants will pay the 2nd respondent a sum of Rs. 3500/- (Rupees
Three Thousand Five Hundred) as costs of this appeal.



**G. P. S. DE SILVA C.J.** \- I agree



**RAMANATHAN J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/10.html_  

