[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1992](./) >> **[1992] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1992+10 or 1992+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1992+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Bandula v. Almeida and Others - SLR - 309, Vol 1 of 1995 [1992] LKSC 10;
(1995) 1 Sri LR 309 (27 March 1992)

**309**

**BANDULA** **  
v.** **  
ALMEIDA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J,  
S.C. (SPECIAL) NO. 4/29  
FEBRUARY 9, 25 AND MARCH 29, AUGUST 16, SEPTEMBER 7 AND 15, 1993

DECEMBER 2, 1994 AND MARCH 6, 1995.

_Writs - Certiorari - Land Acquisition Act, Sections 2 and 38 - Urban
Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No, 2 of 1980, Sections., 3,
4(1), 6 and 7 - Natural justice - Audi alteram rule - Fairplay- Necessity for
Urban Development Project - Recommendation \- Requisite of an opinion._

The Petitioner on 01 December 1991 purchased two blocks of land bearing
assessment Nos. 1 and 21 on Sri Vipulasena, Mawatha, Colombo 10\. On 22.12.91
he submitted a building application to the, Colombo Municipal Council. On
13.3.92 the Municipal Council approved the plan. Even before the approval the
Petitioner demolished the old buildings, standing on the land and started
construction. On 19.2.92 the Municipal Engineer wrote to the Petitioner's
brother who was an attorney-at-Law and acting for the petitioner to stop
construction on the site as he was doing so without approval. On receiving
approval the Petitioner commenced construction immediately. On 27.3.92 the 2nd
respondent (Additional Director General (P &.O) Urban Development Authority)
wrote to the petitioner's brother after an earlier visit by officials of the
Urban Development " Authority, to stop construction immediately. On 01 April
"1992 the President of the Republic made an order under Section 2 of the Urban
Development, Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980 and published in
Gazette Extraordinary No. 708/15 of the same day declaring that several blocks
of land in including the said lands belonging to the Petitioner are urgently
required for the purpose of carrying out an urban development project. On 07
April 1992 a notice under. Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act was published
in respect of the Petitioner's property and communicated on 14 April 1992 by
registered post to the Petitioner's attorney-at-law, brother The Petitioner
became ware of the President's order only on 28 April 1992 and he filed this
application on 30 April 1992.

**Held:**

(1) The allegation of motive on the part of the 1st Respondent as he had
himself unsuccessfully tried to purchase the property sought to be acquired
has not been proved and with that the allegation of mala fides disappears.

310

(2) The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court vested by virtue of section 4(1)
read with section 6 of -the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions)
Act, No. 2 of 1980 and unaffected by Section 3 thereof, to hear and determine
this matter was considered. The two main ingredients required to be satisfied
in order to render the President's order valid in law are:

(i) that there had to be "a recommendation made by the Minister in charge of
the subject of Urban Development" (here the President) and

(ii) that the President had to form an "opinion" upon such recommendation

(a) that there was in existence "an urban development project"; (b) that such
project was of such nature as "would meet the just requirements of the general
welfare of the People"; (c) that certain lands were "required for the purpose
of carrying out such project, and (d) that such requirement was "urgent".

(3) As the President himself is the Minister, he is not required to make any
recommendation in writing to himself.

(4) On the question of forming an opinion

(a) The omission in the order of the words "to meet the just requirements of
the general welfare of the People" does not render the Order invalid. (b) As
there was no malice the next question that arises is, was the President's
Order baseless, unreasonable and arbitrary? (c) The main question which arises
for consideration in this case is whether in fact there existed an Urban
Development Project but the material produced does not measure up to what is
required to show that any Urban Development Project as contemplated by Act,
No. 2 of. 1980 was, in existence at the time the President made his Order.

(5) Although where the President and the relevant Minister are one and the
same person, no recommendation is expected, yet he must have the necessary
material before him. It is clearly the duty of the officers of the U.D.A. to
fully brief and apprise the President of not only the "full facts", but also
the "true facts" before requesting the President to form his opinion, to make
his Order under Section 2 of Act. No. 2 of 1980.

311

(6) Section 2 requires the President, prior to making his Order to arrive at
and entertain the subjective opinion that there in fact exists "an urban
development project" for the carrying out of which, certain lands are
urgently, required. Section 2 goes on to suggest that the Order itself should
declare that the lands are required for such purpose". If there is no project
the Act itself becomes inoperable and nothing flows.

(7) As there was no project, the President had no material to form an opinion
and an Order made in vacuo so to speak cannot stand.

(8) Although the opinion contemplated by section 2 is a subjective one, it is
justiciable. The Court can look into the matter to discover, what material, if
any, moved the President to form his opinion.

(9) The application is not premature. In terms of section 7 of Act, No. 2 of
1980 it would be possible for the Government to take possession of the
Petitioner's land by utilizing the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act,
and to have all persons ejected from such, land within sixty days of the
making of an application under that, Act. A "section 2 notice under the Land
Acquisition Act" had already been published in respect of the Petitioner's
land and it was always possible for the State to acquire the land immediately,
utilizing the proviso to section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act, thus
bypassing the steps in that Act containing the statutory provision in regard,
inter alia to the holding of an inquiry and giving a hearing at the inquiry.

(10) The general rule is that a right to a hearing constitutes a minimum
prerequisite of natural justice. It ought to have been the duty of the
officers of the U.D.A. who were responsible for formulating the so called
Urban Development Project and making the recommendation to the President to
make the Order in question, to have, at least, informed the owners of the
house and buildings to be acquired of the proposed project and the consequent
need of acquisition, and to have called for their observations and/or
objections. The number of such persons would not have been large and I do not
think it could have categorized as an impracticable exercise so as to afford
an exercise for non-compliance with the audi alteram partem rule. In this
content, the existence of a litis inter partes is not an essential pre
requisite to the exercise of the audi alteram partem rule which arises
whenever there is a duty to act fairly. Natural justice is fairness writ
large, and juridically. It has been described as 'fairplay in action'. Nor is
it lever tote associated only with judicial or quasi-judicial occasions. .

**Cases referred to.**

_1 Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale (1971) 75 NLR 67,_  
_2\. Visvalingam v. Liyanage (1984) 2 Sri LR 123._

312

  
_3\. Wickremabandu v. Herath (1990) 2 Sri L.R 348._  
_4\. Fernandopulle v. E. L. Senanayake 79(2) NLR 115._  
_5\. R. v. Electricity Commissioner (1924) 1 KB 171._  
_6\. Schmidt v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs (1969) 1 AII E.R. 904._  
_7\. Ridge v. Baldwin (1963) 2 All ER 66._  
_8\. R. v. Hendon Rural District Council (1933) 2 KB 696._  
_9\. Ross-Clunis v. Papadoponllous (1958) 2 All ER 23._  
_10\. Don Samuel v. De Silva 60 NLR 547._  
_11\. Ashbridge Investments Ltd. v. Minister of Housing and Local Government
(1965) 3 All ER 371._  
_12\. Coleen Properties Ltd. v. Minister of Housing and Local Government
(1971) 1 All ER 1049._  
_13\. Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Fameside Metropolitan
Borough Council (1976) 2 All ER 665._  
_14\. Furnell v. Whangarari High Schools Board (1973) 1 All ER 400._  
_15\. R. v. H. K (1967) 1 All ER 226, 231._

**APPLICATION** for Writ of Certiorari to quash the Order of the President
made under the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of
1980.

_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C. with Mahinda Ralapanawe and Laksiri de Silva for
Petitioner._  
  
_V. Basnayake, P.C. with D. J. C. Nilanduwa and Sarath Abeysinghe for 1st
respondent._  
  
_P. L. D. Premaratne, P.C. Additional Solicitor-General for 2nd, 3rd, 4th,
5th, 6th, 7th, 8th and 9th respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 6, 1995.  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

On 1st December 1991, the Petitioner purchased two blocks of land, in extent
7.25 perches and bearing assessment numbers 19 and 21 on Sri Vipulasena
Mawatha, Colombo 10, on Deed No. 383 attested by his brother, Amaradasa
Kodikara, Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public (marked X3) and on 23rd December,
1991, submitted, through his brother the said Amaradasa Kodikara, a building
application for approval to the Colombo Municipal Council. On the same day he
started demolishing the dilapidated building which stood on the said land.

313

On 19.2.92, the Municipal Engineer wrote to the brother of the Petitioner, A.
Kodikara, asking him to stop construction on the site as he was doing so
without approval from the Municipality (X3a).

However, on 13th March 1992, the Petitioner's building application was
approved by the Colombo Municipal Council and he was granted building permit
no. ME/PBK/250/91 (marked X6) for the "erection of a three strayed commercial
building for shops;" the construction of which commenced immediately.
Thereafter according to the Petitioner, on 27th March 1992, some persons
purporting to be officials of the Urban Development Authority came onto the
premises in several vehicles and threatened the Petitioner's workmen that
unless construction work was stopped immediately, the building under
construction would be flattened in an hour with a bulldozer. They had stated
further that the Petitioner's property had been acquired by the Urban
Development Authority. The workmen Piyadasa and Somadasa have stated in their
affidavits. X4 and X5 respectively, that they identified the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and
4th Respondents as some of the persons who visited the building site on 27th
March, 1992.

On the same day, viz. 27th March 1992, the 2nd Respondent wrote to the
Petitioner's brother (letter marked X7) as-follows

**" Premises Nos: 19 & 21 Vipulasena Mawatha, Colombo 10 **

Reference your development of the above premises.

Our officers have informed you over the telephone of the acquisition of land
in the area including your premises and requested you to terminate development
activities.

I find that-such activities are continuing.

Please be informed to terminate such activities froth with."

Soon thereafter, on 1st April, 1992; the President of the Republic of Sri
Lanka made an Order under Section 2 of the Urban Development

314

Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980 and published in Gazette
Extraordinary No. 708/15 of the same day (marked 'B') declaring that several
blocks of land including the said lands belonging to the Petitioner are
urgently required for the purpose of carrying out an Urban Development
Project.

On 7th April, 1992 a notice under Section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act was
published in respect of the Petitioner's property and such notice was
communicated to the Petitioner's brother Amaradasa Kodikara on 14th April,
1992 by Registered Post (document marked 'C').

The Petitioner states that he became aware of the publication of the
President's Order (marked 'B') only on 28th April, 1992. He obtained a copy
thereof on the following day and filed this application on the 30th of April
1992.

The Petitioner prays that this Court, be pleased to issue Writs of Certiorari
quashing the President's Order marked 'B' in respect of his property (viz.
Nos. 19-and 21 Sri Vipulasena Mawatha, Colombo 10); the 6th Respondent's
recommendation to the President; the 2nd and/or 5th Respondents decision to
acquire his land, and the 2nd Respondent's order to terminate building
operations on the Petitioner's land. The Petitioner also seeks a declaration
that the Order made by the President (marked 'B') is null and void.

By way of motive for this attempt to take over his land, the Petitioner lays
the blame squarely on the shoulders of the 1st Respondent, who, he says,
misused and abused his official position and instigated the Urban Development
Authority to acquire his land as an act of revenge.

The Petitioner alleges that the reason for this revengeful act is that the 1st
Respondent, who is the Member for the Colombo Municipal Council Ward in which
the land in question is situated, and who lives a few hundred yards away from
the site, had earlier tried to purchase to self same property but failed. The
Petitioner goes on to state that from the time he purchased the said property,
the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and

315

4th, Respondents had been harassing him: the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th, Respondents so
acting at the instigation of the 1st Respondent. The Petitioner points out
that according to his workmen, the 1st Respondent accompanied the 2nd, 3rd,
and 4th Respondents when they entered the premises on 27th March, 1992 and
threatened to flatten the building in an hour if the construction work was of
stopped. The Petitioner asserts that it was the 1st Respondent who had induced
the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents to acquire the only property which the
Petitioner owns, and on which now stands a partly constructed building on
which he has spent about Rs. 2 million. The Petitioner alleges that the
President's Order (marked 'B' ) is a sequel to the steps taken by the 1st,
2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents to dispossess him, and adds that the said 1st to
4th Respondents have used the 5th Respondent to make the necessary
recommendation to the President upon which recommendation, the said
declaration marked "B", under section 2 of the Urban Development Projects
(Special Provisions) Act was made.

The Petitioner goes on to state that the President's order marked "B" is bad
in law as there is no stipulation therein as required by Section 2 of the
Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980 that the
project would meet the just requirements of the general welfare of the People,
and prays for the issue of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the said Order made
by the President in respect of his lots 19 and 21, and to declare the said
order a nullity.

Before I consider the main application, l would take up for consideration the
allegations made against the 1st Respondent. Replying to the averments made by
the Petitioner, the 1st Respondent complains that he has been wrongly made a
party to these proceedings. He states in his affidavit that he had, at hostage
made any attempt to purchase or made any offer to purchase the property in,
question as alleged by the Petitioner, neither did he attempt to have the
property transferred to him through an acquisition effected by the 5th-
Respondent. He denies that he visited the work site on 12.2.92 accompanied by
others as alleged. Setting out the part he played, he states that as a Member
of the Municipal Council of Colombo and as a resident of Ward No. 26 of
Colombo, in the

316

interests of the slum dwellers of the areas he had always been interested in
the re-development of this particular? area, and in furtherance of such public
interest and the duty he owes the rate payers of the area, he had promoted the
construction of flats for the benefit of the poor and in this connection
admits that he had inspected the site once. The 1st Respondent adds that
except for this "legitimate interest" as a politician and an elected member of
the Colombo Municipal Council, he had no personal interest in the acquisition
of the land in question by the Urban Development Authority. He goes onto state
that, on the contrary, he was aware that the said property was included in a
proposed re-development project of this area, and that on a routine inspection
of Ward No. 26, he noticed a new construction in progress and asked the
Municipal Council to investigate into the matter. He admits that, accompanied
by the 2nd Respondent and several other officers; he visited the site in
question on 27.3.92 on an inspection tour, but says that none of them entered
the premises nor did any of them threaten to flatten the land using
bulldozers. He adds that it was the 2nd Respondent who said that the land was
subject to acquisition and that therefore construction should be stopped.

It may be recalled that according to the Petitioner, the sole reason for
setting in motion the steps for acquisition was that the 1st Respondent had
attempted to buy the said property but failed and that he thereafter made this
attempt to get the Urban Development Authority to acquire the property with a
view to having it given over to him by that Authority after acquisition.
Besides merely so stating, the Petitioner does not proceed to substantiate
this allegation in any way. Even in the teeth of the categorical denial by the
1st Respondent, the Petitioner has failed to produce any proof that the 1st
Respondent had ever attempted to purchase the said property. The best proof of
this fact would have been to adduce evidence by way of an affidavit from the
previous owner from whom the 1st Respondent is said to have attempted to buy
the land, to the effect that the 1st Respondent did in fact attempt to buy the
land, but that he did not sell it to him. But no such evidence was adduced by
the Petitioner. In this connection, I have to advert to the fact that Learned
Counsel for the Petitioner invited the attention of this Court to the averment
contained

317

in the 2nd Respondent's first affidavit, to the effect that he was aware that
the 1st Respondent had attempted to purchase the land in question. This is in
reply to paragraph 21 of the Petitioner's affidavit to the Court of Appeal
which has been filed as part and parcel of the present petition to this Court,
and which has been accepted by this Court. The said paragraph 21 states:-

"I am now aware the 1st Respondent has made offers previously to the owner of
the relevant land to purchase the same".

The 2nd Respondent has in reply stated:

"I am aware of the averments contained in paragraph 21 of the said affidavit".

However, on this being pointed out by the Petitioner in a further affidavit,
the 2nd Respondent, filed a second affidavit stating that what had been set
out in his first affidavit was a mistake due to a typographical error and that
the correct position which should have been typed in, was: " I am unaware of
the averments contained in paragraph 21 of the said affidavit".

I have considered the matter very carefully and am inclined to agree that this
was a mere typographical error, here he typist had inadvertently typed the
word "aware" in place of the Word, "unaware". This is further supported by the
context in which it is placed and by the entire tenor of the 2nd. Respondent's
affidavit. In any event, on the matter being pointed but; by the Petitioner,
the 2nd Respondent had promptly corrected it by his sworn affidavit.Â I am
therefore of the view that this is a mere typists error and nothing more.

Thus, it is seen that the Petitioner has adduced no evidence to substantiate
the serious allegation made against the 1st Respondent, which is thus reduced
to a mere bald statement made by the Petitioner to supply a motive for the
acquisition of his Iand. This allegation, made in such affirmative terms
against a Municipal Councilor and a public figure is a very serious one, and
being totally unsubstantiated, I have no hesitation in rejecting it. The 1st
Respondent has categorically denied it and said that he had no personal
interest n the matter, and in the circumstances, I accept his version and hold
that the motive alleged by the Petitioner as against then 1st

318

Respondent remains unproved, and must be rejected. With its jettisoning, the
suggestion of mala fides disappears. Thus the allegation of malice on the part
of the 1st Respondent and the 2nd to 5th Respondents falls away. While still
on the question of malice, I must here mention that no malice or mala fides
has been attributed to the President for making the impugned order marked 'B'.

I shall now turn to a consideration of whether the said Order (marked 'B')
made by the President is invalid as urged by the Petitioner.

In this connection, it was common ground that by virtue of Section 4(1) read
with section 6 of the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No.
2 of 1980, jurisdiction to hear and determine this matter was vested in the
Supreme Court, and that it was unaffected by Section-3 thereof.

As set out above, the President made an order on 1.4.92 (marked 'B') under
Section 2 of the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of
1980. The said order reads as follows:

"By virtue of the powers vested in me, under section 2 of the Urban
Development Projects (Special Provisions). Act, No. 2 of 1980, I, Ranasinghe
Premadasa, President, upon the recommendation of the Minister in charge of the
subject of Urban Development, being of opinion that the lands specified in the
schedule hereto are urgently required for the purpose of carrying out an Urban
Development Project, do by this Order, declare that the said lands are
required for such purpose."

The Schedule to the above Order sets out the several lands so specified, which
includes the two blocks Nos. 19 and 21 belonging to the Petitioner.

The said Order was made in terms of Section 2 of the Urban Development
Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980, which as follows:-

319

"Where the President, upon a recommendation made by the Minister in charge of
the subject of Urban Development, is of opinion that any particular land is,
or lands in any area are, urgently required for the purpose of carrying out an
Urban Development Project which would meet the just requirements of the
general welfare of the People, the President may, by Order published in the
Gazette, declare that such land is, or lands in such area as may be specified,
are required for such purpose."

The two main ingredients required to be satisfied in order to render the said
Order valid in law, are:-

i) that there had to be "a recommendation made by the Minister in charge of
the subject of Urban Development", and

ii) that the President had to form an "opinion" upon such recommendation -

a) that there was in existence "an Urban Development Project";

b) that such project was of such a nature as would meet the just requirements
of the general welfare of the People";

c) that certain lands were "required for the purpose of carrying out" such
project, and

d) that such requirement was "urgent".

As regards the first ingredient (i) above, there was no dispute that the
Minister envisaged in Section 2 was the President himself. Learned President's
Counsel-for the Petitioner submitted that this fact notwithstanding, there
should in fact have been a recommendation upon which the President formed his
opinion; especially impugned Order (marked 'B') refers specifically to the
existence of such a recommendation. However, no such recommendation exists,
nor did Learned President's Counsel for the 2nd to 6th Respondents attempt to
show the contrary. The question then is where the

320

President and the Minister in charge of the subject of Urban Development are
one and the same person would the provisions of section 2 require the
President to make a recommendation to himself before arriving at an opinion?
Will this not be an unnecessary exercise and, if gone through, amount to a
fiction, merely for the sake of giving effect to the letter of the law? Will
the President ever depart from his own recommendation in making his Order?
Inconceivable ! I do not therefore think that in these circumstances the
President was required to make any recommendation in writing to himself. It
must not be forgotten that the President's act in not assigning the subject of
Urban Development to a Minister, whereupon such subject would remain under
him, is permissible in terms of Article 44(2) of the Constitution.

I now propose considering the second ingredient in Section 2 which concerns
the "opinion" which the President ought to have entertained before he made his
Order (marked 'B'). The conditions for the formation of such opinion, as set
out in section 2 are:-

a) that there should in fact have existed an "Urban, Development Project";

b) that such project was designed to "meet the just requirements of the
general welfare of the People";

c) that the lands in question were "required, for the purpose of carrying out"
such project, and

d) that such requirement was "urgent".

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted, firstly, that the Order made by
the President (marked 'B') must, on the face of it, reflect the existence of
the requisite ingredients and that inasmuch as the Order did recite the fact
that the project would meet the just requirements of the general welfare of
the People; the Order was ex facie bad.

The impugned Order has, in fact, omitted to set out these words. However I do
not think it is absolutely necessary that all the words in

321

section 2 should be reproduced in the Order. The Order itself mentions the
fact that it is one made under Section 2, and I do not think that these words
constitute an essential part of the declaration by the President. They only
indicate as to why the :lands are required and the reason for making the
Order. The essential matters are in fact included in the Order and I do not
think any prejudice is caused to anybody by the omission of these words. I am
therefore of the view that the omission of the words "to meet the just
requirements of the general welfare of the People" does not render the Order
invalid.

I now propose to consider the principal submissions of Learned Counsel for the
Petitioner. His attack was two pronged. He first submitted that the entire
exercise culminating in the section 2 Order by the President was tainted with
malice generated by the 1st Respondent. He did not at any stage, impute mala
fides or malice to the President, but submitted that as set out earlier in
this judgment, the attempt to deprive him of his property was motivated by
malice on the part of the 1st Respondent and the officers of the Urban
Development Authority (2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents). However, as set out
earlier, I have considered this matter and found this allegation to be
baseless and therefore it merits no further consideration.

If therefore, there was no malice on the part of anybody, the question that
arises is, was the President's Order baseless, unreasonable and arbitrary?

In this connection, Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted very
strenuously as the second limb of his attack, that no "Urban Development
Project" of any sort existed at the time the impugned Order 'B' was made by
the President. He stressed that thus, the principal ingredient required. by
section 2 to be satisfied was totally absent and that being so the President
had no material and was in no position to form his "opinion," and upon such
opinion, to make his Order (marked 'B').

Thus, in considering the facts of this case in the light of the writ
jurisdiction vested in this Court, the questions that arise are Whether, in
the absence of material as aforesaid, the President has exceeded

322

his jurisdiction; whether his Order is unreasonable and whether in consequence
there has occurred an error of law.

The main question which arises for consideration in this case is whether there
in fact existed an Urban Development Project. Learned Counsel for the
Petitioner submitted that there was none, and that all the papers and
documents produced by the Respondents revealed none He in fact challenged
Learned Counsel for the Respondents to produce even during the hearing, any
material showing the existence of a project, and this Court did in fact call
upon him to do so on the next date of hearing. This he failed to do on any of
the subsequent dates of hearing.

I shall now set out in detail, the material placed before this court by
Learned Counsel for both the 1st and 2nd Respondents, in proof of the
existence of an "Urban Development Project".

The 1st Respondent, in paragraph 7 (c) of his affidavit has stated as
follows:-

"I am aware that there is an integrated plan for the redevelopment of the
larger area, and that the Petitioner's land forms only a part of the said
larger area. For the re-development of the said larger area, all plans have
been made and other steps taken by the Urban Development Authority for the
construction of a Housing Complex consisting of a large number of residential
flats and commercial buildings;"

and in paragraph 8(d) (iv), he says:

"I am aware that the property in question was included in a proposed re-
development project of this area."

I need only say that apart from so stating, the 1st Respondent has n produced
nor in any way caused to be produced any material tending to show the
existence of any such "project".

Besides the 1st Respondent, the Petitioner has cited the Additional Director-
General of the Urban Development Authority as the 2nd

323

Respondent the Assistant Director, (Lands) as the 3rd Respondent the Director
(Lands) as the 4th Respondent and the Urban Development Authority itself as
the 5th Respondent in this case. However, it was only the 2nd Respondent who
sought to file an affidavit in reply to the Petitioner (The 3rd Respondent has
also filed an affidavit, which however is merely supportive of that of the 2nd
Respondent), I must mention that the affidavit of the 2nd Respondent appears
to be only on his own behalf and not on behalf of the other Respondents
including the 5th Respondent (the Urban Development Authority).

In his affidavit, having admitted that on 27.3.92, he, along with several
officers (no mention of the 1st Respondent) visited the property of the
Petitioner on an inspection tour, and having admitted that without entering
the premises he informed the workmen not to continue construction work as the
land was under acquisition, and having denied that any of the officers
threatened to flatten the land with bulldozers, he goes on to set out the
material in his possession pertaining to the all important question of the
existence or not of the alleged "project".

He has produced marked 2R1, a letter sent by the 4th Respondent to the
Municipal Commissioner dated 27.3.1989 enclosing "a copy of the acquisition
sketch showing the above lands (which includes the Petitioner's property),
which ale under acquisition by this authority for a commercial and residential
complex." He next produces the Order of the President (marked 2R2 by him), and
goes on to produce (marked 2R3) a copy of the "proposed development plan of
the adjoining area" which had been acquired earlier. On perusal one finds that
2R3 shows sketches of buildings but is neither signed by anyone nor dated. The
space for the signature of the Chief Architect remains blank. In any event,
this plan does not include and is not applicable to the property of the
Petitioner. Another plan produced by him marked 2R3a, is similarly unsigned
and undated by the relevant authorities. He admits sending the letter marked
X7 to the brother of the Petitioner (reproduced above) wherein, he again uses
the word "acquisition" only. Nowhere in that letter is any "Project", even
mentioned. At this point, it needs to be mentioned that on one of the dates of
hearing (79.94), Learned Counsel for the Respondents

324

attempted to produce enlargements of plans purporting to be the originals of
2113 and 2R3a abovementioned. However, on a close examination and comparison,
this Court found that they were enlargements of some other sketches and plans,
and were quite definitely not the originals of 2133 and 2R3a. We therefore,
rejected them.

The 2nd Respondent next produced a Gazette marked 2R4 setting out that the
area where the Petitioner's property was situated was declared a Development
Area under section 3 of the Urban Development Authority Law, No. 41 of 1978.
This Gazette however does not mention anything about the existence of a
"project" as contemplated by the President's Order. In fact Learned Counsel
for the Petitioner submitted that according to 2R4 the entire area of the
Municipality of Colombo has been made subject to such a declaration; besides
the area covered by the Dehiwala-Mount-Lavinia Municipal Council and the,
Moratuwa Urban Council.

Further answering, the 2nd Respondent states that in 1986 some land "to the
left of the Petitioner's present land" was acquired utilizing the proviso to
section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act (enabling urgent acquisitions to be
effected). He says that this was part of its development project for that
area. He produces the relevant Gazette(2R5) and a copy of the plan (2R5A). No
project is discernible and in, any event this does not concern the
Petitioner's property.

The 2nd Respondent then says in paragraph 10(c) of his affidavit that, "In
1988, the Urban Development Authority took steps to acquire the balance area
for the completion of the project and an application was made to the
Secretary, Lands, to take steps to acquire the said area under the Land
Acquisition Act." He produces the said application marked 2R6 and dated
8.8.88, but this nowhere mentions the Petitioner's property. He also produces
marked 2R6A a document regarding the above acquisition which however is
unsigned, undated and does not bear even a reference number. This too does not
specifically mention the Petitioner's property. 2R6B dated 8.8.88, is a
document containing details of the lands sought be acquired and 2R6C is a
sketch again unsigned and undated, showing the lands to be acquired. While
these two latter documents,

325

mentioned the Petitioner's property, none of them makes any reference to the
all important "Project."

It is to be noted that all this was in August 1988. Although the application
was to acquire the land immediately under the proviso to section 38 of the
Land Acquisition Act (2R6), nothing further was done in this connection.
Thereafter on 12.10.91, a little over 3 years later, the 4th Respondent wrote
2R7 to the Secretary, Ministry of Plan Implementation requesting to be
informed of the present position. Does this show, the urgency, of the matter,
or was the proposed acquisition abandoned and subsequently re-activated?

The 2nd Respondent then says in paragraph 10(e):-

"The Urban Development Authority was informed over the telephone, by the
Ministry of Policy Planning and Implementation to make another application in
respect of the said proposed acquisition, as the earlier application had got
misplaced. As such, another application was made on 28.10.91"

A copy of this application has been produced marked 2R8; where, once again no
reference is made to the Petitioner's lands. Annexed to this application are a
copy of 2R6A (now marked (2R8A), a copy of 2R6B (now marked 2R8B), and a copy
of the sketch 2R6C (now marked 2R8D). The only new document is 2R8C which is
again undated and unsigned, giving a description of the land and a list of
claimants. The lands of the Petitioner, Nos. 19 and 21 are not mentioned.

A matter worth mentioning in connection with the fresh application for
acquisition (2R8) is that in it, the writer (4th Respondent), specifically
requests that the acquisition should be under the normal procedure set out in
the Land Acquisition Act. This is a noteworthy departure from the original
application (2R6), wherein the request was that the acquisition should proceed
under the proviso to section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act which is used for
effecting immediate acquisitions. This too was signed by the 4th Respondent.

326

As set out above, the second application dated 12.10.91 was accompanied by a
request for a normal acquisition, the only inference from which being that
there was no urgency in the matter of the said acquisition.

Thereafter, on 1.12.1991, the Petitioner purchased the property in question
(Lots 19 and 21); had his building application approved by the Municipal
Council on 13.3.1992, and immediately commenced building operations.

Then, on 27.3.92, as set out earlier, the U.D.A. officials arrived at the
building site and asked the workmen to stop construction work; and, just four
days later, on 1.4.92, Gazette Extraordinary No. 708/15 was published
containing the President's Order (marked 'B') saying, inter alia, that the
lands were 'urgently required."

The 2nd Respondent adverts to this fact in the following-manner in paragraph
10(f) of his affidavit:-

"Consequently, in terms of section 2 of the Urban Development Project (Special
Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980, H.E. the t, President made a declaration under
the said section as the land was urgently required for the purpose, of
carrying out an Urban Development Project."

There is no supportive material to substantiate the averments, made.
Thereafter on 7 4.92, steps under the Land Acquisition Act were started with
the publication of a notice under Section 2 thereof, to acquire the
Petitioner's land, (2R9).

It is seen that the 2nd Respondent's narration does not in any way any light
on the question at issue, viz: was there a project in existence? On the
contrary, the only mention is about acquisition of land. No details of a
project as contemplated Act, No 2 0f 1980 are forthcoming. In fact this Court
showed much latitude to the dents by calling upon Learned Counsel to produce,
at any stage of he hearing material to show, the existence of a project.
Although such opportunity was given on several occasions Learned Counsel for
the Respondents failed to produce any such material. All

327

that was forthcoming was a further affidavit by the 2nd Respondent enclosing
several photographs marked 'A' to 'G'. depicting buildings in the area, which
the 2nd Respondent says is an area of "a development, " Situated in "an area
of urban renewal interest," with joint intervention of the National Housing
Development Authority Urban Development Authority and the Colombo-Municipal
Council. He concludes by stating that "the proposed development project is
part of the Development Project of the area" which has been jointly undertaken
by the three institutions mentioned above. However, the 2nd Respondent does
not proceed to say what exactly the project is nor has he filed any affidavits
from the other two institution s mentioned above as to what the joint project
was. In the result, there is no material before us to show that any Urban
Development Project as contemplated by Act, No. 2 of 1980 was in existence at
the time the President made his Order marked 'B'.

On the other hand, as stated earlier, having purchased the property in
question on 1.12.91, the Petitioner, through his brother; Amaradasa Kodikara,
submitted on 23.12.91 a building plan for approval to the Colombo Municipal
Council, which was in fact approved by the said Council on 13.3.92. The
Petitioner's brother, an Attorney-at-Law, has filed an affidavit (marked X9),
stating that well before the purchase of this property, in July 1991, he made
searches and inquiries at the Land Registry, Colombo Municipal Council and the
Urban Development Authority, and was satisfied that there were no encumbrances
or any move to acquire the premises. He adds that he made an inquiry in
writing from the Chief Architect of the Urban Development Authority, Mr. Tissa
Kumarasinghe as to whether that Authority intended to acquire the land in
question, and that Mr. Kumarasinghe whilst stating that he could not give a
reply in writing, assured him that he was satisfied that the UDA had no such
intentions. The 2nd Respondent in reply has not sought to deny this but merely
states that Mr. Tissa Kumarasinghe was not the person competent to give such
information. He has not filed an affidavit from Mr. Kumarasinghe.

As stated above, the Colombo Municipal Council had on 13.3.92 approved the
Petitioner's building plan. On probing the mater further, this Court requested
information as to how the Municipal Council

328

could possibly have approved a building permit if the land in question was
about to be acquired.

It transpired that approval is given by the Planning Committee of the Colombo
Municipal Council, on which the Urban, Development Authority is represented by
an Officer of the level of Director. H P. Silva who has sworn an affidavit to
the effect that, as Director (Development Regulations) of the Urban
Development Authority, he attends meetings of the Planning Committee of the
Council on Planning and Building approval, on the directions of the Chairman,
UDA. He goes on to state that the Petitioner's building application was taken
up and approved by the Planning Committee on 10.3.92, and the building permit
was issued on 13.3.92, but adds that he was not aware of any intended
acquisition of the premises.

The Senior Town Planner, Colombo Municipal. Council, Ms. P. Herath, who is
also a member of the Planning Committee states, in her affidavit that the
Committee unanimously decided to approve the Petitioner's application; adding
that no information was, available "with regard to any acquisition of the said
land by any Authority".

The third member of the Planning Committee was the Deputy Municipal Engineer
of the Municipal Council, U.A.J.S. Perera, who has also filed an affidavit on
the same lines as that of Ms. Herath.

The resulting situation is singular. An urgent Urban Development Project
authored by the U D.A. necessitating the acquisition Petitioner's property and
meriting the personal intervention of the President on 1.4.92, remained
unknown to one of the Directors of U.D.A. who sat on the Planning Committee of
the Colombo Municipal Council, on the directions of the Chairman of the self
same U.D.A. and who approved the Petitioner's building application on 10.3.92
just 20 days before the President made his Order under as Section 2.

In any event, it is inconceivable that the Senior To Council and the Deputy
Municipal Engineer had not even this urgent project which according to the 2nd
respondent had been jointly undertaken by three institutions, of which the
Colombo Municipal Council was a co-participant.

329

This is not all. The Petitioner has led further affidavit in which he refers
to premises Nos. 203 and 205, Deans Road, Colombo, 10, which fall within the
land which according to the 2nd Respondent urgently required for an Urban
Development Protect, which project has been in existence since 1988. The
Petitioner has filed with the said affidavit, the following documents in
respect of the said premises Nos. 203 and 205, viz, the Certificate of
Conformity (P6) dated 7.9.89 in respect of a three-storeyed shop and office
building on the said premises and the Certificate of House Drainage. (P7)
dated 17.8.89. in respect of the same premises; both, of which have been
issued by the Municipal Engineer; Colombo Municipal Council The Petitioner
submits that the fact that private individuals like the owner of premises Nos.
203 and 205 have been allowed to construct buildings within the area said to
be earmarked for an alleged project goes to show that there never was any such
project in the area in question. Further, one wonders as to why and for what
purpose a blanket declaration of the area where the Petitioner's land is
situated (Gazette marked 2R4, dated 30.9.78), as a "Development Area" was
deemed necessary. Was it to put a strangle-hold on ownership of land?
According to paragraph 8(i) (a) of the Petitioner's affidavit of 22.6.92, the
Gazette marked 2R4 declares as a "Development. Area" the entirety of the
Colombo Municipal Council area, the Dehiwela Mount Lavinia Municipal Council
area and the Moratuwa Urban Council area, besides other areas in Sri Lanka.
The Gazette 2R4 therefore does not help the 2nd Respondent in any way.

What is important in this connection is the reply given by the 2nd Respondent
as to why the Colombo Municipal Council allowed, the building application of
the Petitioner and issued him With a permit to build in the teeth of the fact
that the area was supposed, to be urgently required for an Urban Development
Project, and in the teeth of the fact that a Director of the Urban Development
Authority sat on the Planning Committee of the Colombo Municipal Council which
approved the building application and issued the building permit X6 to the
Petitioner. The 2nd Respondent's reply is at paragraph 4 of his affidavit,
where he states that "the Municipal Engineer by an oversight had approved the
said building plan". There is no affidavit by the Municipal Engineer
supporting this position. In any event it is

330

not the function of the Municipal Engineer to approve building plans. That
function is exercised by the Planning Committee of the Municipal Council
consisting of three members, viz. the Senior Town Planner, the Deputy
Municipal Engineer and the Director (Development Regulations) of the Urban
Development Authority, all of whom have filed, affidavits to the effect that
none of them knew anything about an intended acquisition of the area in which
the Petitioner's land stood. It is difficult to believe that, if there in fact
was a development project for the entire area, and if such area was to be
acquired for such purpose, the representative of the U.D.A. would not have
known of it. If he knew of it, I have no doubt that he would have brought it
to the notice of the Planning Committee. After all, the whole point of having
a senior officer of the U.D.A. on the Planning Committee is for the very
purpose of apprising the Committee of the status of the lands in respect of
which building applications are made. According to his own affidavit, this
U.D.A. representative sits on the Committee" on the direction of the Chairman,
Urban Development Authority". At least the Chairman to have known and given
the necessary directions. The question that arises once again is, whether
there was in fact an Urban Development Project in existence relating to the
Petitioner's land. The answer inclines towards the negative. There certainly
was no "oversight". The Planning Committee was totally unaware of any project,
or even of any acquisition for the purposes of a project.

Thus it appears that the totality of the material placed before this Court by
Learned-Counsel for the Respondents does not measure up in any degree to
satisfy the requirements of the factual existence of an Urban Development
Project as envisaged in the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions)
Act No. 2 of 1980. Though given numerous opportunities, Learned Counsel for
the Respondents produced no documents of any sort to show a project plan or
any sort of development plan, which would have constituted a basic document
showing the existence of a development project. Neither did he produce before
us any feasibility report relating to the alleged project or any project
report, or even any minute in files showing that discussions, at least , were
had in connection with the establishment of such a project. On the contrary ,
what appears to have been uppermost in the minds of the Respondents id the
question of Â

331

acquisition of the relevant land. Ever so often in the document produced, one
comes across a phrase to the effect that the land is "under Acquisition". Was
it that the Urban Development Authority, was primarily concerned only with
merely acquiring the relevant land; the question of an Urban Development
Project to follow at some future time, once the land had been acquired and
taken possession of? This seems to have been the pattern, as it was pointed
out to us that even the adjacent lands though acquired, were not utilised for
any project. It appears that in their minds, the Respondents equated.
"acquisition" with "project", or at least, felt that from an acquisition one
ought automatically to infer the actual existence of a "project" What strikes
me at this point is that Learned Counsel for the Respondents wanted this Court
to infer that an Urban Development Project existed, from the gazettes,
sketches and photographs he produced. I regret I am unable to draw such an
inference, and wish to state affirmatively, that this is too important a
matter to be disposed of upon the basis of any such inference. There must be
definite and positive material showing that a project already existed; for
which project, the land in question had to be acquired, and not the other way
around. The simplest thing Learned Counsel far the Respondents could have done
was to have produced before us the file pertaining to the alleged project or
at least the relevant development plans or project reports or feasibility
reports and other relevant documents. This he did not do, and it would not be
unreasonable to conclude that no such file and no such documents in fact
exist.

In view of the conclusion reached that there was no Urban Development Project
in existence at the time the President made an Order, the question that arises
is: "What material. if any, did the Respondent have before him to enable him
to arrive at his opinion before making his Order under section 2 of Act No.2
of 1980

In fact, Section 2 incorporates the safeguard of requiting the relevant
Minister to place his recommendation before the President. This means that the
President must not act arbitrarily or unreasonably, but on definite material
placed before him. Where the President and the relevant Minister are one and
the same person, even though one would not expect him to make a recommendation
to himself, he must,

332

nevertheless have the necessary material him. It is clearly the duty of the
officers of the U.D.A to fully brief and apprise the President of not only the
"full facts", but also the "true facts" before requesting the President to
form his opinion, and upon such opinion, to make his Order under section 2 of
Act, No 2 of 1980.

This involves, a consideration of the vital question in connection with the
ingredients made necessary of compliance by section 2 of Act No. 2 of 1940. I
have set put the but feel it necessary to reiterate only the fact of that the
said section 2 requires the President, prior to making his order to arrive at
and entertain the subjective opinion that there in fact exist "an Urban
Development Project", for the Carrying out which certain lands are urgently
required. Section 2 goes on to suggest that the Order itself should declare
that the lands are required "for such purpose"

I wish to stress here that the vital ingredient is, that there should exist a
project. If there is no project the act itself becomes inoperable and nothing
flows, I have been at pains to set out in detail, every item of relevant
material submitted by Learned Councel for the Respondents but as stated above
have been unable to discover the existence any of project as contemplated by
Section 2.

I there hold that there was no Urban Development Project in existence and that
therefore the Respondents have failed to satisfy essential ingredient required
by section 2, to be satisfied prior to making of the impugned Order .if there
was no project then it have at his opinion before making the order .How then
did the resident arrive at his opinion? Can such an Order made in vacuo, so
speak, be allowed to stand? I think not.

Although the opinion contemplated by section 2 is a subjective one I am of the
view that it is nevertheless justiciable and subject to review-vide.

_Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale(1971)75 NLR 67(1)_

_Visvalingam v. Liyanage(1984)2 Sri L.R 123(2) and_

_Wickremabandu v. Herath(1990)2 Sri L.R. 348(3)_

_**333**_

The contention of Learned Counsel for the Petitioner was that the President
did not have material or which he could properly have formed such an opinion.
Learned Counsel for the Respondents, on the other hand, contended that the
President's opinion was unfettered, but I do not think that that is the
correct position in law and I therefore cannot agree with him I therefore hold
that this Count can look into the matter with a View to discovering what
material if any, moved the President to form his opinion.

On the question of whether this application is premature and whether the Order
of the President has caused prejudice to the Petitioner, it was submitted by
Learned Counsel for the Petitioner, that upon the impugned Order being
published, there was an imminent danger of the Petitioner being forcibly
evicted from and deprived of his land, by the use of the provisions of Section
7 of Act, No 2 of 1980, and of his being immediately divested by the use of
the proviso to section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act. Thus, Learned counsel
submitted that once the Order is published, the Petitioner's property was "as
good as gone", and that there was an automatic impact of an adverse nature
thereon; his right as owner being necessary to affected.

In terms of Section 7 of Act, No. 2 of 1980, it would be possible the
Government to take possession of the Petitioner's land by utilized the State
Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, and to have persons ejected from such land
within sixty days of the making of application under that Act.

Then again, now that a Section 2 notice under the Land Acquisition Act has
already been published in respect of the Petitioner's land, it is always
possible for the State to acquire his land immediately utilizing the proviso
to section 38 of the Land Acquisition Act, thus by-passing the steps in that
Act containing the salutary provisions in regard, inter alia, to the holding
of an inquiry and the giving of a hearing at such inquiry. The Petitioner
could thus be deprived of the opportunity of voicing his protest under that
Act.

It is thus seen that the prejudice caused to the Petitioner by such an act of
strangulation is only too clear. At the same time, I feel

334

 that the petitioner's instant application for a Writ of Certiorari is
certainly not premature. As set out above, I do not think he need wait until
acquisition proceedings actually get going under the Land Acquisition Act, to
lodge his protest to Court. If he waits that long it may well be too late in
the day, for, after possession of his property is taken under the proviso to
section 38, all that the Petitioner could do is to mount a challenge on the
question of the urgency in resorting to that provision, vide _Fernandopulle v.
E. L. Senanayake_ (4).

It is noted in passing, that the label used has no impact on what I have said
on this matter. Whether it is called a "declaration" in terms of Section 2 of
Act, No. 2 of 1980, or anything else, consequences as set out above do flow
from the Order made by the President.

Therefore, I am of the view that the Petitioner has very correctly made his
application to this Court in terms of Section 4 of Act, No. 2 of 1980.

Now to a consideration of the Petitioner's application for a Write of
Certiorari to quash the Order made by the President under Section 2 of Act,
No. 2 of 1980, it needs to be mentioned at the that it is clear that a statute
which has the effect of reaching on the rights of the citizen, whether as
regards person property, must be strictly construed. (Maxwell's Interpretation
of 11th Edition, at page 275). The Act under consideration is such, and upon a
strict construction thereof, I am of the view that the reasons set out
earlier, the President could not reasonably arrived at, and entertained the
opinion he is said to have entertained.

Lord Atkin said in R. v. Electricity Commissioners (5) that Certiorari should
issue to "any body of persons having legal authority to determine questions
affecting the rights of subjects, and having duty to act judically."

Firstly, inasmuch as Section 2 of Act No. 2 of 1980 vests in the, President
the legal authority to make the Order thereunder and inasmuch as the President
in fact made the said Order in pursuance of the legal authority so vested in
him, there can be no doubt that President in fact had the legal authority to
make the Order in question.

335

The second question that arises is whether the said order affected the rights
of the Petitioner. It is settled now that the word "rights" must be
interpreted broadly and is not confined to enforceable rights only. Lord
Denning has said in _Schmidt v. Secretary of state for Affairs_ (6) that, "it
all depends, on whether he has some rights or right or interest ... of which
it would not be fair to deprive him without hearing what he may have to say."
I have set out earlier in this judgement as to how and in what manner the
President's Order affected the Petitioner's rights, and it is not necessary to
repeat those comments here Suffice it to say that in my view the said Order is
one that adversely affects the rights of the Petitioner as owner of the said
lots 19 and 21, and as such, he would come within he ambit of the dictum of
Lord Atkin as regards his "rights".

Regarding the third matter, viz: the duty to judicially, the accepted view is
that the authority concerned (in this instance, the President) is under a duty
to act judicially or quasi-judicially, when he is clothed with judicial power,
but even a purely administrative power.

The. House of _Lords in Ridge v. Baldwin_ (7) made it clear the remedy lies in
respect of "bodies having legal authority to questions ... and (which
accordingly have) the duty to act judicially. This decision extended both the
scope of the operation of the Writ Certiorari and, with it, the scope of the
operation of the rule Natural Justice.

It has even been held that where a decision is sufficiently close a judicial
decision, such a decision may also be amenable to a of Certiorari, ( _R. v.
Hendon Rural District council_ (8). However in _Clunis v. Papadoponllous_ (9))
the Privy Council went further and held that even if the power which was
granted by the enactment was an administrative power, "If it could be shown
that there were no grounds on which the appellant could be so satisfied, a
Court might infer that he did not honestly form that view, or that, in forming
it, he could not have applied his mind to the relevant facts."

This was followed in Don Samuel v. De Silva (10) in which it was held that,
"as the Director did not ...even bring his mind to bear upon the

336

question, the principle enunciated in the Cyprus case (above) would a fortiori
apply."

In Ashbridge Investments Ltd., V. Minister of. Housing and local Government
(11) Lord Denning stated that, "The Court can interfere with the Minister's
decision if he has acted on no evidence This was followed in Coleen Properties
Ltd, v Minister of Housing and Local Government (12) where a local authority
had declared two rows of. houses to be clearance areas under the Housing Act,
1 1957.That Act authorised compulsory purchase of many adjoining land, the
acquisition of which is reasonably necessary, for the satisfactory development
or use of the cleared area. The local authority, under this power, sought to
acquire compulsorily, a property owned applicants. Following objections by the
applicants, a public inquiry was held , at which no evidence was presented to
show the need property in order to develop the cleared land. Inspector
reported that its acquisition was not reasonably necessary for that purpose.
This notwithstanding the minister this finding and confirmed the compulsory
purchase order. Court Of Appeal quashed the Ministers decision on the ground
there was no evidence upon which he could have arrived at his decision.

Secretary of State for Education and Science v. Fameside metropolitan Borough
Council (13) Lord Wilberforce said, "If a requires, before it can be made, the
existence of some , then although the evaluation of those facts is for the
Secretary State alone, the Court must inquire whether those facts exist, and
have been taken into account... If these requirements are not met, often the
exercise of the judgment, however bona fide it may be, becomes capable of
challenge." In this case the subjective wording used, viz: " If (he) is
satisfied." and the question for the Court therefore becomes did the Secretary
of State have reasonable grounds upon which he could, consider that the meant,
acting unreasonably?"; and "unreasonably" meant , acting in a way that no
reasonable authority would act. The House of Lords held that the information
available to the Secretary of State did not warrant his entertaining the view
he did.

337

If I may reiterate, in the instant case, it has been clearly demonstrated, and
I have so held, that inasmuch as there was no material to show the existence
of a project at the time the President made his Order, the President had no
evidence whatsoever before him to enable him to form the opinion he was
required to form, before making his decision to issue his Order. There was
therefore no material before him which he could have considered and given his
mind to, and no ground upon which he could have formed an opinion before he
made his Order: The Order made by him under these circumstances cannot
therefore be allowed to stand.

The duty to act judicially or quasi-judicially involves the duty to afford a
hearing. As set out earlier, in Schmidt v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs
(6) Lord Denning spoke of a right or interest in the aggrieved party "Of which
it would not be fair to deprive him without hearing what he may have to say."
In the instant case it was nobody's contention that the President himself
ought to have held an inquiry and given a hearing. This would be both
impractical and unrealistic. However, the general rule is that a right to a
hearing constitutes a minimum pre-requisite of Natural Justice, and in the
instant case, I am of the view that it ought to have been the duty of the
officers of the U.D.A. who were responsible for formulating the so called
Urban Development. Project and making the recommendation to the President to
make the Order in question, to have at least informed the owners of the houses
and buildings to be acquired of the proposed project and the consequent need
for acquisition, and to have called for their observations and/or objections.
The number of such persons would not have been large and I do not think it
could have been categorized, as an impracticable exercise so as to afford an
excuse for non-compliance with the audi alteram partem rule.-In this context,
the existence of a litis inter partes is not an essential prerequisite to he
exercise of the audi alteram partem rule, which arises whenever, there is a
duty to act fairly., (S. A. de Smith, Judicial Review of Administrative
Action, 4th Edition, pages 176 and 177).

And, on the question of fairness, I need only advert to what Lord Morris said
in the Privy Council case of Furnell v. Whangarai High

338

 Schools Board (14). Delivering the majority, opinion, he said: "Natural
Justice is but fairness Writ large and judicially. It has been described as
'fair play in action'. Nor is it a lever to be associated only with judicial
or quasi-judicial occasions."

In R. v. H. K. (15) Lord Parker; C.J. said Good administration and an honest
bona fide decision must, as it seems to me, require not merely impartiality,
but acting fairly," and Salmon L.J. added at page 223: "The authorities, in
exercising these powers and making decisions, must act fairly in accordance
with the principles of Natural Justice."

As mentioned earlier no hearing of whatever kind was afforded to the
Petitioner before the impugned Order was published. Needless to say, if a
hearing was given, the fact that there did not exist any project as
contemplated in section 2 of Act 2 of 1980 would have, to say the least, come
to light.

Learned counsel for the Respondents submitted that since the President's Order
relates to several lands besides those of the Petitioner, it will not be
possible for this court to quash only that part of the impugned Order (marked
'B') relating to the lands Nos. 19 and 21 belonging to the Petitioner.

It is my view and I so hold that the Order of the President marked 'B',
tainted as it is with more than one defect, warrants the issue of a Writ of
Certiorari quashing the entire Order.

I would add that on a consideration of Article 35 of the Constitution, the
Petitioner has correctly not made the President a party Respondent to the
amended application. however he is represented by the Attorney-General.

I have given long and anxious consideration to this matter, and for the
reasons set out above, hold that the impugned Order of the President marked
'B' is null and void, and must be quashed.

It is not necessary for the purposes of this case to discuss the other
ingredients set out in Section 2 of Act, No. 2 of 1980. It is

339

 sufficient to say that, in the circumstances of this case, Certiorari lies
for the reasons set out above.

I accordingly quash the Order of the President of the Republic of Sri Lanka
dated 1.4.92. The Petitioner is entitled to costs of this application from the
State.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application allowed.  
_  
_Certiorari to issue._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/10.html_  

