[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1982](./) >> **[1982] LKSC 10**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1982+10 or 1982+LKSC+10) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1982+LKSC+10) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Aloysius v. Pillaipody - SLR - 762, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 10; (1982) 2
Sri LR 762 (2 December 1982)

# 762

**  ALOYSIUS**

**v.**

**PILLAIPODY**

SUPREME COURT

WIMALARATNE, J., RATWATTE, J., AND COLIN‑THOME, J.

S.C. 4/82;

C.A. 72/77;

M. C. (CIVIL) JAFFNA 167/L

NOVEMBER 16, 1982



    Landlord and tenant ‑ Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, sections 4, 22(2) (ii) (b) and 22(7) Calculation of standard rent.



The plaintiff was the landlord of premises No. 49, Grand Bazaar Road, Jaffna
having acquired it in 1948. The defendant was the tenant of the said premises
having come into occupation of the premises long before 1948.



The plaintiff sued the defendant for ejectment from the premises on the ground
of reasonable requirement. In order to succeed under 22(2) (ii) (b) and 22(7)
of the Rent Act he had to prove that the standard rent of the premises
exceeded Rs. 100/‑ p.m.



**  763**



No. 49, Grand Bazaar Road, Jaffna was described as a tiled house in 1941 and
as a tiled boutique in 1956 in the Assessment Register. The question that
arose was whether the annual value of the tiled house in 1941 or whether the
annual value of the tiled boutique in 1956 was relevant to determine the
standard rent.



The District Court and the Court of Appeal held that the standard rent
exceeded Rs. 100/‑ on the basis of the annual value of 1956. The defendant
appealed to the Supreme Court on the question of the calculation of standard
rent.



# Held -



The mere registration by the tenant of a business under the Business Names
Registration Ordinance in 1954 will not have the effect of converting
residential premises into business premises.



The description of the property as entered in the Assessment Register affords
prima facie evidence as to whether the property has been assessed as
residential premises or business premises. It is not necessary to call an
officer from the Municipal Council to prove the fact. The standard rent of the
premises should be calculated on the 1956 annual value as that was the first
time that the premises were assessed as a business premises:



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal reported at (1982) 1 Sri L.R.
p.106.



_H.L. de Silva, S.A.,_ with _S.C. Crosette Tainbiah_ and _K. Thevarajah_ for
defendant‑appellant.



_K.N. Choksy, S.A.,_ with _S. Mahathevan, Harsha Soza, Miss. I.R. Rajapakse,
N. Fernando and R. Selvaskandan_ for plaintiff‑respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



December 2, 1982



**WIMALARATNE, J.**



This is an action instituted by the landlord, who is the
plaintiff-­respondent, for the ejectment of the tenant, who is the
de­fendant‑appellant, from premises No. 49, Grand Bazzar Road, Jaffna, on the
ground that the premises are reasonably required by the plaintiff for the
purposes of his business. Admittedly the premises were, on the date of action,
business premises to which the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 applied, and the annual
value of which was less than the "relevant amount" (Rs. 1500/‑). Admittedly
also, the plaintiff had acquired ownership of the premises on a date
(September 1973) subsequent to the date on which the defendant came into
occupation (in 1948). The combined effect of sections 22(2) (ii) (b) and 22(7)
of the Rent Act, is that the landlord could succeed in an action for the
ejectment of a tenant from business premises on the ground of reasonable
requirement only if he establishes that the standard rent for a month
(determined under section 4 of the Act) exceeds Rs. 100/‑, besides proving
reasonable requirement.



#  764



The trial Judge as well as the Court of Appeal have held with the plaintiff on
both matters, and the Court of Appeal has ex mero motu granted leave to appeal
to this Court on the question of the calculation of the standard rent.



For the determination of the standard rent of business premises the formula
laid down in section 4(1) is as follows:‑



"4(l) The standard rent per annum .... of any business premises the annual
value of which does not exceed the relevant amount, means ‑



(a) the amount of the annual value of such premises as specified in the
assessment in force during the month of November 1941, or if the assessment of
the annual value of such premises is made for the first time after that month,
the amount of such annual value as specified in such assessment, or



(b) if the rates levied in respect of such premises are, under the terms of
the tenancy, payable by the landlord, the aggregate of the amount determined
under paragraph



(a) and of the amount payable per annum by way of rates in respect of such
premises for the year 1941 or, as the case may be, for the year in which such
first assessment is made".



The burden was on the plaintiff to establish that the standard rent exceeded
Rs. 100/‑ per month. In order to discharge that burden the plaintiff relied
upon two documents ‑ P1 & P13. P1 is a decision of the Rent Control Board of
Jaffna made on 28.8.75 fixing the authorised rent at Rs. 126.69 p.m. On the
basis that the standard rent was Rs. 1319.64 p.a. This fixation was a a result
of an application to the Board by the tenant, apparently under section 34 of
the Act. An appeal by the tenant to the Board of Review, had not been
concluded when the trial reached a finality in the Magistrate's Court.
Therefore the fixation by the Rent Board of the authorised rent (and hence of
the standard rent) was not final and conclusive. Besides as the fixation had
not been made under section 4(5) of the Act: the amount determined cannot be
deemed to be the standard rent for the purposes of the Act. So the standard
rent has to be determined under section 4(1).



P13 is a copy of the Assessment Register produced at the trial without
objection. This is a Register required to be maintained under



# 765



section 235 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance (Cap. 252), The plaintiff
relied upon the change in the entries made in 1956. In 1941 these premises
bore assessement number 32 and were assessed for the purposes of rates at an
annual value of Rs. 720/‑. The premises were described as "tiled house". In
1956 a new assessment number 49 was given; the annual value was increased from
Rs. 960/‑ to Rs. 1173/‑ and the premises were for the first time described as
"'tiled botique". The Court of Appeal has accepted the contention on behalf of
the plaintiff that the premises were for the first time assessed as business
premises in 1956 and that the base annual value for the purpose of calculating
the standard rent in terms of section 4(1) is the 1956 annual value, and not
the annual value for any previous year, even though the premises may have been
used for purposes of business.



Mr. de Silva for the appellant has argued before us that -



(a) the definition of "premises" in the Rent Act as meaning "a building or
part of a building together with the land appertaining thereto" has no
relation to any purpose for which the premises is used; therefore the
expression "of such premises" in section 4(1) means "of the building in
question", and as the building in question was assessed in 1941 for the
purposes of rates, it is the 1941 annual value which should be taken as the
base value;



(b) the entries in the Assessment Register, other than those in relation to
annual value and rates are, in the absence of provision in any written law,
not conclusive proof, nor even _prima facie_ evidence of what they represent;



(c) the fact that the premises are situated in the grand bazzar of Jaffna and
were occupied by "Adam Bhai Stores" in 1941 rebuts any inference that the
premises were assessed as residential premises that year.



Mr. Choksy for the respondent has contended that ‑



(1) when an assessment is made of the annual value of any premises that
assessment has necessarily to be based on the character of the premises, that
is whether it is residential or business premises. The description of the
property as residential or business premises in the Assessment Register is
therefore intimately linked with the assessment of the annual value;



(2) if a description of the property assessed is not entered in the Assessment
Register, then it would not be possible to work the Rent Act. The provisions
in the Rent Act such as those relating



# 766



to standard rent, relevant amount and excepted premises cannot be construed
apart from the written laws under which the annual value as assessed for the
purpose of levying rates;



(3) the description "tiled house" is not equivocal. It could have only one
meaning, namely, a residential house, as contrasted with business premises;



(4) the change in the description of the premises in the Assessment Register
from "tiled house" in 1941 to "tiled botique" in' 1956 is significant, and has
to be given a meaning.



Section 48 of the Rent Act defines "annual value" as follows:‑.



"Annual value of any premises means the annual value of such premises _"
assessed as residential or business premises,_ as the case may be, for the
purpose of any rates levied by any local authorities under any written law,
and as specified in the assessment under such‑written law ....' (The emphasis
is mine).



The written laws under which local authorities are authorised to assess the
annual value of premises for the purpose of any rates levied by such local
authorities are the Municipal Councils Ordinance (Cap. 252) the Urban Councils
Ordinance (Cap. 255) and the Town Councils Ordinance (Cap. 256). The
provisions relating to assessment of annual value of property in the Municipal
Councils Ordinance apply to Urban Councils and Town Councils as well. Now
"annual value" is defined in section 327 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance
as meaning "the annual rent which a tenant might reasonably be expected,
taking one year with another, to pay for any house, building, land or
tenement..."  It is common knowledge that the rent of business premises are
generally higher than those of residential premises. Section 234 of the
Municipal Councils Ordinance empowers the Council to require the owner and
occupier of each house, building, land and tenement to furnish returns of the
rent and annual value thereof, and empowers also an authorised officer to
enter, inspect and survey such premises for a like purpose. The entries in the
Assessment Register required to be maintained under section 235 are made only
upon receipt of information obtained under section 234\. On such information
the Council is able to assess the premises as business or residential
premises, and prior to assessment of the annual value the character of the
premises is known to the Municipal Council. When the assessment register is
compiled the description of the premises as well as its annual value assessed
for the purpose of rates are entered. Therefore the annual value entered in
the



# 767



register is necessarily linked with the description of the property. The
description of the property as entered in the register thus affords _prima
facie_ evidence as to whether the property has been _assessed as residential
premises or as business premises_. It is not necessary, as contended by Mr. de
Silva,. to call as a witness an officer from the Municipal Council to prove
that fact.



As section 48 of the Rent Act defines annual value as the value of the
premises assessed as residential or business premises for the purpose of the
rates levied by the local authority, and as such rates are levied and
assessment made under the authority of the Municipal Councils Ordinance, the
Urban Councils Ordinance and the Town Councils Ordinance, the Rent Act cannot
be construed without reference to these laws. As the standard rent under the
Rent Act is based upon the annual value, and as the annual value is determined
under the written laws relating to local authorities, the standard rent cannot
be determined without reference to those laws. Therefore not only the annual
value and the rates, but also the description of the property as entered in
the assessment register afford proof of the matters represented therein. The
entries also afford material for determining the 'relevant amount" and also
whether premises are or are not "excepted premises".



The next question is whether the description of the property in 1941 as "tiled
house" is evidence that the premises were assessed as residential premises
that year. Mr. de Silva contends that the term tiled house is equivocal
because it could mean either a 'tiled residential house or a tiled business
house. Mr. Choksy invites us to give a meaning to the change in description to
'tiled botique' in 1956, along with the increase in the annual value. The
change, in my view, is significant. It means that the premises were first
assessed by the Municipal Council as business premises in 1956. Prior to that
the premises has been assessed as residential premises.



The inference to be drawn, if at all, from the description of the premises as
"tiled house" in 1941, has been rebutted according to Mr. de Silva, by the
fact that the premises are situated in the grand bazzar of Jaffna and that the
name of occupier appears in the Register as "Adam Bhai Stores". It seems to me
that these two factors by themselves do not rebut the inference, in the
absence of evidence that there were no residential houses in Grand Bazzar
Road, and that the premises were not used wholly or mainly for purposes of
residence.



# 768



Then there is evidence (D1) that the defendant registered his business as a
dealer in textiles and toilet requisites in 1954. Mr. de Silva invites us to
treat the year 1954 as the year in which the premises were first assessed, as
business premises, in which event the standard rent would still be less than
Rs. 100/‑ p.m. The mere registration by a tenant of a business under the
Business Names Registration Ordinance (Cap. 149) will not have the effect of
converting residential premises into business premises. If the tenant desired
to have the premises described in the Assessment Register as business premises
and assessed as business premises in 1954, then there was ample provision in
sections 235 to 239 of the Municipal Councils Ordinance for him to have taken
the necessary steps. He had not done so.



The landlord has therefore discharged the burden of establishing that the
premises in question were assessed as business, premises for the first time in
1956, and that the standard rent on the date of institution of action exceeded
Rs. 100/‑ per month. This appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.



**RATWATTE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.** ‑ I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/10.html_  

