[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1984](./) >> **[1984] LKSC 11**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1984+11 or 1984+LKSC+11) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1984+LKSC+11) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Rev. Maiyawe Saddhananda Thero v. Ratnayake - SLR - 373, Vol 2 of 1984
[1984] LKSC 11; (1984) 2 Sri LR 373 (14 December 1984)

##  373



**REV. MAIYAWE SADDHANANDA THERO**

**v.**

**RATNAYAKE**



SUPREME COURT.

WANASUNDERA, J. RANASINGHE, J. AND ABDUL CADER, J.

S.C. APPEAL No. 44/83 ‑ D.C. CHILAW No. 20386.

NOVEMBER 26. 1984.



_Land Development Ordinance, Sections 56, 33 and 170 ‑ Land held by a Buddhist
monk on a grant under the Land Development Ordinance ‑Succession under s. 170
of the Land Development Ordinance ‑ Operation of ss 20 and 23 of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance._



The land in dispute belonging to the State had been granted under the Land
Development Ordinance to Rev. Maiyawe Saddhananda Thero by Grant P1 dated
7.7.1955. In 1955 the grantee nominated his mother as his successor to the
holding in terms of section 56 of the Land Development Ordinance. The mother
predeceased the grantee in February 1967\. The grantee died on 1.7.1976
without making any further nomination. A dispute to title to the land then
arose between the defendant who was the lay brother of the deceased monk and
the plaintiff Viharadhipathy of the temple to which the deceased monk
belonged, The plaintiff claimed the land in terms of section 23 of the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance on the basis that the land should be deemed
to be the property of the temple. The defendant however claimed that the land
being a protected holding held under the conditions and restraints imposed by
the Land Development Ordinance, the later statute, section 170 of the
Ordinance applied to bar any mode of succession other than that provided in
the Ordinance itself from being applied. Further doctrinally this land could
not be considered _Sanghika_ as the holder lacked full title.



**Held ‑** (Ranasinghe, J. dissenting) :



Section 23 does not prescribe a mode of succession as such but rather seeks to
effect a transforrnation of the character of the particular property by which
it becomes deemed to be the property of the temple. It is a legal fiction that
operates and it is not necessary to decide whether the property is in fact
_sanghika_ or not. Therefore section 23 of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance must be given effect to rather than section 170 of the Land
Development Ordinance.



_A. C. Gooneratne, Q.C._ with _K. S. Tillekeratne_ and _Mrs. H. Jayalath_ for
plaintiff ‑appellant.

                                                                                               

_Walter Wimalachandra_ with _S. C. B. Walgampaya_ for defendant‑respondent

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               _Cur. adv. vult._



##  374



December 14, 1984. ** **

**WANASUNDERA, J**.



The plaintiff in his capacity as the Controlling Viharadhipathi of Ratnagiri
Rajamaha Vihara, Nalladarankattuwa, sued the defendant for a declaration of
title to a land called Wilpatha Mukalana, the subject‑matter of the action,
and for ejectment of the defendant and for damages.



This land had been granted to one Rev. Maiyawe Saddhananda Thero of this same
temple on Crown Grant Pi dated 7th July 1955.



In 1955, the Grantee had nominated his mother as his successor to the holding
in terms of section 56 of the Land Development Ordinance. His mother Menikhamy
however died in February 1967, predeceasing the Grantee who died nine years
later on 1st July 1976 **** without making any further nomination.



Upon the Grantee's death, two rival claims emerged in respect **** of his
interests : one by the temple authorities to which the Grantee belonged, and
the other by the defendant ‑ the lay brother of the Grantee. Hence this
action. Both those rival claims are, each founded on a different statutory
provision and the issue before us is to ascertain which one of these statutory
provisions should prevail over the other.



The plaintiff‑appellant relies on section 23 of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance (Cap. 318), which is worded as follows :‑



"All _pudgalika_ property that is acquired by any individual _bhikkhu_ for his
exclusive personal use, shall, if not alienated by such _bhikkhu_ during his
life‑time, be deemed to be the property of the temple to which such _bhikkhu_
belonged unless such property had been inherited by such _bhikkhu. "_



Mr‑Gooneratne for the appellant has submitted that all the requirements of
this section are satisfied in this case and the allotment has now become the
property of the Temple and accordingly that the plaintiff‑appellant is
entitled to vindicate title to it.



The defendant‑respondent dent on the other hand relies on the provisions of
the Land Development Ordinance. Mr. Wimalachandra relied in particular on the
provisions of section 170 of the Land

##  375



Development Ordinance and generally on the other provisions of that Ordinance.
Section 170 indicates a special mode of succession and excludes the
application of any other mode of succession. He further submitted that a Grant
under the Land Development Ordinance gives only limited ownership and also
restrains alienation except in the controlled manner provided by the said
Ordinance, and all these provisions were incompatible with the concept of
sanghika property and excluded the application of section 23 of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance to the devolution of title to an allotment under the
Land Development Ordinance. He also said that the Land Development Ordinance
is later in date to the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance and had been
specifically enacted for the alienation and development of Crown land and was
entitled to prevail over the other Ordinance in case of a conflict.



This land had first come into the possession of Rev. Maiyawe Saddhananda Thero
in 1942, during the time of the Second World War, when he was issued a
temporary permit by the Assistant Government Agent, Chilaw, under the
Emergency (Food Production) Regulations. Thereafter, in 1944, the monk who was
possessing this land on this permit had been given specific permission to have
a permanent plantation on this allotment. In 1949, after the war was over,
Rev. Maiyawe Saddhananda Thero obtained a permit under the provisions of the
Land Development Ordinance in respect of this same allotment. This permit had
been issued to the monk not as representative of the temple, but in his
individual capacity as a monk. I have something further to say on this matter
later.



We know that under the provisions of the Land Development Ordinance the issue
of a permit is generally the first step in the process of the alienation of
Crown land. The second step consists in the issue of a formal Grant. In 1953
Rev. Saddhananda applied for a Grant but at that stage the authorities were
not prepared to issue him a Grant, because as D5 puts it, "it is not the
policy to alienate land to Buddhist priests under the L. D. O. ". However, a
few years later, in 1955 Rev. Saddhananda succeeded in obtaining a Grant,
which is sighed by no less a person than the Governor‑General and
authenticated by the Seal of the Island. This apparently shows a change of
policy on the part of the Government, and if so, this issue of a Grant to a
monk must carry with it all consequences that are associated with his status.

##  376

           

As stated earlier, in September 1958, the Grantee had nominated his mother as
his successor in accordance with the provisions of the Ordinance. in the
meantime he had developed the land with a permanent plantation of coconut It
is not disputed that the improvement was effected by him using moneys
belonging to the temple. Originally the monk had nominated his mother as his
successor but after his mother's death he had expressed a desire to have the
allotment vested in the temple upon his own death. This was apparently a firm
conviction on his part, for he had even communicated this intention to the
Land Commissioner and had requested that this wish be given effect to. The
authorities had however put him off by giving him some gratuitous advice to
the effect that such a course of action was not legally possible ‑D 15.
Whether or not this is so, it seems to us, is essentially a legal question to
be decided by a court of law. So that, at or about the time of his death, Rev.
Saddhananda has had a strong desire to see that this property should go to the
temple and not to his lay relations or to an outsider.



The Grant P1 embodies all the conditions set out in the First  Schedule to the
Ordinance as required by the law. It also contains a provision for the payment
of an annual rent of Rs. 48.50. An examination of the other conditions shows
that P1 embodies only a. few of the conditions of the Second Schedule, namely
items 4 and 7 only. Section 33 states that the incorporation of the conditions
in the, Second Schedule is optional. One significant omission may be noted and
this is item 5 of the Second Schedule which requires the owner to reside on
the allotment.



It appears to me that there is nothing in the conditions embodied in PI that
makes it burdensome or incompatible with the status of a Viharadhipathi of a
temple for the property to be vested in him on behalf of the temple. In fact,
he had been, in his capacity as a monk let. into possession as a permit holder
and had been possessing the allotment for a number of years without complaint
from the authorities that his possession was inconsistent with his status as a
monk.



The Court of Appeal in its judgment has drawn attention to the fact' that a
land alienated by the Government by way of Grant under the Land Development
Ordinance becomes a protected holding. In respect of such a protected holding,
the Ordinance has imposed a

##  377



number of conditions and restraints. A disposition (meaning any transaction of
whatever nature affecting the land or its title) requires the written consent
of the Government Agent. Similarly, a lease or mortgage of the protected
holding would also require the prior written consent of the Government Agent.
The law also provides that a protected holding cannot be seized and sold in
the decree of  court. The main fetter however is in execution of a respect of
the devolution of title to the holding by way of succession. The law seeks to
ensure that there is no fragmentation of the land and that as far as possible
the allotment would remain intact and without division in the, family of the
original Grantee. However, the line of permitted succession set out in the
Third Schedule follows more or less the line of the general mode of succession
upon an intestacy in ordinary law. Any mode of succession outside this, except
with the prior written consent of the Government Agent, would be unlawful
under the Ordinance.



At this stage I would like to say that much of those provisions relating to
succession appear to be inapplicable to the case of a Buddhist monk, although
the Grant had been made after due consideration not to a layman, but to Rev.
Saddhananda in his capacity as a Buddhist monk. The fact that he did not
represent the temple is immaterial. In my view, it is the failure to accord to
Rev. Saddhananda his true status as a monk that has led to so much confusion
in this case. The Grant was undoubtedly made to the monk in his individual
capacity and not as representative of the temple. But, this in no way means
that Rev. Saddhananda could be placed in the position of a layman in relation
to this Grant. He received the Grant not as a layman but as a monk, and all
incidents that appertain to a monk must be taken care of and provided for in
the course of his dealings with this land in so far as the legal provisions
permit it.



Mr. Wimalachandra however emphasised the implications of the provisions of
section 170 of the Land Development Ordinance and relied on it as his main
submission. It is worded as follows :‑



"(1) No written law (other than this Ordinance) which provides for succession
to land upon an intestacy and no other law relating to succession to land upon
an intestacy shall have any application in respect of any land alienated under
this Ordinance.

##  378



(2) No person shall, by virtue of any appointment in any last will, have or
acquire any title to succeed to any land alienated under this Ordinance save
and except a life holder or a successor duly nominated by last will under the
provisions of Chapter Vll."



He stressed the absolute nature of the prohibition contained here and
submitted that the present case is undoubtedly a case of succession since it
involves the manner of the devolution of the land, upon the death of Rev.
Saddhananda. He submits that in the face of this provision no other mode of
succession contained in the written or unwritten law is entitled to prevail.



Mr. Gooneratne's reply was characteristically brief. He submitted that section
23 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance on which he­ relies is not a
provision relating to succession but of an entirely different nature. Section
23, he submits, contains a presumption which has the effect of transforming
property of one character to another on the happening of an event, namely,
_pudgalika_ property into temple property, if it is not alienated during the
life‑time of the monk. I am inclined to agree with Mr. Gooneratne that section
23 seeks to effect a transformation in the character of a property by
operation of law and does not deal with succession as such. Undoubtedly a law
of succession will depend on the character of the particular property, but the
converse is not true for the character of property can stand independently of
the law of succession. The character of the property can have a general and
wider application as this very Ordinance shows, and I am satisfied that
section 23 precedes any application Of a law of succession and does not
constitute an integral part of the law of succession. In fact, this provision
has the effect of obviating any search for a law of succession which should
apply to such property. If this construction is correct, as it appears to me
to be, then section 170 can have no application to this case, and I must
perforce give effect to the provisions of section 23 leaving aside the
provisions of. section 170 of the Land Development Ordinance.



Mr. Wimalachandra's final submission is that it is a requirement for an
offering of immovable property to be considered as _sanghika_ , that it should
be property over which the offeror has full title, and that the gift must also
be made in perpetuity. Since an allotment under the Land Development Ordinance
is not capable of giving that plenitude, he

##  379



submits that such property cannot constitute _sanghika_ property. For this
proposition he relied on concepts embodied in the Dhamma Vinaya, but could
cite no legal authority‑ Mr. Gooneratne disputed this and said that, on the
contrary, a devout Buddhist is never prevented Irons making a pious offering
and gifting almost any right, interest, or property (a few things however are
excluded) is considered a meritorious act, and the requirement for full
ownership or perpetuity as suggested are superimpositions not justified by the
doctrine.



I am relieved however to find that this matter could be resolved without
reference to abstruse matters of doctrine. An examination of section 23,
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, shows that it merely states that the
_pudgalika_ property acquired by a _bhikkhu_ for his own use, if not alienated
during his life‑time "shall . . . . . . . , be deemed to be the property of
the temple". It is not for us to decide whether or not such property is in
fact _sanghika,_ i.e., Using the term in the religious concept.



As far as the law is concerned, it would appear that property belonging to a
temple is not limited to _sanghika_ property properly so called Temple
property is all land "belonging or in any wise appertaining to or appropriated
to the use of any temple" ‑ section 20. In this regard Mr. Wimalachandra's
submission that this is not strictly _sanghika_ property may view.



The sea‑change the property undergoes under section 23 is due solely to the
operation of law and it is apparent that none of the rites, rituals, and
ceremonies which are considered essential by the religious texts or practices
for such. a change of character of property have been made a requirement here.
In the result, one is compelled to regard this section as a kind of pure
statutory definition of a constitutive nature, meaning just what it states and
no more, namely, that such property shall be deemed to be the property of the
temple". The use of the word 'deemed' further emphasises the fact that it is a
legal device or fiction. Whether or not it is appropriate to use the word '
_sanghika_ ' in its religious connotation in this context is another matter,
but this provision declares that as far as the law and the secular authorities
are concerned, they Would regard and deal with property falling within section
23 as the property of the temple, irrespective of what it may constitute from
the religious and doctrinal point of view.

##  380



In the result, the appeal must be allowed. I accordingly set aside the
judgment of the Court of Appeal and restore the judgment of the trial court.
The plaintiff‑appellant would also be entitled to costs both here and in the
Court of Appeal.



**ABDUL CADER, J. ‑** I agree.



**RANASINGHE, J**.



have had the advantage of perusing the judgment of Wanasundera, J. I, however,
find myself unable to agree with the construction placed upon the provisions
of sec. 23, Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance by Wanasundera, J. in the said
judgment.



I am inclined to the view that the said section 23 is a provision of written
law as is contemplated by the provisions of sub‑sec (1) of sec., 170 Land
Development Ordinance (chapter 464). The consequence of property, which falls
within the scope of the said sec. 23, being deemed to vest in the temple would
no doubt be to change the original _pudgalika_ character of the said property
and impress it thereafter with the character of _sanghika_ property. It is a
consequence which is brought about by operation of law. It so follows from a
provision of law which states what is to happen to the property which belonged
to a   person who has passed away without having expressaly declared to whom
it should go upon his death. Such a result would not detract from the primary
concern of the said provision which is to provide for the passing of property
upon the death of the person who was entitled to and could have given
directions in regard to how it should devolve upon his death, but who has
however, not given any such directions to take effect upon his death. The
conversion of the character of the property from that which it bore prior to
the death of the owner to­ another after the death of the owner is not
something which the provisions of the section themselves do. It is but the
consequence what they ordain. The said section 23 is, in my opinion, a
provision of law which makes provision for and regulates the passing of
property upon the death of one who could have given directions in regard to
its develution upon his death but had nevertheless failed to do so.



I am not, therefore, disposed to interfere with the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. The appeal of the plaintiff‑appellant must, accordingly, be dismissed
with costs.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/11.html_  

