##  George Stuart & Co. Ltd. v. Lankem Tea & Rubber Plantations Ltd. - SLR -
246, Vol 1 of 2004 [2004] LKSC 1; (2004) 1 Sri LR 246 (29 January 2004)

**246**

**GEORGE STUART & CO. LTD.  
 v  
 LANKEM TEA & RUBBER PLANTATIONS LTD.**

  
SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC (CHC) LA NO 12/2002  
HC (ARB) NO. 773/2001  
JUNE 25, NOVEMBER 7 AND DECEMBER 23 AND 17, 2003  
  
_Arbitration - Act, No. 11 of 1995- Order of the High Court under section 31
of the Act for enforcement of award - Leave to appeal from the order of the
High Court under section 37 - Time of application for leave from the High
Court.  
_  
On the application of the respondent, the High Court of Colombo by its order
dated 1.3.2002 made under section 31 of the Arbitration Act, allowed the
enforcement of the arbitral award made in favour of the respondent. An
appli­cation was made by the petitioner on 18.6.2002 (108 days after the order
of 1.3.2002) for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court under section 37 of the
Act.  
  
**Held:  
  
**1\. In the absence of provision in section 37, or a rule under section 43 of
the Act prescribing time to seek leave to appeal, the application for leave to
appeal should be made within a reasonable time. An applica­tion made 108 days
after the order of the High Court is unreasonable.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
  
**1\. Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka v United Agency Construction (Pvt) Ltd.
- (2002) 1 Sri L R 08

**247**

2\. _Billimoria v Minister of Lands and Land Development -_ (1978-79-80) 1 Sri
LR 10  
  
3. _Ganeshanatham v Vivienne Gunawardene and others -_ (1984) 1 Sri LR319  
  
4\. _Jeyaraj Fernandopulle v Premachandra de Silva and others_ (1996) 1 Sri LR
70  
  
5\. _Young v Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd_ \- (1994) 2 ALL ER 293  
  
6\. _GTE Directories Lanka (Pvt) Ltd v Mukthar Marikk'ar and another -_
(1998)2 Sri LR 180  
  
7\. _Morelle Ltd v Makeling -_ (1955) ALL ER 708  
  
**APPLICATION** for leave to appeal from the order of the High Court  
  
_K. Kanglswaran. P.C._ with _Anil Tittawela and Avindra Rodrigo_ for _ _
petitioners  
  
_Romesh de Silva P.C_. with _Marsha Amarasekera_ for respondent

_Cur.adv.vult_

January 29, 2004  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The claimant-respondent-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the
petitioner) entered into a Management Agreement with the  respondent-
petitioner-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) on
04.09.1995. By the said Agreement, it was agreed that the management fees for
the period specified in the said agreement should accrue to the then current
shareholders of the petitioner company.  
  
Upon the respondent failing to comply with the conditions of the said
agreement, the petitioner as provided by Clause 23 of the said  
Agreement invoked the Arbitration Clause. The Arbitration Tribunal held on
15.02.2000, that the alleged dispute cannot constitute the subject matter of
the proceedings before it and any finding in relation to substantive questions
covered by the other issues would serve no purpose as they are outside their
jurisdiction. The Arbitration Tribunal made an award against the petitioner
and he was directed to pay Rs.750,000/- to the respondent as costs of
Arbitration. The petitioner thereafter instituted action in the District Court
of Colombo against the respondent seeking to set aside the award of the
Arbitration Tribunal and for a declaration that there exists a valid and
subsisting agreement to arbitration. The matter is still pending before the
District Court of Colombo.

**248**

Meanwhile the respondent by petition dated 14.02.2001, institut­ed proceedings
in the High Court of Colombo seeking to have the award made by the Arbitral-
Tribunal dated 15.02.2000, enforced under section 31(1) of the Act. The High
Court made order on 01.03.2002 holding that the respondent is entitled to
recover the sum of Rs. 750,000/- as awarded by the Arbitral Tribunal and
further ordered the petitioner to pay the respondent a sum of Rs. 15,000/-as
costs.  
  
Being aggrieved by the order of the High Court, the petitioner sought leave to
appeal from this Court.  
  
When the learned President's Counsel for the petitioner sought to support the
application for leave to appeal, a preliminary objection was raised on behalf
of the respondent that this application was out of time and therefore it
should be rejected.  
  
It is common ground that the order of the High Court was made on 01.03.2002
and that the petitioner filed this application on 18.06.2002, which is 108
days after the said order.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the respondent relied on the decision of this
Court in Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka v United Agency Construction (Pvt)
Ltd(1) In the said case the application for leave to appeal from the judgment
of the High Court to the Supreme Court was made 55 days after the order of the
High Court and this Court held that the period of 55 days taken by the
petitioner to file this application for leave to appeal cannot be considered
as reasonable.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner however submitted that the said
decision in case of Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka  
(supra) was given per incuriam and therefore cannot be taken as an authority
which has laid down the time period within which an appeal from an order of
the High Court should be lodged in the Supreme Court.  
  
Regard to this matter learned President's Counsel for the peti­tioner cited
the decisions in Billimoria v Minister of Lands and Land Development and
Mahaweli Developmen(2), Ganeshanantham v Vivienne Goonawardene and three
others(3) Jeyaraj Fernandopulle v Premachandra de Silva and others(4). He also
referred to two Classes of decisions regarded as per incuriam. As pointed out
by Greene, M.R in Young v Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd(5) and referred to

**249**

in the decision in Billimoria (supra) the two Classes of decisions are:-  
  
(i) a decision in ignorance of a previous decision of its own Court or of a
Court of co-ordinate jurisdiction cov­ering the case; and  
  
(ii) a decision in ignorance of a decision of a higher Court covering the case
which binds the lower Court,  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner relied on the decision in GTE
Directories Lanka (Pvt) Ltd v Mukthar Marikkar and another(6) where the
question arose as to the time limit within which an appeal should be lodged
under the Code of Intellectual Property Act, No. 52 of 1979. This Act does not
provide a time limit within an appeal should be lodged in the District Court
in terms of section 182 70 of the Act. In the District Court, a preliminary
objection was taken that the appeal should be dismissed as it has not been
filed within a rea­sonable time. The Supreme Court, setting aside the order of
the District Court and the judgment of the Court of Appeal held that an appeal
under section 182 of the Code of Intellectual Property Act could be filed
within 3 years of the decision of the Registrar. Referring to the judgment, in
GTE Directories Lanka (Pvt) Ltd (supra) learned President's Counsel for the
petitioner contended that, in the said case, the Court had held that, when the
law does not prescribe an appealable period, the provisions of section 10 of
the prescription Ordinance would apply and that an appeal could therefore be
made within a period of 3 years.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner also took up the position that
the right of appeal under section 37 of the Arbitration Act is a vested right
and such a vested right cannot be taken away or restricted unless it is
expressly and unambiguously provided by statute, It was submitted that when
the Supreme Court is conferred with powers to make rules in respect of
practice and procedure relat­ing to appeals to the Supreme Court, any
limitations with regard to such matters relating to appeals could only be
prescribed by express and unambiguous rules made in compliance with the
procedure pro­vided for making such Rules in terms of Article 136 of the
Constitution.

**250**

He submitted that no such Rules were made by the Supreme Court in terms of
Article 136 of the Constitution and section 43 of the Arbitration Act
prescribing a time frame within which an application for leave to appeal
should be made to the Supreme Court under sec­tion 37 of the Arbitration Act.
It was contended on behalf of the peti­tioner that considering the procedure
laid down in Article 136 of the Constitution, the Court cannot formulate such
Rules by applying the doctrine of reasonable time.  
  
Furthermore, learned President's Counsel for the petitioner sub­mitted that
denial of litigant's vested right of appeal is violative of his constitutional
right under Article 12(1) which has been enacted for the purpose of upholding
the Rule of Law and granting such protec­tion under the law.  
  
Finally, it was contended that although the Arbitration Act does not provide
for an appealable time frame from an order of the High Court to the Supreme
Court, section 31(1) provides that a party may with­in one year and after the
expiry of fourteen days of the making of an award apply to the High Court for
the enforcement of the award. It was therefore submitted that, in view of
section 31(1) of the Arbitration Act, that a reasonable time should not exceed
a period of 42 days cannot be maintained.  
  
Admittedly, the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995, does not stipulate a time
frame in respect of application for leave to appeal.  
  
Section 31(1) of the Act provides for an application for the enforcement of
the award and section 32(1) provides for an applica­tion to be made for
setting aside the arbitral award. Under section 37(1) an application has to be
made within one year after the expiry  of fourteen days of the making of an
award whereas in terms of sec­tion 32(1) an application for setting aside an
arbitral award can be made within 60 days of the award being made.  
  
The contention of the learned President's Counsel for the peti­tioner was
that, as provision has been made for a period of one year to make an
application for the enforcement of the award, it would not be reasonable to
limit the time frame to make an application for leave to appeal to 42 days.  
  
Section 31(1), as pointed out earlier deals only with the enforce­ment of an
award. An arbitrator's award, is different to an order or a

**251**

judgment of a Court, as it does not immediately entitle the success­ful party
to take action for execution against the assets of the unsuccessful party.
Prior to taking such action on the award, the success­ful party must take
steps to convert the award into a judgment or an order of Court. It is only
thereafter that the successful party would be entitled to commence execution.
Therefore it would be necessary to have a long time span for both parties to
take necessary action after the pronouncement of an arbitral award.  
  
An appeal on the other hand is made by a party who is dissatis­fied with the
decision made by the arbitrator. In such circumstances, an appeal cannot wait
until the enforcement of award is made and must be made at the earliest
possible instance so as to avoid undue delay. In a situation where no such
time frame is specified in the Act, it would be necessary to refer to the
Supreme Court Rules in order to ascertain the requirements in filing a leave
to appeal application. As contended quite correctly by the learned President's
Counsel for the petitioner there are no Rules pertaining to leave to appeal
appli­cations from an order of the High Court to the Supreme Court. Although
in terms of section 43 of the Arbitration Act, the Supreme Court could make
such Rules regulating the practice and procedure of the Court, it cannot be
taken as a mandatory requirement that such Rules be made by the Supreme Court.
Section 43 of the Arbitration Act only sets out that the Supreme Court 'may'
make Rules. Moreover, Article 136(1) of the Constitution which refers to Rules
of the Supreme Court reads thus,  
  
"Subject to the provision of the Constitution and of any law, the Chief
Justice with any three Judges of the Supreme Court nominated by him, may, from
time to time, make rules regulating generally the practice and the procedure
of the Court.. "  
  
It is to be remembered that direct applications for leave to appeal from the
High Court to the Supreme Court came into being only after the 13th amendment
to the Constitution was enacted providing for the establishment of High Courts
of the Provinces.  
  
Prior to the enactment of the Arbitration Act and the establishment of the
High Courts of the Provinces, leave to appeal applications form the Court of
Appeal to the Supreme Court followed the procedure laid down in terms of the
Rules of the Supreme Court. Accordingly when

**252**

a leave to appeal application is made to the Supreme Court,- Rule 19(3)
provides that it may be made in terms of Rule 7 of the Supreme Court Rules
1990. Rule 7 is the following terms.

> "Every such application shall be made within **six weeks** for the order,
> judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of Appeal in respect of which
> special leave to appeal is sought (emphasis added)."

When no provision is made in the relevant Act, specifying the time frame in
which an application for leave to appeal be made to the Supreme Court and
simultaneously when there are Rules providing for such situations, the
appropriate procedure would be to follow the current Rules which govern the
leave to appeal application to the Supreme Court. Consequently such an
application would have to be filed within 42 days from the date of the award.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner strenuously argued that the
Court could not take away a vested right and that it was only a matter for the
legislature to take such action. His position was that the Court has no power
to take away by way of interpretation the right of appeal given to a party.  
  
On the other hand, learned President's Counsel for the respon­dent quite
correctly pointed out that the contention of the petitioner is based on a
wrong premise. His position was that there is no such 'vested right' as in an
appeal, as it is necessary 'to obtain leave' ini­tially from the Supreme
Court.  
  
Section 37(1) of the Arbitration Act refers to appeals from any order,
judgment or decree of the High Court to the Supreme Court. This section
specifies that an appeal or revision shall be in respect of any order,
judgment or decree of the High Court subject to the provi­sions of sub-section
2 of section 37 of the Act. Section 37(2) of the Act in the following terms:  
  
"An appeal shall lie from an order, judgment or decree of the High Court
referred to in sub-section (1) to the  Supreme Court only on a question of law
and **with the leave of the Supreme Court first obtained** (empha­sis added)".  
  
Accordingly there is no vested right of appeal as such, and making

**253**

an application for leave to appeal cannot be regarded as a right of appeal
given to the petitioner as he has to first obtain leave of the Supreme Court.
Furthermore, even if a petitioner has a right of appeal, it is a necessary
requirement that such an application be made within the prescribed period. For
instance, a person who alleges that his fundamental rights guaranteed in terms
of the 210 Constitution have been violated, he must come before Court within
such prescribed period. In a situation where such period has lapsed, the
petitioner cannot be heard to say that as he had a vested right of coming
before the Court on the alleged violation of his fundamental rights, that his
petition should be entertained even beyond the pre­scribed period.  
  
In such circumstances, whether there is a vested right or not, it would be
necessary to exercise such a right within the prescribed period.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the petitioner took up the posi­tion that the
decision in Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (supra) was made per incuriam.  
  
What makes a decision per incuriam was discussed in detail, as mentioned
earlier, in Billimoria v Minister of Lands (supra). In that decision,
Samarakoon, CJ. had cited the observations of the Court in Morelle Ltd v
Wakeling(7) in the following terms:

> "As a general rule the only cases in which decisions should be held to have
> been given per incuriam are those decisions given in ignorance or
> forgetfulness of some inconsistent statutory provision or of some authority
> binding on the Court concerned: so that in such cases 230 some part of the
> decision or some step in the reasoning on which it is based is found, on
> that account, to be demonstrably wrong...."

Considering the decision in Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (supra) it is
obvious that it does not come within the scope discussed in Morelle's case or
within the scope of Young v Bristol Aeroplane Co. Ltd. (supra). A close
scrutiny of the said decision clearly shows that it is not a judgment, which
was given in ignorance of a previous deci­sion of this Court or any other
Court. The decision in Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (supra) had discussed
air the relevant provisions governing the matter and further there is nothing
to indicate

**254**

that there was ignorance or forgetfulness of some inconsistent statu­tory
provisions or of some authority binding on this Court. Accordingly, I am
unable to agree with the submission Of learned President's Counsel for the
petitioner that the decision in Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka (supra) was
given per incuriam.  
  
There are two other points I wish to make before I part from this judgment.  
  
Firstly, it was pointed out by learned President' s Counsel for the respondent
that if the contention of the petitioner is upheld, there is not time limit
for an application for leave to appeal to be lodged, then such an application
could even be made after 10 years from the date of the order of the High
Court. While endorsing the contention of the learned President's Counsel for
the respondent I wish to add further that such a situation would lead to an
absurdity in that, the party who was successful in the High Court in the
action for the enforcement of the award, will have to wait for an unknown
period not knowing whether there would be a leave to appeal application made
by the other party to the Supreme Court. Such a situation would lead to an
absurd system, where it would not be possible for the Arbitration Act to work
as stipulated. It is a well-known fundamental rule that any interpretation
given to a statute must not lead to absurdity that would direct the smooth
functioning of a system in to chaos.  
  
Secondly, the decision in Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka {supra) was decided
on 12.12.2001 and the order of the High Court in the petitioner's case was
made on 01.03.2002. By the time the said order of the High Court was made, the
Supreme Court had decided that an application for leave to appeal from the
High Court has to be made within 42 days of the date of the order of the High
Court. Therefore the petitioner had sufficient notice of the time limit to
make an application for leave to appeal from the High Court to the Supreme
Court and suf­ficient notice to comply with the said decision if he wanted to
do so.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, I uphold the preliminary objec­tion raised,
and reject this application for leave to appeal.  
There will be no costs.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. - I agree.  
**  
**YAPA, J. - I agree.**

_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/1.html_  

