##  Malhotra International (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Anglo Asian Distributors Ltd. and
Another - SLR - 116, Vol 3 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 15; (2000) 3 Sri LR 116 (31
July 2000)

**116**

**MALHOTRA INTERNATIONAL (PVT.) LTD  
v.  
ANGLO-ASIAN DISTRIBUTORS LTD AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL 8/97  
HC (CIVIL) CASE NO. 17/96(3)  
DC COLOMBO CASE NO. 1/4267 SP1  
22ND JUNE, 2000  
10TH JULY, 2000  
  
Intellectual property - Unfair competition - Section 142 of the Code of
Intellectual Property Act, No. 52 of 1979 - Order of the Registrar of Patents
and Trade Marks in respect of an application to register a trade mark -
Procedure for appeal against the Order \- Section 182 of the Act - Relevance
of the form and actual use of a mark on the question of unfair competition.  
_  
The plaintiff-appellant (the appellant) was the owner of the trade mark TOPAZ
in respect of inter alia safety razors and safety razor blades in several
countries including India and Sri Lanka. The 1st defendant-respondent (the 1st
respondent) applied to the Registrar of Patents and Trade Marks, the 2nd
defendant-respondent (the 2nd respondent) to register trademarks "2PAS",
"2-PAZ" and "FOBAS" in respect of inter alia safety razors and safety razor
blades. The appellant objected to the applications alleging that the proposed
trade marks had a close resemblance to the appellant's trade mark TOPAZ and
was intended to mislead the public as to the source of its goods. After
inquiry. the 2nd respondent dismissed the trade mark applications in respect
of "2-PAS" and "2-PAZ", but allowed the propounded mark "FOBAS" to be
registered.  
  
The appellant appealed to the District Court in terms of section 182 of the
Code of Intellectual Property Act (IP Act). The appeal was lodged by way of
filing a plaint like a regular action in he District Court. That appeal was
transferred to the High Court of Colombo, in terms of section 10 of the High
Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 10 of 1996.

**117**

**Held :  
**  
(1) The appeal which was lodged by way of filing a regular action was not
technically flawed in view of the decision in G.T.C. Directories Lanka (Put.)
Ltd. v. Mukthar Marrikar and Another:''.  
  
(2) The documentary evidence before the Court showed that the get up, colour
scheme of labels or hanging cards, adopted by the 1st respondent were
deceptively similar to those of the appellant under the mark "TOPAZ". Such
evidence was relevant to a decision as to whether there were acts on the part
of the 1st respondent amounting to unfair competition within the meaning of
section 142(2) of the IP Act.  
  
Per Dheeraratne, J.  
  
"In order to determine the existence of unfair competition, it would not be
adequate to consider only the form in which the propounded mark is applied
for, but a consideration of the actual use of that mark becomes necessary in
given circumstances: the form in which a propounded mark is applied for, by
itself, may look quite innocuous"  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
_1\. G.T.E. Directories Lanka. (Put.) Ltd. v. Mukthar Marrikar and Another
(1998) 3 Sri LR 180.  
  
K.  Kanag-lsvaran, P. C. with K M. B. Ahamed for plaintiff appellant  
  
_1st defendant-respondent absent and unrepresented.  
_  
_S. Barrie, S. C. for the 2nd defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. volt._

July 31, 2000.  
**  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
The plaintiff - appellant (the appellant) is the owner of the trade mark
TOPAZ, in respect of inter alia safety razors and safety razor blades, in
several countries, including India and Sri Lanka. The appellant has been
exporting safety razors and safety blades from India under the trade mark
TOPAZ and has been advertising those items for sale in the several countries

**118**

where the trade mark has been registered. In Sri Lanka, the appellant is the
registered owner of the trade mark No. 61181 with the word TOPAZ, with a
diamond outline and with an overlapping diamond in class 8, in respect of
safety razors and safety blades, with effect from 29th April 1991. Prior to
the registration of this trade mark, the appellant was also the registered
owner of the same trade mark registered under No. 37856, with effect from 1st
February 1977. Due to an oversight in the payment of the renewal fees, that
registration lapsed on 1st February 1987 and the said trade mark was removed
from the register of marks on 14th November 1994\. Before the removal of the
appellant's trade mark No. 37856, about July or August 1990, the first
defendant - respondent (the 1st respondent) made applications to the Registrar
of Patents and Trade Marks (the 2nd respondent) to register trade marks Nos.
59482 '2 - PAS, 59484 '2 - PAZ and 59690 'FOBAS' in class 8, in respect of
inter alia safety razors and safety blades. The appellant, alleging that these
applications were made by the 1st respondent, with the avowed object of
bringing its trade mark into close resemblance with the appellant's trade mark
TOPAZ, to mislead the public as to the source of its goods, filed notices of
opposition and objected to the registration of 1st respondent's aforesaid
trade marks. The 2nd respondent, after inquiry, dismissed the trade mark
applications No. 59482 and 59484 of the 1st respondent, in respect of '2 -
PAS' and '2 - PAZ' respectively, on the ground that they resembled
phonetically, the appellant's trade mark `TOPAZ'. However, by his order dated
3rd October 1994, the 2nd respondent dismissed the notice of opposition of the
appellant and allowed the propounded mark of the is' respondent's application
No. 59690 'FOBAS', to be registered.  
  
Being aggrieved by the said order in respect of 1st respondent's application
No. 59690, the appellant preferred an appeal to the District Court in terms of
section 182 of the Code of Intellectual Property Act No. 52 of 1979 (IP Act).

**119**

The appeal was lodged by way of filing a plaint, like in a regular action in
the District Court. That appeal which was pending before the District Court
was later transferred to the High Court, Colombo, in terms of section 10 of
the High Court of Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 10 of 1996. The High
Court by its judgment dated 9th January 1997, dismissed the appeal of the
appellant and the present appeal to this Court is the sequel. The High Court
dismissed the appeal on two grounds. The first ground was that the appeal was
technically flawed, inasmuch as an appeal in terms of section 182 of the IP
Act, cannot be lodged by way of filing a regular plaint in the District Court.
I need hardly labour on this aspect of the matter, as that has been already
carefully considered and specifically determined by this Court in the case of
G. T. E. Directories Lanka (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Mukthar Marrikar and another(1). I
hold that the appeal to the District Court was, therefore, not technically
flawed.  
  
The second ground for dismissal of the appeal was that on merits, the 1st
respondent's propounded mark was entitled to be registered. The appellant
mainly relied on section 100(1) (e) read with section 142 of the IP Act, in
objecting to the propounded mark. In terms of those sections, a mark shall not
be registered, which infringes other third party rights or is contrary to the
provisions of Chapter XXIX relating to the prevention of unfair competition.
Subsection 142(1) which comes under that specific Chapter states, that any act
of competition contrary to honest practices in industrial or commercial
matters shall constitute an act of unfair competition. Subsection 142(2) gives
an inclusive definition of `acts of unfair competition 7, by specifying
certain acts which shall be included within the meaning of that term. Our
attention was drawn by learned President's Counsel for the appellant, in
particular, to subsection 142(2) (a) which reads: - all acts of such a nature
as to create confusion by any means whatsoever with the establishment, the
goods, services or the industrial or commercial activities of the competitor.

**120**

In the consideration of the application of the relevant law. to the facts of
this case, it is material to take into account, the fact that the 1st
respondent's unsuccessful attempts to obtain registration of the two trade
marks `2 - P A S and `2 - P A Z'. Were those too, attempts made by the 1st
respondent, to create confusion with the goods of the appellant with the mark
"TOPAZ"? The phonetical resemblance of the 1st respondent's marks with that of
the appellant, could not certainly be accidental. It is also material to
observe that no appeals were lodged against the orders of refusal for
registration made by the Registrar.  
  
With the notice of opposition to the registration of the 1st respondent's mark
`FOBAS', an affidavit was filed tendering certain relevant documents for the
consideration of the Registrar. These documents, it was contended on behalf of
the appellant, revealed that the get up, colour scheme of labels or hanging
cards, adopted by the 1st respondent were deceptively similar to those of the
appellant under the mark `TOPAZ. Principally, following similarities were high
lighted between each set of labels used for the marks `FOBAS' and 'TOPAZ',
namely; the top of letter `F' was styled to imitate the letter `'; the shape.
size and colour of letters in each set were identical; the profile of a woman
pictured in each set was quite similar, although the face of the woman was
turned to two different directions in each set; double triangle within the
marks appear and the placement of the marks within the triangle were
identical. The leading characteristics of the two sets of labels bear close
resemblance to each other. It was rightly contended by learned counsel for the
appellant that neither the Registrar nor the learned High Court Judge, did
consider these matters closely, with a view to determine whether there were
acts on the part of the 1st respondent, so as to create confusion amounting to
acts of unfair competition within the meaning of the law. In order to
determine the existence of unfair competition, it would not be adequate to
consider only the form in which the propounded mark is applied for, but a

**121**

consideration of the actual use of that mark, becomes necessary in given
circumstances; the form in which a propounded mark is applied for, by itself,
may look quite innocuous. It would appear to me that both the Registrar and
the learned High Court Judge were in error when they looked at the propounded
mark only and not its user, the evidence of which was before them, in coming
to the respective conclusions they reached. Had they looked at the user of
that mark they would have unhesitatingly arrived at a different conclusion.  
  
For the above reasons, I allow the appeal and (a) set aside the judgment of
the High Court; (b) set aside the order the 2nd respondent; and (c) direct the
2nd respondent not to register the propounded mark number 59690 `FOBAS'. I
further direct the 1st respondent to pay the appellant a sum of Rs. 25,000 as
costs of this appeal.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/15.html_  

