##  Abeywickrema v. Pathirana - SLR - 215, Vol 1 of 1984 [1984] LKSC 16;
(1984) 1 Sri LR 215 (1 January 1984)

#  215



**ABEYWICKREMA**

**v.**

**PATHIRANA**



SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, A.C, J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND RANASINGHE,J.,

S.C. REFERENCE No. 3/83,ELECTION PETITION No. 5/1983.

DECEMBER 14, 1983.



Election Petition ‑ Articles 57(1) and 58(1) of the Constitution ‑ Delegation
of powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of
Public Officers by Public Service Commission or Committee thereof ‑ Article 55
(5) of the Constitution ‑ Jurisdiction of Election Court to decide questions
regarding validity of acceptance of letter of resignation of a Public Officer
‑ Reference to Supreme Court in terms of Article 125 (1) of the Constitution.



At the hearing of the Election Petition against the 1st respondent, a
preliminary objection was raised by his Counsel that the Election Court had no
jurisdiction to inquire into the validity of the acceptance of the letter of
resignation of 12.4.1983 from his post of Principal, Galaboda Aturuwella Maha
Vidyalaya, Induruwa, under the Department of Education of the Government of
Sri Lanka, submitted by the 1st respondent to the Regional Director of
Education, Galle, "by reason of Article 55(5) of the Constitution."



The contention of the petitioner was that the Regional Director was not
competent and had no legal authority to accept the 1st respondent's letter of
resignation and terminate his services as Principal as he had not been
delegated the requisite powers by the Public Service Commission or by a
Committee thereof under Article 58 (1) read with Article 57 (1) of the
Constitution.



The Election Judge acting in terms of Article 125 (1) of the Constitution
referred the following question to the Supreme Court for determination:



"Is the acceptance of a resignation of a public officer, an order or decision
which, by reason of the provisions of paragraph (5) of Article 55 of the
Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, cannot be
inquired into, pronounced upon or in any manner called in question in the
exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to try Election
Petitions?"



# Held‑



The provisions of Article 56 (5) may be invoked or applied only when the order
or decision in regard to any matter concerning the appointment, transfer,
dismissal or disciplinary control of a Public Officer is made, inter alia, by
a "Public Officer" to whom the Public Service Commission or any Committee
thereof has delegated, in terms of



#  216



Article 58 (1) of the Constitution, the powers of appointment, transfer,
dismissal & disciplinary control of any category of Public Officers. The
burden of establishing that there has been no such express delegation to the
Regional Director of Education, Galle, is on the petitioner. If the petitioner
establishes that there has been no express delegation, then the 1st respondent
may lead evidence that there has been an implied delegation of the powers
referred to in Article 58 (1).



To decide the question, there must be a record of the findings of fact by the
Election Judge as to whether there had been any express or implied delegation
by the Public Service Commission or by a Committee thereof of all or any of
the powers referred to in Article 58 (1) of the Constitution to the Regional
Director and whether he had legal authority to accept the 1st respondent's
letter of resignation and terminate his services.



The record is sent back for the Election Judge to record his findings of fact
on the question of delegation. If the delegation is found to be express the
question ends there, if implied, the finding must be referred by the Election
Judge to the Supreme Court for a determination whether such implied delegation
satisfies the requirements of "delegation" envisaged in Article 58(1) and
whether Article 55(5) could be invoked in the circumstances of this case. (The
petitioner was reserved the liberty to contend that 11 resignation" does not
come within the scope of Article 55(5) and that implied delegation is not
sufficient to satisfy the constitutional requirement of Article 58(1 ).)



**REFERENCE** by Election Judge to the Supreme Court under Article 125 (1) of
the Constitution.



_K N. Choksy, S.A.,_ with _Neville de Jacolyn Seneviratne, L. C. Seneviratne,
Daya Pelpola, Lakshman Perera, Miss. I. R. Rajapakse_ and _Nihal Fernando_ for
petitioner.



_H. L. de Silva, S.A.,_ with _K. Shanmugalingam_ and _M. S. A. Hassan_ for 1st
respondent.



_M. S. Aziz, D. S. G.,_ with _Prasanthalal de Alwis S. C.,_ as amicus curiae.



_Cur. adv. vult._



January 10, 1984.

**SHARVANANDA, A.C.J. ‑read the following order of the Court :**

** **

At the hearing of the Election Petition against the 1st respondent, one of the
preliminary objections raised by his counsel was "that the election court had
no jurisdiction to inquire into the validity of the acceptance of the letter
of resignation submitted by the 1st respondent to the Regional Director of
Education, Galle, by reason of Article 55 (5) of the Constitution". With
reference to his objection he submitted that since it raised a question
relating to the interpretation of a provision of the Constitution it had to be
referred to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 125(1) of the Constitution.
Counsel for the petitioner and the Senior State Counsel protested against this
reference on the ground, inter alia, that Article 55 (5) of the Constitution
had no application to the question involved in the



#  217

** **

proceedings. Justice G. P. S. de Silva, the Election Judge, has however
referred to this Court, the following question, in terms of Article 125 (1) of
the Constitution:



"Is the acceptance of a resignation of a public officer, an order or decision
which, by reason of the provisions of paragraph (5) of Article 55 of the
Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, cannot be
inquired into, pronounced upon or in any manner called in question in the
exercise of the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to try Election Petitions
?"



We have heard counsel for the 1st respondent and for the petitioner and, in
terms of Article 125 (1), we make the following determination on the question
referred to us by the Election Judge.



In our view, the provisions of Article 55 (5) may be invoked or applied only
when the order or decision in regard to any matter concerning the appointment,
transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of a Public Officer is made inter
alia, by a "Public Officer" to whom the Public Service Commission or any
Committee thereof has delegated, in terms of Article 58 (1) of the
Constitution, the powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary
control of any category of Public Officers.



According to the scheme of Chapter IX of the Constitution (Articles 54 ‑ 61),
the appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of Public
Officers are vested in the first instance in the Cabinet of Ministers. The
Cabinet of Ministers is however authorised to delegate such powers to the
Public Service Commission subject to the limitation that it cannot do so in
respect of Heads of Departments. The Cabinet is further authorised,
notwithstanding any delegation to the Public Service Commission, to ‑delegate
to any Minister its power of transfer, in respect of such categories of
officers as may be specified, and upon such delegation the Public Service
Commission or any Committee thereof cannot exercise such power of transfer, in
respect of such categories of officers ‑ vide article 55 (1),(2) and (3).



Article 57 (1) provides that whenever the Cabinet of Ministers so directs the
Chairman of the Public Service Commission, shall appoint a Committee of the
Public Service Commission to exercise the powers of the Commission in respect
of such category of Public Officers as are specified in such direction.



#  218



            Article 58 (1) further provides that the Public Service Commission or any Committee thereof may delegate to a Public Officer, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Cabinet of Ministers, its power of appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of any category of Public Officers.



It is the case of the petitioner that the Regional Director of Education,
Galle, who, it is alleged, accepted the resignation, was not legally competent
to accept the letter of resignation submitted by the 1st respondent to him as
he was not a Public Officer, to whom, in terms of Article 58 (1) of the
Constitution, the Public Service Commission or any Committee thereof had
delegated its power of appointment, transfer, etc., and that hence the
Regional Director of Education, Galle, had no legal authority to accept the
1st respondent's letter of resignation dated 12.4.83 and terminate his
contract of service as Principal of Galaboda Aturuwella Maha Vidyalaya,
Induruwa, under the Department of Education of the Government of Sri Lanka.



Mr. H. L. de Silva, Counsel for the 1st respondent contended that the
delegation of the powers referred to in Article 58 (1) may either be express
or implied and that in the absence of express delegation, where the Regional
Director had under colour of office, been in the habit of accepting letters of
resignation from Public Officers working under him and where such acceptance
had not been rejected or disowned by the Ministry or the Department of
Education, but had been acquiesced in then the conclusion may, in the
circumstances be drawn, that there had been implied delegation of the powers
to the Regional Director and that the Regional Director had implied authority
to accept the letter of resignation.



In our judgment the burden of establishing that the powers referred to in
Article 58 (1) of the Constitution had not been expressly delegated to the
Regional Director of Education, Galle, rests on the petitioner and if he
established that there was no express delegation of the relevant powers to the
Regional Director, then the 1st respondent may lead evidence to establish that
there had been an implied delegation of the powers referred to in Article
58(1) by the Public Service Commission or the Committee thereof to the
Regional Director, so as to make the exercise of such power by the Regional
Director, valid and binding.



#  219



Mr. Choksy, Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that implied delegation
will not be sufficient to meet the requirements of delegation " under Article
58 (1) of the Constitution. In our view, to enable this Court to give a final
pronouncement on the hypothetical submission of Counsel, it will be necessary
to have a record of the finding of fact by the Election Judge whether there
had been any express or implied delegation by the Public Service Commission or
any Committee thereof, to the Regional Director of Education, Galle, of all or
any of the powers referred to in Article 58 (1) of the Constitution and
whether the said Regional Director had legal authority to accept the 1st
respondent's letter of resignation and terminate his services.



Hence we direct that the record be returned to the Election Judge, for him to
record his findings, whether there had been an express or implied delegation
to the Regional Director of Education, Galle, of the relevant powers in terms
of Article 58 (1) of the Constitution. If he finds that there is express
delegation the question ends there, but if he finds that there is no such
express delegation then he shall proceed to record his findings, whether there
has been implied delegation of such powers and if he does come to the
conclusion that there has been such an implied delegation he shall refer that
finding to this Court to make a determination, whether such delegation of
power is envisaged by Article 58 (1) and whether Article 55 (5) could be
invoked in the circumstances of this case. In the argument of that reference,
liberty is reserved to the petitioner to contend that "resignation" does not
come within the scope of Article 55 (5) and that implied delegation is not
sufficient to satisfy the constitutional requirement of Article 58 (1).



Since the Election Petition has to be heard and disposed of without delay, we
direct the Election Judge to hear and conclude the Election Petition and give
his determination on the various issues arising on the Election Petition and
only thereafter to transmit his answer to the question referred to above, to
this Court. If the Election Petition can be determined independently of the
application of Article 55 (5) of the Constitution, the Election Judge may make
his determination and order on the petition along with his findings referred
to above.



_Case sent back for Election Judge's findings as directed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/16.html_  

