MARCH 14 and 15, 1990.

_

Constitution-Interpretation "aggrieved party" within the meaning of Article
128(1) of the Constitution - Partition Law, No. 21 of 1977, S. 25(2) - Locus
standi.

_

In a partition action the principal contest was between the plaintiff on the
one hand and the 8th and 9th defendants on the other who claimed certain lots
of the corpus by prescription. The 5th defendant who was the husband of the
9th defendant claimed certain improvement before the surveyor, but filed no
statement of claim. The District Judge dismissed the action and the plaintiff
appealed to the Court of Appeal making all parties to the action respondents,
but only the 8th and 9th defendants resisted the appeal. The Court of Appeal
reversed the judgement of the District Court and proceeded to allot shares to
the plaintiff and 1st to 3rd defendants and declared the 5th defendant
entitled to compensation for improvements. The 5th defendant appealed to the
Supreme Court and a preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the plaintiff
that the 5th defendant lacked locus standi.

**

Held :

**

In terms Article 128(1) of the Constitution an appeal lies to the Supreme
Court at the instance of an aggrieved party. Such a party must be a party who
has suffered a legal grievance, a party against whom a decision has been
pronounced which wrongly deprived him of something or wrongly affected his
title to something. These attributes are not present in the 5th defendant and
therefore the appeal should be rejected.

**

Cases referred to

**_

In re Sidebottam 1880,'14 Ch. Div. 458

_**

APPEAL** from judgement of the Court of Appeal - preliminary objection.

_

l. M. R. Wijetunge, P. C. with M. L. De Silva_ for petitioner __  

_

N. R. M. Daluwatte, P. C. with L. V. P. Wettasinghe, P. Keerthisinghe and Miss
S. Abhaygeewa_ for plaintiff-respondent. _

Cur. adv. vult.

_

April 6, 1990.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.

**

This matter comes up by way of a preliminary objection raised by learned
Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent, for entertaining by this Court the
appeal preferred by the 5th defendant against the judgment delivered by the
Court of Appeal, on the ground that the appellant lacks locus standi.

**250**

A brief reference to the history of this case is necessary to appreciate the
point raised by learned Counsel. The plaintiff filed this action in the
District Court as far back as 30.3.1967, seeking to partition the land called
lot c (Northern Block) of contiguous lands called Medagamakele and Digana.
Although originally the action related to an extent of 26A, OR, 30P, after
several surveys, the corpus was restricted to an extent of 6A. 3R. 18P. One of
the principal contests to the case of the plaintiff came from the 8th and 9th
defendants (the last being the wife of the 5th defendant) who pleaded for the
dismissal of the action, on the ground that they - the 8th and 9th defendants
- had prescribed to certain portions of the corpus.

The 5th defendant filed proxy on 9.11.19 74 through his Attorney-at-Law Mr. T.
S. Doole, who was also the Attorney-at-Law for the 8th and 9th defendants, but
while 8th and 9th defendants filed a statement of claim, the 5th defendant did
not. The 5th defendant claimed certain improvements in the corpus before the
Surveyor, was present throughout the trial, and was the principal witness to
testify in support of the case of his wife.

The learned trial Judge after a protracted trial lasting several days, gave
judgment on 28.4.1978, dismissing the plaintiff's action, while upholding the
claim of prescription of the 8th and 9th defendants to certain portions of the
corpus. The plaintiff appealed from that judgment to the Court of Appeal
making all the defendants inclusive of the 5th defendant, respondents. At the
argument in the Court of Appeal, only the 8th and 9th defendants resisted the
plaintiff's case through Counsel. The Court of Appeal on 31.7.1986 in
reversing the judgment of the original Court, rejected the claim of
prescription of the 8th and 9th defendants and proceeded to allot shares in
the corpus to the plaintiff and 1st to 3rd defendants, further declaring the
5th defendant entitled to compensation for certain improvements effected by
him on the lots claimed by the 9th defendant.

The present appeal, quite strangely, is not filed by the 8th or the 9th
'defendants, but by the 5th defendant. It is pointed out by learned Counsel
for the plaintiff that in terms of Article 128(1) of the Constitution, the 5th
defendant is no "aggrieved party" to the proceedings of the Court of Appeal,
at the instance of which party only that Court has jurisdiction to grant leave
to appeal (if not granted ex mero motu),

**251**

Our attention was invited to the case of In re Sidebotham, (1) in which James
L. J., at p. 465 expressed as follows :

"A person aggrieved must be a man who has suffered a legal grievance, a man
against whom a decision has been pronounced which wrongly deprived him of
something, or wrongly affected his title to something."

I am unable to identify in the 5th defendant any of those attributes of an
aggrieved man referred to by James L. J., Springing as they must, from the
judgment of the Court of Appeal. The petition filed in this Court by the 5th
defendant, appears to me to be a veritable statement of claim, and that too
filed for the first time in the long and lengthy partition proceedings,
spanning a period of about 20 years. This claim is made in the teeth of
S.25(2) of the Partition Law,-No.'-21 of 1977, which reads as follows :

"If a defendant shall fail to file a statement of claim on the due date the
trial may proceed ex parte as against such party in default, who shall not be
entitled, without leave of Court, to raise any contest or dispute the claim of
any other party to the action at the trial."

I find it difficult to subscribe to the proposition advanced on behalf of the
appellant, that a defaulting party, who is disentitled to raise a contest or a
dispute as a matter of right at the trial, acquires such a privilege once the
trial is concluded. How much so ever genuine, may be the 5th defendant's
sharing in common a grievance with his wife. I am unable to hold that in the
eyes of the law he is an aggrieved party to the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. In the District Court, he asked nothing and received nothing ; in the
Court of Appeal he gained perhaps unasked, partly what his wife lost, although
it may be a poor consolation for the extent of his wife's loss.

The appeal is rejected with costs fixed at Rs. 525.

**

FERNANDO, J. -** I agree.

**KULATUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
_**  
Appeal rejected.** _

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/16.html_  

