##  Merryl Perera v. Abeysuriya and Others - SLR - 293, Vol 2 of 1983 [1983]
LKSC 16; (1983) 2 Sri LR 293 (1 January 1983)

#  293

  **MERRYL PERERA**

**v.**

**ABEYSURIYA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON C. J., RATWATTE, J. AND VICTOR PEREFIA, J.

S.C.L.A. No. 62/82, S.C. APPEAL No. 48/82 S.C.

C.A. APPLICATION No. 697/82

D.C. COLOMBO No. 2146/8/5

07 MARCH 1983.



    Contempt \- Can jurisdiction of Appeal Court be invoked where the District Court had jurisdiction?



# Held-



The Court of Appeal and District Court had parallel jurisdiction to punish for
contempt for disobedience to an injunction. The appellant had the right to
make the application to the Court of Appeal and the Court being clothed by the
Constitution to make the order prayed for had a duty to make the order if the
facts were established to its satisfaction. It could not have refused to
entertain the petition.



Cases referred to:



1. _Sheffield Corporation v. Lusford_ 1929 2KB 180



2. _Perera v. Perera_ 4 NLR 282



**APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal



_H. L. de Silva, S.A._ with _J. P. de Almeida_ for appellant.



_K. N. Choksy, S.A._ with _K. Kanag-Iswaran,_ for respondents.



## Cur. adv. vult



22 March, 1983

  
SAMARAKOON, C. J.

_  _

The Appellant and the Respondents are members of a Club known as the Otter
Aquatic Club. The Appellant applied for, and obtained from the District Court
of Colombo, an interim injunction restraining the Respondents from acting upon
the



#  294



"purported amendment to or repeal" of Clause 12(f) of the Club's Constitution
and from permitting persons disqualified by the original Clause 12(f) "to
contest at any election as an office bearer of the said Otter Aquatic Club".
The Appellant made an application to the Court of Appeal under the provisions
of Article 105(3) of the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka alleging
that the Respondents had disobeyed the injunction and praying that the
Respondents be dealt with for contempt of the District Court. The Court of
Appeal has refused to entertain the application. Seneviratne, J. was of the
view that though there was parallel jurisdiction in the Court of Appeal and
the District Court to take cognisance of this matter, the Court of Appeal
would only do so if the Appellant showed special reason why in the first
instance the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal should be invoked without
resort to the District Court under the provisions of Section 663 of the Civil
Procedure Code. He stated that the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal should
be invoked only when there is a contumacious and persistent disregard of the
authority of the District Court. His reasons for this conclusion are as
follows:



1.The resulting overburdening of the Court of Appeal with numerous
applications,



2.Heavy expense and inconvenience to Respondents, and



3.If encouraged it will end in the Court of Appeal performing the functions of
the original Court on the basis that the Court of Appeal has parallel
jurisdiction.



The reasons no doubt merit consideration and the conclusion is not
unreasonable. However Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Court of
Appeal had no alternative but to entertain the application. The history of
this power in the Superior Courts to deal with offences of contempt of other
Courts is relevant. Section 47 of the Courts Ordinance (Cap.6) gave the
Supreme Court or any Judge thereof power to take cognisance of and try in



#  295

**  **

a summary manner any offence of contempt committed against or in disrespect of
the authority of itself "or in disrespect of the authority of any other Court
and which such Court has no jurisdiction under Section 57 to take cognisance
of and punish ........ This power was conferred on the High Court by the
provisions of the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973. Section 41(2)
reads thus -



"(2) Every High Court may take cognizance of and try in a summary manner any
offence of contempt committed against or in disrespect of its authority or any
offence of contempt committed within its jurisdiction against or in disrespect
of the authority of any other court or other institution established by law
which such court or institution has not the jurisdiction to take cognizance of
and punish, and on conviction impose a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding
five years or a fine not exceeding five thousand rupees or both such
imprisonment and fine."



These two provisions impose a limit on the power conferred by stating that in
respect of the offence of contempt of any other Court, the power can be
exercised only if that other Court has no jurisdiction to take cognizance of
such contempt. The Constitution of 1978 conferred this power on the Court of
Appeal but placed no limitation as in the Courts Ordinance and the
Administration of Justice Law. Article 105(3) of the Constitution reads as
follows: -



"(3) The Supreme Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka and the Court of Appeal of
the Republic of Sri Lanka shall each be a superior court of record and shall
have all the powers of such court including the power to punish for contempt
of itself, whether committed in the court itself or elsewhere, with
imprisonment or fine or both as the court may deem fit. The power of the Court
of Appeal shall include the power to punish for contempt of any other court,
tribunal or institution referred to in paragraph 1(c) of this Article, whether
committed in the presence of such court or elsewhere-



#  296



 Provided that the preceding provisions of this Article shall not prejudice or
affect the rights now or hereafter vested by any law in such other court,
tribunal or institution to punish for contempt of itself."



The proviso is significant. It saves similar jurisdiction of other Courts. In
the result the Court of Appeal and the District Court had parallel
jurisdiction in respect of the offence of contempt as alleged in this case.



Counsel for the Respondents submitted that Article 105(3) was only an enabling
provision and was comparable to the provisions of Article 140 of the
Constitution. He stated that this latter Article contained an enabling power,
but the Courts had a discretion to refuse the issue of a Writ. He referred to
the fact, that Courts refused to issue a Writ when the Petitioner was guilty
of laches or when the equities were not within the Petitioner. This is no
doubt correct but Article 140 provides that the grant and issue of Writs
should be done "according to law". "Law" here, means written and unwritten
laws that were in force immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Vide Article 168(1)). The two instances of refusal by the Courts
referred to by Counsel for the Respondents were part of the unwritten law of
the land. Article 140 is therefore no guide to the interpretation of the
provisions of Article 105(3). Counsel also submitted that he Court of Appeal
must have a discretion for the reasons given by Seneviratne, J. Perhaps it is
good policy, but policy cannot justify the modification of a provision of law.



Article 105(3) of the Constitution does not confer any discretion on the Court
of Appeal. The Appellant had the right to make this application to the Court
of Appeal and the Court being clothed by the Constitution to make the order
prayed for had a duty to make the order if the facts were established to its
satisfaction. It could not have refused to entertain the petition. _Sheffield
Corporation v. Lusford_ (1). A similar situation arose at a time when the
District Court and the Court of Requests had concurrent jurisdiction over
certain matters. In the case of _Perera v. Perera_ (2) the District Court
dismissed an action under the provisions of Section 247 of the Civil Procedure
Code because



#  297

**  **

the land which was seized, and was the subject matter of the action was under
Rs.300/- in value. The District Court had jurisdiction in this matter under
the provisions of Section 74 of the Courts Ordinance and the Supreme Court
held that it could not dismiss the action merely because it might have been
brought in the Court of Requests. All it could do was to deprive the
successful plaintiff of his costs.



There is another aspect to this case. We are dealing with a Constitutional
provision and not with ordinary Statute Law. The former must command the
greater respect. The Court of Appeal erred in refusing to grant the
application for the issue of summons and in dismissing the application. This
appeal is therefore allowed with costs.



**RATWATTE, J** \- I agree.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.** \- I agree.



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/16.html_  

