[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1994](./) >> **[1994] LKSC 16**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1994+16 or 1994+LKSC+16) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1994+LKSC+16) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Weragama v. Eksath Lanka Wathu Kamkaru Samithiya and Others - SLR - 293,
Vol 1 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 16; (1994) 1 Sri LR 293 (1 January 1994)

**293**

**WERAGAMA** ****

**v** ****

**EKSATH LANKA WATHU KAMKARU SAMITHIYA AND OTHERS**  



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

DHEERARATNE, J. AND

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 45/94

H.C. (WP) NO. 21/92

OCTOBER 28TH, 1994.



Certiorari and Mandamus - High Court of a Province - Jurisdiction to issue
writs of Certiorari and Mandamus against the President of a Labour Tribunal -
Constitution Article 154 P(3) and (4) - High Court of the Provinces (Special
Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990, s. 3.

_ _

Article 154P introduced by the Thirteenth Amendment did not confer on High
Courts writ jurisdiction in respect of Presidents of Labour Tribunals.



Nor did Parliament by Law confer such a jurisdiction on High Courts under and
in terms of Article 154 P(3) (C).



If a law or a statute is covered by a matter in the (exclusive) Provincial
Council List, but not otherwise, the exercise of powers thereunder are subject
to the writ jurisdiction of the High Court.

**294**



Apart from an error in punctuation (semicolon to be ignored or replaced by a
comma) the meaning of Article 154P(4) is perfectly clear; and there is no
ambiguity, absurdity or injustice justifying modification of language. In the
Thirteenth Amendment there was no intention to devolve power. There was
nothing more than a re-arrangement of the jurisdictions of the judiciary.



The Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is not an entrenched jurisdiction
because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions "of any
law", "Hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction
to be reduced or transferred by ordinary law. (of course, to a body entitled
to exercise judicial power). It was the absence of such a provision that made
Parliament unable to reduce or affect the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
under Article 140; because its jurisdiction under Article 140 and 141 are
entrenched; but for the proviso inserted by the First Amendment, its
jurisdiction under Article 140 cannot be transferred even to the Supreme
Court.



Article 154P(3) did not authorise Parliament, by ordinary law, to confer the
writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 140 (either exclusively
or concurrently) on the High Courts.



Section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19
of 1990, conferred on the High Courts, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction
in respect of Labour Tribunals; the phrase "appellate and revisionary
jurisdiction" has been used in Article 154P(3) in contradistinction to the
writ jurisdiction and hence the same phrase in Section 3 cannot be interpreted
to include the writ jurisdiction.

** **

**Cases referred to:**

_ _

1 _. Swastika Textile Industries Ltd. v. Dayaratne, _ SC No. 7/92, SC Minutes
of 27.10.92.

_ _

2 _.In re the Thirteenth Amendment,_ [1987] 2 Sri LR 312.

_ _

3 _.In re the Agrarian Services (Amendment) Bill SC Special Determinations_
Nos. 2 & 4 of 1991 - Decided on 7.02.1991.



**APPEAL** from order of High Court (W P).

_ _

_L C. Seneviratne P.C._ with _Lakshman Perera_ and _Shayamal Jayasinghe_ for
respondent-respondent-appellant.

_ _

_A. A. de Silva_ with _Nimal Punchihewa_ for applicant-petitioner-respondent.





_Cur .adv. vult_.



**295**



November, 04th, 1994.  


**FERNANDO, J.**

** **

In this appeal we have to decide whether the High Court of a Province has
jurisdiction to issue writs of Certiorari and Mandamus against the President
of a Labour Tribunal.



The President of the Labour Tribunal Avissawella refused his application to
order the production for inspection of a document from which a witness giving
evidence was apparently refreshing his memory, and then granted the Applicant-
Petitioner-Respondent ("the Respondent") a postponement subject to payment of
costs. Being dissatisfied with those two orders, the Respondent applied to the
High Court of the Western Province (sitting at Avissawella) for Certiorari and
Mandamus. A preliminary objection by the Respondent-Respondent Appellant ("the
Appellant") that the High Court had no writ jurisdiction in respect of a
President of a Labour Tribunal was overruled by the High Court, relying on
Swastika Textile Industries Ltd. v Dayaratne (1), which is contrary to this
view of the writ jurisdiction, as I will show later in this judgment - and an
article written by Justice Sarath Silva, of which neither the reference nor a
copy is in the brief. The Appellant appealed to this Court with special leave.



Prior to the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, the jurisdictions of
the Court of Appeal included exclusive appellate and revisionary jurisdiction
(under Article 138), and exclusive "writ jurisdiction" (namely, to grant
habeas corpus under Article 141, and the other prerogative writs under Article
140). These jurisdictions applied inter alia, to High Courts, District Courts,
Magistrate's Courts, Primary Courts and Labour Tribunals.



The relevant provisions introduced by the Thirteenth Amendment are as follows:



"154P (3) Every ... High Court (of a Province) shall -



(a) exercise according to law, the original criminal jurisdiction of the High
Court of Sri Lanka in respect of offences committed within the Province;

**296**



(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law, exercise
appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions, sentences
and orders entered or imposed by Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts within
the Province;



(c) exercise such other jurisdiction and powers as Parliament may, by law,
provide.  


154P (4) Every such High Court shall have jurisdiction to issue, according to
law,



(a) orders in the nature of habeas corpus in respect of persons illegally
detained within the Province; and



(b) orders in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo,
mandamus, and quo warranto, against any person exercising within the Province,
any power under



(i) any law; or



(ii) any statutes made by a Provincial Council established for that Province,
in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List."



These amendments affected the appellate, revisionary and writ jurisdiction of
the Court of Appeal only in two respects. Firstly, Article 154P (3) (b)
conferred appellate and revisionary jurisdiction (but not writ jurisdiction)
in respect of Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts (but not Labour
Tribunals, or other courts and tribunals); this was "notwithstanding anything
in Article 138" (and that Article was in any event "subject to the provisions
of the Constitution"), and so either the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
was protanto transferred to the High Courts or the Court of Appeal and the
High Courts had concurrent jurisdiction. Secondly, Article 154P (4) conferred
writ jurisdiction over any person exercising, within the Province, any power
under any law or statute specified therein; this was not stated to be
"exclusive", or "notwithstanding anything in Articles 140 and 141 ", and hence
the High Courts had concurrent jurisdiction with the

**297**



court of Appeal. The Respondent says that "any law" included the enactments
under which Presidents of Labour Tribunals exercised their powers, and that
therefore High Courts had writ jurisdiction over Labour Tribunals. Apart from
that, the Respondent has an alternative submission: he refers to Article 154P
(3) (c) - which empowered Parliament, by ordinary law, to confer other
jurisdictions on High Courts - and says that Parliament did by law confer on
High Courts writ jurisdiction in respect of Presidents of Labour Tribunals;
this, he claims, was done by section 3 and/or section 7 of the High Court of
the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, and/or sections 31 D
(4) (b) and 31 DDD of the Industrial Disputes Act (Cap. 131) as amended by Act
No. 32 of 1990.



Thus the appeal involves two questions:



1\. Did Article 154P, introduced by the Thirteenth Amendment, confer on High
Courts writ jurisdiction in respect of Presidents of Labour Tribunals?



2\. Alternatively, did Parliament by law confer such a jurisdiction on High
Courts, under and in terms of Article 154P (3) (c)?



1.It is accepted that the Industrial Disputes Act and any other enactments
which may confer powers on Labour Tribunals are not within- the scope of any
item or matter in the Provincial Council List; and also that it is only the
Reserved List which contains any item or matter which would cover those
enactments and Labour Tribunals - "Justice in so far as it relates to the
judiciary and the courts structure (including] ... jurisdiction and powers of
all courts ...". Accordingly, those enactments would not fall within "any law
... in respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List", and High
Courts would not have writ jurisdiction over Labour Tribunals.



However, learned Counsel for the Respondent contends that the final clause of
Article 154P (4) does not qualify "any law", but only sub-paragraph (ii). The
semicolon appearing after "any law" is an obvious error, because the preceding
word "under" must govern both sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii), if sub-paragraph
(ii) is to make any sense. Learned Counsel says it should be a full stop, but
even then

298  


sub-paragraph (ii) would be meaningless. Accordingly, that semicolon must be
ignored, or a comma substituted. In that event the final clause qualifies both
sub-paragraphs which then make perfect sense: if a law or a statute is covered
by a matter in the (exclusive) Provincial Council List, but not otherwise, the
exercise of powers thereunder are subject to the writ jurisdiction of the High
Court. Despite this, learned Counsel invites us to interpret this provision
"liberally", and to hold that the final clause qualified only "any statutes".
He advanced two reasons for doing so. He referred to the well-known principles
of interpretation justifying modification of language in cases of ambiguity,
absurdity, injustice, patent error, and the like; and he also urged that the
intention of the Thirteenth Amendment was to "devolve" judicial power to the
Provinces, which he said had been recognised in the Determination of this
Court In re the Thirteenth Amendment (2). On that basis he urged that this
Court should adopt a broad interpretation so as to allow writ jurisdiction to
the High Courts in respect of powers exercised under any law whatsoever.



Apart from the error in punctuation, the meaning of Article 154P (4) is
perfectly clear; and there is no ambiguity, absurdity, or injustice justifying
modification of language.



As to the intention of Parliament in adopting the Thirteenth Amendment, this
Court cannot attribute an intention except that which appears from the words
used by Parliament. I find nothing suggesting a general intention of devolving
power to the Provinces; insofar as the three Lists are concerned, only what
was specifically mentioned was devolved, and "all subjects and functions not
specified in List I or List II" were reserved - thus contradicting any such
general intention. As for the Determination of this Court regarding the
Thirteenth Amendment, the majority held that it did not effect any change in
the structure of the Courts or the judicial power of the People; that vesting
additional jurisdiction in the High Courts only brought justice nearer home to
the citizen, reducing delay and expense; and that the Provincial Council had
no control over the judiciary functioning in the Province (per Sharvananda,
C.J. at R. 323). Of the three dissenting judgments, only the principal dissent
referred to the judiciary. That judgment dealt exhaustively with the

**299**



provisions of the Thirteenth Amendment, and its background terrorism and the
secessionist problem, the reasonable governmental efforts made to solve it
politically without seeking a military solution, the various negotiations,
etc. Although taking the narrow view that there was excessive devolution in
respect of legislative and executive power, yet, significantly, it did not
find in the Bill, or even in its legislative and executive history, any
intention of devolution in regard to the judiciary - and it went no further
than observations that the conferment of concurrent writ jurisdiction on the
High Court was interference with, and devaluation of, the writ jurisdiction of
the Court of Appeal (per Wanasundera, J., at p. 380). None of the five
judgments support-the Respondent's contention that there was in the Thirteenth
Amendment an intention to devolve judicial power. There was nothing more than
a re-arrangement of the jurisdictions of the judiciary. To accede to Counsel's
invitation to adopt a liberal interpretation would be, in this instance, a
clear trespass into the legislative domain.



The first question must therefore be answered in the negative.



2.By the Thirteenth Amendment, Parliament could have taken away (or
diminished) even an entrenched jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal, because a
constitutional provision can be amended by a later constitutional amendment.
But Parliament cannot, by a constitutional amendment, give itself a blanket
authorisation to affect an entrenched jurisdiction by means of a subsequent
ordinary law. For example, Parliament cannot confer an entrenched jurisdiction
of this Court (e.g. under Articles 125 to 127) on High Courts, by an Act
passed under and in terms of Article 154P (3). However, the jurisdiction of
the Court of Appeal under Article 138 is not an entrenched jurisdiction,
because Article 138 provides that it is subject to the provisions. "of any
law"; hence it was always constitutionally permissible for that jurisdiction
to be reduced or transferred by ordinary law (of course, to a body entitled to
exercise judicial power). That is the reason why I held (in -Swastika Textile
Industries Ltd. v. Dayaratne, (1) that section 3 of the High Court of the
Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred concurrent,
appellate and revisionary jurisdiction on the High Courts

**300**



in respect of Labour Tribunals, and that thereafter section 31 D3 of the
Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990, made that
jurisdiction exclusive, thereby taking away the jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal in that respect). And it was the absence of such a provision that made
Parliament unable to reduce or affect the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
under Article 140: because "its jurisdictions under Articles 140 and 141 are
entrenched; but for the proviso inserted by the First Amendment, its
jurisdiction under Article 140 cannot be transferred even to the Supreme
Court" (Determination in re the Agrarian Services (Amendment) Bill (3)). It
had first to remove the entrenchment, thereby giving Parliament the power, by
subsequent ordinary law, to transfer part of that jurisdiction to this Court.
If a constitutional amendment was necessary in order to transfer part of an
entrenched jurisdiction from the Court of Appeal to a higher Court, it would
be anomalous indeed if a transfer to an inferior court was possible without
such an amendment.



Had the power conferred by Article 154P (3) (c) been enlarged by the inclusion
in sub-paragraph (c) of words such as "notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in Article 141 of the Constitution", the position might have been
different. But in the absence of any removal of the entrenchment of that
Article, I hold that Article 154P (3) did not authorise Parliament, by
ordinary law, to confer the writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under
Article 140 (either exclusively or concurrently) on the High Courts.



While this makes it unnecessary to consider the Respondent's submissions on
the second question, I must mention that there is no doubt whatever that
Parliament did not even attempt to affect the writ jurisdiction of the Court
of Appeal. Section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions)
Act, No. 19 of 1990, conferred on the High Court appellate and revisionary
jurisdiction in respect of Labour Tribunals; the phrase "appellate and
revisionary jurisdiction" has been used in Article 154P (3) in
contradistinction to the writ jurisdiction, and hence the same phrase in
section 3 cannot be interpreted to include the writ jurisdiction. None of the
other provisions relied on by the Respondent purport to confer jurisdiction.

**301**



I therefore answer the second question in the negative.



The order of the High Court is set aside, and appeal is allowed, with costs in
a sum of Rs. 2,000.



**DHEERARATNE, J**. - I agree.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I  agree



_Order of High Court set aside._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/16.html_  

