[![CommonLII](/images/logos/CommonLII_small.jpg)](/) |  [Home](/) |
[Databases](/databases.html) | [WorldLII](http://www.worldlii.org) |
[Search](/forms/search1.html) | [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)

# Supreme Court of Sri Lanka  
  
---|---  
**You are here:**   [CommonLII](/) >> [Databases](/databases.html) >> [Supreme
Court of Sri Lanka](../) >> [1997](./) >> **[1997] LKSC 11**

[Database Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC) | [Name
Search](/form/search1.html?mask=lk/cases/LKSC&title=1) | [Recent
Decisions](../recent.html) |
[Noteup](/form/search/?method=boolean&query=LKSC+1997+11 or 1997+LKSC+11) |
[LawCite](/cgi-bin/LawCite/?cit=1997+LKSC+11) |
[Help](/commonlii/help/cases.html "Help")

* * *

##  Topa Sporting Goods Pvt) Ltd. v. The Commissioner of Labour and Three
Others - SLR - 95, Vol 2 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 11; (1997) 2 Sri LR 95 (2 May
1997)

95



TOPA SPORTING GOODS (PVT) LTD.

v.

THE COMMISSIONER OF LABOUR AND THREE OTHERS



SUPREME COURT

G. P. S. DE SILVA C.J.

RAMANATHAN. J. AND

DR. BANDARANAYAKE. J. S.C.

APPEAL NO. 48/96.

C.A. NO. 3/96.

FEBRUARY 17 AND MARCH 26. 1997.



_Certiorari - Termination of Employment of Workman (Special Provisions) Act,
No. 51 of 1988 - Order to pay compensation - Rejection of application on
ground of lathes and delay._

_ _

Ordinarily a court should be very slow to dismiss an application without
issuing notice on the respondents on the ground of delay of a short period of
six months unless there are compelling circumstances such as grave and
substantial prejudice caused to a party by reason of such delay. To refuse
certiorari solely on the ground of delay may undermine the rule of law
particularly where the decision is sought to be quashed on the basis of want
of jurisdiction.



**Case referred to:  
 **

Sebastian Fernando v. Katana Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd., and
Others [1990] 1 Sri. L.R. 342.



**APPEAL** from the order of Court of Appeal.

_ _

_Sanleewa Jayawardena_ for the petitioner-appellant.  


_S. Sinnathamby_ for the 4th respondent-respondent.

_  
U. Egalahewa, S.C._ for the 1- 3rd respondents-respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._  


**96**



May 02, 1997.  


**G. R S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

** **

The petitioner-appellant, a private limited liability company engaged in the
principal business of the manufacture of tennis rackets for export moved the
Court of Appeal by way of a writ of certiorari to quash the order made by the
1st respondent (the Commissioner of Labour) in terms of section 6A (1) of the
Termination of Employment of Workman (Special Provisions) Act. The order (P27)
dated 18.6.95 required the petitioner-appellant to pay certain sums of money
as compensation to the workmen whose names were set out in the schedule to
P27. The appellant company was ordered to pay the money on or before 31.7.95.
The application for the writ of certiorari was filed on 2.01.96. The Court of
Appeal took the view that the delay of six months was fatal to the application
and dismissed it summarily without issuing notice on the respondents. It is
right to add that the Court of Appeal observed that the reason given in the
petition for the delay was false.



It was averred inter alia, in the petition that P27 was illegal, null and void
inasmuch as it failed to take into account "relevant circumstances" and was
"totally arbitrary" for the reason that there was "no rational basis of
computation of the compensation."



Special leave to appeal to this court was allowed on the question whether the
Court of Appeal erred in holding that the petitioner appellant was guilty of
!aches and whether summary dismissal was justified.



Several decisions have dealt with the question whether delay per se is fatal
to an application for a writ of certiorari. Some of these decisions are
referred to in Sebastian Fernando v. Katana Multi Purpose Co-operative Society
Ltd., and Others(1) and reference to that case would suffice for present
purposes. Fernando J., observed, "Alt ugh the court has a discretion, in
appropriate circumstances, to refuse certiorari and mandamus on the ground of
delay, that plea involves equitable considerations. ... (at page 345)
Kulatunga, J., in

97  


a separate judgment citing S. A. de Smith, Judicial Review of Administrative
Action, 4th Edition, p. 423-424 said, "Even where (as in England) time for
making an application is provided by rules, delay by itself would not defeat
an application. It is only a discretionary bar to be applied, having regard to
the conduct of parties, the issues involved and substantial prejudice which
may result in varying the impugned order." (at page 352).



Ordinarily a court would be very slow to dismiss an application without
issuing notice on the respondents on the ground of delay of a short period of
six months unless there are compelling circumstances such as grave and
substantial prejudice caused to a party by reason of such delay. To refuse
certiorari solely on the ground of delay may undermine the rule of law
particularly where the decision is sought to be quashed on the basis of want
of jurisdiction. It seems to me that this was eminently a case where the court
should have issued notice and left it to the respondents to take the plea in
their objections, if so advised.



I accordingly allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal
and direct the Court of Appeal to issue notice on the respondents and hear and
determine the application.



There will be no costs.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/11.html_  

