##  Tyagarajah and Another v. Perera and Three Others - SLR - 384, Vol 1 of
1983 [1983] LKSC 8; (1983) 1 Sri LR 384 (10 May 1983)

# 384

TYAGARAJAH AND ANOTHER

**v.**

#  PERERA AND THREE OTHERS

  
SUPREME COURT.

SHARVANANDA, J., COLIN‑THOME, J.,

AND SOZA, J..

S.C.NO. 40/82‑S.C.SPECIAL

L.A. NO. 57/82-

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 488/82.

FEBRUARY 2, 1983.



Execution of decrees against the estate of a deceased judgment debtor ‑
Sections 341, 347 and 763 of Civil Procedure Code ‑ Application for a writ of
execution and substitution ‑ Writ issued without notice ‑ Resist by the
respondents.

_ _

The plaintiffs (Appellants to this appeal) who were the owners of the premises
No. 7, St. Albans Place, Colombo 4, instituted action against the defendant
one Shyama de Silva to have her ejected said premises. On 28‑11‑79 the
District Judge. made an order ex parte in favour of the plaintiffs. A copy of
the decree was served on the defendant 6‑2‑80\. She died on 18‑2‑ 80.



An application was filed on 21‑7‑80 for a writ of execution of the decree and
to substitute the 1st, respondent as the legal representative of the deceased
defendant. The Court ordered the substitution and directed notice of
application for writ to be issued.  


# 385

  
However the Court on 6‑8‑80 issued writ without service of notice. When the
writ of possession was executed on 19‑9‑80, the Fiscal was resisted by the
2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents.



on 6‑4‑82 the District Judge directed the re‑issue of the writ and also held
that the 2nd respondent was none other than the substituted legal
repre­sentative of the deceased judgment debtor (1st respondent to the
appeal). The 2nd respondent filed an application in revision, in the Court of
Appeal to set aside the said order.



The Court of Appeal set aside the orders of 6‑8‑80 and 6‑4‑82, directed the
issue of the writ and held that the lst and 2nd respondents are one and the
same person.  


The appellants in this appeal raised the following questions regarding the
procedure that should be adopted in the execution of decrees against the
estate of a deceased judgment debtor.



(1) Where the judgment debtor dies before execution of decree, is notice
necessary before substitution of his legal represen­tative?



(2) Should the person substituted as legal representative be noticed to show
cause before execution issues?



(3) Is failure to issue notice  before execution issues fatal where the legal
represen­tative becomes aware of the application for  execution?



###### Held



(1)Where the judgment debtor dies before execution of decree, and where a
legal repre­sentative should be substituted , for the deceased judgment
debtor, no service of notice

#  386



on the legal representative is necessary before the substitution. Execution
and substi­tution should be asked for in one petition. Substitution will be ex
parte and notice will issue.



(2) The person substituted as legal represen­tative should receive the notice
of the application for execution and also should be called upon to show cause
against the said application. He can then in objecting to execution take up as
one of his defences the plea that he has been wrongly substituted as legal
representative.

(3)Where the legal representative becomes aware of the application for
execution failure to issue notice before execution issues, is not fatal.



**Cases referred to**



_(1) Omer v. Fernando (1913) 21 C.A.C. 128.  
 _

_(2) Pathurpillai v. Kandappen (1913) 3 C.A.C.  
 _

_(3) Manuel Perera v. Palaniappa Chetty (1913) 1 S.C.D. 16.  
 _

_(4) Siriwardena v. Kitulgalla (1941) 42 N.L.R. 510.  
 _

_(5) Latiff v. Seneviratne (1938) 40 N.L.R. 141.  
 _

_(6) Sirimala Veda v. Siripala (1954.) 55 N.L.R. 544.  
 _

_(7) Edward v. de Silva (1945) 46 N.L.R. 342.  
 _

_(8) Ragunath Das v. Sundar Das Khetri A.I.R. 1914 Privy Council 129. 131.  
 _

_(9) Wimalesekera v. Parakrama Samudra Co ‑ operatlive Agricultural Production
and Sales Society Ltd., (1955) 58 N.L.R. 298.  
 _

_(10)   Perera v. Novishamyamy (1927) 29 N.L.R. 242._

# 387



(11) _Fernando v. Thambiraja_ (1945) 46 N.L.R.81.  


(12)   _Rodrigo v. Weerakoon_ (1957) 61 N.L.R.150.  


(13)   _Chandra Nath Bagchi v. Nabadwip Chandra Dutt_ A.I.R. 1931 Calcutta
476.  


(14) _  Fakhrul Islam v. Bhubaneswari Kuer _A.I.R. 1929 Patna 79.  


(15) _  Kannangara v. Peries _%11928) 30 N.L.R. 78



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



K.N. Choksy Senior Attorney with S. Mahenthir'an A. Kirupaidasan and Miss.
I.R. Rajepakse for appellants.



H.L. de Silva Senior Attorney with I. Mohamed for 2nd respondent.



Other respondents absent and unrepresented.

_Cur.adv.vult._



May 10, 1983.  


**SOZA, J.**



This appeal raises an interesting question regarding the procedure that should
be adopted in the execution of decrees against the estate of a deceased
judgment‑debtor. I will set out in brief outline the salient facts of this
case which have given rise to this question.



The two plaintiffs who are the appellants before us instituted this suit
against one Shyanta de Silva to vindicate their title to premises No.7, St.
Albans Place, Colombo 4 to have her ejected therefrom and to recover damages
for wrongful occupation and costs. They also asked for an in­junction and on
being noticed in regard to this Shyama de Silva the defendant filed proxy and
objections but did not pursue them. She made no further appearance in the case
and hence ex parte trial was held and judgment entered for the plain‑



**388  
 **

tiffs as prayed for with Costs on November 28, 1979. A copy of the decree was
served on Shyama de, Silva on February 6, 1980. On February 18,1980 Shyama de
Silva died. No application was made by Shyama de Silva or after her death by
any representative of hers to have the decree set aside a therefore no
question as to the validity of the decree can be entertained now. Nor indeed
has any such question been raised before us.



On July 21, 1980 the appellants filed application for a writ of execution of
the decree entered in the case naming a Mrs. Malcolm Perera as respondent and
seeking her substitution as legal representative as she had adiated the
inheritance. The Court ordered the substitution and directed notice of the
application for writ to issue but later changed its mind and on August 6, 1980
issued writ without service of notice. On September  19, 1980 the Fiscal
repaired to the premises in suit execute the writ of possession. One Mrs .
Elizabeth Fonseka now the second respondent, Mr. T.M.R. Gunasekera, the third
respondent and attorney‑at‑law Mr. Daya Wettasinghe resisted the Fiscal and
this was reported to Court. The appellants then sought to have themselves put
into possession and the second, third and fourth respondents dealt with for
contempt of court. The second and third respondents filed objections and after
a hotly contest inquiry the District Judge by his order of April 1982 held
that the second and third respondents resisted the Fiscal on incorrect advice
given the fourth respondent and let them off with a warning and directed
reissue of the writ. One important finding of the District Judge was that the
second respondent was none other than Mrs. Malcolm Perera substituted as the
legal representative the deceased judgment‑debtor and not a non‑existent
person as asserted by the second and third respondents. On the very day on
which the District Judge delivered his order the second respondent alone of

#  389



 the respondents filed an application in revision in the Court of Appeal
seeking to have the order, set aside and at the same time moved for and
obtained an order staying execution. After hearing argument the Court of
Appeal set aside the orders of 6.8.80 and 6.4.82 of the District Judge and the
direction to issue writ but affirmed the finding that the second respondent
and Mrs. Malcolm Perera are one and the same person. In these circumstances
the challenge to the identity of Mrs. Malcolm Perera must be regarded as
closed.



In this factual background this appeal poses three questions:



1.  Where the judgment‑debtor dies before execu­tion of decree, is notice necessary before substitution of his legal representative?  


2.  Should the person substituted as legal rep­resentative be noticed to show cause before execution issues?  


3.  Is failure to issue notice before execution issues fatal where the legal representative becomes aware of the application for execu­tion?



It is well established that when the judgment ­debtor dies before execution of
decree the judgment‑creditor must proceed under section 341 of the Civil
Procedure Code ‑ see the cases of _Omer vs. Fernando_ (1) _Pathurupillai vs.
Kandappen_. (2) _Manuel Perera vs.Palaniappa Chetty_ (3) _and Siriwardene vs.
Kitugalla_ (4). Section 341 provides that when the judgment‑debtor dies before
execution of decree, the decree‑holder must apply for execution by petition to
which the legal representative is made respondent. But neither in section 341
nor in any other section of the Civil Procedure Code is there any special
procedure laid down for substitution of the legal representative. The practice
and

#  390



procedure hitherto being followed is for such  substitution to be made ex
parte if sufficient material has been placed before the court justify the
making of such an order ‑ see section 4 of the Civil Procedure Code. In the
case of Manuel Perera vs. Palaniappa Chetty(supra) the judgment creditor.
"moved to substitute the administrator as defendant; and writ issued against
him." This held to be a sufficient compliance with section (p. 17 of the
report). The substitution of legal representative is merely a step in aid
execution. Nowhere in the Civil‑Procedure Code in the decided cases can
support be found for proposition that the proposed legal representative should
be noticed to show cause why he should be substituted. The Civil, Procedure
Code does contemplate an application for substitution as distinct from an
application for execution. All that is required is that the judgment‑creditor
file a petition moving for execution in which he names legal representative
and gives reasons which w satisfy the court that the person so named should be
substituted in the room of the deceased judgment‑debtor The qualifications for
appoint as legal representative are laid down in sect 338(3) (b) of the Civil
Procedure Code. He must be the executor or administrator or if the estate of
the deceased. Judgment‑debtor is below Rs. 20, 000/- a next of kin who has
adiated the inheritance. As will appear from my discussion of the next
question for decision ho injustice will take place by observance of the
practice to effect the substitution of the legal representative ex parte.
Execution, it must be borne in mind, is really against the est. of‑ the
deceased judgment‑debtor and the representative will be liable only to the
extent the‑property of‑the deceased which has come to his hands and has not
been duly disposed of.



When the judgment‑debtor dies before  execution of the decree the correct
procedure then is  

# 391  


for the decree‑holder to file a petition naming as respondent the legal
representative of the deceased judgment‑debtor and praying for execution to
issue against such representative. In the petition itself the decree‑holder
should ask for substitution of the legal representative giving reasons. The
court will treat the application for substitution as in­cidental to the
application for execution and, if satisfied with the reasons, effect the
substi­tution ex parte.



I will now turn to the second question whether the person substituted as legal
representa­tive should have notice before execution issues. At the outset it
is well to remember that in execution proceedings the statutory procedures are
so de­signed as to assist the judgment‑creditor to recover the fruits of his
judgment and not to afford facilities to the judgment‑debtor to defeat or
delay the execution of the decree of court. Hence the general principle is
that notice is not required of an application for execution of a decree. The
application for execution should con­form to the requirements of section 224
of the Civil Procedure Code (Form 42 of the First Schedule to the Code). There
is a stipulation to mention the names of the parties but no petition to which
any party is named respondent is necessary.



Situations however arise from various causes when delay is occasioned as when
the judgment-­debtor dies before execution of decree or when the
judgment‑creditor himself is guilty of delay. Our Civil Procedure Code deals
with such situations in a special way following the inspiration of the Indian
Code. The scheme adopted by our Civil Procedure Code can be more clearly
appreciated by comparing our section 341 and the related section 347 with the
corresponding sections of the Indian Code of Civil, Procedure, Act No. XIV of
1882 on which our Civil Procedure Code is modelled. As the text of the Indian
provisions is not readily available I will reproduce them for the purposes of

# 392

  
comparison. Our section 341 corresponds to section 234 of the Indian Code of
1882 and section 347 to section 248:  
  
Section 341 C.P.C



(1) If the judgment debtor dies before the debtor dies before the decree has
been fully executed, the holder of the decree may apply to the court which
passed _it, by petition, to which the legal representative of the deceased
shall be made respondent, to execute the same_ against the legal
representative of the deceased.



(2) Such representative shall be liable only to the property of the deceased
which has come to his hands and has not been duly disposed of; and for the
purpose of ascertaining such liability, the court executing the decree may on
the application of the decree-holder compel the said representative to produce
such accounts as it thinks fit.



Section 234  Indian Code of 1882



(1) If a judgment debtor dies before the decree has been fully satisfied, the
holder of the decree may apply to the court which passed it to execute the
same against the legal representative of the deceased.



(2) Such legal representative shall be liable only to the extent of the
property of the deceased which has come  to his hands and has not been duly
disposed of; and for the purpose of ascertaining such liability, the court
executing the decree may, of its own motion or on the application of the
decree-holder, compel such accounts as it thinks fit.

**  393**

(Emphasis mine showing the differences)



Perhaps  I should add that the Indian Code of Civil Procedure, Act  No. 5 of
1908 now in operation in India has in its section 50 adopted the old section
234 almost in toto. The only alterations are the following  :



1\. The word "Where" has been substituted for the word "If" at the beginning
of sub-section (1).  


2\. The words "Where the decree is executed against such legal representative,
he" have been substituted for the words "Such legal representative " at the
beginning of sub-section (2).



I will now quote section 347 of our Code and its counterpart in the Indian
Code of 1882- section 248 :  
  

Section 347 C.P.C. | Section 248Indian Code of 1882.  
---|---  
  
_In cases where there is no respondent named in the petition of application
for execution,_ if more than one year has elapsed between the date of the
decree and the application for its execution the court shall cause the
petition to be served on the judgment-debtor, and shall proceed thereon _as if
he were originally named respondent therein:_ Provided that no such service
shall  |   |

The Court shall issue a notice to the party against whom execution is applied
for, requiring him to show cause, with in a period to be  fixed by the Court,
why  the decree should not be executed against his -  
  
(a) If more than one year has elapsed between the date of the decree and the
application for its execution, or  
  
(b) If the enforcement  
  
  


**394  
 **

be necessary if the application be made within one year from the date of any
decree passed on appeal from the decree sought to be executed or from the date
of the last order against the party against whom execution is applied for,
passed on any previous application for execution.

|  |

of the decree be applied for against the legal representative of a party to
the suit  which the decree was made:  
---|---|---  
  


|

Provided that no such, notice shall be necessary ‑ in consequence of more than
one year, having elapsed between the date of the decree and the application
for execution, if the application be made with in one year from the date of
any decree passed on appeal from the decree sought to be executed, or if the
last order against the party against whom execution is applied for, passed on
any previous application for execution, or in consequence of the application
being against the legal representative of the Judgement debtor, if upon a
previous application for  a execution against the same person the court has
ordered execution to issue against him. Explanation - In This section the
phrase  
  
---|---  
  




#  395



|

"the court" means the Court by which the decree was passed unless the decree
has been sent to another Court for execution, in which case it means such
other Court.  
---|---  
  


Section 248 appears in the Indian Code of 1908 as Order XXI Rule 22(1) with
many differences in transposition and a new sub-rule (2). The  explanation
given in section 248 is dropped. It should be observed that in our section 347
there is no provision relating to applications for execution against a legal
representative of a judgment-debtor and even in regard to the provision for
notice where one year has elapsed after the entry of the decree there is the
qualification that this is necessary only "in cases where there is no
respondent named in the petition of application for execution". It is only if
no respondent is named and notice is thought necessary by the Legislature that
a special provision for notice is included. Our Legislature has proceeded on
the footing that by providing for a party to be named respondent it is
impliedly providing for notice to such party. The Indian approach is
different. For such situ­ations as where a decree is one year old or where
execution has to be issued against the legal representative of a deceased
judgment‑debtor spe­cial provision is made for notice. Both systems achieve
the same result. In this connection the observations of De Kretser J in the
case of Siriwardene v. Kitugalla (supra) appear very relevant:‑



"It is only section 341 which deals with the ha execution of decrees after the
death of the judgment‑debtor. Section 50 of the present

**396**

  


Indian Code corresponds fairly closely with section 341 of our Code but there
is a vital difference in that it does not require the legal representative to
be made a respondent to the application. Section 50 replaced a somewhat
similar provision of the old Code. It was section 248,now replaced by O,XXI R.
22(corresponding somewhat with section 347 of our Code)   which required the
Court to give notice to the legal representative before allowing execution to
issue. We have taken away from section347 the part which related to legal
representative and we have added that part in substance  to section 341."
(pp.511,512).



The section of the old Indian Code which the present section 50 replaced was
section 234 to  which reference has already been made.  


Two other occasions when our Legislature has adopted the device of stipulating
the  naming of respondents instead of expressly providing for notice can be
found in section 339 and section 763 of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
Our section transferee of for execution of a decree by a transferee of title
to the decree. This section corresponds to section 232 of the Indian Code of
1882(replaced with minor alterations by Order XXI Rule 16). Under both the old
and new Codes in India notice to the transferor and judgment-debtor where the
transfer is by assignment is expressly stipulated as an essential step prior
to the issue of execution. Our section 339 requires the transferee whether the
transfer is by assignment or operation of law to apply for execution of the
decree" by petition, to which all the parties to the action or their
representatives shall be made respondents. "But if the transfer is by
operation of law the transferor need not be made a respondent. What is
required under this section is that the transferee should

#  397



file a petition praying for execution to issue and of course stating the
grounds on which he claims to be a transferee. The parties to the action
including the judgment‑debtor must be named respondents to the petition and
the Court after noticing them and affording them an Opportunity to raise their
objections if any will allow the application or reject it, ‑ see the cases of
_Latiff vs. Seneviratne_ (5) and , _Sirimala Veda vs. Siripala_ (6). Fernando
A.J. said in the latter case referring to section 339 "The principal object of
the section" is "not so much to permit objections to the issue of execution
but to permit challenge of the validity of the assignment." (p. 548).



So far as section 763 of our Civil Procedure Code goes its counterpart in the
Indian Code of 1882 (section 546) and in the Code of 1908 (Order XLI Rule 6)
is differently formulated and no useful comparison can be made. Our section
763 provides that in the case of an application being made by the
judgment‑creditor for execution. of a decree which is appealed against the
judgment-debtor shall  be made respondent. In the case of _Edward vs. de
Silva_.(7) Soertsz A.C.J. interpreted the provision to mean that the
judgment‑debtor "shall be brought before the Court or shall be given the
opportunity of coming before the Court by being served with a notice calling
upon him to show cause, if he has any cause to show, against the application
for execution" (P.345). Our Courts have repeatedly held that the purpose of
making a judgment‑debtor a party respondent to an application under section
763 is to enable him to show cause against it.  


A comparative examination of the provisions of our Civil Procedure Code on the
question of execution of decrees can leave no doubt, that the provision in
section 341 to I make the legal representative a party respondent is there to
ensure that he receives notice of the application for execution. It should be
emphasised that the

# 398  


notice under this section should call upon the legal representative to show
cause why the decree should not be executed against him-see the Privy Council
decision of Ragunath Das vs. Sundar Das Kheetri (80 decided in connection with
section 248 of the Indian Code of 1882. The notice should be to show cause
against the application for execution and not to the application for
substitution. In showing cause against the application for execution one of
the defences open to the party noticed could be that he has been wrongly
substituted as legal representative.



Now to turn to the third question. There is the highest authority for the
proposition that execution without notice where notice is expressly or
impliedly stipulated, is void for want of jurisdiction and not not merely
voidable, So Soertasz  A.C.J.held in the case of Edward vs. de Silva ( supra)
and K. D .de Silva J. in _Wimalasekera_ vs. _PraPrakrama Samudra Co-poerative
Agriciltural Production and Sales Society Ltd._ (9) with reference to section
763of the Civil Procedure Code. In Ragunath Das vs. Sundar Das Khetri(supra)
the Privy Council held that a notice under section 248 (of the Indian Code of
1882 which corresponds generally to our section 347)  is essential for the
Court to clothe itself with jurisdiction to proceed to execution against the
legal representative of a deceased judgment-debtor Our local decisions on
section 347 are to the same effect - see for instance the cases of Perera vs.
Novishamy (10), _Ferenado_ vs _. Thambiraja_ (11) and _Rodrigo_ vs.
_Weerakoon_ (12). The same principle will apply where notice is not issued of
an application for execution against the legal representative of a deceased
judgment-debtor under section 341 of the Civil Procedure Code. The issue of
execution without notice will be null and void for want of jurisdiction.

#  399





But a further question arises. Although notice in due form has not been issued
will the execution proceedings be null and void even where  the legal
representative has become otherwise aware of the application for execution?
Fernando A.J . in the case of Sirimala Veda v. Siripala(supra) observed that
the Court will not be disposed to interfere with execution proceedings on
merely technical grounds when the requirements of the statute have been
substantially fulfilled. Again in the case of Latiff vs. Seneviratne (supra)
Hearne J.(with whom Soertsz J. agreed) said upon technical grounds when the
execution has been substantially right. As Soonavala says in his treatise on
Execution Proceedings (1958) at page850:-  


"The object of the rule is, to  give the j.d. an opportunity to show cause why
the execution should not proceed, and if the j.d. is aware of the proceeding,
the Court has jurisdiction to hold the sale. Consequently if though no notice
is served, he appears and contests the application or if he was served with a
notice under rule 66 and was thus aware of the application pending against
him, the object of the rule is achieved and the proceedings are valid."





Rule 66 refers to proclamations of sales in execution by public
auction.Soonavala is here discussing Order 21 Rule 22 which provides also for
notice to the legal representative of a deceased judgment‑debtor before
execution issues but is otherwise similar to our section 347. On the Indian
Rule there is the very illuminating judgment of Rankin C.J. in the _Chandra
Nath Bagchi_ vs. _Nabawip Chandra Dutt_ (13) This was a case where the
judgment- debtor appearing on notice under Rule 66 pleaded absence of notice
under  Rule 22 although he had actively participated in the

# 400

  
proceedings for two years,  Citing another case where the facts were similar
Rankin C.J. said:



"'There was a case somewhat similar to this before the High Court of Patna,
namely the case of Fakhrul Islam v. Bhubaneswari Kuer (14). In that case
execution had proceeded and an appeal was taken to the High Court on the
ground of absence of notice under R.22 and the High Court set aside the
execution proceedings. The case went back to the executing Court and, after
further proceedings, a sale was directed. Thereupon an objection was taken
that, even so, no notice yet had been served under 0.21, R.22 and still the
sale was bad. Dealing with that kind of objection, the learned Judge Kulwant
Sahay, J., said:-



'All that 0.21, R.22 requires is that an opportunity should be given to the
judgment‑debtors against whom the execution is taken out more than a year
after the decree to show cause why execution should not proceed.'



In my judgment, that is‑ the substance and the meaning of the requirement." (
pp.477, 478). And a little later on in his judgment Rankin C. J. after
affirming the principle that there would be no jurisdiction without notice at
least in substance to the party entitled to notice, made the following
trenchant remarks :‑



"It appears to me to be merely piling unreason, upon technicality to hold upon
the circumstances of this case that it is open to the judgment‑debtors on
these grounds to object to the jurisdiction of the Court because they have not
got a formal notice to do something, namely to dispute the execution of the
decree when in point of fact they were busy disputing

# 401

  
about it in all the Courts for the best part of the last two years. I decline
to push the doctrine so far as that and it seems to me that the execution
should proceed." (p.478)

  
The same reasoning will apply to execution proceedings under section 341 of
our Civil Procedure Code. In the instant case no notice of the application for
execution was issued or served on the legal representative of the deceased
judgment‑debtor before writ was first issued on August 6, 1980. If Mrs.
Malcolm Perera and Mrs. Elizabeth Fonseka are one and the same person as they
have been held to be, then the second respondent can rightly complain that she
had no notice of the application for execution and the issue of writ was bad.
The resistance to the Fiscal offered by the second respondent cannot then be
visited with penal consequences.



I might add here that if Mrs. Elizabeth Fonseka is not the legal
representative of the deceased judgment‑debtor, then she is not a person
entitled to notice of the application for execution. The order to issue writ
of execution as against her would not then be void. As Drieberg A.J. said in
_Kannangara vs. Peries_ (15) at page 80 :‑



"Notice is required in the interests of parties against whom execution is
sought, and the absence of notice makes the execution proceedings void as
3gainst them and not pro merely voidable, but I do not think they can be
regarded as void as against persons not parties to the action _and who were_
not entitled to notice." (emphasis mine).



The second respondent received notice in connection with the proceedings taken
against her for resisting the Fiscal. At the inquiry that

#  402  


ensued she denied she was the same person as Mrs. Malcolm Perera and
challenged  the substitution and issue of writ. The question of her identity
has been resolved against her. She made full use of the opportunity given to
her to oppose the issue of writ of execution. To insist on fresh  notice of
the application for  execution being issued would be tantamount to giving the
second respondent a second bite at the same cherry.  The second order for the
reissue of writ was made after the second respondent had been afforded every
opportunity of opposing the application for execution and the substitution.
She made full us of this opportunity and on the facts has bee worsted. To put
it euphemistically she has in addition no recognisable right to be in
possession of the premises in suit.



Therefore the first order to issue writ made on 6.8.1980 was bad and I uphold
the decision b the Court of Appeal in regard to this  order. My conclusion in
regard to the second order to issue­ writ made on 6.4.1982 is that it is
unexceptionable and valid. I allow the appeal in regard to this second order
to issue writ of execution. I direct that writ of execution as ordered on
6.4.1982 by the Judge do issue‑ In order to bring the name of the respondent
into line with the findings of the District Judge and the Court of Appeal I
direct that the name of the respondent be amend to read as Mrs. Malcolm Perera
alias Mrs. Elizabeth Fonseka. In view of the fact that all these protracted
proceedings are attributable to the occasion, failure to issue notice on the
first occasion, direct that the parties bear their own costs but.., here and
in the Courts below.

_  _

**_Appeal dismissed re.order of 6.8.1980._**

**_Appeal allowed re.order of 6.4.1982._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/8.html_  

