##  Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali and Others - SLR - 262, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981]
LKSC 8; (1981) 1 Sri LR 262 (20 November 1981)

**262**

**RASHEED ALI  
v.  
 MOHAMED ALI AND OTHERS**

**SUPREME COURT  
WEERARATNE J., SHARVANANDA J.,  
AND WANASUNDERA J.,  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 6/81  
C: A. APPLICATION NO. 997/80  
D. C. COLOMBO NO. 3290/2L  
JULY 21, 1981,  
AUGUST 31,1981  
& SEPTEMBER. 1,1981.  
**  
_Civil Procedure - Execution proceedings - Constructive possession -
Resistance to Fiscal - S. 325 and 236 C.P.C. - Can revision lie from order
under s. 326 C.P.C. Article .128 of Constitution? Is the order a final order?  
_  
**Held  
**  
(1) The powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are very wide and the
Court can in a fit case exercise that power whether or not an appeal lies.
Where the law does not give a right of appeal and makes the order final, the
Court of Appeal may nevertheless exercise its powers of revision, but it
should do so only in exceptional circumstances. Ordinarily the Court will, not
interfere by way of review, particularly when the law has expressly given an
aggrieved party an alternate remedy such as the right to file a separate
action except when non-interference will cause a denial of justice or
irremediable harm.  
  
(2) The preliminary objection that the appeal is not properly constituted
because the order appealed from is an interlocutory order or judgment and
special leave to appeal should have been obtained is not entitled to succeed
because the order in question is a final order. There can be a final judgment.
in. execution. proceedings.  
  
(3) Held further (a) (Sharvananda J. dissenting) the Court of Appeal has erred
in taking the view that unless the application for: revision was entertained
the appellant would not be able to obtain a stay order until he files an
appeal; and the ultimate remedy would be rendered nugatory and that
constituted exceptional circumstances. The fact that a Judge's order is merely
wrong is not a sufficient ground for exercising the powers of revision.  
  
(b) The appellant had not complied with Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules
1978 and has suppressed from the appellate Court some essential material. The
claim to title and/or tenancy rights and/or rights of a licensee show a lack
of consistency and coherence in the appellant's case and the preliminary
objection that material facts were suppressed is entitled to succeed.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_(1) Ibrahim Saibo v. Mansoor 11953) 54 NLR 217.  
  
(2) Marikar v. Dharmapala Unnanse (1934) 36 NLR 201.  
  
(3) Arlis Appuhamy v. Simon (1947) 48 NLR 298._

**263**

_(4) Palaniappa Chetty v. Mercantile Bank of India (1942) 43 NLR 352  
  
(5) Usoof v. Nadarajah Chettiar (1957) 58 NLR 436.  
  
(6) Subramaniam Chetty v. Soysa (1923) 25 NLR 344.  
  
(7) Arnolis Fernando v. Selestina. Fernando (192214 CL Rec. 71.  
  
(8) Usoof v. The National Bank of India Ltd. (1958) 60 NLR 381, 383.  
  
(9) Zahir v. Perera (1970) 73 NLR 424.  
  
(10) Somawathie v. Cooray (1961) 64 NLR 495  
  
(11) Krishna Pershad Singh v. Motichand (1913) 40 Cal. 635.  
  
(12) Ramchand Manjimal v. Gower Dhandas AIR 1920 PC 86.  
  
(13) Salaman v. Warner (1891) 1 OB 734.  
  
(14) Bozon v. Altrincham U.D.C. (19031 1 KB 547.  
  
(15) Abdul Rahman v. Cassim & Sons AIR 1933 PC 58.  
  
**APPEAL**_ from judgment of the Court of Appeal reported at .11981 j. (2) SLR
29.  
  
_C. Thiagalingam O. C. with S. Mahenthiram_ for Petitioner-appellant  
  
_H. W. Jayewardene Q.C. with N. S. A. Goonetilleke, A. Mahendran, Lakshman
Perera. and Miss P. R. Seneviratne_ for the Plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 20, 1981.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
In this matter, the applicant (who is a person claiming in good faith to be in
possession of certain premises seized in execution proceedings) appeals
against the order of .the Court of Appeal refusing to revise an order of the
District Court in favour of the execution creditor - the plaintiff-respondent
in execution proceedings. The main action was filed by the plaintiff-
respondent Khan Mohamed Ali against his vendor one Marshall, the present
defendant respondent, for a declaration of title to and vacant possession of
the property he had purchased.  
  
Khan Mohamed Ali had :bought this property on deed 2208 of 22.2:1979 from
Marshall and the vendor had undertaken to give him vacant possession of the
premises by 30th June 1980. Failing to get vacant possession, Khan Mohamed Ali
filed this action on 18th October 1979 against: Marshall. When the case came
up for hearing, the defendant Marshall consented to judgment, and decree was
entered in favour of Khan Mohamed Ali declaring that he was entitled to the
premises and ordering the ejectment of Marshall and "all those holding under
him."  
  
On the 7th of February 1980, when the Fiscal went to execute the writ he found
two persons on the premises. The first was a gram seller in occupation of the
front portion of the premises, but we are not concerned with him in this case.
The other was the appellant Mohamed Haniffa Rasheed Ali, who stated that he
was carrying on business in the premises by virtue of an agreement with one
Sangaralingam Muttusamy, which he produced (now

**264**

marked as A4). The writ was accordingly returned unexecuted. On a later date,
the Fiscal, in accordance with the' legal position enunciated in Ibrahim Saibo
v. Mansoor, 54 N.L.R.217(1) gave constructive delivery of possession of the
premises to the judgment-creditor, without prejudice to his right to take
proceedings under section 325, Civil Procedure Code, for a complete and
effectual delivery. of possession.  
  
In the objections filed by the present appellant in the inquiry under section
325, he appears to have taken a number of different positions. He first stated
that he' had been placed in possession of the premises by S. Muttusamy who was
a tenant of Marshall. Then he went on to add that.  
  
(a) Muttusamy was collecting a sum of Rs. 1350/- per mensem from him and
paying a sum of Rs. 600/- to Marshall.  
  
(b) the appellant was in occupation of the premises with the knowledge and
acquiescence of Marshall.  
  
(c) about the end of 1978 Marshall had asked the appellant "for an increased
rental and a sum of Rs. 750/-was paid from January 1979."  
  
(d) Marshall had negotiated. with him for the sale of the premises for a sum
of Rs. 140,000/- and a sum of Rs. 40,000/- as an advance was paid by him to
Marshall on 6th February 1979.  
  
Along with the objections, an affidavit had also been filed; but it has not
been included in the papers filed by the appellant in the Court of Appeal or
before us, although produced in. the trial court as 2R5.  
  
At the inquiry appellant's counsel, in justifying the resistance and
obstruction by his. client to the execution of the writ to possession,
explained and clarified what was stated in the statement of objections.
Counsel .had stated that the appellant "remains there on his own rights or
that he is there as the tenant of the seller_ Marshall." The appellant, when
he gave evidence, further amplified his position by not only suggesting that
he had a direct relationship with Marshall, but went further arid produced a
certificate of registration under the Business Names Registration Ordinance
(2R1), showing that he has been carrying on a business under the name "New.
Wappa House" in these premises from as early as 23rd July 1975. He also stated
that Marshall had wanted to sell these premises to the appellant for Rs.
140,000/-

**265**

and, the appellant had agreed to buy them and had actually paid Marshall an
advance of Rs. 40,000/-. When the appellant heard that Marshall had sold this
property to the judgment-creditor behind his back, the appellant had
complained to the Police and had gone to the extent of seeing that criminal
proceedings were filed in the Magistrate's Court against Marshall. He produced
a copy of the plaint 2R3. In the same context, the appellant also referred to
the agreement he had with Muttusamy by which Muttusamy had handed over to the
appellant the management of the business called "Dawalagiri Hotel" carried on
by Muttusamy in these premises. This evidence was clearly contradictory in
nature.  
  
The learned trial Judge had disbelieved the appellant and rejected his claim.
He held that the evidence did not show that the appellant was either a tenant
of Marshall or of Muttusamy, under whom the appellant had merely a management
agreement in respect of an eating house called Hotel Dawalagiri. Accordingly,
in terms of the provisions of section. 326, the learned District Judge held
that the resistance and obstruction on the part of the appellant was frivolous
and vexatious and directed that the judgment-creditor be placed in possession
of the premises.  
  
Now an order made under section 326 against any party other than the judgment-
debtor is not appeasable. But,: any aggrieved party has been given the right
to institute an action to establish his right of title to such property (vide
section 329). The appellant however came directly to the Court of Appeal and
applied to have that order revised: A preliminary objection, whether or not an
application for revision would lie from an order under section 326 of the
Civil Procedure Code, was one of the matters debated before the Court of
Appeal and also before us.  
  
It may be convenient to dispose of this matter at the outset. The Court of
Appeal, after an examination of numerous authorities, has rightly taken the
view that the powers of revision vested in the Court of Appeal are very wide
and the Court can in a fit case exercise that power whether or not an appeal
lies. When, however, the law does not give a right of appeal and makes the
order final, the Court of Appeal may nevertheless exercise its powers of
revision, but it should do so only in exceptional circumstances. Ordinarily
the Court will not interfere by way of review, particularly when the law has
expressly given an. aggrieved party an alternate remedy such as the right to
file a separate action, except when non-interference will cause a denial of
justice or irremediable harm.

**266**

The Court of Appeal has however erred in the application of these principles
to the facts of this case. The Court was of the view that, unless this
application for revision was entertained, the appellant would not be able to
obtain a stay order until he files an appeal; and if a stay order was not
granted at this stage, the ultimate decision in the case would be rendered
nugatory. The Court was of the opinion that this constituted exceptional
circumstances: This reasoning is not tenable for more than one reason and the
fact that Court by an oversight had forgotten that there is no right of appeal
in this case is alone sufficient to invalidate its decision. It would be
sufficient in the present context also to state that the fact that a judge's
order may be merely wrong should not be a sufficient ground for the exercise
of the powers of revision in a case such as this and, as far as I could see,
the appellant could. not have placed his case any higher. In an application
for revision of this nature, the threshold is much higher than that required
from an appellant exercising a mere right of appeal. When the facts are
examined, it will be seen that this was .not such a case and the Court of
Appeal should not have properly exercised its powers of revision in this
matter.  
  
Another matter taken up before the Court of Appeal on behalf of the judgment-
creditor was a preliminary objection that the appellant had not complied with
Rule 48 of the Supreme Court Rules 1978 and has suppressed from the appellate
court some essential material. This rule which is applicable to the appellate
procedure before the Court of Appeal requires the appellant to place before
Court, along with his petition, all "documents material to the case." This
objection had been taken when this revision application first came up in the
Court of Appeal before a bench presided by Wimalaratne, J. After this bench
heard arguments and had reserved its order, Wimalaratne, J., was elevated to
the Supreme Court and the case was then argued de novo before another bench
consisting of Soza, J., and L. H. de Alwis, J. Counsel or the respondents said
that the non-production of this material was not a mere omission but a studied
suppression of relevant material The respondent alleges that the- Business
Registration Certificate which was always available to the appellant for
production was kept away from the Court of Appeal when the first bench heard
the case, but at a later stage the appellant sought to produce it after that
Court had made some adverse comments regarding its non-production. When the
case was re-argued, this same document was again withheld presumably because
the first bench had given an indication that this document went against the
case of the appellant. The same was said of the Magistrate's Court proceedings
which have not been produced.

**267**

The appellant; on the other hand, has stated that he had to file the revision
papers with the utmost urgency with whatever material that was available since
he ran a real risk of being evicted from the premises if there had been the
slightest delay on his part. It is understandable that in such circumstances a
party may well find it difficult or impossible to furnish a complete brief
with all the . material documents at such short notice. The Court of Appeal
has, therefore, taken a practical view of the matter and was prepared to
excuse the initial lapse on the part of the appellant in not filing the
relevant documents along with his petition.  
  
But the complaint against the appellant does not rest there. The Court of
Appeal upheld the preliminary objection, because it took the view that the
provisions of regulation 46 have a mandatory effect and any omission must be
made good even at a late stage. As the Court. of Appeal pointed out, there are
provisions in the Rules enabling an amendment of the petition and for the
tendering of additional material with the permission of court. This the
appellant has failed to do. Referring to this, the Court of Appeal said-  
  
".... yet this does not absolve the petitioner from complying with Rule 46 as
soon as it was possible for him to do so by moving for amendment of the
petition or tender of additional documents. Instead as late as 19.11.1980 he
tendered one document - a copy of a complaint to the Police (2133) - without
verification and without obtaining the permission of Court and after the pinch
of the argument was ascertained at. the earlier hearing concluded on
1.10.1980. The documents -- a certificated copy of the Magistrate's Court case
No. JMC 34213 relating to the payment of Rs. 40,000/- by the petitioner to the
first respondent and the Certificate of Business Registration of the
petitioner - remain yet to be presented. For these reasons the preliminary
objection is entitled to succeed."  
  
As an excuse for the appellant not complying with Rule 46 even at a late
stage, it has been submitted that before he could furnish these documents the
respondent had come into the Court of Appeal even before the notice returnable
date, and filed those documents. The appellant therefore considered it
unnecessary to duplicate that material. Let me examine' this excuse a little
more closely. While I am against mere technicalities standing in the way of
this Court doing justice, it must be admitted that there are rules and rules.
Sometimes courts are expressly vested with powers to mitigate hardships, but
more often we are called upon to decide which rules are merely directory and
which mandatory carrying

**268**

certain adverse consequences for non-compliance. Many procedural rules have
been enacted in the interest of the due administration of justice,
irrespective of whether or not a non-compliance causes prejudice to the
opposite party. It is in this context that Judges have stressed the mandatory
nature of some rules and the need to keep the channels of procedure open for
justice to flow freely and smoothly. The position of course would be worse if
such non-compliance also causes prejudice to the opposite party.  
  
If we are to accede to the appellant's plea that he should be excused from
complying with the rule, because the respondent has filed some of these
documents, we would be virtually investing an appellant with a discretion
whether or not to comply with the rule, because the required material has
already been filed by the opposite party or it is anticipated that they would
be filed by that party. Such I think is not the law. The material filed by a
respondent is in, support of his own case and is in no way intended to
supplement the appellant's case or to make good any omissions on the part of
the appellant. I am having in mind here not mere formal documents, but
material that have a direct bearing on the issues in a case.  
  
Even assuming that the appellant's excuse is acceptable, it would still cover
only those documents which have been produced by the respondent. Mr.
Jayewardene pointed out that there are yet other documents which are material
to the case and are not before the Court. These are the two documents referred
to in judgment of the Court of Appeal. It may be mentioned that an attempt was
made at the last moment when the matter was before us to have these documents
filed in this Court. This has not been allowed.  
  
Mr. Thiagalingam then submitted that he was prepared to argue his case without
reference to these documents and stated that the point he is raising before us
is a legal one and can be decided with reference only to two documents, namely
A4 and A11,which are now before us. Even in this connection it may be observed
that document A4, which now appears to be the foundation of the appellant's
argument, was not a document filed by him but is one of .the documents
tendered by the respondent to the Court of Appeal. In fact, even at the
inquiry before the learned District Judge, this document had been produced by
the respondent to meet the appellant's claim to legal title in his own right
or a tenancy right. The question then is, whether or- not this issue raised by
Mr. Thiagalingam an be decided in isolation without regard to the totality of
the. evidence in the case, particularly those

**269**

documents not produced by the appellant. A consideration of the evidence is
thus necessary and incidentally in this inquiry one has to traverse the same
ground as is necessary for a decision on the merits.  
  
The document All shows that on 31st October 1975, Muttusamy handed over "the
management of the said Hotel business" (namely, Dawalagiri Hotel) of which he
claimed to be the owner, to the appellant for a 3 year period commencing on
1st November 1975.. The provisions of the agreement relate to matters of pure
management - the payment of salaries and wages of the employees, the payment
of electricity. bills and water tax, which obligations, were undertaken by the
appellant. There is no indication, express or implied, showing that these
premises were sublet to the appellant although he occupied the premises for
management purposes. The agreement also does not speak of a payment of rent.
As consideration, the appellant had 'deposited a sum of Rs. 12,250/- as.
security on the execution of the agreement and agreed to pay Muttusamy Rs.
45/- daily as commission.  
  
By agreement A4, the management agreement was extended for a further- period
of 3 years, commencing on 1st November 1978, on the same terms as the earlier
agreement. Mr. Thiagalingam has submitted that irrespective of any other
considerations, these two agreements are` sufficient to establish a legal
interest in the appellant to enable the appellant to prefer a- bona fide claim
to continue in possession and to resist the judgment-creditor, and that such a
claim by the appellant cannot be regarded as being frivolous or vexatious.  
  
There may have been some substance in Mr. Thiagalingam's submission if that
was his client's case from the outset, and it was a straightforward account
without ramifications and other factors bearing on it. Unfortunately, the
matter is complicated by a number of other features and it has become
necessary to consider the validity of the appellant's claim in a wider context
than suggested by Mr. Thiagalingam The courts below have thought it fit to
consider certain other documents in: addition to the two relied on by Mr.
Thiagalingam for the resolution of this issue and they are embodied in the two
judgments of the courts below. All those matters are before us in this appeal
and the relevancy of-those documents to this matter will become evident when
the facts are carefully examined.  
  
At the time the respondent Khan Mohamed Ali filed action against Marshall,
claiming vacant possession of these premises,

**270**

Muttusamy who was alleged to be Marshall's tenant had been dead. He had died
on 1st March 1979 and his business on these premises was being conducted
ostensibly not by any of his heirs but by the appellant. Up to now his heirs
have neither come forward to make a claim to the tenancy nor shown any right
or interest in these premises. Muttusamy was thus not made a party to the
action. Further, the Certificate of Registration of Business Names produced.
in. the trial court (but not produced before the Court of Appeal or before us)
appears to be in line with the appellant's claim for an independent title and
has therefore the effect of destroying the case the appellant has now sought
to put forward, based on documents A4 and Al 1.This certificate shows that the
appellant has registered himself in his own right as the owner of a business
called "New Wappa Eating House" at these premises and that this business had
been going on since 23rd July 1975. It will be observed that the agreements A4
and All are in respect of. Dawalagiri Hotel and not '.'New Wappa Eating
House." Further, the management agreements commence 'from 31st October 1975,
which is subsequent to the date given in' the certificate. All in all, the
certificate cuts across the foundation of the appellant's Claim to be a tenant
of Muttusamy. The effect of this evidence is to se 0ver the appellant from any
connection with the person or persons lawfully entitled to own or occupy these
premises and to isolate him and place him in an independent position .
disabling him from making any valid and bona fide claim. to remain in
possession. It is therefore not surprising that the lower courts have rejected
the appellant's claim.  
  
At the inquiry before the District Judge, the appellant placed in the
forefront of his case his claim that he was in the premises in his own right.
The other position he took up that he was a tenant, was a subsidiary one. This
Certificate of Registration of the Business therefore is a vital document
without which this case cannot be properly decided and it is inconceivable
that any court would make a pronouncement on the issues that arose in this
case by shutting its eyes to all this material. I am therefore unable to say
that the Court of Appeal erred when it upheld the preliminary objection. Both
the trial Judge and the Court of Appeal had also considered the facts with
great care and I am again unable to say that their decision on the merits is
erroneous. We have therefore the concurrent findings of fact of two courts
rejecting the claim put forward by the appellant.  
  
The lack of consistency and coherence in the appellant's case, as revealed by
the contradictory nature of the material adduced by him; appeals to be
explicable in terms of a submission Mr. Jayewardene made to us. He submitted
that it is generally

**271**

known that tenants are subletting their houses in defiance of: the Rent Laws,
.by. adopting various ruses and devices. The so-called management -agreement
is one such favorite device whereby a tenant seeks to .give to a third party
exclusive occupation or possession of premises intended for his own
occupation. Apart from the conflicting material produced by the appellant
himself, the strange silence and absence of any interest in this matter on the
part of Muttusamy's heirs lends further credence to this view.  
  
In view of the fact that the preliminary objections are entitled to prevail, I
do not think that we are now called upon to make a pronouncement and to define
our position as regards such sham transactions. Suffice it is to say that the
appellant's claim to be a licensee appears to be an afterthought put forward
for the first time in the last stages of these :proceedings. All the
circumstances and the conduct of the parties negative any intention to create
such a licence. In reality, Muttusamy and the appellant had agreed to create a
sub-tenancy in favour of the appellant and the transaction has been disguised
so as to appear as a simple management agreement. The appellant has only
himself to blame for his present predicament. If a person enters into a sham
transaction, it ought  
  
\- not to surprise him if he were to find himself in a precarious position
where he can neither achieve the desired result nor fall back on the purported
transaction: There is nothing in the appellant's case to help himself out of
this situation. Even if his claim to be a - licensee were to be considered, I
do not think any court, having regard to the circumstances of this case, would
be prepared to concede to him any proprietary right or interest (even of an
equitable nature) which is enforceable and valid against third parties. In the
result, I am of the view that the Court of Appeal and the trial Judge were
right in their conclusions in rejecting the claim put forward by the
appellant.  
  
I finally come to the preliminary objection taken by l r. Jayewardene, namely
that the present appeal is not properly constituted. He submitted that what is
involved in this case is an interlocutory order or judgment and the appellant
should therefore have obtained the Special Leave of this Court under Article
128(2) of the Constitution. Instead, the appellant has got the leave of the
Court of Appeal in terms of Article 128(1), but this Mr. Jayewardene submits
is of no- avail. The question is whether the judgment appealed from is a final
judgment or an interlocutory judgment. The reported cases brought to our
notice by counsel on both sides do not deal with the interpretation of the
present constitutional provisions. They are nevertheless sufficiently close so
as to be of some help to us. Mr. Thiagalingam relied on the distinction some

**272**

of these cases. drew between on the one hand proceedings between the parties
to the original action and on the other hand proceedings where third parties
come in at the stage of execution proceedings. _Vide Marikar v. Dharmapala
Unnanse,_ 36 N. L. R. 201(2); _Arlis Appuhamy v. Siman_ , 48 N.L.R.298(3);
_Palaniappa Chetty v. Mercantile Bank of India_ , 43 N.L.R. 352(4); _Usoof v.
Nadarajah Chettiar,_ 58 N.L.R. 436(5). _In Subramaniam Chetty v. Soysa,_ 25
N.L.R. 344(6) Bertram, C: J., appears to have come round to this view,
although he had expressed a different view in an earlier case -- _Arnolis
Fernando v. Selestina Fernando_ , (1922) 4 C. L. Rec. 71(7), These decisions
held that it was not the intention of the Legislature to deny a right of
appeal to persons who were not parties to the original action and whose rights
are affected by final orders made in proceedings arising out of the original
action. A slightly broader view of what constitutes finality appears to be
taken  in Woof v. The National Bank of India Ltd., 60 N. L. R. 381(8) and in
some Indian decisions. I think that the distinction which Mr. Thiagalingam
sought to draw is a valid. one and sufficient for the purposes of the present
case. I am therefore of the view that this appeal is correctly before us and
the preliminary objection taken by Mr. Jayewardene fails.  
  
For the above reasons I would uphold the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
dismiss this appeal with costs payable to the plaintiff-respondent.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J. - I** agree

**273**

**SHARVANANDA, J.**  
  
The plaintiff-respondent instituted this action on 18.10.79 against the
defendant-respondent for a declaration of title in respect of premises bearing
assessment No. 19, Galle Road, Bambalapitiya, for ejectment of the defendant
and for damages. The. premises are admittedly business premises. In his plaint
he stated that by deed of transfer No. 2208 dated 22nd February 1979, the
defendant sold and conveyed the said premises to him, and by writing dated the
same day, the defendant undertook to give vacant possession of the said
premises to the plaintiff on or before the 30th day of June 1979. The
defendant by his answer dated 19th December 1979 admitted the sale and his
undertaking to give vacant possession of .the said premises to the plaintiff
but stated that handing over of possession by him was impossible. A consent
decree was entered on 19.12.79 declaring the plaintiff entitled to the said
premises and ordering the defendant and all those holding under him to be
ejected from the said premises. The claim for costs and damages was withdrawn
by the plaintiff. Writ of possession was taken out and when the Fiscal went to
execute the writ on 7.2.80, the petitioner-appellant resisted the execution of
the writ and refused to vacate the premises. The Fiscal in his report states:
"There was one Mohamed Haniffa Rasheed Ali (petitioner-appellant) who said he
is carrying on business in the premises on an agreement entered into between
him and one Sangaralingam 'Muttusamy: He produced agreement No. 182 (A4) dated
27.8.78 attested by U.L.M. Farook, N.P., and duly registered in the Land
Registry. I requested him to vacate the premises, but he refused to do so. He
said the premises had been obtained by S. Muttusamy from the defendant in this
case." The Fiscal further states: in his report that on that occasion the
plaintiff, the judgment-creditor, made the following statement to him: "I
bought these premises from the defendant L. W. R. P. Marshall. At the time of
purchase I was aware that the present occupants did not have any connection
with the defendant or these premises." I n the circumstances, on 4.3.80 the
Fiscal was able to deliver only constructive possession of the premises to the
plaintiff. The plaintiff-respondent thereafter by his petition dated 5.3.80
instituted proceedings under section 325 of the Civil Procedure Code pleading
that the claim of the petitioner-appellant to be in possession of the premises
'vas frivolous or vexatious. The petitioner-appellant thereafter filed
statement of objections dated 19.3.80 justifying his possession of the
premises, inter-alia, on the following grounds:  
  
(a) The premises in suit is governed by the provisions of the Rent Act.

**274**

(b) One S. Muttusamy was the tenant of the premises.  
  
(c) He has been placed in possession of the premises by S. Muttusamy.  
  
(d) The said S. Muttusamy was collecting a sum of Rs. 1,300/per mensem from
him and paying a sum of Rs. 600/- to Marshall, the judgment-debtor.  
  
(e) He was in occupation of the premises with the knowledge and acquiescence
of the said Marshall.  
  
(f) In or about the end of 1978; Marshall had asked him for an increased
rental and a sum of Rs. 750/- was paid by him direct to Marshall for the month
of January 1979.  
  
(g) Marshall also negotiated with him for the sale of the premises in suit and
agreed to sell the premises for Rs. 140,000/-, and a sum of Rs. 40,000/- was
paid as an advance on 6.2.79.  
  
He further stated: (a) that he had tendered the February rent to Marshall, but
the latter had refused to accept same, (b) that a sum of Rs. 12,250/- was
deposited with S. Muttusamy on account of his articles being placed in his
possession, and (c) that the plaintiff who was carrying on business in the
adjoining premises was well aware of his possession and occupation of the
premises in suit.  
  
At the inquiry into the plaintiff's application, Counsel for the petitioner-
appellant stated that the premises in suit was governed by the Rent Act and
that the appellant was not bound by the judgment' entered into between the
plaintiff and the defendant Marshall and that the appellant remained in the
premises on his own rights, or that he was there as a tenant of the defendant
Marshall. The appellant gave evidence and stated that his business of New
Wappa Hotel, whose registration certificate has been marked 2R1, was started
on 23rd July 1975 and that he obtained. these premises from Muttusamy in
pursuance of the first agreement No. 122 (A11A) dated 31st October 1975 and
attested by U. L. M. Farook, N.P., for three years, and the second agreement
No. 182 (A4) dated 27th July 1978 for a further period of three years, and
that in January 1979, he paid Marshall Rs. 750/- as rent for the premises. By
his order dated 1st August 1980, the learned District Judge rejected the
petitioner's objections and held that the claim of the petitioner to be in
possession of the premises was frivolous or vexatious. He disbelieved the
evidence of the petitioner-appellant that he had paid the rent direct to
Marshall in January 1979 and become the defendant's tenant. With reference to
the petitioner-appellant's claim to be in occupation of

**275**

the premises on the strength of the notarial agreements A11A and - A4, the
District Judge stated that since Muttusamy was dead and' since the heirs of
Muttusamy were not claiming the tenancy on the death of Muttusamy, "it is not
proved that the appellant is a tenant or a sub-tenant."  
  
As soon as the District Judge gave his order holding against the petitioner-
appellant, the petitioner-appellant by his petition of the same date moved the
Court of Appear by way of revision to set aside the said order of 1.8.80. The
application was supported that date itself and the Court directed issue of
notice returnable on 15.8.80 and ordered the stay of execution proceedings
pending the hearing of the application. The plaintiff-respondent did not wait
till the notice returnable date, but filed his objections with the necessary
documents on 7th August 1980. The revision application was ultimately heard by
the Court of Appeal on 8th and 9th December 1980. By its judgment dated 30th
January 1981, that Court affirmed the order of the District Judge and
dismissed the revision application with costs.  
  
At the hearing of the revision application by the Court of Appeal, Counsel for
the plaintiff.-respondent had taken a preliminary objection that a revision
application did not lie and that in any event the petitioner's application
should be rejected on the ground that the petitioner had not complied with the
provisions of . Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978 published in the
Government Gazette of 8.11.78. He referred to section 329 of the Civil
Procedure Code, which reads:  
  
"No appeal shall lie from any order made under sections 326 and 327 against
any party other than the judgment-debtor. Any such order shall not bar the
right of such party to institute an action to establish his right or title to
such property"  
  
and submitted that the legislature, by making the order unappeasable,
intended- the order to be final, and since the order of the District Judge
1.8.80 did not bar .the right of the petitioner appellant to institute an
action to establish his right to possession of the premises in suit, he was
not without any remedy. He further objected that there were no exceptional
circumstances in this case to justify the exercise of its reversionary powers
by the Court of Appeal. In support of his objection he referred to the case of
Zahir v. Perera (73 N.L.R. 424)(9). The Court of Appeal rejected the,
objection. It held that there were exceptional circumstances present in this
case calling for the intervention of the Court byway of revision in the
interests of justice. It reasoned: "If the order of the District Judge was to
stand, on the basis of that order the petitioner-appellant would be ejected
and he will be out

**276**

of possession of his business premises, thereby suffering irreparable injury,
and if the ultimate decision in the action instituted by- him goes in his
favour; it would torn out to be. nugatory." I agree that, in the circumstances
of the case, the. petitioner was entitled to invoke the Court of Appeal to
exercise its revisionary power. (Somawathie v. Cooray - 64 N.L.R. 495(10) and
that if that Court was satisfied that the order of the District Judge could
not be justified, it was bound to revise the order, as there would result, if
the order was allowed to operate, grave miscarriage of justice.  
  
The Court of Appeal, however, upheld the other objection of the respondent
that the application should fail for non-compliance with Rule 46 of the
Supreme Court Rules, 1978. Rule 46 reads as follows:  
  
"Every application made to the Court of Appeal for the exercise of the powers
vested in the Court of Appeal by Articles 140 and 141 of the Constitution
shall be by way of petition and affidavit in support of the averments set out
in the petition and shall be accompanied by originals of documents material to
the case or duly certified copies thereof in the form of exhibits.  
  
In this connexion , reference was made to the judgment of the Court of Appeal
in Navaratnasingham v Arumugam and another [ 19801 2 Sri L. R. p.1) where non-
compliance with the provisions of Rule 46 was held to be fatal. Soza J., in
the present judgment, correctly modified his earlier view expressed in the
aforesaid case that the provisions of Rule 46 were imperative, and added that
"what I said in the judgment should be read subject to the principle that the
law does not expect a person to do what is impossible and that there may be
occasions when matters of grave urgency arise where a party has to seek the
revisionary powers of this Court buts left with no time to obtain the
documents as required by Rule 46. On such an occasion, the Court, no doubt;
will take a reasonable view of the matter and extend such indulgence as is
necessary . to enable the petitioner to comply with the requirements
subsequent to the filing of the petition". I agree with this observation of
Soza J. I n the present case however, Soza J. held that if circumstances
beyond his control prevented the petitioner from complying with Rule 46 at the
moment of filing the application, he should yet have complied with ,it as soon
as possible. He referred to Rules 50; 51 and 54 and said that there was
provision in the Rules for amendment to the petition or tender of additional
papers with the permission of the Court to which a petitioner could resort so
as to comply with Rule 46. In the instant case;

**277**

the petitioner did not file along with his petition the "originals of
documents material to the case, or duly certified copies thereof in the form
of exhibits," nor even later. In view of his reasonable apprehension that the
order of the District Judge dated 1.8.80 would be carried out without delay
and that he would be ejected and his application rendered nugatory by the
delay involved in getting the certified copies of documents filed in the
District Court in connexion with the inquiry, the Court of Appeal accepted
that the urgency of the situation excused his filing the application for
revision without the exhibits referred to in Rule 46\. However, it could not
condone the petitioner's failure to file those exhibits later, after the
petitioner had obtained a stay of execution from the Court. The excuse given
by the petitioner was that, since the plaintiff-respondent had without waiting
for the notice returnable date rushed to Court on 7th August 1980 and filed
his objections with the certified copies of documents material to the case, no
useful purpose was served by duplicating the papers. In this connection the
Court of Appeal observed: "It is true the plaintiff-respondent filed a
statement annexing a number of documents so as to present an adequate picture
of the dispute between the parties. Yet, this does not absolve the petitioner
from complying with Rule 46 as soon as it was possible for him to do so." In
my view, a party should ordinarily comply with the requirements of Rule 46,
and if he fails to do so, his petition is liable to be rejected, unless he had
good reason for such non-compliance. It is a matter falling within the
discretion of the Court whether, in the circumstances, the petitioner should
be excused or not for such non-compliance. In the instant case, I am satisfied
that the plaintiff-respondent, by furnishing to Court on 7.8.80 all the
necessary exhibits, relieved the petitioner of the requirement to file the
material documents. The Court was in possession of the necessary material and
hence it was not obligatory on the part of the petitioner to duplicate the
exhibits. If the originals or certified copies of documents material to the
case have been filed of record by any party, whether petitioner or respondent,
and are available to Court for a proper appreciation of the issue. involved in
the application, the purpose of the requirement of the petitioner filing those
documents is satisfied. A procedural requirement should be construed
literally. In my view the Court of Appeal has, in the circumstances, erred in
upholding this preliminary objection. Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent
further pointed out that in any event two documents, viz. certificate of
registration and copy of complaint to the Police in M. C. Colombo case No.
34213 marked 2131 and 2133, respectively, in the inquiry proceedings, had not
been furnished to Court in time. But, in view of the fact that these documents
though marked in

**278**

the lower court were not material to the decision in the case, in the sense
that they were not relevant to the contention pressed in support of the
petitioner's case and have no bearing on the question in issue before the
Court, this failure to file those documents. does not justify rejection of the
application. The Rules are designed to facilitate justice and further its
ends; they are not designed to trip the petitioner for justice. Too technical
a construction of the Rules should be guarded against. Counsel for the
petitioner was content to confine his argument before that Court to the
documents Al 1A and A4. The documents 2R1 and 2R3 were not relevant for the
arguments centering round the documents A11A and A4 and reference to them was
not necessary.  
  
By its order dated 30.1.81, the Court of Appeal affirmed the order of the
District Judge and dismissed the 'application with costs. On the date the
judgment was delivered, Counsel for the petitioner-appellant orally applied to
that Court for leave to appeal to this Court. Counsel for the plaintiff-
respondent stated that he had no objection, and the Court granted leave to
appeal. The present appeal has thus come to this Court with the leave of the
Court of Appeal.  
  
At the commencement of the hearing of the appeal, senior Counsel' for the
plaintiff-respondent raised a preliminary objection to the appeal. He
submitted that the order of the Court of Appeal appealed from is an
interlocutory order and that the Court of Appeal had no jurisdiction to grant
leave to appeal to the Supreme court from such an order. He contended that the
petitioner-appellant should have sought and obtained the special leave of this
Court to appeal, and that since this appeal had not come through that channel,
the appeal should be rejected.  
  
Under the provisions of Article 128 of the Constitution, an appeal lies to the
Supreme Court from any final order or judgment of the Court of Appeal, either
with the leave of the Court of Appeal or of the Supreme Court; and from an in
order/judgment of the Court of Appeal, only on special leave being granted by
this Court. Thus, the appellate jurisdiction of this Court can be invoked by a
party to question an interlocutory order or judgment of the Court of Appeal
only with the special leave of this Court. The Court of Appeal has no
jurisdiction to- grant leave to appeal from an interlocutory order or
judgment.  
  
The foundation of Counsel's objection is the assumption that the order
appealed from is an interlocutory order or judgment and

**279**

not a final order or judgment. The main burden of his argument was that all
steps taken after the final determination of the action by judgment between
the parties and all orders made thereon are interlocutory in their nature. He
submitted that there cannot be two judgments in an action, that the judgment
entered in the present case in favour of the plaintiff against the defendant
was the only final judgment in the action, and that the orders made thereafter
in the course of execution proceedings were interlocutory orders, even though
made against a person who was not a party to the judgment. In support of his
submission, he referred us to the case of _Palaniappa Chetty v. Mercantile
Bank of India Ltd_.(43 N. L. R. 352) (4). I n that case, which was an action
on a mortgage bond, after the mortgage decree had been affirmed in appeal, the
parties entered into an agreement with regard to the execution of the mortgage
decree. Thereafter, application for execution of the mortgage decree was made
in the District Court, and allowed. On appeal, the order allowing execution
was affirmed. The appellant thereupon applied for conditional leave to appeal
to the Privy Council from the order allowing execution. It was held that the
order allowing execution was not a final judgment or order within the meaning
of Rule 1(a) of the Rules in the Schedule to the Appeals (Privy Council)
Ordinance. In that case, admittedly, the rights of the parties to the action
had been finally determined by the mortgage decree; the order allowing
execution by the decree-holder against the judgment-debtor related only to the
manner of execution of the decree and hence was rightly held to be an
interlocutory order as it did not decide the rights of the parties. The case
of Subramaniam v. Soysa (25 N. L. R. 344) (6) was distinguished. In the latter
case, the Supreme Court, at the instance of the execution-creditor, set aside
the sale of the judgment-debtor's property on the ground of material
irregularities in the conduct of the sale. The purchaser, who was a third
party, applied for conditional leave to appeal to the Privy Council. It was
held that the order setting aside the sale was a final judgment within the
meaning of Rule1 (a) in Schedule I of the Privy Council Ordinance, on the
ground that the order setting aside the sale finally disposed of the case
between the parties to the proceedings, that is to say, the purchaser and the
execution creditor.  
  
In the case of Usoof v. Nadarajah Chettiar (58 N.L.R. 436) (5), it was held
that a judgment of the Supreme Court dismissing an appeal from an order of a
District Court refusing to set aside the sale of a property belonging to the
defendants in execution of a decree entered against them was a final judgment
within the meaning of Rule 1(a) of the Rules in the Schedule to the Appeals
(Privy Council) Ordinance.

**280**

Again, in Usoof v. National Bank of India Ltd. (60 N.L.R. 581) (8) it was held
that a judgment of the Supreme Court dismissing an appeal from an order of the
District Court refusing to set aside the sale of a property in execution of a
mortgage decree is a "final judgment" within the meaning of the aforesaid Rule
1(a), although the property sold in execution was purchased by the judgment-
creditor himself and not by a third party. The fact that the property that was
sold in execution of the decree was purchased by the judgment-creditor himself
and not by a third party was held to make no difference to the nature of the
order on the sale.  
  
In Krishna Pershad Singh v. Motichand ((1913) 40 Cal. 635) (11) which was
followed in Subramaniam v. Soysa (25 N.L.R. 344) (supra) Lord Moulton,
delivering the judgment of the Privy Council, held that the order of the High
Court refusing to set aside the sale where the property sold in execution of
the decree was purchased by the judgment-creditor was a final order which
dealt finally with the rights of the parties and that an appeal to the Privy
Council lay to the judgment-debtor.  
  
In Ramchand Manjimal v. Gower Dhandas (A. I. R. (1920) P. C. 86)(12) Viscount
Cave observed: "The question as-to what is a final order was considered by the
Court of Appeal in the case of Salaman v. Warner ((1891) 1 Q. 8. 734) (13) and
that decision was followed by the same Court in the case of Bozon v.
Altrincham U.D.C. ((1903) 1 K. B. 547) (14) . The effect of those and other
judgments is that an order is final if it finally disposes of the rights of
the parties." I n Abdul Rahman v. Cassim & Sons (A. I. R. (1933) P. C. 58)(15)
the Privy Council stated that "the finality must be a finality in relation to
the suit. If after the order the suit is still alive, a live suit in which the
rights of the parties have still to be determined, no appeal lies against it
to the Privy Council as it was not a final judgment or order. Of these Privy
Council decisions, the decision in Krishna Pershad Singh v. Motichand related
to execution proceedings. Referring to this decision, Sansoni J. in Usoof v.
National Bank of India Ltd. (60 N.L.R. 381 at 383(8) stated that he regarded
that decision as authority for the view that there can be a final order or
judgment even in execution proceedings between the parties to the action.
Rejecting the objection that the order refusing the judgment-debtor's
application to set aside the sale of property in execution of a mortgage
decree is not a final judgment, he relevantly observed: "It seems to me to
dispose of the argument that when the mortgage decree was entered in this
action, it had been finally determined and that there could be no further
final judgment as

**281**

between the parties. While it is true that a ,judgment is not final unless it
finally disposes' of the rights of the parties, I do not see why there cannot
;be' a final judgment in execution proceedings whether those proceedings are
between the parties to the action or not; and, so far as the judgment-debtors
in this case are concerned, they have, by the judgment of this Court, finally
lost their rights in the mortgaged property; and execution proceedings are no
longer live proceedings". I respectfully agree with this statement.  
  
In the case of Marikar v. Dharmapala Unnanse (36 N. L. R: 201) (2) Garvin J.
held that where a stranger to a decree claimed possession of the premises in
respect of which a writ of possession was issued in his own right and on the
ground that the resistance offered by him was not at the instigation of the
judgment-debtor but in assertion of his own rights; an order rejecting his
plea and committing him to prison under section 326 of the old Civil Procedure
Code determined the proceedings in which the order was made and that such
order was a final order. He stated that after the decree in a Court of
Requests action, there may be execution proceedings in which judgments having
the effect of final judgments may be passed. Dias J. in Arlis Appuhamy v.
Simon (48 N. L. R. 298) (3) followed the principle laid down in this case.  
  
The judgment or order appealed against has determined the appellant's right to
possess the' premises in suit. True, the order will- not, by virtue of section
329 of the Civil Procedure Code, operate as res judicata in any action that
maybe instituted by him to establish his right, but, as far as this action is
concerned; he is bound by the order which has decreed him to be ejected, and
the plaintiff-respondent to be in possession. I n relation to the present
action; the order has finally disposed of the appellant's right to possess the
premises in suit and the execution proceedings have ceased to be live
proceedings. For, the above reasons, I am of the view that the judgment or
order in question is not an interlocutory order but is a final judgment or
order within. the meaning of those expressions in Article 128 of the
Constitution and that it was competent for the Court of Appeal to have granted
leave to appeal from the impugned order. The preliminary objection cannot, in
the circumstances, be sustained and is accordingly overruled.  
  
In view of the above conclusion as to the nature or quality of the judgment or
order appealed against, it is not necessary to examine the. submission of
Counsel for the appellant that it does not lie in the mouth of the respondent
to question the validity of the leave granted by the Court of Appeal, after
his. Counsel had stated to that Court that he had no objection to the
appellant's

**282**

application for grant of leave by that Court, and the counter submission of
Counsel for the respondent that his consent did not preclude him from
asserting want of jurisdiction in the Court of Appeal to grant the leave:  
  
The facts of the case, so far as relevant to the question involved in the
appeal, are very simple and lie within a very small compass and have not been
controverter by the plaintiff-respondent who, by the fact of his doing
business in the premises adjoining the premises in suit, was in a position to
testify that the petitioner appellant was not in occupation of the premises in
suit from 1975 on his own account running a hotel business on an agreement
with Muttusamy, the tenant of the premises, as deposed to by him in evidence,
if that was so.  
  
Objecting to the plaintiff-respondent's section 325 application complaining.
of the petitioner's resistance, the petitioner-appellant claimed to be in
possession of premises No.19, Gape Road, Bambalapitiya, on his own account. He
based his' claim on two grounds:  
  
(1) that he had been placed in possession of the premises by Muttusamy. He
produced notarial agreement No. 182 dated 27th August 1978 to substantiate
such claim; and  
  
(2) that he had become the tenant of the premises by paying the rental for
January 1979 to the defendant-respondent, the vendor of the premises.  
  
His evidence that in January 1979 he had become the tenant of . the defendant-
respondent is tenuous and has been rejected by the trial Judge. Mr.
Thiagalingam did not canvass this finding, but he focussed on the other ground
that Muttusamy, who was a tenant of the defendant-respondent, had put the
petitioner appellant in possession of the premises as far back as 1975. He'
referred to the notarial agreement No. 122 dated 31st October 1975 (A11A)
whereby. Muttusamy had let out the hotel business called and known as
'Dawalagiri Hotel' "with the furniture, fittings,' effects and things fully
described in the schedule thereto to the petitioner-appellant as from 1st
November 1975 for a period of three years with immediate vacant possession"
and the petitioner-appellant had agreed to pay him a sum of Rs. 45/.daily as
commission: On the expiry of the said 3-year period, a lease: of the business
for a further period of three years was given by the said Muttusamy to the,
petitioner-appellant by notarial agreement No. 182 dated 27th October 1978
(A4). In terms of the said notarial agreements. Muttusamy placed the
petitioner appellant in charge of the hotel business and gave over the
management,

**283**

control and conduct of the business for a period of three years; and to enable
the petitioner-appellant to carry on the said hotel business, he put the
petitioner in possession of the premises in which the hotel was being run. The
said agreements provided that "these presents shall bind the 'parties thereto
and their respective heirs, executors and administrators firmly."  
  
Under the notarial agreement No.182 (A4), what was leased was "the hotel
business carried on at premises No. 19, Galle Road, Bambalapitiya," and hence
the petitioner-appellant was entitled to carry on the hotel business in the
said premises until 31st October 1981, and, for the; purpose of carrying it
on, it was necessary that he should be in possession of the premises for that
period. The business could not be conceived apart from the premises where it
was carried on. Both the District Judge and the Court of Appeal do not appear
to have appreciated that, for the purpose of the business leased out by the
agreements A11A and A4, the petitioner should have possession of the premises
where the business was carried on and hence was put in possession of the
premises for the periods covered by the lease. It was not seriously disputed
that Muttusamy was a tenant of the premises in suit at all relevant times. It
is true that Muttusamy died on 1st March 1979, but his death did not affect
the tenure of the lease agreement No. 182 (A4). The heirs of Muttusamy stepped
into the shoes of Muttusamy. As the' premises in suit is subject to the
provisions of the Rent Act, No. 2 of 1972, the heirs of Muttusamy are deemed
to have succeeded to the tenancy of the premises in suit (section 36 of the
Rent Act of 1972). The death of Muttusamy did not terminate the lease of the
hotel business, nor the licence to occupy the premises in suit granted to the
petitioner-appellant by him. It was not a revocable licence which terminated
with the death of the grantor. The licence was an integral part of the lease
of the business and endured for the period of the lease. Muttusamy's rights
and obligations passed to his heirs (clause 12 of A4), and the petitioner-
appellant continued to be a licencee of the premises under the heirs of
Muttusamy. On the death of Muttusamy, the tenancy of the 'premises devolved on
his heirs and the petitioner could remain in the premises until that tenancy
was terminated and decree entered against them: The petitioner-appellant could
not be ejected from the premises by the landlord of the premises, viz. the
defendant Marshall,. or the plaintiff, unless and until decree for ejectment
of the tenant under the provisions of the Rent Act was obtained. It is to be
noted that the heirs of Muttusamy were not made parties to the present action
and hence they were not bound by the decree entered in the case. The
petitioner who was holding under them was therefore not affected by such a
decree.

**284**

The effect of a concluded contract of sub-tenancy is that the . tenant, while
remaining liable to the original landlord for the fulfillment of his own
contractual obligations, has for the time being transferred to a sub-tenant
the right to occupy the rented premises. A sub-tenant is not a trespasser and
is, in law, not in wrongful. possession. He is entitled to occupy the rented
premises so long as the tenant was entitled to occupy same. (vide Ibrahim v.
Mansoor- 54 N.L.R. 217). A licensee under the tenant is in the same position
as the sub-tenant, as far as right to possession of the rented premises is
concerned, vis-a-vis the original landlord until a decree for ejectment has
been entered against the tenant. Thus, as licensee under Muttusamy and his
heirs,. the petitioner-appellant continues in lawful occupation of the
premises as against the plaintiff-respondent and is entitled to continue in
occupation until the tenancy of Muttusamy's heirs has been determined and
decree for ejectment entered against them.  
  
Section 36 of the Rent Act states that on the death of the tenant of business
premises, the heirs or executor/administrator of the estate of the deceased
'tenant "shall . . . . . . . . . . .be deemed, for the purpose of this Act, to
be the tenant of the premises." The District Judge has erred in holding that
the heirs of Muttusamy had not become tenants of the premises on the death of
Muttusamy.  
  
It is not disputed that he petitioner-appellant has been in occupation of the
premises in suit at least from 1975 under Muttusamy. There has been no nexus
between him and the defendant-respondent. This is corroborated by the
statement of. the plaintiff to the Fiscal: "I bought these premises from the
defendant Marshall. At the time of the purchase, I was aware that the present
occupants did not have any connection with the defendant or these premises."
The occupation of the premises by the petitioner is referable to the aforesaid
agreements A11A and A4. The District Judge had failed to draw the proper
inferences from the admitted facts of the case and - is in error in holding
that the agreement A4 of 1978 is not valid after the death of Muttusamy. In
affirming the District judge's findings of fact, the. Court . of Appeal has
also erred.  
  
The Court of Appeal has construed deed No. 182 (A4) as a partnership
agreement. This construction is absolutely untenable in the light of the
various clauses of that agreement and has not been supported . by Counsel for
the plaintiff-respondent. The agreement provides for the handing over of the
management and control of the hotel business called and known as 'Dhawalagiri
Hotel' carried on in premises No.19, Galle Road, Bambalapitiya.

**285**

for a period of three years with immediate vacant possession to the
petitioner-appellant by Muttusamy, and for the petitioner appellant to pay Rs.
45/- daily as commission and for Muttusamy to pay the rent of the premises
where the business was carried on. According to- the tenor of the. agreement,
during the said period of three years, the business was to be the business of
the petitioner-appellant. There was no question of the said business being
carried on in common between Muttusamy and the petitioner-appellant during
that period. The evidence shows that the petitioner-appellant was from 1975
carrying on hotel business not under the name of, Dhawalagiri Hotel' but as
'New Wappa Eating House'. The agreements Nos., 122 and 182 do not prohibit the
petitioner appellant carrying on hotel business under a name other than that
of Dhawalagiri Hotel and hence it was not wrongful for the petitioner-
appellant to have, from 1975, carried on the said business under the name of
'New Wappa Eating House.' In any event, the only person who could have
objected to or complained of the petitioner-appellant carrying on hotel
business under a different name in the premises in suit was Muttusamy. But
Muttusamy never objected to the new name of the Hotel.  
  
The Court 'of Appeal has observed that: "The position of the petitioner, so
far as the Court can ascertain it, is that he came in here to run the business
called 'Dhawalagiri Hotel' in terms of a partnership agreement which he
signed. The mutual obligations of the two partners are set out in the deed.
The petitioner: altered the name of the business to New Wappa- Eating House.
The claim of the petitioner that he was a sub-tenant based on the deed. No.
182 of 27.9.78 was therefore rightly regarded as without any foundation." A
proper appreciation of: the nature of the relationship between Muttusamy and
the petitioner-appellant established by deed No. 182 of 27,9.78 (A4) does not
warrant this observation. The agreement has not been looked at in its proper
perspective. The conclusion both of the District Judge and of the. Court of
Appeal that the claim of the petitioner-appellant to be in possession of the
premises in suit is frivolous or vexatious is based on their erroneous
conclusions and is not justified by the admitted facts of the case. The
agreement No. 182 (A4) entitled the petitioner appellant to be in lawful
possession of the premises.  
  
In the circumstances, this Court can properly, and indeed should, reach its
own conclusion by applying the law to the - unquestioned facts, such as the
occupation of the premises in suit by the petitioner-appellant on the strength
of the lease agreements Nos. 122 and 182. This case is not. one to which the
rule

**286**

as to 'concurrent findings' is applicable. Manifest and important errors of
law and serious misdirection on the proper inference to be drawn from
undisputed facts committed by the courts below inhibit this Court from
attaching too much sanctity to their conclusions. In the circumstances, to
prevent a miscarriage of justice, this Court is compelled to review the
conclusions of fact . In my view, far from the claim of the petitioner-
appellant being 'frivolous or vexatious,' it is well founded in law. The
conclusion that the resistance to the execution of the decree for possession
was occasioned by the petitioner-appellant claiming in good faith to be in
possession of the premises on his own account is irresistible.  
  
I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and the
order of the District Court and dismiss the petition of the plaintiff-
respondent to the District Court. The plaintiff respondent shall pay the
petitioner-appellant the latter's costs in this Court, in the Court of Appeal
and in the District Court.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/8.html_  

