##  Ediriweera, Returning Officer For Akuressa Pradeshiya Sabha v. Kapukotuwa,
General Secretary, United National Party and Others - SLR - 228, Vol 1 of 2003
[2002] LKSC 8; (2003) 1 Sri LR 228 (19 June 2002)

**228**

**EDIRIWEERA, RETURNING OFFICER** ****

**FOR AKURESSA PRADESHIYA SABHA** ****

**v.** ****

**KAPUKOTUWA, GENERAL SECRETARY, UNITED NATIONAL**

**PARTY** ******AND OTHERS  **

** **



SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA, CJ.

ISMAIL, J. AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC APPEAL No. 31/2002

CA APPLICATION No. 342/2002

19TH JUNE, 2002



Writ of Certiorari - Failure of the Secretary of a Political Party to sign the
nomination paper - Local Authorities Elections Ordinance, Sections 28(5),
31(1)(a) and (b) of the Ordinance - Rejection of the nomination paper.

The appellant was the Returning Officer for the Akuressa Pradeshiya Sabha
Election and the respondent was the General Secretary of the United National
Party ("the UNP"). Section 28(5) of Local Authorities Elections Ordinance
("the

229

Ordinance") requires _inter alia_ that a nomination paper be signed by the
Secretary of a Political Party or the Group Leader of an Independent Group.
Such signature shall be attested by a Justice of the Peace. The form   of the
nomination paper appearing in the First Schedule to the Ordinance also
pro­vides for the signature of such persons. Section 31(1)(e) requires the
Returning Officer to reject any nomination paper which is not so signed or
attested.

The nomination paper of the UNP has the office stamp of the Secretary below
the space provided for the Secretary's signature. A Justice of the Peace had
purported to attest the signature. But the Secretary had in fact not signed
the nomination paper as required.

**Held :**

The requirement of section 28(5) of the Ordinance as to the signature and the
rejecting of the nomination paper where the signature of the Secretary of the
Party does not appear, required by section 30(1 )(e) of the Ordinance are
mandatory and calls for proper compliance.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal

**Case referred to :**

1\. _Mayappan_ vs _Manchanyake_ 62 NLR 529

_Saleem Marsoof._ P.C., Additional Solicitor-General with _Janak de Silva,_
State Counsel for respondent-appellant

_Razik Zarook with Lasantha Hettiarachchi_ and _S.A. Jayawickrema for_
petition­er - respondent

# Cur. adv. vult

January 24,2003  
**SARATH N. SILVA, C.J.**

This appeal relates to the submission of nomination papers for the election of
members to the Akuressa Pradeshiya Sabhawa. Several nomination papers were
submitted including a nomination paper purporting to be of the United National
Party which was tendered

230

on 8.2.2002, being the last day for the delivery of nomination papers. After
the expiry of the period for handing over nominations and during the period
for objections, three persons objected to the nomination paper purporting to
be of the United National Party on the ground that it had not been signed by
the Secretary of that party. The Returning Officer, being the appellant in
this case, upheld the objection and rejected that nomination paper. On that
basis the election was to be held amongst the candidates who were duly
nominated.



The Secretary of the United National Party and the candi­dates whose names
appeared on the nomination paper that was rejected, filed an application in
the Court of Appeal for a writ of certiorari to quash the said decision of the
Returning Officer and for a writ of mandamus directing the Returning Officer
to accept that nomination paper. The Court of Appeal made an interim order
stay­ing the election. By judgment dated 4.3.2002, the application was allowed
with costs and the writs of certiorari and mandamus that were sought were
granted. This Court allowed special leave to appeal on the application of the
Returning Officer, and stayed the operation of the judgment of the Court of
Appeal.



A photocopy of the relevant nomination paper has been pro­duced marked X3(c).
It is seen that the form of the nomination paper used is the one set out in
the First Schedule to the Local Authorities Elections Ordinance as amended by
Act, No. 25 of 1990. The first paragraph of the nomination paper gives the
name of the recognized political party and states that the party, "hereby
nominates the following persons as candidates for election of mem­bers of the
Akuressa Pradeshiya Sabhawa." Beneath this is the space in which the names and
other particulars of candidates are set out in two groups. Group II contains
the names of the youth candidates. The following words appear beneath the two
groups of names; "I do hereby certify that all the youth candidates whose
names appear in this nomination are within the age stipulated in Section 89 of
the Ordinance" with, the space for the signature of the Secretary of the
recognized political party, his name and address. The form ends with the
provision for the attestation of the signature of the Secretary of the
recognized political party by a Justice of the Peace or a Notary Public.

231

In the relevant nomination paper "X3c"; the space for the sig­nature of the
Secretary of the recognized political party has been left blank. The name of
the Secretary and his address have been written in the space set apart for
that purpose below the space for the signature. The name and address are
repeated in what appears to be the same handwriting in the attestation and the
Justice of the Peace has purported to attest a signature which is plainly not
there.



I will now refer to the relevant provisions of the Local Authorities Elections
Ordinance.

Section 28(5) of the Ordinance as amended by Act, No. 24 of 1987 states as
follows :

"Each nomination paper shall be signed by the Secretary of a recognized
political party and in the case of an independent group, by the candidate
whose name appears in the nomi­nation paper of that group and is designated
therein as the group leader of that group (such candidate is hereinafter
referred to as "the group leader") and shall be attested by a Justice of the
Peace or by a Notary Public."

As regards the proceedings after the period for submission of nom­inations,
Section 31(1) provides as follows:

"The Returning Officer shall, immediately after the expiry of the nomination
period, examine the nomination papers received by him and reject any
nomination paper -

(a)         that has not been delivered in accordance with the provi­sions of
subsection (5) of Section 28; or

(b)         that does not contain the total number of candidates required to
be nominated under subsection (2) of Section  
28; or

(c)   in respect of which the deposit required under Section 29 has not been
made; or where the consent of one or more candidates nominated has or have not
been endorsed on the nomination paper or

(d)   where the oath or affirmation in the form set out in the seventh
schedule to the Constitution of one or more can­didates has or have not been
annexed to the nomination paper; or

232

(e) where the signature of the Secretary in the case of a rec­ognized
political party or of the group leader in the case of an independent group
does not appear on the nomina­tion paper or where such signature has not been
attested as required by subsection (5) of Section 28."

When objections were raised to the acceptance of the nomi­nation paper in
question, the Returning Officer was confronted with two matters. The first is
a question of fact and the second is one of law. The question of fact is
whether the nomination paper had been signed by the Secretary of the
recognized political party as required by Section 28(5). If the answer is in
the negative, then the question of law arises, should the nomination paper be
rejected.  


It is clear from the provisions that are reproduced above, that both Sections
28(5) and 31(1) are couched in mandatory terms. Section 28(5) states that each
nomination paper "shall" be signed by the Secretary of the recognized
political party or the group leader of an independent group and Section 31(1)
provides that if the signature does not appear as required, the nomination
paper "shall" be rejected. The Returning Officer, in this instance was
con­fronted with a nomination paper which had a blank in the place where the
signature of the Secretary of the recognized political party should appear and
he rejected the nomination paper as required by Section 31(1)(e). This is a
straight-forward course of action based on giving the words of the statute
their ordinary and natural meaning being the first and most elementary rule of
inter­pretation.

On the other hand, the Court of Appeal held that the Returning Officer should
not insist on a "strict compliance" of the Sections referred to, but should
take into consideration a "broader concept" of whether there had been
"substantial compliance" with the statutory requirements. Further it had been
observed by the Court of Appeal that it is necessary to ascertain whether the
Secretary of the political party "had in some way conveyed his rat­ification
of the authenticity of the names and the ages of the youth candidates. Whether
the authenticity and the genuineness of the contents of the nomination paper
were signified affirmatively by the 1st Petitioner" (the Secretary). At a
later point in the judgment, the Court of Appeal had posed the same question
in slightly different

233



terms, as follows; "Therefore the important matter that had to be ascertained
was whether the Secretary of the political party/group leader had knowledge
and authenticated the contents of P3" (marked X3c in this appeal). On this
line of reasoning the Court of Appeal has concluded that "it is manifest in
all the circumstances of the case" that the Secretary "had full knowledge of
the contents and authenticated P3" (the nomination paper).

The requirement in Section 28(5) is for the Secretary of a re­cognized
political party or a group leader (in the case of an indepen­dent group) to
sign each nomination paper. The question which aris­es as noted above is
whether the required signature appears at the place where it should be. The
Court of Appeal has relied on three matters to infer that the Secretary had
knowledge and authenticated the contents of the nomination paper. These
matters are :-

1.           that the Secretary has deposed in an affidavit filed in Court that his initials appear in several places where there are corrections in the nomination paper.

2.           that the rubber seal bearing his name and designation has been placed beneath the place set apart for the sig­nature.

3.           that the nomination paper has been "duly attested and certified by the Justice of the Peace"

In this process of reasoning the Court of Appeal has veered to the view that
there has been substantial compliance with the requirement in Section 28(5).
Therefore, it is necessary to examine the question of substantial compliance,
although I am inclined to the view that such a question should never have
engaged the attention of any Court, given the very clear and unambiguous
pro­visions contained in the relevant sections reproduced above.  


The question whether substantial compliance with a requirement in a statute is
permitted as distinct from proper or what may be termed as strict compliance,
should be examined on two basic premises. They are, firstly the significance
of the requirement in the scheme of the relevant provisions in the statute
and, secondly the sanction which attaches to a non-com­pliance of the
requirement.

234

In examining the significance of the mandatory provision in Section 28(5) that
the Secretary of the recognized political party or the group leader, shall
sign each nomination paper delivered to the Returning Officer, it is necessary
to consider albeit briefly, the elec­toral process in the light of what
existed before. The Local Authorities Elections Ordinance was enacted in 1946
and provided the system of elections in respect of all local authorities,
ranging from Village Committees to Municipal Councils, that had been
established decades before the grant of independence. This fol­lowed the well
established tradition of effective governance at the grass root level which
existed under the indigenous monarchical system of government. The Ordinance
provided a simple electoral process for all local authorities based on what
was commonly known as the "ward system". The area of each local authority was
divided into smaller units known as wards and the election was in respect of
each such ward. Candidates were nominated by a proposer and seconder, being
voters of the electoral area. In many instances votes were counted in the ward
itself and the result was declared then and there, establishing a clearly
defined and versa­tile link between the voter being a resident of the ward and
his ward member. By Law, No. 24 of 1977, this system was done away with. The
ward system which existed for decades was replaced by a sys­tem in which the
entire local authority became one electoral area. Instead of nomination by a
proposer and seconder within a ward, groups of candidates are nominated by
recognized political parties or leaders of independent groups. Thus the link
between a recog­nized political party and the candidate which was at a minimum
in the system which existed in the past, was entrenched and made firm.
Candidates who were previously proposed and seconded by voters at the grass
root level became groups nominated by recog­nized political parties or leaders
of independent groups. This per­vasive link between a recognized political
party and its groups of candidates is manifested by the signature of the
Secretary of the party. It is for this reason that a specific place is
provided in the nomination form for the signature of the Secretary, beneath
the name of the candidates and with a preceding certification that the youth
candidates are below the stipulated age. The significance of the requirement
is brought to a zenith by the provision in Section 28(5) that the signature
should be attested by a Justice of the

235

Peace or by a Notary Public. Therefore in relation to the first premise to be
examined as to the significance of the requirement, it has to be concluded
that it is necessary for the Secretary of the recognised political party or
group leader to sign each nomination paper in order to establish the vital and
pervasive link between the recognized political party and the candidates or
the group leader and the candidates, as the case may be. This requirement is
unquestionably of the highest significance in the scheme of the rel­evant
provisions in the statute.

Moving to the second premise which relates to the sanction attaching to the
non compliance of the requirement for the Secretary of the recognized
political party or the group leader to sign the nomination paper, it is seen
that Section 31(1)(e), places a firm sanction by mandating a rejection of the
nomination in the event of non compliance. Thus the significance of the
requirement is matched by the severity of the sanction which attaches to non
compliance. When examined in the scheme of the relevant provi­sions of the
statute, I have to conclude that the requirement in Section 28(5) is mandatory
and calls for proper compliance.

Be that as it may, the three matters, relied on by the Court of Appeal as
constituting substantial compliance do not bear scrutiny.

Firstly, the Court of Appeal has acted on an affidavit filed by the Secretary
of the recognized political party in Court, in which he has stated that
initials appearing as against corrections in the nom­ination paper have been
placed by him. The Court of Appeal makes a point that this affidavit has not
been contradicted and has fault­ed the Returning Officer for not acting on the
basis of these initials. I have to note that this is an erroneous premise. The
affidavit is a subsequent emanation and was not there when the nomination
process took place before the Returning Officer. He had the nomi­nation paper
and the objections that were taken and he made his order on these documents.
That is the record on the basis of which the Court may consider exercising the
power of judicial review if the Returning Officer had acted in excess of his
authority. By importing the contents of documents which did not and could not
have formed part of the record of the officer vested with jurisdiction, the
Court of Appeal has distorted the process of judicial review. I have to deal
with this matter further since learned Counsel for the respondent

236

  
has also relied heavily, on these "initials". It has even been con­tended that
since the law does not specify where the signature of the Secretary should be
placed and, the initials appear on the nom­ination paper, the Returning
Officer cannot reject the nomination paper in terms of Section 31(1)(e). This
contention cannot be accepted, for two reasons.

Firstly, the Court of Appeal and learned Counsel have failed to take into
account the purpose in initialing documents reduced to writing. A person
signing a document places his initials as against corrections in the document
to denote that they were there at the time he signed the document. If the
signature denoting the making of the document is not there what earthly use is
there of these ini­tials? The second contention, that the law does not specify
the place where the signature of the Secretary should appear, is equal­ly
erroneous. Section 28(5) provides that each nomination paper shall be signed
by the Secretary of the recognized political party and "shall be attested by a
Justice of the Peace or by a Notary Public." The attestation is the
confirmation by the Justice of the Peace or the Notary Public that the
document (nomination paper) was made by the Secretary who signed it in his
presence. Therefore the place where the signature should appear has to be in
relation to the attestation. This is made abundantly clear in the Form of
Nomination in the First Schedule to the Ordinance (being the same as X3c) in
which the place for the signature of the Secretary is clearly denoted
immediately above the attestation. That is the place which the Returning
Officer should look at to ascertain whether the nomination paper has been
signed by the Secretary as required by Section 28(5). The Returning Officer
can­not and should not venture to glean a signature from initials scat­tered
in several places in the nomination paper.

The next matter relied on by the Court of Appeal to infer that the Secretary
had "knowledge and authenticated the contents of the nomination paper "is that
the Justice of the Peace "duly attest­ed and certified the nomination paper."
I have noted above the pur­pose of the requirement for attestation. It is a
certification that the nomination paper was completed and signed by the
Secretary in the presence of the Justice of the Peace. In the absence of the
sig­nature of the Secretary the attestation is meaningless.

237

Finally I have to deal with the rubber seal bearing the name and designation
of the Secretary which has been placed beneath the space for the signature.
The Court of Appeal has made a point of the Secretary's "personal seal" being
placed by him on the basis of the affidavit filed in Court. This amounts to,
as noted above, an improper admission of evidence in a proceeding for judicial
review. Counsel contended that this seal should be taken as a mark placed by
the Secretary and should therefore be taken as compliance with the
requirement. Several judgments have been cited which deal with a signature of
a person engraved in facsimile and of marks used by persons, in place of
signatures. These judgments are irrel­evant to the question at issue. A
perusal of X3c shows that the rub­ber seal has been placed below the space for
the signature of the Secretary. It does not contain a signature engraved in
facsimile. It contains only the name and designation of the Secretary in
print. It is plain to see that it was not intended to pass off for the
signature of the Secretary. It was intended to be descriptive of the signature
by giving in print his name and designation. But unfortunately the signature
was not placed and the description in the rubber seal, like the other matters
referred to above, become meaningless.

In the case of _Mayappan_ vs _Manchanayake,_ Sansoni, J. (as he then was)
considered the validity of a cheque endorsed by a partnership in an action for
recovery of money from the partners. The endorsement bore the rubber stamp of
the partnership, but not the signatures of the partners. It was held that the
endorsement in question in invalid. Sansoni, J. made a general observation,
rele­vant to the facts of this appeal, as follows (at p.533) -

"As a matter of language, giving the words their ordinary meaning, when a
document is required to be signed, or when a person's signature is required on
a document, the person's name should be written by hand with a pen or pencil."



I would add that the signature placed in this manner repre­sents the person
who writes it and denotes his act. Counsel con­tended that the findings of
Sansoni, J., should be restricted in its application to bills of exchange and
cannot be extended to the pro­vision we are called upon to examine. This
contention cannot be accepted. It has to be borne in mind that the
significance of the sig­nature in relation to the provisions in question is
higher than in relation

238

  
to a bill of exchange. The signature in a bill of exchange does not require
attestation whereas section 28(5) requires the signature to be attested by a
Justice of the Peace or a Notary Public. With no amount of ingenuity could it
be contended that it is the placing of the rubber seal which the Justice of
the Peace attested.



For the reasons stated above the appeal is allowed with costs in both courts
payable by the 1st Petitioner Respondent. The appropriate authority should now
take action according to law to continue with the process of the election to
the Akuressa Pradeseeya Sabhawa.

**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASURIYA, J.** - I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/8.html_  

