##  Mohinudeen and Another v. Lanka Bankuwa,York Street,Colombo 01 - SLR -
290, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 8; (2001) 1 Sri LR 290 (15 May 2001)

**290**

**MOHINUDEEN AND ANOTHER  
v.  
LANKA BANKUWA, YORK STREET, COLOMBO 01**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
ISMAIL, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPEAL (CHC) NO. 23/2000  
SC (HC) LA NO. 17/2000  
H.C. CIVIL CASE NO. 5/99(1)  
16TH MARCH, 2001  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Section 147 - Discretion of the court to try issues of
taw first - Mixed question of fact and law.  
_  
The plaintiff Bank, incorporated under the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance (Cap.302)
instituted action against the defendants for the recovery of a sum of Rs.
19,811,503.92, on the basis that they being directors of a company called
Mohinudeen Ltd. had guaranteed the repayment of a loan (overdraft facility)
granted to the said company. At the trial, parties raised 26 issues. On the
motion of the defendants two of the said issues were tried as preliminary
issues of law.  
  
(a) Issue No. 14 (read with paragraph 7(a) of the answer): whether the
plaintiff had locus standi to institute legal proceedings in that no legal
person had been incorporated (in terms of the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance) under
the name of "Lanka Bankuwa"  
  
(b) Issue No. 16 (read with paragraph 7(c) of the answer): whether the plaint
discloses a cause of action against the defendant in that there is no plea to
say that the payment has been demanded in writing which is a condition
precedent to the payment by the guarantors. The High Court determined issue
No. 14 in favour of the plaintiff and decided to answer issue No. 16 at the
end of the trial with the other issues.  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. In view of section 9 of the 1972 Constitution which declared that the
language of legislation was Sinhala, the Bank of Ceylon (Amendment) Law No. 10
of 1974 (Sinhala) which referred to the Bank as "Lanka Bankuwa" and Article
23(1) of the 1978 Constitution which provided inter alia, that all laws shall
be in Sinhala and Tamil and Article 23(4) which provided inter alia, that all
laws in force immediately prior to

**291**

the commencement of the Constitution shall be published in the Gazette in
Sinhala and Tamil as expeditiously as possible, the plaintiff Bank has the
locus standi to file the action using its Sinhala name "Lanka Bankuwa."
Further, the use of the name "Lanka Bankuwa" did not mislead the defendants.
Hence there is no merit in the 1st preliminary objection.  
  
2\. In view of the averments in paragraphs 11 and 13 of the plaint that the
plaintiff Bank had demanded full payment from the defendants on various
occasions, the second preliminary issue ceased to be an issue of law only
which goes to the root of the case. The question as to whether a demand was
made in writing or not could be determined only after evidence has been
presented.  
  
_Per_ Hector Yapa, J.  
  
" **. . . . . . . . . .** section 147 of the Civil Procedure Code gives a wide
discretion to the trial judge, so that even if he has decided earlier to try
an issue as a preliminary issue of law, it is open to him to decide such an
issue later, if he is of the view that it cannot be decided without taking
evidence."  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _L.B. Finance Ltd. v. Manchanayake_ (2000) 2 Sri L.R. 142 (C.A.)  
  
2\. _Muthukrishna v. Gomes_ (1994) 3 Sri L.R. 01  
  
3\. _Pure Beverages Ltd. v. Shanil Fernando_ (1997) 3 Sri L.R. 202 (C.A.)  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the High Court.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P.C_. with _Palitha Kumarasinghe_ for appellants.  
  
_N.S.A. Gunatillake, P.C_. with _N. Mahendra_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 15, 2001  
  
**HECTOR YAPA, J.  
  
**The plaintiff, a banking corporation duly incorporated under the Bank of
Ceylon Ordinance (Cap. 302) instituted action against the 1st and 2nd
defendants for the recovery of a sum of Rs. 19,811,503.92 together with
interest thereon, on the basis that the aforesaid defendants who are the
directors of a company called M.M. Mohinudeen Limited had guaranteed the
repayment

**292**

of a loan (overdraft facility) granted to the said company. At the
commencement of the trial issues 1 - 13 were raised on behalf of the plaintiff
and issues 14 - 26 on behalf of the defendants. Thereafter the defendants
moved that the following issues, namely, issue No. 14 and issue No. 16 be
tried as preliminary issues of law. The said issues are as follows:-  
  


**Issue No. 14** : | For the reasons set out in paragraph 7 (a) of the answer,
can the plaintiff have and maintain this action as presently constituted?  
---|---  
  
In paragraph 7(a) of the answer, defendants pleaded that the plaintiff has no
locus standi to institute proceedings in that no legal person has been
incorporated under the name "Lanka Bankuwa."  
  


**Issue No. 16** : | Can the plaintiff have and maintain this action, for the
reasons set out in paragraph 7(c) of the answer?  
---|---  
  
In paragraph 7(c) of the answer the defendants pleaded that in any event, the
plaint does not disclose a cause of action against the defendants in that
there is no plea to say that the payment has been demanded in writing which is
a condition precedent to the payment by the guarantors under the purported
guarantee and/or an essential ingredient of the alleged cause of action
against these defendants.  
  
After considering the submissions of Counsel for the plaintiff and the
defendants, on 21.07.2000, the learned High Court Judge made the following
order in regard to the said preliminary issues. With regard to issue No. 14,
the High Court Judge observed that use of the name "Lanka Bankuwa" had not led
to any doubt or misconception in the mind of any person in Sri Lanka that the
"Bank of Ceylon" is also known in Sinhala as "Lanka Bankuwa" and the
translation of a name is permissible and cited as an example the name, Mt.
Lavinia in English which is called "Galkissa" in Sinhala. He further observed
that no one

**293**

is misled by the use of the Sinhala name Lanka Bankuwa and especially the
defendants who would have received bank statements and other documents from
the Bank of Ceylon on the letter-heads giving the name of the Bank in Sinhala
as "Lanka Bankuwa." Hence, the learned High Court Judge held that this
objection taken by the defendants is without merit and answered the issue No.
14 in favour of the plaintiff. With regard to the issue No. 16 the High Court
Judge decided to answer it at the end of the trial together with the other
issues, since according to paragraph 11 of the plaint the plaintiff bank has
demanded from the defendants that the money be paid back even though there is
no specific mention as to the manner of demand.  
  
The defendants have now preferred an appeal to this Court from the said order
of the learned High Court Judge made in respect of the two issues referred to
above. When the application for special leave was supported on 20.11.2000,
this Court having considered the submissions made on behalf of the defendants-
appellants, granted leave to appeal with respect to the following questions:  
  
i. Did the learned Judge of the High Court err in holding that the Bank of
Ceylon had locus stands to file this action because no one is misled by the
use of the Sinhala name Lanka Bankuwa and especially the defendant who would
have received his bank statements and other documents from the Bank of Ceylon
on letter heads from the Bank of Ceylon giving the name of the Bank of Ceylon
in Sinhala as Lanka Bankuwa?  
  
ii. Did the learned Judge of the High Court err in deciding to hear the
question as to whether there had been compliance with the agreement with
regard to the manner and nature of the demand, at the end of the trial, after
deciding to take up the matter as a preliminary issue?

**294**

At the hearing before us learned President's Counsel for the defendants-
appellants submitted that an institution called the Bank of Ceylon was created
by the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance. That Sections 2 and 3 of the said Ordinance
provided that a bank to be called the Bank of Ceylon is hereby established
(Section 2) and the bank shall be a body corporate with perpetual succession
and a common seal and may sue and be sued in its corporate name. (Section 3)
Learned Counsel further submitted that Sections 2 and 3 of the Bank of Ceylon
Ordinance, No. 53 of 1938, has not been amended or replaced with a Sinhala
translation and therefore, the incorporated name Bank of Ceylon has not been
changed to any other name or to its literal translation in Sinhala. Thus the
institution established by the said Ordinance continues to be the Bank of
Ceylon and no other. Hence learned Counsel argued that the legislature has not
permitted any translation, abbreviation or any other convenient name instead
of the corporate name for the purpose of litigation and therefore all actions
by the Bank of Ceylon should be in its corporate name i. e. Bank of Ceylon and
no other name. Accordingly learned Counsel contended that any proceedings
instituted under the name of "Lanka Bankuwa" a name other than the corporate
name given in the enactment is bad in law.  
  
There is no doubt that the legislature by the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance has
created a body corporate called the "Bank of Ceylon" which is empowered to
carry on the business of banking with the right to sue and be sued in its
corporate name. Therefore, when the plaint is filed in Sinhala on behalf of
the institution called the Bank of Ceylon, it would be fair and logical to use
the name "Lanka Bankuwa" the term used in Sinhala by the Bank of Ceylon
itself. Besides, the Bank of Ceylon over the years has continued to use the
term "Lanka Bankuwa" in their dealings with the public and today the term
"Lanka Bankuwa" is synonymous with the term Bank of Ceylon. Hence it would
appear that the learned High Court Judge has correctly held that the Bank of
Ceylon has the locus standi to file actions using the Sinhala name of the Bank
of Ceylon namely the Lanka

**295**

Bankuwa. Besides, the appellants would have received their bank statements and
other documents from the Bank of Ceylon on the letter heads giving the name of
the Bank of Ceylon in Sinhala as Lanka Bankuwa and therefore there is no
question of the appellants or any one else for that matter being misled that
the reference was not to the Bank of Ceylon.  
  
Further as submitted by learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-
respondent the language of legislation under the 1972 Constitution was Sinhala
and there had to be a Tamil translation of every law so enacted or made (Vide
Section 9). Hence the Sinhala statute of the Bank of Ceylon (Amendment) Law,
No. 10 of 1974, has referred to the Bank of Ceylon as Lanka Bankuwa. The said
amendment law while repealing several sections of the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance
has substituted new sections in their place. The Sinhala version of the said
amendment Law, No. 10 of 1974 refers to the Bank of Ceylon as the Lanka
Bankuwa which is a clear indication that the legislature has recognized that
the corporate name of the Bank of Ceylon in Sinhala would be the Lanka
Bankuwa. It is also relevant to note that Article 23 of the present 1978
Constitution has made the following provisions regard to the language of
legislation.  
  
23\. (1) All laws and subordinate legislation shall be enacted or made, and
published, in Sinhala and Tamil, together with a translation thereof in
English:  
  
Provided that Parliament shall, at the stage of enactment of any law determine
which text shall prevail in the event of any inconsistency between the texts.  
  
Provided further that in respect of all other written laws and the text in
which such written laws was enacted or adopted or made,- shall prevail in the
event of any inconsistency between such texts :

**296**

(2) All Orders, Proclamations, rules, by-laws, regulations and notifications
made or issued under any written law other than by a Provincial Council or a
local authority, and the Gazette shall be published in Sinhala and Tamil
together with a translation thereof in English.  
  
(3) All Orders, Proclamations, rules, by-laws, regulations and notifications
made or issued under any written law by any Provincial Council or local
authority, and all documents, including circulars and forms issued by such
body or any public institution shall be published in the Language used in the
administration in the respective areas in which they function, together with a
translation thereof in English.  
  
(4) All laws and subordinate legislation in force immediately prior to the
commencement of the Constitution, shall be published in the Gazette in the
Sinhala and Tamil Language as expeditiously as possible.  
  
Section 10 of the 1972 Constitution also contained similar provisions. Having
regard to these provisions contained in the 1972 and 1978 Constitutions, the
Bank of Ceylon (Amendment) Law, No. 10 of 1974 enacted in Sinhala should be
given due weight, since it was provided in the 1972 Constitution that the law
published in Sinhala shall be deemed to be the law which supersedes the
corresponding law in English. (Vide Section 10(3)). Further as referred to
above Sinhala was the language of legislation under the 1972 Constitution. The
1978 Constitution provided that all laws be enacted and published in Sinhala
and Tamil, together with a translation in English and in the event of any
inconsistency between such texts, the text in which such written laws was
enacted shall prevail. Therefore even though the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance has
not been translated into Sinhala or Tamil, it is clear that in view of the
Bank of Ceylon (Amendment) Law, No. 10 of 1974 enacted in Sinhala, the Lanka
Bankuwa referred to in that law was none other than the Bank of Ceylon. Under
these circumstances there can be no doubt that the Bank of Ceylon has the
locus standi

**297**

to file this action using its Sinhala name Lanka Bankuwa. Besides it should be
re-iterated that the defendants-appellants have not been misled to think that
the Lanka Bankuwa is not the Bank of Ceylon. Hence, I see no merit in this
objection raised by the learned Counsel for defendants-appellants and
accordingly it should fail.  
  
The other question to be considered here is whether the learned High Court
Judge was correct in deciding to consider the issue No. 16 at the end of the
trial, after having decided earlier to take it as a preliminary issue.
According to learned Counsel for the defendants-appellants a demand in writing
was an essential ingredient of the cause of action and the failure of the
respondent bank to plead in the plaint such a demand in writing was fatal. In
support of this proposition he cited the case of _L.B. Finance Ltd. Vs.
Manchanayake_ (1) where the Court of Appeal held that there ought to be an
averment in the plaint that the demand was made (consequent to such
termination) and that such demand was not honoured. Therefore Counsel argued
that since the plaintiff respondent has not pleaded in the plaint that payment
had been demanded in writing, it was incumbent on the part of the High Court
Judge to have decided the issue No. 16 as a preliminary issue of law. Hence
Counsel submitted that the learned High Court Judge has erred in holding that
the said issue could be considered at the end of the trial.  
  
In this case, one cannot overlook the fact that the High Court Judge decided
to postpone the determination of the said issue at the end of the trial with
other issues for a good reason, namely, that in paragraph 11 of the plaint, it
has been pleaded that the plaintiff bank has demanded from the defendants that
the money be paid back even though the manner of such demand has not been
specifically mentioned. It is the demand that is material and the writing may
be one form in which such a demand can be made and that is a matter of
evidence as to whether such a demand was made orally or in writing. In the
case of _L.B. Finance Ltd. Vs. Manchanayake_ (supra) which

**298**

was cited by learned Counsel for the defendants-appellants, the plaintiff had
not pleaded the demand at all and accordingly the Court held that the
plaintiff's action was bad in law. In the present case, however, it has been
clearly stated in the plaint that the demand had been made by the plaintiff-
respondent. Further it is to be observed that in paragraph 13 of the plaint,
it has been pleaded that "in terms of the guarantee bond dated 14.02.1985,
despite the plaintiff bank having demanded full payment from the defendants on
various occasions, they have failed and defaulted in payment." When paragraph
13 of the plaint stated that the plaintiff bank "in terms of the guarantee
bond" demanded payment from the defendants, it is more likely that such demand
was made in writing. Anyway, the averments contained in paragraphs 11 and 13
of the plaint, is indicative of the fact that the plaintiff bank had demanded
payment from the defendants. Whether it was in writing or not Is a matter of
evidence and it is clearly a question of fact to be decided at the end of the
trial. On this matter as to how the demand was made, it would appear that the
parties are at variance.  
  
In relation to this question it is worth considering the provisions contained
in section 147 of the Civil Procedure Code. This section provides as follows:  
  
"When issues both of law and of fact arise in the same action, and the court
is of opinion that the case may be disposed of on the issues of law only, it
shall try those issues first, and for that purpose may, if it thinks fit,
postpone the settlement of the issues of fact until after the issues of law
have been determined."  
  
It would appear from this section that a discretion has been vested in the
Court to try the issues of law first, if the Court is of the opinion that the
case may be disposed of on the issues of law only. In the case of
_Muthukrishna Vs. Gomes_ (2) it was held that under section 147 of the Civil
Procedure Code for a case to be disposed of on a preliminary issue, it should
be a pure question of law which goes to the root of the case. In that

**299**

case it was observed by Wijeyaratne, J. that Judges of original courts should,
as far as practicable, go through the entire trial and answer all the issues
unless they are certain that a pure question of law without the leading of
evidence (apart from formal evidence) can dispose of the case."  
  
In the case of _Pure Beverages Ltd. Vs. Shanil Fernando_ (3) it was held that
if an issue of law arises in relation to a fact or factual position in regard
to which parties are at variance. that issue cannot and ought not to be tried
first as a preliminary issue of law. In that case Gunawardena, J. made the
following observation. "It also needs to be stressed that in a trial of an
action the question as to how or in what manner the issues have to be dealt
with or tried is primarily a matter best left to the discretion of the trial
Judge, and a Court exercising appellate or revisionary powers ought to be slow
to interfere with that discretion except perhaps, in a case where it is patent
or obvious that the discretion has been exercised by the trial Judge not
according to reason but according to caprice."  
  
In the present case the question as to whether a demand was made in writing or
not could be determined only after the evidence has been presented. Further it
is a question of fact in regard to which the parties appear to be at variance.
Hence it would cause serious prejudice to the plaintiff bank if the said issue
No. 16 is tried as a preliminary issue without permitting evidence to be led
on the matter. As observed above section 147 of the Civil Procedure Code gives
a wide discretion to the trial Judge, so that even if he has decided earlier
to try an issue as a preliminary issue of law, it is open to him to decide
such an issue later, if he is of the view that it cannot be decided without
taking evidence. Having regard to the circumstances of this case, undoubtedly
serious prejudice would have been caused to the plaintiff bank if the said
issue No. 16, was tried as a preliminary issue of law without permitting
evidence to be led on the matter. Besides it is now clear that the said issue
is not purely an issue of law. Thus the learned High Court Judge was correct
in deciding to answer the said issue at the end of the trial.

**300**

For the aforesaid reasons, the two questions of law are answered in the
negative. Accordingly the appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 5,000/=.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL. J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/8.html_  

