##  Kalegama Ananda Thero v. Makkuddala Gnanissara Thero - SLR - 218, Vol 2 of
1999 [1999] LKSC 8; (1999) 2 Sri LR 218 (24 May 1999)

**218**

**KALEGAMA ANANDA THERO  
v.  
MAKKUDDALA GNANISSARA THERO**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA,  
CJ., PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 74/95  
C.A. NO. 468/84 (F)  
D.C. KEGALLE NO. 1291/L  
MARCH 8, 9, AND, 11, 1999

_Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law \- Viharadhipathiship of a temple - Abandonment
of Viharadhipathiship - Plea of abandonment - Burden of proof._

The original plaintiff instituted action against the defendant seeking a
declaration that he was the Viharadhipathi of Lendaramulla Vihare which was an
appurtenent temple of Helamada Vihare. The plaintiff claimed as the surviving
senior pupil of Pemananda Thero who resided at the Helamada temple and died on
6.1.75. The defendant claimed under Dhammajothi Thero who was himself a pupil
of Pemananda Thero and would have succeeded to the Viharadhipath ship of
Lendaramulle Vihare but for the fact that he predeceased Pemananda Thero, in
1966. Dhammajothi Thero was resident at the Lendaramulla Vihare and was in
fact in charge of its affairs. The defendant based his claim on the plea that
in view of the evidence given by Pemananda Thero in an action filed by
Dhammajothi Thero in 1939 for the ejectment of a trespasser from a land
belonging to the Lendaramulle Vihare, Pemananda Thero had abandoned the
Viharadhipathiship of Lendaramulle Vihare, in favour of Dhammajothi Thero. In
the course of his evidence (marked VI) Pemananda Thero had said that he
recognised Dhammajothi Thero as the Viharadhipathi of the temple and made no
claim to the Viharadhipathiship.

**219**

**Held :**

1\. There is a strong presumption against abandonment of the legal right of a
lawful Vharadhipathi. "Abandonment" means desertion of the temple, viz giving
up of the temple coupled with a clear manifestation of a decision not to
attend to the functions and duties of such office. Whether a person, who was
in law entitled to succeed to the incumbency has so conducted himself is a
question of fact. Such conduct must be conscious, deliberate, and must be
clearly established and should not be left in doubt.

2\. The burden is entirely on the defendant to establish by clear, cogent and
convincing evidence that Pemananda Thero abandoned his rights to the office of
Vharadhipathi of Lendaramulla Vihare.

3\. The evidence of Pemananda Thero relied upon showed that his intention was
merely to protect the property of the temple by supporting the case filed by
his pupil. On the other hand subsequent documents such as Upasampada
declarations and deeds of purchase in favour of Dhammajothi Thero showed that
Pemananda Thero continued as the Vharadhipathi of both Helamada and
Lendaramulla temples. The evidence reflected no more than the de facto
position, namely that Dhammajothi Thero being resident at Lendaramulla Vihare
was in fact in charge of its affairs.

**Cases referred to :**

1\. _Dhammaratne Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse_ (1912) 14 NLR 400, 407.  
  
2. _Welakanda Dhammasiddi v. Kamburuoitiya Somaloka Thero_ (1990) 1 Sri LR 234.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_N. R. M. Daluwatte,_ PC with _Daya Guruge_ for defendant-appellant.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera,_ PC with _Keerthi Sri Gunawardana_ for substituted
plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 24, 1999.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The original plaintiff (Ariyagnana Thero) instituted these proceedings in
November, 1975, against the defendant (Ananda Thero) seeking a declaration
that he is the Viharadhipathi of the Lendaramulla Watudeniya Vihare
(Lendaramulla Vihare) and for the ejectment of the defendant from the Vihare.

220

It is common ground that Tekewe Ratnajothi Thero was at one time the
Viharadhipathi of Lendaramulla Vihare (the temple in dispute) and also of the
Helamada Vihare which is the main Vihare. Upon the death of Ratnajothi Thero
on 27.10.1927, his senior pupil Pohorambe Gnanissara Thero became the
Viharadhipathi of both the Vihare in dispute and the Helamada Vihare.
Pohorambe Gnanissara Thero died in 1928 and upon his death his senior pupil
Pemananda Thero became the Viharadhipathi. Pemananda Thero was the
Viharadhipathi of several temples including Helamada Vihare and the
Lendaramulla Vihare. Pemananda Thero resided at the main temple, the Helamada
Vihare. Pemananda Thero died on 6.1.75. His senior pupil Dhammajothi Thero,
under whom the defendant claims his right to the Viharadhipathiship of
Lendaramulla Vihare, died on 5.3.66. In other words, Dhammajothi Thero
predeceased his tutor Pemananda Thero. Upon the death of Pemananda Thero on
6.1.75 his surviving senior pupil was Ariyagnana Thero, the original plaintiff
in this case. It is to be noted that it is now not in dispute that upon the
death of Pohorambe Gnanissara Thero, his senior pupil Pemananda Thero became
the Viharadhipathi of the main temple, Helamada Viharaya, and the temple in
dispute, the Lendaramulla Viharaya. Dhammajothi Thero did not survive his
tutor Pemananda Thero and thus could not succeed to the Viharadhipathiship of
his tutor's temples. Therefore, it was the original plaintiff (Ariyagnana
Thero), the senior surviving pupil of Pemananda Thero who had the right of
succession to the Viharadhipathiship of the temple in dispute, Lendaramulla
Vihare.

The claim of the defendant to be the Viharadhipathi of Lendaramulla Vihare is
under Dhammajothi Thero. As stated earlier, Dhammajothi Thero was himself a
pupil of Pemananda Thero and would have succeeded to the Viharadhipathiship of
Lendaramulla Vihare but for the fact that he died in 1966 before the death of
his tutor Pemananda Thero. The case for defendant is that Pemananda Thero
abandoned the Viharadhipathiship of Lendaramulla Vihare and that he recognised
Dhammajothi Thero as the lawful Viharadhipathi of Lendaramulla Vihare.
Therefore, the crucial issue in the case is whether Pemananda Thero abandoned
the Viharadhipathiship of Lendaramulla Vihare on or about 16.6.1934 and
recognised Dhammajothi Thero as the lawful Viharadhipathi of Lendaramulla
Vihare. The District Court answered the issue of "abandonment" in favour of
the defendant and dismissed the plaintiff's action. The Court of Appeal
allowed the plaintiff's appeal on the ground that the defendant failed to
establish his plea of

221

"abandonment". Hence the present appeal by the defendant to this Court.

Mr. Daluwatte for the defendant-appellant submitted that the case for the
defendant rested entirely on the plea of "abandonment", and this plea was
based on the evidence given by Pemananda Thero in 1939 before the Court of
Requests, Kegalle, in case No. 11811. The evidence has been marked as V1 and
the decree as V2. The plaintiff in that action was Dhammajothi Thero who was
described in the caption as "Incumbent priest of Lendaramulla Vihare". The
action was instituted for the ejectment of a trespasser from a land belonging
to the Lendaramulla Vihare. Dhammajothi Thero was successful in the action. He
called as his witness Pemananda Thero who stated that he was the
Viharadhipathi of the Helamada temple and proceeded to testify as follows:

" I recognise him (ie Dhammajothi Thero) as the rightful Viharadhipathi of the
temple (ie Lendaramulla Vihare). I make no claim to the Viharadhipathiship."

It is upon this evidence that Mr. Daluwatte placed the utmost reliance in
support of the defendant's plea of "abandonment". 1 may add that it is upon
this evidence that the District Court held in favour of the defendant and
dismissed the plaintiff's action.

Mr. Daluwatta strongly urged both in his oral and detailed written submissions
that the testimony set out above was a solemn statement made by Pemananda
Thero in judicial proceedings under affirmation. In support of the plea of
abandonment Mr. Daluwatte strenuously contended (a) that the aforesaid
evidence constituted an "express abandonment" (as opposed to an "implied
abandonment"); (b) that the evidence on record (which was accepted by the
Trial Judge) showed that Pemananda Thero never functioned as Viharadhipathi of
the Lendaramulla Vihare after he gave evidence in Court in 1939 and even for
some time before 1939; (c) that the consent decree V5 dated 26.3.64 entered in
DC Kegalle case No. 15047 is another significant instance where Dhammajothi
Thero asserted his rights as Viharadhipathi of Lendaramulla Vihare and sought
the ejectment of two laymen from land belonging to the Vihare; (d) that in
terms of sections 18 and 20 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance it is the
"controlling viharadhipathi" who is entitled to sue in respect of property
belonging to the Vihare and so it was Dhammajothi Thero (and

222

not Pemananda Thero) who instituted the actions in respect of Lendaramulla
Vihare land.

What is meant by the expression "abandonment"? As submitted by Mr. Daluwatta,
the concept of abandonment is known to the Roman Dutch Law. "An abandoned
thing is something which its owner has thrown away or discarded with the
intention of relinquishing his ownership **. . .** " Wille, Principles of
South African Law, 8th edition page 283. In Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law there
is a strong presumption against the abandonment of the legal right of the
lawful Viharadhipathi to function as the Viharadhipathi of the Vihare. Upon a
consideration of the opinions of several scholar monks Wood Renton, J. in
_Dhammaratna Unnanse v. Sumangala Unnanse_ (1) expressed himself in the
following terms:

"The weight of the expert testimony decidedly supports the view that a right
of pupillary succession will be forfeited if the pupil deserts his tutor and
the temple the incumbency of which he claims." (emphasis added). Referring to
the case of Punnananda v. Weliwitiya Soratha, 51 NLR 372 Gunasekera, J.
pointed out in Mapalane Dhammadaja Thero v. Rotumba Wimalajothi Thero, 79 NLR
volume 1 145 at 193 that it is not the renunciation of the right to function
as Viharadhipathi but the desertion of the Vihare which constitutes "a
forfeiture".

His Lordship Chief Justice Ranasinghe in _Welakanda Dhammasiddi v.
Kamburupitiye Somaloka Thero_ (2) reviewed several decisions which dealt with
the plea of "abandonment" and concluded as follows at page 243:

"On a consideration of the principles elucidated in the foregoing judgments of
the Supreme Court, in regard to this aspect of the Buddhist Ecclesiastical
Law, it would seem that, what works the forfeiture of the right to an
incumbency is the abandonment of the temple, the incumbency of which is in
dispute: that, in determining whether or not such an abandonment has taken
place, a renunciation by him, who was, in law entitled to succeed, is an
important item of evidence: abandonment connotes both a physical and a mental
element: it means and requires both a giving-up of or going away from the
temple, coupled with a clear manifestation of a decision not to attend to the
functions and duties which are traditionally associated with and are expected
to be performed by

223

one who holds such office: whether a person, who was, in law, entitled to
succeed to the incumbency, has so conducted himself is a question of fact:
that such conduct must be conscious, deliberate, and must be clearly
established and should not be left in doubt."

As submitted by Mr. Samarasekera for the plaintiff-respondent, there is one
other relevant matter which must not be overlooked in considering the plea of
abandonment, namely, the burden of proof. The legal title to the Vihare was in
Pemananda Thero and thereafter in the original plaintiff. There is no burden
on the plaintiff to prove that Pemananda Thero resided at the Lendaramulla
Vihare or that he exercised his lawful rights as Viharadhipathi. The burden is
entirely on the defendant to establish by clear, cogent and convincing
evidence that Pemananda Thero completely gave up all his rights to the office
of Viharadhipathi and that there was a total severance of his association with
the Lendaramulla Vihare. The question then is, has the defendant discharged
the burden that lies on him?

The foundation of the case for the defendant is in the evidence of Pemananda
Thero (V1) referred to above. This evidence, however, has to be considered in
the context of the relationship that existed between Pemananda Thero the tutor
and his pupil Dhammajothi Thero. Mr. Samarasekera stressed the fact that there
is ample evidence (and indeed it is common ground) to show that the
relationship between the tutor and his pupil was close, warm and cordial at
all material times. It is in evidence that Pemananda Thero permitted
Dhammajothi Thero to maintain a dispensary on a land at Polgahawela belonging
to Pemananda Thero. When cross-examined about the actions filed in the Court
of Requests (V1 and V5) the defendant stated that it was the intention of both
Pemananda Thero and Dhammajothi Thero to protect the property belonging to the
temple. This is an admission which throws light on the true reason for the
institution of the actions in the Court of Requests. In other words, Pemananda
Thero gave evidence in support of the case filed by his pupil in order to
safeguard property belonging to Lendaramulla Vihare. This certainly was not a
case where the issue of Viharadhipathiship arose for consideration. It is to
be noted that the decree V2 merely declares that the property belongs to the
temple. It seems to me that it is somewhat unreal to seize upon the literal
meaning of the words used by Pemananda Thero in his evidence (V1) and conclude
that Pemananda Thero has renounced his legal rights to the office of
Viharadhipathi. A proper evaluation of the evidence (V1) necessarily involves
due weight being

224

given to the purpose of the action and the prevailing cordial relations
between tutor and pupil. It seems to me, therefore, that Mr. Samarasekera's
submission that Pemananda Thero had given evidence relied on by Dhammajothi
Thero solely to safeguard a property of the temple is well founded.

Besides, the documentary evidence tends to weaken the defendant's case of
"abandonment." V6 is the Upasampada Declaration dated 28.5.43 of the original
plaintiff. In column 19 of V6 it is stated that Pemananda Thero is the
Viharadhipathi of both the Helamada and Lendaramulla temples. Pemananda Thero
has signed V6 as the tutor who presented the original plaintiff for
ordination. V6 shows that Pemananda Thero was the viharadhipathi of the
Lendaramlla Vihare even in 1943. P2 is the Upasampada Declaration of Makuddala
Gnanissara dated 3.6.68 wherein Pemananda Thero is described as Viharadhipathi
of the Helamada and Lendaramulla temples. There are the two deeds V3 and V4
which are deeds of purchase in favour of Dhammajothi Thero. V3 was executed in
1960 and V4 in 1948. In neither V3 nor V4 is Dhammajothi Thero described as
the Viharadhipathi of Lendaramulla Vihare. The omission is undoubtedly of
significance.

Upon a consideration of the evidence the Court of Appeal has concluded that
"Pemananda Thero's subsequent conduct as evident in the aforesaid documents is
a manifestation of his claiming rights in the Viharadhipathiship of the Vihare
in dispute. Such conduct does not establish a complete giving up of his claim
to the Viharadhipathiship of the Vihare in dispute." (emphasis added). This
finding is reasonable and is supported by the evidence in the case.

Moreover V1, which is the basis of the defendant's case, when viewed in the
context of the other documentary evidence reflects no more than the de facto
position, namely that Dhammajothi Thero being resident at the Lendaramulla
Vihare was in fact in charge of its affairs. I accordingly, hold that the
defendant's plea of "abandonment" fails.

For these reasons, the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the
appeal is dismissed but without costs.

**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/8.html_  

