##  Rajanayagam v. Bandula Wijayaratne, Commissioner-General of Excise and
Others - SLR - 129, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 8; (1998) 3 Sri LR 129 (1
October 1998)

**129**

**RAJANAYAGAM  
v.  
BANDULA WIJAYARATNE,**

**COMMISSIONER-GENERAL OF EXCISE  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 389/98  
SEPTEMBER 03RD, 1998.

_Fundamental Rights - Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution -
Licence to sell foreign liquor - Excise Ordinance S. 32 (1) - Rules and
notifications -Guidelines. Exercise of Statutory discretion - Opportunity of
being heard - Equal protection of the law - Right to livelihood._

**Held:**

1\. Section 32 (1) imperatively requires Parliamentary approval for all rules
made under the Excise Ordinance, whether or not they relate to excise revenue.
It is section 32 (1) alone which empowers the Minister to make rules for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of (the) Ordinance, subsection (2) does
not confer any new or additional power, but only spells out some of the
subjects on which such rules may be made. That is not in order to expand the
scope of subsection (1), but solely to preclude any argument that the subjects
stipulated in subsection (2) fall outside the general words conferring the
rule making power.

2\. It is very clear that the preconditions for the issue of a licence are a
matter for rules and not for notifications and that such rules acquire the
force of law (subject to the specified exception in the case of urgency) only
when Parliamentary confirmation is gazetted by means of a notification. Had
there been any doubt, it is axiomatic that is had to be resolved in favour of
Parliamentary control of delegated legislation, rather than freedom from such
control.

3\. The question of law that arises is not whether the notification was ultra
vires or void (for lack of Parliamentary confirmation) at the time of
publication in November, 1997, but the more limited question whether it had
acquired the force of law on 9.3.98 when petitioner made his application for
the

130

licence or even on 13.6.98 when petitioner says he received the 1st
respondent's reply that the application could not be entertained. The
petitioner's cause of action was the attempt to apply that notification to him
in June,1998 and not its publication.

4\. The petitioner had the right to apply for a licence under and in terms of
the Ordinance, and if the only form which the 1 st respondent would issue for
that purpose was one prescribed by the guidelines, the mere use of that form
would not give rise to an estoppel or waiver of rights. Much more is required
to establish an estoppel or a waiver of rights.

5\. The 1 st respondent applied the principles and provisions of the
notifications not because he thought they were right or that he had any choice
in the matter, but only because he thought they were valid and binding on him
despite the lack of Parliamentary confirmation and subsequent notification.
There was no independent exercise of his discretion under the Ordinance, but
rather a total abdication of his statutory discretion in favour of the
guidelines in the notification.

Even the notification he did not apply fairly. He denied the petitioner even
the limited right to a hearing which clause 10 is purported to guarantee.

6\. The petitioner was denied the equal protection of the law and his right to
livelihood was infringed.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed
by Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution.

Tilak Marapana, PC with Jayantha Fernando for the petitioner.

Harsha Fernando, SC for the respondents.

Cur. adv. vult.

October 01, 1998

**FERNANDO, J.**

The petitioner complains that his fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1) and
14 (1) (g) have been infringed by the 1st respondent, the Commissioner-General
of Excise, by the refusal of a restaurant licence (i.e. a licence to sell
foreign liquor for consumption on the premises, or an FL 11 licence) in
respect of premises No. 1, Tangalle Road, Hambantota.

131

In 1979, the Government Agent, Hambantota, issued a notice calling for tenders
for licences to be issued with effect from 1.1.80 to operate liquor
restaurants within the Hambantota Urban Council area. That notice stated that
the selected tenderers may renew their licences for the subsequent years on
payment of licence fees only, and that restaurant licences will be subject to
general conditions for the time being in force and applicable to all excise
licences.

The petitioner stated that he and his brother were awarded that tender, and
carried on the business up to 1994, in respect of the same premises; that the
practice was that upon receipt of a communication from the authorities
informing them of the amount to be paid for the renewal of the licence for the
following year, that sum was paid and the licence was renewed; and that in
1994 a notice was received informing them of the amount payable for the period
1.1.95 to 30.4.95, which was paid. Consequent to a newspaper advertisement on
15.12.94 by the 1st respondent calling for applications in respect of the rest
of 1995, the petitioner and his brother applied for licences, but were
refused. They did not apply for licences for 1996 and 1997. Thus from mid-1995
to 1997 they did not carry on the business.

In the Gazette No. 1001/20 of 13.11.97 there appeared the following
Notification:

THE EXCISE ORDINANCE

Excise Notification No. 833

GUIDELINES AND CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO THE ISSUE  
OF EXCISE LICENCES

The Minister of Finance and Planning has under section 25 read with section 32
(2) Of the Excise Ordinance directed that the guidelines and conditions given
below will be followed in respect of the issue of liquor licences. These
guidelines and conditions shall apply in respect of the following category of
licences and with these guidelines and conditions coming into operation the
Excise

**132**

notification No. 827 . . . shall be deemed rescinded, so far as the same is
contrary to or incompatible with these guidelines and conditions. . .

B. C. PERERA  
Secretary  
Ministry of Finance and Planning  

1\. (a) All guidelines and conditions hitherto in operation . . . are hereby
revoked, and the said licences shall be issued solely on the basis of, and
subject to the guidelines, restrictions and conditions set out below.

(b) The present holders of such licences will not be entitled to automatic
renewal thereof; and that [sty all applications will be considered solely on
the information and material furnished in the application for the succeeding
year in accordance with these guidelines and conditions. Applications
furnished by such licensees on or before the 15th day of December of the year
preceding the year of licence may be considered by the Commissioner-General of
Excise in terms of these guidelines and conditions . . .

2\. (a) Applications should be made ... to the Commissioner-General ... on
forms obtained from the Excise Department, on payment of the relevant
application fees.

(b) Late applications will not be entertained . . .

Clause 4 specified Requirements regarding location and premises. Clause 4 (c)
required that the premises should be 500 metres away (as the crow flies) from
schools and places of public religious worship. That was subject to two
provisos. In respect of premises where licences have been in continuous
operation for 20 years and more ... the relaxation of [those] distances . . ..
may be considered by the Commissioner-General of Excise if he is satisfied
that the premises are suitable for the operation of liquor licences (clause 4
(a)); and, further, that requirement would not apply where the sale of liquor
is not the main commercial object of the enterprise as determined

**133**

by the Commissioner-General or any other appropriate authority relevant to the
nature of the business of the applicant (clause 4 (e)).

Clause 10 (a) imposed a duty on the Commissioner-General, if he was of the
opinion that an applicant should not be issued a licence, to inform him within
eight weeks of the receipt of the application of his reasons for forming such
opinion and to require the applicant to show cause as to why he should be
issued with a licence, whereupon the applicant had a right to show cause
within two weeks.

The petitioner stated that he met the 3rd respondent (the Officer in Charge,
Excise Office, Hambantota) on 10.12.97, and requested an application form; he
refused, saying that forms are given only to those who had licences for 1997,
but added that an application form could be issued if a letter was brought
from the Member of Parliament from the People's Alliance Party. On 12.12.97 he
asked the 4th respondent (the Area Commissioner of Excise, Excise Office,
Bentota) for an application form; he too said that an application form could
be issued only if the Member of Parliament from the People's Alliance Party
had authorized it. Neither of those respondents filed affidavits contradicting
those averments. Although the 1st respondent denied those allegations, he did
not claim any personal knowledge. The 1st respondent added that requests made
after the closing date specified in notification No. 833 were not entertained.

The identical allegations had been made in SC application No. 20/98 which the
petitioner filed on 13.1.98 upon the refusal to issue an application form.
That application was settled on 24.2.98, upon the 1st respondent agreeing to
issue the application form upon payment of the requisite fee. It was also
agreed that the application would not be rejected on the ground that it had
been made out of time, but would be considered in the normal way, and that, if
dissatisfied with the 1st respondent's order, the petitioner would have the
right to seek redress.

The petitioner submitted his application on 9.3.98. Not having received a
response, he sent a reminder dated 15.5.98, by registered post. He says he
thereafter met the 1st respondent at his office on 11.6.98, and that the. 1st
respondent informed him that a reply dated 8.5.98 had already been sent. This,
the petitioner says, he received

**134**

only on 13.6.98. In that reply all that the 1st respondent stated was that the
licence had not been renewed after 30.9.95, and that the application could not
be entertained because there were places of worship and schools within a
radius of 500 metres; he did not ask the petitioner to show cause. The
petitioner filed this application on 13.7.98, seeking leave to proceed under
Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g), but not Article 12 (2). Leave was granted.

On behalf of the 1st respondent, learned state counsel took a preliminary
objection that the application was time-barred. That objection necessarily
involved an assertion by the 1 st respondent that his letter dated 8.5.98 had
been received by the petitioner before 13.6.98, and therefore the burden of
establishing that fact was on him. He did not say that his letter was sent by
registered post, and there is no direct evidence of either the date of posting
or the date of delivery. On the other hand, even assuming that it had been
posted on 8.5.98, it is common knowledge that there were postal delays during
the relevant period, and the fact that the petitioner sent a reminder by
registered post confirms that he had not received that letter on or before
15.5.98. The petitioner asserted that he had received that letter only on
13.6.98. The 1st respondent merely stated that he was unaware of the reminder,
without either denying its receipt or explaining his failure to reply to it.
The petitioner was obviously interested in vindicating his rights, having
already applied to this court simply to get an application form, and it is
unlikely that he would have refrained from acting promptly. It is far more
probable therefore that the petitioner only received the 1st respondent's
reply on 13.6.98. We therefore overruled the preliminary objection.

Mr. Marapana, PC, submitted that Notification No. 833 did not apply: although
section 32 of the Excise Ordinance, gave the Minister the power to make rules,
such rules acquire the force of law only upon compliance with section 32 (1):

32 (1) The Minister may make rules for the purpose of carrying out the
provisions of this Ordinance or other law for the time being in force relating
to excise revenue; and all such rules shall be laid as soon as conveniently
may be before Parliament, and upon being confirmed, with or without
modification, by a resolution of Parliament, and upon such confirmation being
notified

135

in the Gazette, shall have the force of law from the date of such
notification, or upon such date as may be therein fixed:

Provided that in any case of urgency the Minister may by notification declare
any such rules to be in force from a date named therein, and such rules shall
thereupon come into force on such date; but If within forty days of the date
upon which such rules are laid before Parliament a resolution be passed by
Parliament praying that all or any of such rule be modified or annulled, such
rules or rule shall thenceforth be modified or annulled accordingly, but
without prejudice to anything done thereunder.

(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
provision, the Minister may make rules-

(g) regulating the periods and localities for which licences . . . may be
granted;

(h) prescribing the procedure to be followed and the matters to be ascertained
before any licence for such sale is granted in any locality;

(i) prescribing the restrictions under and the conditions on which any licence
. . . may be granted, including . .

Learned state counsel submitted that the notification No. 833 had been
incorporated in Gazette No. 1006 of 7.5.98, and brought before Parliament by a
resolution, and had been confirmed on 23.6.98; he conceded, however, that such
confirmation had not been notified in the Gazette, and that no order had been
made under the proviso. No such Gazette was produced.

Mr. Marapana replied that he would accept that position, but contended that in
the absence of subsequent Gazette notification of Parliamentary confirmation,
the rules failed to acquire the force of law; and that in any event, when the
petitioner's application was made, and even when the refusal was communicated
to him, Parliamentary confirmation had not been obtained. Either way, he
argued, the 1st respondent was not-entitled to refuse the petitioner's
application on the basis of the notification No. 833. He went further,
contending that

**136**

even if that notification was procedurally valid, yet the requirements in
clause 4 were discriminatory.

State counsel made several submissions in reply. First he contended that
section 32 (1) only applies to rules relating to excise revenue; that the
notification did not relate to excise revenue; and that therefore
Parliamentary confirmation was unnecessary. Excise revenue is defined in
section 2 as revenue derived or derivable from any duty, fee, tax, fine ...
Learned state counsel's contention is plainly untenable because the
notification refers to application fees, and fees for shifting, and thus
obviously relates to excise revenue. But, more important, that contention is
based on a misinterpretation of section 32 (1), because the phrase relating to
excise revenue does not qualify rules, but only other law for the time being
in force. Thus section 32 (1) imperatively requires Parliamentary approval for
all rules made under the Excise Ordinance, whether or not they relate to
excise revenue.

His second submission was that notification No, 833 was made under and by
virtue of, and fell within, section 32 (2), and not section 32 (1); and that
therefore section 32 (1) did not apply. That is a fallacy. That argument
attempts to treat the two subsections as if they were entirely distinct and
independent provisions, constituting two different sources of authority to
enact delegated legislation. It is section 32 (1) alone which empowers the
Minister to make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of [the]
Ordinance; subsection (2) does not confer any new or additional power, but
only spells out some of the subjects on which such rules may be made. That is
not in order to expand the scope of subsection (1), but solely to preclude any
argument that the subjects stipulated in subsection (2) fall outside the
general words conferring the rule-making power.

It was his next contention that notification No. 833 was not a set of rules,
but only an Excise Notification, for which the only requirement was (in terms
of section 60 (1) of the Ordinance) publication in the Gazette. Excise
Notification1' is defined in section 60 (4) to mean a notification made or
issued under the Ordinance, or for the purpose of the Ordinance. The
notification No. 833 deals with the conditions for the issue of licences.
Nowhere does the Ordinance authorise or permit such conditions to be
prescribed by means of a

**137**

notification. Such conditions can only be prescribed by rules (see sections 32
(2) (g), (h) and (f) ). Learned state counsel then tried to fall back on
section 25 (d), which provides that every licence shall be in such form and
contain such particulars as the Minister may direct. . .. That is a provision
which deals only with matters of form, and it is section 25 (c) which refers
to restrictions and conditions, which - it is plain from section 32 (2) - the
Minister may certainly prescribe, but only by means of rules.

In making those three contentions, what learned state counsel was trying to do
was to interpret several different provisions of the Ordinance, narrowly and
in isolation, in an attempt to persuade us that salutary provisions for
Parliamentary control of delegated legislative power were inapplicable. Not
only are those interpretations plainly untenable even in isolation, but when
the relevant provisions are considered, as they must be, in the context of the
Ordinance taken as a whole, it is very clear that the preconditions for the
issue of a licence are a matter for rules and not for notifications, and that
such rules acquire the force of law (subject to the specified exception in the
case of urgency) only when Parliamentary confirmation is gazetted by means of
a notification. Had there been any doubt, it is axiomatic that it had to be
resolved in favour of Parliamentary control of delegated legislation, rather
than freedom from such control.

Fourth, it was argued that this petition was filed out of-time because the
petitioner sought to challenge the notification No. 833 issued in November,
1997, only eight months later, in July, 1998. That is misconceived. The
question of law that arises is not whether the notification was ultra vires or
void (for lack of' Parliamentary confirmation) at the time of publication in
November, 1997, but the more limited question whether it had acquired the
force of law on 9.3.98 or even on 13.6.98. The petitioner's cause of action
was the attempt to apply that notification to him in June, 1998, and not its
publication.

State counsel's fifth contention was that because the petitioner had applied
for a licence in terms of the guidelines, and had used a form issued under
those guidelines, he was not entitled to challenge the guidelines themselves.
That is untenable: the petitioner had the right to apply for a licence under
and in terms of the Ordinance, and if

**138**

the only form which the 1st respondent would issue for that purpose was one
prescribed by the guidelines, the mere use of that form would not give rise to
an estoppel or a waiver of rights. Much more is required to establish an
estoppel or a waiver of rights. That contention is also factually unsound,
because in SC Application No. 20/98 the petitioner expressly pleaded that the
guidelines did not have the force of law, and it was with knowledge of that
that the 1st respondent agreed to issue him an application form thereafter; he
knew from the outset that there was no acquiescence or waiver by the
petitioner.

Finally, it was urged that even if the notification No. 833 did not have the
force of law, yet the 1 st respondent had applied its provisions uniformly to
all applicants including the petitioner, and that was a legitimate exercise of
discretion. That is an inherently contradictory plea. The 1st respondent
applied the principles and provisions of the notification not because he
thought they were right or that he had any choice in the matter, but only
because he thought they were valid and binding on him despite the lack of
Parliamentary confirmation and subsequent notification. There was no
independent exercise of his discretion under the Ordinance, but rather a total
abdication of his statutory discretion in favour of the guidelines in the
notification.

And even the notification he did not apply fairly. Thus his letter dated
8.5.98 did not - despite clause 10 - require the applicant to show cause as to
why he should be issued with a licence, and he thereby denied the petitioner
even the limited right to a hearing which clause 10 purported to guarantee.

The 1st respondent even tried to justify the refusal of an application form,
upon a complete distortion of the notification, claiming that the petitioner's
request had been made after the closing date: and that was despite the
settlement in SC Application No. 20/98. The only closing date stipulated in
the notification is 15th December, and the petitioner's request for a form had
been made before that date. Refusal on that ground was therefore capricious
and perverse. Further, the 1st respondent deposed that he regarded the
petitioner's application as a new one, and not for renewal; and that therefore
he did not consider that the petitioner's application fell within clause 4 (d)
(ie that it was not an application in respect of premises where licences had
been in continuous operation for twenty years). Clause 1 (b)

139

stipulated a closing date only for applications for renewal, and not for new
applications. If the 1st respondent had honestly believed that the
petitioner's application was not for renewal, he could not have refused that
application on the ground that it had been made after 15.12.97, and, a
fortiori, he should not have refused the petitioner's request for an
application form on that ground. Finally, clause 2 (b) deals with late
applications, not with late requests for application forms. Admittedly, an
application form is issued only upon payment of a fee of Rs. 5,000. If an
application subsequently made, using that form, was in law belated, that
application would be refused but the fee of Rs. 5,000 already paid would
nevertheless remain in the coffers of the state. The refusal of a request for
an application form, despite the loss to the revenue, seems inconsistent with
the claim that the 1st respondent was endeavouring to apply the guidelines
fairly; indeed, it points the other way. I must observe that this is by no
means the only instance in which the 1st respondent refused requests for
application forms: several fundamental rights applications have been made to
this court during the past year in respect of such refusals, in which the
grant of leave to proceed was not followed by judgments only because the 1st
respondent then agreed to issue application forms.

Another unsatisfactory feature of the guidelines must be mentioned.
Notification No. 833 was published only on 13.11.97. An application for a
licence for 1998 could have been made on 15.12.97. But even if made with the
utmost promptitude, on 13.11.97 itself, clause 10 gave the Commissioner-
General eight weeks to convey his opinion, ie till 8.1.98. If that was
unfavourable, an applicant had two weeks to appeal. But even if he appealed on
8.1.98, the Commissioner-General had another eight weeks for his decision, ie
till 5.3.98. By that time two months of the year would have elapsed. It is
arguable that reasonable guidelines should have ensured applicants an early
decision before the commencement of the licensing year so that a successful
applicant could commence business as soon as possible (providing a service to
his customers, employment for his staff, profit for himself, and revenue for
the state); and an unsuccessful applicant could apply for timely relief. Be
that as it may, given the time limits stipulated, if fairness was the 1st
respondents objective, he would have acted much more expeditiously.

In view of the above conclusions it is unnecessary to consider Mr. Marapana's
submissions that the guidelines were discriminatory, and that the distances
specified were arbitrary and unreasonable.

140

The refusal of the petitioner's application for a licence was illegal because
the 1st respondent applied the notification No. 833 as if it had the force of
law, and did not exercise his statutory discretion; he denied the petitioner
an opportunity of being heard in regard to that matter, and as to whether the
distances from schools and places of worship were such as to disentitle him in
law to a licence; and even if the notification did apply, he acted
capriciously, arbitrarily and unreasonably. The petitioner was thus denied the
equal protection of the law, and his right to livelihood infringed. I grant
the petitioner a declaration that his fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1)
and 14 (1) (g) have been infringed by the 1st respondent.

In considering what relief should be granted, I must take into account the
fact that the 1st respondent has tried to use the guidelines as an instrument
of harassment - by refusing an application form, delaying the communication of
his initial response, denying an opportunity to show cause, and relying at
every turn on technicalities. He should have been better advised from the
outset.

The petitioner claims that he expected a monthly income of Rs. 20,000 from the
business. He has been prejudiced by the undue delay in issuing an application
form and in dealing with his application according to law. To direct the 1st
respondent to consider the petitioner's application afresh would be futile, as
the decision-making process lends itself to needless delay, and only another
three months remain of the year 1998. I therefore award the petitioner a sum
of Rs. 200,000 as compensation and Rs. 20,000 as costs, payable by the state.
That must be paid, and proof of payment furnished to the registrar of this
court, before 10.11.98, failing which the registrar is directed to list this
application for an order of court in regard to enforcement.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

Relief granted.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/8.html_  

