##  Natalie Abeysundere v. Christopher Abeysundere and Another - SLR - 185,
Vol 1 of 1998 [1997] LKSC 8; (1998) 1 Sri LR 185 (16 December 1997)

**185**

**NATALIE ABEYSUNDERE  
 v.  
CHRISTOPHER ABEYSUNDERE AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
PERERA, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 70/96  
HIGH COURT GALLE NO. 5/94  
M.C. GALLE NO. 6403  
OCTOBER 13TH AND 14TH, 1997.  
  
_Penal Code, S. 362 B - Bigamy - Muslim Marriage contracted during the
subsistence of a monogamous marriage - Validity of the second marriage
-Marriage Registration Ordinance, Sections 18, 19 (1), 35 (1) , 35 (2) and
section 64.  
_  
The accused-respondent and his first wife the appellant both Roman Catholics
were married under the Marriage Registration Ordinance. During the subsistence
of the first marriage, the accused registered a marriage with one Miss
Edirisinghe under the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act. The accused was
convicted of the offence of bigamy. His defence was that prior to his second
marriage, both he and Miss Edirisinghe had embraced Islam; and as such, the
second marriage was valid.

**186**

(1) Section 18 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance prohibits polygamy and
sections 18, 19 (1), 35 (1) and 35 (2) read together show beyond doubt that
the Ordinance contemplates only a monogamous marriage; and the respondent
could not, by a unilateral conversion to Islam, cast aside his antecedent
statutory liabilities and obligations incurred by reason of the prior
marriage. The rights of the respondent are qualified and restricted by the
legal rights of his wife whom he married in terms of the Marriage Registration
Ordinance.  
  
(2) The second purported marriage of the respondent during the subsistence of
the prior marriage contracted under the Marriage Registration Ordinance is
void, notwithstanding the respondent's conversion to Islam. Attorney-General
v. Reid (1966) 67 NLR 25 P.C. and Reid v. Attorney-General (1964) 65 NLR 97 SC
overruled.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1. _Attorney-General v. Reid_ (1966) 67 NLR 25 P.C.  
  
2. _Weatherley v. Weatherley_ (1879) Kotze 71.  
  
3\. _Niboyet v. Niboyet_ 4 PD 1 (Court of Appeal).  
  
4\. _King v. Perumal_ (1912) 14 NLR 496 (Full Bench).  
  
5\. Pasmore and others v. Oswaldwistle Urban District Council (1898) A.C 387,
393.  
  
6\. Reid v. Attorney-General (1964) 65 NLR 97 SC.  
  
7\. Smt Sarla Mudgal, President, Kalyani and Others (Petitioners) v. Union of
India and others (Respondents) AIR 1995 SC 1531.  
  
**APPEAL** from the High Court, Galle.  
  
_Ranjit Abeysuriya, PC with M. Markhani, Ms. Priyadharshani Dias and Ms.
Mrinali Talgodapitiya_ for the appellant  
  
_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC with Jayantha de Almeida Gunaratne, Ms. Dhammika
Dharmadasa and Upul Ranjan Hewage_ for the respondent  
  
_B. P. Aluvihare, SSC_ for the Attorney-General.  
  
_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ as amicus curiae.

_Cur. adv. vult_

**187**

December 16, 1997.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.  
**  
The accused-respondent (hereinafter referred to as respondent) was convicted
of the offence of bigamy (s. 362 (B) of the Penal Code). The charge was that
on 6.10.85 he contracted a second marriage with Kanthika Chitral Saranalatha
Edirisinghe whilst his lawful wife Natalie Manel Antoinette Abeysundera was
alive. These proceedings were instituted by the Police in the Magistrate's
Court of Galle.  
  
The offence of bigamy as set out in section 362 (B) of the Penal Code reads
thus:  
  
"Whoever, having a husband or wife living, marries in any case in which such
marriage is void by reason of its taking place during the life of such husband
or wife, shall be punished with imprisonment . . ."  
  
The ingredients of the offence are (i) at the time of his second marriage the
accused already has a spouse living, (ii) the accused purports to marry a
second time during the subsistence of the prior marriage, (iii) the second
marriage is void by reason of its taking place while the prior valid marriage
remains undissolved.  
  
In the present case there is no dispute that the ingredients (i) and (ii)
above have been established by the prosecution. The matter in issue is the
third ingredient of the offence enumerated above.  
  
The first marriage was solemnized at the All Saints' Church. Borella, on 27th
September, 1958, (vide marriage certificate P1). Admittedly, the respondent
and his wife (who is the present appellant) were both Roman Catholics. The
respondent was an Engineer serving at the Colombo Municipal Council. He worked
at the Colombo Municipal Council until his retirement in 1975. Thereafter he
worked abroad for 2 years and upon his return to Sri Lanka joined the "DFCC"
in August, 1979. While working at the "DFCC", he developed a friendship with
Miss K. C. S. Edirisinghe. In 1980 the respondent instituted divorce
proceedings against the present appellant in the District Court of Colombo.
The action, however, was dismissed on 4th September, 1985 (P2). The respondent
did not prefer an appeal against the judgment dismissing his action. On 26th
September, 1985, he gifted

**188**

his 'matrimonial home" to Miss K. C. S. Edirisinghe (deed of gift P3). At the
trial before the Magistrate's Court he made a statement from the dock and
asserted that both he and Miss Edirisinghe were converted to Islam in March,
1985. On 6th October, 1985, for the second time the respondent got married and
it was to Miss K. C. S. Edirisinghe, under the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act
(P4 the certificate of marriage dated 6.10. 85 and P5 the declaration dated 6.
10. 85 by the bridegroom in terms of section 18 (1) of the Muslim Marriage and
Divorce Act).  
  
As stated earlier, the Magistrate convicted the respondent on the charge of
bigamy; he was sentenced to a term of 18 months rigorous imprisonment
suspended for a period of 5 years and a fine of Rs. 2,000 was also imposed.
The respondent preferred an appeal to the Provincial High Court of Galle. His
appeal was successful, the conviction and sentence were set aside and he was
acquitted. With the leave of this court, the aggrieved party N. Manel A.
Abeysundera has preferred the present appeal.  
  
When this appeal came up before a Bench of 3 Judges, Mr. Abeysuriya, counsel
for the appellant, at first stated that he would accept the correctness of the
decision of the Privy Council in Attorney-General v. Reid (1) . However, at a
subsequent stage of the argument, counsel submitted that he would be
challenging the correctness of the decision of the Privy Council in Reid's
case (supra). It was in these circumstances that an order was made directing
that this appeal be heard before a Bench comprising five Judges (Article 132
(3) of the Constitution). It is relevant to note that the principal reason for
the acquittal of the respondent by the Judge of the High Court was the ruling
given by the Privy Council in Reid's case (supra).  
  
The material facts in the present case are almost the same as the facts in
Reid's case. Reid married Edna Margaret de Witt at St. Mary's Church, Badulla,
on 18th September, 1933. Both parties were Christians at the time of the
marriage and they lived together until 1957. In 1957 Reid's wife left him and
obtained an order for maintenance against him in the Magistrate's Court of
Colombo. On 13th June 1959, Reid and a divorced lady named Fatima Pansy were
converted to Islam. On 16th July 1959, they got married in Colombo and the
marriage was solemnized by the Registrar of Muslim Marriages under the
provisions of the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act, not-

**189**

withstanding the fact that Reid's earlier marriage was subsisting. Reid was
indicted before the District Court of Colombo and was convicted of the offence
of bigamy under section 362 (B) of the Penal Code. He appealed against the
conviction to the Supreme Court and his conviction was quashed. The Attorney-
General appealed against the judgment of the Supreme Court to the Privy
Council. The Attorney-General's appeal, however, was dismissed by the Privy
Council. As in the instant case, the only question that arose for
consideration is whether the third ingredient of the offence of bigamy was
established. Their Lordships of the Privy Council concluded that "whatever may
be the situation in a purely Christian country (as to which their Lordships
express no opinion) they cannot agree that in a country such as Ceylon a
Christian monogamous marriage prohibits for all time during the subsistence of
that marriage a change of faith and of personal law on the part of a husband
resident and domiciled there. They agree with the observations of Innes, J.
almost 100 years ago. In their Lordships view in such countries there must be
an inherent right in the inhabitants domiciled there to change their religion
and personal law and so to contract a valid polygamous marriage if recognized
by the laws of the country notwithstanding an earlier marriage. If such
inherent right is to be abrogated it must be done by statute. Admittedly,
there is none ... It follows that as the Attorney-General of Ceylon cannot
establish that this second marriage was void by the law of Ceylon by reason of
the earlier Christian monogamous marriage the appeal must fail."  
  
In order to consider the crucial question that arises for decision in this
appeal, namely, whether the second marriage was void, it is first necessary to
consider the nature of a contract of marriage and in particular the precise
character of the first marriage which the respondent contracted under the
Marriage Registration Ordinance. It is not disputed that the first marriage
was a valid marriage contracted in terms of the Marriage Registration
Ordinance.  
  
First, as to the general nature of the contract of marriage; Wille in
Principles of South African Law, 5th edition states:  
  
"Marriage is an institution which is regulated by the law, and which confers a
**status** on the parties to it. It is a juristic act sui generis . . . The
legal consequences of a valid marriage are that a continuing collection of
rights and duties, mostly reciprocal, are

**190**

conferred or imposed on the parties. This combination of rights and duties is
usually termed a relationship" (p. 89).  
  
Kotze, J. in Weatherley v. Weatherley (2) stated :  
  
"Marriage is not a mere ordinary private contract between the parties, it is a
contract creating a status and gives right to important consequences directly
affecting society at large. It lies indeed at the root of civilized society."  
  
Brett, LJ. in Niboyet v. Niboyet(3) (Court of Appeal) expressed himself in the
following terms:  
  
"Marriage is the fulfilment of a contract satisfied by the solemnization of
the marriage, but marriage directly it exists creates by a law a relation
between the parties and what is called **a status of each**. The status of an
individual, used as a legal term, means a legal position of the individual in
or with regard to the rest of a community. That relation between the parties,
and that status of each of them with regard to the community, which are
constituted upon marriage are not imposed or defined by contract or agreement
but by law."  
  
What then are the provisions of the law in terms of which the respondent chose
to enter into a contract of marriage on 27th September 1958? (i.e. the first
marriage). The material provisions of the Marriage Registration Ordinance are
sections 18,19 (1), 35 (1) & (2) and the definition of "marriage" contained in
the interpretation section, namely, section 64.  
  
Section 18 : "No marriage shall be valid where either of the parties thereto
shall have contracted a prior marriage which shall not have been legally
dissolved or declared void."  
  
Section 19 (1) "No marriage shall be dissolved during the lifetime of the
parties except by judgment of divorce a vinculo matrimonil pronounced in some
competent court."

**191**

Section 35 (1): "A marriage in the presence of the registrar shall, except as
hereinafter provided, be solemnized between the parties at his office or
station with open doors, and between the hours of six O'clock in the morning
and six O'clock in the afternoon, and in the presence of two or more
respectable witnesses, and in the following manner:  
  
(2) The registrar shall address the parties to the following effect:  
  
"Be it known unto you. A, B and C, D., that by the public reception of each
other as man and wife in my presence, and the subsequent attestation thereof
by signing your name to that effect in the registry book, you become legally
married to each other, although no other rite of a civil or religious nature
shall take place; and know ye further that the marriage now intended to be
contracted cannot be dissolved during your lifetime except by a valid judgment
of divorce, and that" if either of you before the death of the other shall
contract another marriage before the former marriage is thus legally
dissolved, you will be guilty of bigamy and be liable to the penalties
attached to that offence."  
  
Section 64: "In this Ordinance, **unless the context otherwise requires -  
**  
'marriage" means any marriage, save and except marriages contracted under and
by virtue of the Kandyan Marriage Ordinance, 1870, or the Kandyan Marriage and
Divorce Act, and except marriages contracted between persons professing
Islam."  
  
There is little doubt that section 18 **expressly** **prohibits** polygamy and
sections 18, 19 (1) and 35 (1) & (2) read together show beyond doubt that the
Marriage Registration Ordinance contemplates **only a monogamous marriage**.
As stated by Dr. H. W. Tambiah in his work Laws and Customs of the Tamils of
Jaffna, "by the General Marriage Ordinance  only monogamy is recognised . . ."
(page 106). The

**192**

respondent having solemnized his first marriage under the Marriage
Registration Ordinance is **bound to monogamy** and, what is more, the only
mode by which such marriage could be dissolved is by a "judgment of divorce a
vinculo matrimonil pronounced in some competent court". The obligation of
monogamy and the mode of dissolution of the marriage are the **statutory**
**incidents** of the first marriage which the respondent entered into with the
appellant.  
  
As rightly pointed out by Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera, the judgment of the Privy
Council in Reid's case makes no reference at all to the enactments which
preceded the present Marriage Registration Ordinance. Mr. Goonesekera drew our
attention to section 28 of Ordinance No. 6 of 1847.  
  
The section reads thus:  
  
"28\. And it is further enacted, that no marriage solemnized in any part of
this Island, after the notification in the Gazette of the confirmation of this
Ordinance by Her Majesty, shall be valid (except among Muhammedans) where
either of the parties thereto shall have contracted a prior marriage, which
shall not have been legally dissolved or declared void by decree of some
competent court. And every person, except a Muhammedan, who shall, after such
period as aforesaid contract a subsequent marriage, before his or her prior
marriage shall have been so dissolved or declared void and every person except
a Muhammedan, who shall marry another whom he or she shall know to be bound by
a previous marriage not so dissolved or declared void, shall be guilty of
bigamy, and liable to imprisonment with or without hard labour for any period
not exceeding three years. Provided always, that no person marrying a second
time, whose husband or wife shall have been continually absent from such
person for the space of seven years then last past, and shall not have been
known by such person to be living within that time, shall be deemed to be
guilty of bigamy."  
  
It is thus clear that as far back as 1847, our law made express provision
prohibiting polygamy (except in the case of Muslims) and defining the offence
of bigamy. A provision to the same effect was found in section 19 of Ordinance
No. 2 of 1895. Thus in 1911 Lascelles, CJ. in King v. Perumal (4) (Full Bench)
stated:

**  193**

"That polygamy has been prohibited and has been an offence under the Municipal
law of Ceylon for more than half a century, except in the case of Muhammadans,
is beyond all question" (at page 505).  
  
Having considered the statute law and rules of Private International Law the
learned Chief Justice went on to state -  
  
"It is thus clear that, except in the case of Muhammadans, **polygamy is as
obnoxious to the public policy of Ceylon as to that of European States**. . .
In view of the circumstance that polygamy is **expressly prohibited** by the
Municipal law of the Colony (except in the case of Muhammadans) I am clearly
of opinion that a polygamous marriage between persons who are not Muhammadans
is void in Ceylon . . ."  
  
It is also relevant to note that Wood Renton, J. who was the trial Judge in
Perumal's case while "stating the case" in terms of section 355 (1) of the
then Criminal Procedure Code expressed the view that the Marriage Registration
Ordinance, No. 19 of 1907 "not only contemplates monogamous marriage alone but
expressly prohibits polygamy. . .".  
  
It is therefore abundantly clear that the concept of monogamy and the
prohibition on polygamy was a part of our law relating to marriage as long ago
as 1847, Unfortunately, neither the relevant statutes nor the Full Bench
decision in Perumal's case were cited before the Privy Council in Reid's case.  
  
Perumal's case is important for another reason. Dealing with the concept of a
"Christian marriage" in relation to the rule of Private international Law
"under which the capacity to marry depends upon the domicil of the parties"
and the "well-recognized exceptions to the rule," Lascelles, CJ observed:  
  
"But the use of these expressions (the general consent of all Christendom',
the law of God' and the law of Christendom') does not imply that it is only in
countries where Christianity is the prevailing religion that polygamous and
incentuous marriages are beyond the pale of private international law. If a
non-Christian country has followed the rule of Christendom as to polygamy and
by its Municipal law has prohibited such marriages it surely stands

**194**

on the same footing as Christendom as regards the non-recognition of
polygamous marriages. The only distinction is that in the f **ormer case the
prohibition rests on grounds of public policy** , whilst in the latter case it
is associated with the teaching of Christianity" (at page 505).  
  
Thus the submission of Mr. Goonesekera that prohibition against polygamy
(except in the case of Muslims) under our statute law rests on grounds of
public policy is well-founded. As stressed by Mr. Goonasekera, the integrity
of the institution of marriage is the most important consideration. None of
these matters were considered by the Privy Council. The Privy Council was
content to observe, "whatever may be the situation in a purely Christian
country (as to which their Lordships express no opinion) they cannot agree
that in a country such as Ceylon a Christian monogamous marriage prohibits for
all time during the subsistence of that marriage a change of faith and of
personal law on the part of a husband resident and domiciled there" Attorney-
General v. Reid (supra) at 32.  
  
There is no question that Reid was free to change his faith, but the true
question which arose for decision was whether Reid could cast off the
statutory obligations which **directly** **arose** from his previous marriage
in terms of the Marriage Registration Ordinance by the simple expedient of
**unilateral conversion to Islam**. Could he **by his own** act overcome the
incidents of the marriage he chose to contract in terms of the Marriage
Registration Ordinance? In my view, the answer is emphatically in the
negative. The statute expressly provides for the mode of dissolution of the
marriage, and that is the only mode provided for by law. "The principle that
where a specific remedy is given by a statute, it thereby deprives the person
who insists upon a remedy of any other form of remedy than that given by the
statute, is one which is very familiar and runs through the law". Pasmore and
others v. The Oswaldtwistle Urban District Council (5). The Privy Council in
Reid's case did not focus on the crucial question whether by a unilateral
conversion to Islam subsequent to a lawful marriage in terms of the Marriage
Registration Ordinance, Reid could absolve himself of the statutory
liabilities incurred and the statutory obligations undertaken by him. The
Privy Council overlooked the fact that the "rights" of Reid were qualified and
restricted by the legal rights of his wife whom he married in terms of the
Marriage Registration Ordinance.

**195**

Savitri Goonesekera in her work on the Sri Lanka Law on Parent and Child
relevantly states (commenting on Reid's case):  
  
"In emphasizing the right of a person to change his personal law by a
unilateral act, the Privy Council seems to have been influenced by the theory
that the inhabitants of Sri Lanka have an inherent right to change their
religion and personal law. This view, we have observed, is not correct with
regard to other personal laws (i.e. other than Muslim law) that apply in Sri
Lanka. Besides, the concept of the monogamous marriage, in the non-Muslim law
on family relations in this country, indicates that there is no absolute right
to convert to Islam and change one's personal law. . . In Reid's case the
Attorney-General argued that a marriage under the General Marriages Ordinance
created a status of monogamy which could not be changed legally unless the
marriage was dissolved or annulled. The Privy Council rejected this argument
stating that whatever may be the situation in a purely Christian country . . .
in a country like Ceylon ... a monogamous marriage (does not) prohibit for all
time during the subsistence of that marriage, a change of faith and personal
law. The Privy Council, we have observed, was unaware of the fact that there
are strict limitations on the application of the other personal laws. In
rejecting the Attorney-General's argument, the Court refused to appreciate
that even the right of conversion to Islam and of becoming subject to Muslim
law **could be qualified in a non Muslim state, where the monogamous marriage
was the norm in the law on family relations.** " (at pages 56 and 57).  
  
Again, the Privy Council in Reid's case failed altogether to appreciate the
significance of section 35 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance in the
context of a statute which recognizes only a monogamous marriage. The comment
of the Privy Council on section 35 reads thus :  
  
"Their Lordships have not overlooked section 35 of the Marriage Registration
Ordinance which tends to support Mr. Liftman's argument, but the exhortation
contained in the registrar's address is no more than a warning and though it
may be apt to mislead the ordinary man or woman ignorant of the definition of
marriage contained in section 64, it cannot successfully be prayed in aid

**196**

when considering whether the offence of bigamy has been committed in terms of
section 362 (B) of the Penal Code" Attorney-General v. Reid (supra) at 32.  
  
It is to be noted that section 35 contemplates the situation where the
Registrar addresses the parties to the marriage just before they place their
signature on "the registry book". They are unambiguously told in simple
language that the marriage intended to be contracted cannot be dissolved
except by a valid judgment of divorce and if either of the parties contracts
another marriage before the former marriage is legally dissolved he or she
will be guilty of bigamy. It is difficult to understand what the Privy Council
meant by saying that the "exhortation" is apt "to mislead the ordinary man or
woman". The true meaning of section 35 is lucidly expressed by Savitri
Goonesekera in the following terms :  
  
"He (the Registrar) is required to tell them that the marriage can only be
dissolved by a valid judgment of divorce, or death, and that a marriage prior
to dissolution amounts to bigamy. This provision on the Registrar's directive
is therefore not based on a misconception of the law, as the Privy Council
suggested. It is an articulation of the concept that status of marriage
acquired under the General Marriages Ordinance prevents a spouse from
contracting a valid second marriage. Inasmuch as a subsequent marriage under
the Ordinance is declared void when a prior marriage has not been legally
dissolved, **the statute contemplates the creation of** **a monogamous marital
status**." (Sri Lanka Law on Parent and Child, p. 58).  
  
It is thus clear that the approach of the Privy Council to a pivotal provision
in the Marriage Registration Ordinance is fundamentally flawed.  
  
Mr. D. S. Wijesinghe for the respondent adopted the reasoning of His Lordship
Chief Justice Basnayake in Reid's case"' and strenuously contended that the
entirety of the Marriage Registration Ordinance has no application whatever to
persons professing Islam. The respondent's second marriage was under the
Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act and ex facie it is a valid and [awful
marriage. In short, counsel's submission was that the prohibition contained in
section 18 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance will not and cannot apply to
persons professing Islam. Reliance was placed on the definition

**197**

of "marriage" in section 64 of the Ordinance. Counsel for the Attorney General
agreed with the submissions of Mr. Wijesinghe.  
  
Having cited section 18, His Lordship Chief Justice Basnayake reasoned thus:
"The section declares that no marriage" shall be valid when there is a prior
'subsisting marriage'. Now what is a marriage for the purpose of section 18?
That expression is defined in section 64 and it means 'any marriage save and
except marriages contracted under and by virtue of the Kandyan Marriage
Ordinance 1870 or the Kandyan Marriage and Divorce Act and except marriages
contracted between persons professing Islam. There is nothing in the context
of section 18 which renders the definition inapplicable". Mr. Abeysuriya for
the appellant submitted that the approach of His Lordship the Chief Justice
was "simplistic". Section 18 is an all-important provision of the Ordinance.
The section enshrines the concept of a monogamous marriage and expressly
prohibits polygamy. I therefore cannot agree that "there is nothing in the
context of section 18 which renders the definition inapplicable". The
definition of "marriage" applies "unless the context otherwise, requires"
(section 64). The Marriage Registration Ordinance is founded on the concept of
a monogamous marriage and this is the relevant context. To have recourse to
the definition of the term "marriage", in the way suggested, would render a
basic and essential provision of the Ordinance largely nugatory. This is not a
permissible mode of interpretation. By reason of the definition of "marriage",
persons professing Islam cannot marry under the Marriage Registration
Ordinance. The true issue is not whether the respondent's second marriage
under the Muslim Marriage and Divorce Act is valid or not, but whether by a
unilateral conversion to Islam he could cast aside his antecedent statutory
liabilities and obligations incurred by reason of the prior marriage.  
As stated earlier, the answer is clearly in the negative.  
  
Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera cited before us a recent judgment of the Supreme
Court of India which seems to me of decisive importance \- Smt Sarla Mudgal,
President, Kalyani and others (petitioners) v. Union of India and others
(respondents 71 . The question that arose for decision was "whether a Hindu
husband, married under Hindu law, by embracing Islam, can solemnize a second
marriage. Whether such a marriage without having the first marriage dissolved
under law would be a valid marriage, qua the first wife who continues to be
Hindu? Whether the apostate husband would be guilty of the offence under

**198**

section 494 of the Indian Penal Code"? After a careful and a comprehensive
consideration of the position under Hindu law, and the Hindu Marriage Act 1955
as well as several decisions of the Indian courts, Justice Kuldip Singh
concluded that the "second marriage of a Hindu husband after his conversion to
Islam is a void marriage in terms of section 494 of the Indian Penal Code".
Justice Kuldip Singh reasoned as follows :  
  
"It is, thus, obvious from a catena of case law that a marriage celebrated
under a particular personal law cannot be dissolved by the application of
another personal law to which one of the spouses converts and the other
refuses to do so. Where a marriage takes place under Hindu law the parties
acquire a status and certain rights by the marriage itself under the law
governing the Hindu Marriage and if one of the parties is allowed to dissolve
the marriage by adopting and enforcing a new personal law, it would tantamount
to destroying the existing rights of the other spouse who continues to be
Hindu. We, therefore, hold that under the Hindu Personal Law as it existed
prior to its codification in 1955, a Hindu marriage continued to subsist even
after one of the spouses converted to Islam. There was no automatic
dissolution of the marriage . . . The position has not changed after coming
into force of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (the Act) rather it has become
worse for the apostate ... A marriage solemnized, whether before or after the
commencement of the Act, can only be dissolved by a decree of divorce on any
of the grounds enumerated in section 13 of the Act ... It is obvious from the
various provisions of the Act that the modern Hindu law strictly enforces
monogamy. A marriage performed under the Act cannot be dissolved except on the
grounds available under section 13, of the Act. In that situation parties who
have solemnized the marriage under the Act remain married even when the
husband embraces Islam in pursuit of other {sic!) wife. A second marriage by
an apostate under the shelter of conversion to Islam would nevertheless by
(sic) a marriage in violation of the provisions of the Act by which he would
be continuing to be governed so far as his first marriage under the Act is
concerned despite his conversion to Islam. The second marriage of an apostate
would, therefore be (sic) illegal marriage qua his wife who married him under
the Act and continues to be Hindu. Between the apostate and his Hindu wife the
second marriage is in violation of the

**199**

provisions of the Act and as such would be non est. Section 494 Indian Penal
Code is as under :  
  
Marrying again during lifetime of husband or wife' - Whoever, having a husband
or wife living marries in any case in which such marriage is void by reason of
its taking place during the life of such husband or wife, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven
years, and shall also be liable to fine.  
  
The necessary ingredients of the section are : (1) having a husband or wife
living; (2) marries in any case; (3) in which such marriage is void; (4) by
reason of its taking place during the life of such husband or wife . . .  
  
It is no doubt correct that the marriage solemnized by a Hindu husband after
embracing Islam may not be strictly a void marriage under the Act because he
is no longer a Hindu, but the fact remains that the said marriage would be in
violation of the Act which strictly professes monogamy . . .  
  
The expression "void" under section 494 I. P. C. has been used in the wider
sense. **A marriage which is in violation of any provisions of law would be
void in terms of the expression used under section 494 I. P. C.  
**  
"A Hindu marriage solemnized under the Act can only be dissolved on any of the
grounds specified under the Act. Till the time a Hindu marriage is dissolved
under the Act none of the spouses can contract second marriage. Conversion to
Islam and marrying again would not, by itself, dissolve the Hindu marriage
under the Act. **The second marriage by a convert would therefore be in
violation of the Act and as such void in terms of section 494 I. P. C. Any Act
which is in violation of mandatory provisions of law is per se void.  
**  
The real reason for the voidness of the second marriage is the subsisting
(sic) of the first marriage which is not dissolved even by the conversion of
the husband. It would be giving a go-bye to the substance of the matter and
acting against the spirit of the statute if the second marriage of the convert
is held to be legal", (pages 1536 to 1537).

**200**

In my view, the reasoning of Justice Kuldip Singh set out in extenso above is
cogent and valid, and is clearly applicable to the facts of the fact before
us, and to Reid's case.  
  
In the early part of his judgment Justice Kuldip Singh made a very relevant
observation which Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera rightly emphasized in the course of
his submissions. The issues that arise are concerned with an institution of
the utmost importance, namely marriage and the family. Said the learned Judge,
"Marriage is the very foundation of the civilized society. **The relation once
formed, the law steps in and binds the parties to various obligations and
liabilities thereunder.** Marriage is an institution in the maintenance of
which the public at large is deeply interested. It is the foundation of the
family and in turn of the society without which no civilization can exist."
(page 1533). These wider considerations, so relevant and important for a
correct appreciation of the issues involved, I say with the utmost respect,
were completely lost sight of by the Privy Council and His Lordship the Chief
Justice. To attempt to literally transpose the definition of the expression
"marriage" to the core provision in the Ordinance (section 18) has the effect
of emasculating the section. This approach is wrong for it takes no account of
the basic principle enshrined in the Ordinance, the recognition of monogamy
alone and the explicit prohibition on polygamy.  
  
For the reasons I have endeavored to set out above, I hold that Reid's case
[supra] was wrongly decided and must be overruled. As stated earlier, the
material facts in Reid's case and in the present appeal before us are almost
identical and the legal issues are the same. I accordingly hold that the
second purported marriage of the respondent to Miss Edirisinghe during the
subsistence of the prior valid marriage contracted under the Marriage
Registration Ordinance is void, notwithstanding the respondent's conversion to
Islam. It follows that the charge of bigamy (section 362 (B) of the Penal
Code) preferred against the respondent is proved.  
  
The appeal against the acquittal of the respondent by the Judge of the High
Court is accordingly allowed and the judgment of the High Court is set aside.
I affirm the conviction and the sentence imposed by the learned Magistrate.

**201**

Whilst thanking Mr. Abeysuriya, Mr. Wijesinghe and Mr. Aluvihare for their
assistance in this not altogether easy case, I wish to place on record my deep
appreciation of the assistance given by Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera who appeared
as amicus on the invitation of the court.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
  
PERERA, J. - I agree.  
  
WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/8.html_  

