##  Muthappan Chettiar v. Karunanayake And Another - SLR - 327, Vol 3 of 2005
[2005] LKSC 9; (2005) 3 Sri LR 327 (10 May 2005)

**327**

**MUTHAPPAN CHETTIAR  
VS  
KARUNANAYAKE AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.  
BANDARANAYAKE.J.  
FERNANDOJ.  
AMARATUNGA J.  
SC 69/2003.  
FEBRUARY 17, 2005.  
MARCH 4, 2005.  
MAY 10,2005.

Supreme Court Rules 1990 -Rules 2, 6,8(6), 30, 30(1), 30(6), 30(7),34, 35(c) -
Filing of written submissions within six weeks from date special leave is
granted - Is It mandatory? - Could the party be heard?

**HELD:**

Per Shirani Bandaranayake, J.

" Objection raised on a non compliance of a mandatory Rule, in my view cannot
be taken as a mere technical objection and where there has been no compliance
at all of such mandatory Rules at the time the matter was taken up for hearing
serious consideration should be given for such non compliance as that kind of
behaviour could lead to serious erosion of well established Court procedures
maintained throughout several decades".

(1) Rules 30 (1) and 30 (6) specify that it is mandatory that within 6 weeks
of the grant of special leave to appeal the appellant has to file hfs written
submissions, although the appeal shall not be dismissed for the non compliance
of Rule 30 (c) and the effect of such non compliance would be the non
entitlement to be heard, such non compliance would attract Rule 34 which
states that, an appellant who fails to exercise due diligence in taking all
necessary steps for the purpose for prosecuting the appeal, the Court could
declare the appeal to stand dismissed for non prosecution.

(2) A party in default could move Court stating valid and acceptable reasons
and seek the leave of Court of further time to furnish written submissions.

**328**

(3) Non compliance of Rules 30(1) - 30 (6) combined with the non compliance
would certainly amount to failure to show due diligence.

**Cases referred to :-**  
  
1\. Priyani Soysa vs. Rienzie Arasakularatne - 1999 1 Sri LR 179

2\. Union Approach (Pvt.) Ltd vs. Director General of Customs - 2000 1 Sri LR
27

3\. Balasingham and another vs. Puranthiran (minor) by the next friend - 2000
1 Sri LR 163

4\. Coomasaru vs. Leechman Ltd \- SC 217/72 - 307, 72-SCM 26.6. 1976

5\. Samarawickrema vs. Attorney General - 1983 - 2 Sri LR 162

6\. Mylvaganam vs. Reckit and Colman - SC 154/87 - SCM 8.7. 1987

7\. All Ceylon Metal Workers Union vs. Jaufer Hassan and Another - 1990 2 Sri
LR 420

8\. Read vs. Samsudeen - 1895 1 NLR 292

9\. Aspinall vs. Sutton - 1894 2QB 349

10\. Secretary of State for Defence vs. Warn - 1968 3 NLR 609

**329**

had not complied with the mandatory requirement of filing written submissions
within six weeks from the date on which special leave to appeal was granted
and therefore the appellant had failed to comply with the said Rule. Learned
President's Counsel for the respondents therefore contended that having regard
to the fact that an essential step of the prosecution of the present appeal
had not been taken by the appellants and therefore the appeal should be
dismissed for non compliance. Both parties thereafter agreed to file written
submissions on the preliminary objection and judgment was reserved on the said
preliminary issue.

Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that there are no
provisions in the Supreme Court Rules of 1990, to indicate that an appeal must
be dismissed for the non filing of written submissions. In support of his
contention learned President's Counsel drew our attention to Rule 30(1) of the
Supreme Court Rules of 1990 and the decisions of this Court in Priyani Soysa v
Rienzie Arsecujaratne and Union Apparel (pvt) Ltd. vs. Director General of
Customs Referring to the said decisions, learned President's Counsel contended
that, it is clear law that non compliance with the Rules, particularly in
regard to non filling of written submissions, will not disentitle the
appellant to be heard. It was also submitted that the Court can order the
appellant to furnish written submissions at any time determined by Court.

Having said that, let me now turn to examine the provisions of the relevant
Rules and the ratio decidendi of the aforementioned cases and their
applicability to the appeal in question.  
Rule 30 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990 deals with the written submissions
that has to be filed prior to the date of the hearing. Both Rules 30(1) and
30(6) refer to the filing of the written submissions regarding an appeal.
Whilst Rule 30(1) refers to the need for filing of such submissions, Rule
30(6) clearly specifies the time period given for the filing of the said
written submissions. A careful reading of both Rules indicates that the
provisions stated in them are mandatory. Rules 30(1) and 30 <?>) of the
Supreme Court Rules, 1990 are in the following terms:

Rule 30(1)

No party to an appeal shall be entitled to be heard, unless he has previously
lodged five copies of his written submissions (hereinafter referred to as
'submissions') complying with the provisions of this rule."

**330**

"Rule 30(6)

The appellant shall within six weeks of the grant of special leave to appeal,
or leave to appeal, as the case may be lodge his submissions at the Registry
and shall forthwith give notice thereof to each respondent by serving on him a
copy of such submissions."

In terms of these two Rules, it is necessary for the appellant to file five
copies of his written submissions in the Registry and this has to be carried
out within six weeks of the grant of special leave to appeal or leave to
appeal by this Court. Also it is necessary that the appellant must take steps
to give notice to each respondent of the lodging at the Registry of such
submissions by serving on them a copy of his written submissions. Therefore
(he cumulative effect of Rules 30{1) and 30(6) would be that the appellant
should file five copies of his written submission within six weeks of the
grant of special leave to appeal or leave to appeal as the case may be, and a
copy of such submissions has to be served to the respondents' notifying of the
said submissions.

In the event of non-compliance of the said provisions of the Rules, Rule 30(1)
specifically states that, such party shall not be entitled to be heard.

Learned President's Counsel for the appellant's first submission was that the
Rules do not indicate that an appeal should be dismissed for non filing of
written submissions. As referred toealier, Rules 30(1) and 30(6) clearly
specify that it is mandatory that within Six weeks of the grant of special
leave to appeal, the appellant has to file his written submissions. Although
the appeal shall not be dismissed for the non-compliance of Rule 30(1) and the
effect of such non compliance would be the non entitlement to be heard, such
non-compliance would attract Rule 34 which clearly states that, an appellant
who fails to show due diligence in taking all necessary steps for the purpose
of prosecuting the appeal, the Court would declare the appeal to stand
dismissed for non prosecution.

The applicability of Rule 34, when the appellants had failed to file their
written submisions, was considered by this Court in Balasingham and another
vs. Puranthiran (A Minor) by his next friend Sivapackiam . In that case, the
appellants had failed to file their written submissions in terms of Rule 30 of
the Supreme Court Rules, 1990 within six weeks from the date on which special
leave to appeal was granted. The written submissions

**331**

were filed approximately one year from that date. The respondent in his
submissions took an objection on the ground of such default and moved that the
appeal be declared dismissed for non-prosecution, in terms of Rule 34. It is
to be noted that the appellants in that case had also failed to give an
acceptable excuse for the default on their part. Considering the material
placed before this Court, it was decided that the preliminary objection raised
on behalf of the respondent that the appeal be declared dismissed for non-
compliance must be sustained, in Balasingham's case reference was made to
Coomasaru vs. Leechman Ltd (4) whore the former Supreme Court dismissed an
appeal for failure to file written submissions in terms of Rules of the Appeal
Procedure Rules in the absence of any excuse for such failure.

Samarawickrama vs. Attorney- General(5) is also a decision that is worthy of
note in this regard. In that case, a preliminary objection was taken by the
Senior State Counsel that the appellant had not complied with the provisions
of Rule 35(c) of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978. Rule 35(c) requires the
appellant, within 14 days of the grant of special leave to appeal, to lodge
his written submissions and forthwith give notice thereof to each respondent
by serving on him a copy of the submission. Learned Counsel for the appellant
had taken up the position that a copy of the written submission was handed
over to the office of the Hon. Attorney General. However, the Senior State
Counsel had informed Court that there was no record of such receipt and the
learned Counsel for the appellant conceded that he had no proof of such
service. The Court noted that apart from the aforementioned submission that no
other excuse for the non-compliance with the Rule 35(c) of the Supreme Court
Rules, 1978 was given by the appellant. The Supreme Court took the view that
the relevant provisions have been consistently held by the Court as, being
imperative' and the preliminary objections were so upheld. A similar approach
was taken in Mylvagnam vs. Reckittand Colman6 and the appeal was dismissed for
failure to comply with Rule 35 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978\. This Court
had also considered the necessity to comply with Rule 35 of the Supreme Court
Rules of 1978, in Alt Ceylon Match Workers Union vs. JauferHassan and others
(7JwhereAmerasinghe, J. held that, when the appellant had not filed any
written submissions there is a failure on the part of the appellant to comply
with Rule 35.

In view of the aforementioned decisions of this Court, it is apparent that
objections taken in terms of Rule 30 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990

**332**

have not only been upheld, but Rule 30 also have been considered in terms of
Rule 34 of such Rules.

Having considered the first submission of the learned President's Counsel for
the appellant let me now turn to examine his second submission.

Learned President's Counsel drew our attention to the decision in Priyani
Soysa vs. Rienzie Arsecularatne (supra) and Union Apparel (Pvt.) Ltd. vs.
Director General of Customs (supra). His contention was that in these two
decisions this Court had held that the non-compliance with the said Rules is
not fatal and does not necessitate a dismissal of the case. However, it is to
be noted that both the aforementioned cases could be distinguished from the
instant case for several reasons, which are discussed in the following
paragraphs.

In Priyani Soysa's case, the question arose with regard to the non-compliance
with Rules 2, 6 and 8(6) of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990. This Court in its
majority view had decided that there was compliance with the aforementioned
Rules for the reason that,

(a) if the respondent had failed to file the caveat within the time specified
by Rule 3(6}, but submits an explanation, which the Court is prepared to
accept, eg. that he was in fact not resident at the address on the date of
receipt of the notice, the Court may in its discretion regard the date of
'Actual' receipt of the notice as the relevant date for the purpose of
compliance with the Rule. On a liberal view of the matter, the respondent had
filed the caveat within time ;

(b) the only lapse of the petitioner relied upon by the respondent was that
the petitioner had failed to obtain the Court's permission in terms of the
proviso to Rule 2 to tender the copies of the Court of Appeal briefs and the
fact that the petitioner filed three instead of four copies. However, Rule
8(7) enables the respondent also to submit the same documents by way of
objection whilst Rule 13(2) empowers the Court to direct the Registrar to call
for the same, and having regard to the purpose of the Rules, non-compliances
of this nature would not necessarily deprive a party of the opportunity of
being heard on the merits at the threshold stage unless there is some
compelling reason to do so.

**333**

The decision in Union Apparels (Pvt.) Ltd. vs. Director General of Customs and
others (Supra) also could be clearly distinguished from the instant case. In
that case, the question arose as to whether the petitioner had filed his
written submissions in compliance with the Rule 34 of Supreme Court Rule of
1990. The petitioner company had filed its application on 03.06.1999. Hearing
was fixed for 20.08.1999 and the written submissions were filed by the
petitioner on 19.08.1999. The respondents' objection was that the petitioner
thereby had failed to comply with Rule 45(7), which requires the written
submissions to be filed at least' One weak before the date fixed for hearing'.
The 2nd respondent took up the position that the application must stand
dismissed in terms of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990 as the written
submissions of the petitioner were not filed in terms of the Rules. This Court
having regard to the purpose of Rule 45(7) in comparison with Rule 30 and
considering the purpose of Rule 34 and especially the circumstances of the
case decided that it cannot be said that the petitioner had failed to show due
diligence in taking all necessary steps for the purpose of prosecuting the
application. Accordingly the Court held that the preliminary objection must be
overruled.

It is to be borne in mind that in Union Apparels (Pvt). Ltd. (Supra), although
there was a delay in filing the written submissions, it was however filed one
day before the date of the hearing. Therefore it is to be noted that, when
that matter was taken up for hearing, the written submissions were available.

The purpose of the Rules of the Supreme Court is to ensure that the necessary
submissions and authorities are available to Court when the appeal or the
application is taken up for argument. It is also necessary to be borne in mind
that the right to be heard by a party is one of the most elementary, but
significantly important rights of any party before Court. Nevertheless, when a
party is before this Court in connection with an appeal or an application,
this right has to be exercised in terms of the Supreme Court Rules, as the
failure to comply with the rules cannot be simply ignored. I am in complete
agreement with the view expressed over a century ago by Bonser, C. J. in Read
vs. Samsudin where his Lordship quoted the words of Sir George Jessei, Master
of the Rolls with approval that, it is not the duty of a judge to throw
technical objection, difficulties in the way of the administration of Justice,
but where he sees that he is prevented from receiving material or available
evidence merely by reason of a technical objection he ought to remove the
technical objection out of the way upon proper terms as to costs and
otherwise."

**334**

However, objection raised on a non-compliance of a mandatory Rule, in my view
cannot be taken as a mere technical objection and where there has been no
compliance at all of such mandatory Rules at the time the matterwas taken up
for hearing, serious consideration should be given for such non-compliance as
that kind of behaviour by parties could lead to serious erosion of well
established Court procedures, maintained throughout several decades.

In the instant case, it is quite clear that the appellant had not taken steps
to comply with Rule 30 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990. The case record
reveals that this Court granted special leave to appeal in this matter on
24.09.2003. On that day, the Court had made order that written submissions be
filed according to Rules. Supreme Court Rules of 1990 clearly states that the
appellant should, within six weeks of the grant of special leave to appeal,
lodge his submissions at the Registry and should give notice to each
respondent by serving on him a copy of such submission (Rule 30(6). Rule 30(7)
of the Rules of the Supreme Court, 1990 refers to the time given to the
respondant in submitting his written submissions in case of an appeal and
states that,

" the respondent shall within six weeks of the receipt of notice of the
lodging of the appellants submissions, lodge his submissions at the Registry,
and shall forthwith give notice thereof to the appellant and to every other
respondent, by serving on each of them a copy of such submissions."

It further provides that,

'Where the appellant has failed to lodge his submissions as required by sub-
rule (6), the respondent shall lodge his submissions within twelve weeks of
the grant of special leave to appeal, or leave to appeal as the case may be
giving notice in like manner."

According to the aforementioned Rufes, the appellant should have filed his
written submissions on or before 05.11.2003. Although the matter was fixed for
argument on 29.01.2004, on a motion filed by the learned President's Counsel
for the respondents dated 10.10.2003, this matterwas re-fixed for hearing on
03.03.2004. On 03.03.2004, on an application made on behalf of the learned
President's Counsel for the appellant, the hearing

**335**

was again re-fixed for 01.07.2004. On 01.07.2004, it was not possible for the
appeal to be taken up for hearing as the Bench comprised of a judge who had
heard this matter in the Court of Appeal and this was re-fixed for hearing on
01.11.2004. On that day it was once again re-fixed for hearing for 17.02.2005.
By that time one year and four months had lapsed from the date special leave
to appeal was granted. It is not disputed that even on the day this appeal was
finally taken up for hearing, viz. on 17.02.2005, the appellant had neither
filed his written submissions nor had he given an explanation as to why it was
not possible to file such written submissions in accordance with the Rules.

Notwithstanding the aforementioned non-compliance, it appears that even
thereafter, the appellant had not taken any interest to comply with the rules
relating to the filing of written submissions. On 17.02.2005, when this matter
was taken up for hearing and when the learned President's Counsel for the
respondents took up the preliminary objection, appellant moved to file written
submissions on the question of the preliminary objection. This Court granted
time for both parties to tender such written submissions and reserved the
judgment on the question of the preliminary objection. The Court directed the
respondents to file their written submissions on or before 07.03.2005 and the
appellant to file their written submissions on or before 01.04.2005.

The respondent filed their written submissions on 04.03.2005 and the
appellant's written submissions were not filed on 01.04.2005, as directed by
this Court. Later the appellant had filed their written submissions on
10.05.2005. The written submissions filed belatedly refer to the
aforementioned submissions pertaining to Rule 30 and the decision in Priyani
Soysa (Supra) and Union Apparels (Pvt.) Ltd. (Supra), but does not give any
reason as to why there was no compliance with the rules after special leave to
appeal was granted and also an explanation for the delay in filing written
submissions after hearing the objection on the preliminary issue, as directed
by this Court.

Enactments legislating the procedure in Courts are usually construed as
imperative Aspinall vs. Sutton191 Secretary of State for Defence vs. Warn and
this position, as pointed out earlier, has been up held on numerous occasions
by the Supreme Court in this country.

**336**

The appellant could have moved this Court stating valid and acceptable reasons
and sought the leave of the Court for further time to furnish written
submissions, so that this Court could have exercised its discretion in
permitting the appellant to file his written submissions. However, it is to be
borne in mind that the appellant had not sought to exercise the discretion of
this Court, but also had not given any valid reason even belatedly for this
Court to consider using its discretion.

It is therefore absolutely clear that the appellant has not complied with
Rules 30(1 )and 30(6) of the Rules. The contention of the learned President's
Counsel for the appellant is that non-compliance with such Rules will not
disentitle the petitioner being given a hearing. I am in agreement with the
learned President's Counsel that Rule 30(1) does not refer to an appeal being
dismissed for non compliance with that Rule. However, it is necessary to
consider the circumstances of this case, which makes it necessary for this
Court to take cognizance of them.

As referred to earlier, in Balasingham's case (Supra) appellants had filed
their written submissions approximately one year after special leave to appeal
was granted and this Court held not only that there was non-compliance, but
also that such non-compliance was the appellant's failure to show due
diligence.

It is quite clear from the aforementioned that there was not only non-
compliance of Rules 30(1) and 30(6) of the Supreme Court Rules of 1990, but
also that such non-compliance combined with the non -availability of a valid
explanation for such non-compliance would certainly amount to failure to show
due diligence. In such circumstances, in terms of Rule 34, the appeal stands
to be dismissed for non prosecution.

For the aforementioned reasons, I hold that the preliminary objection raised
by learned President's Counsel for the respondents must be sustained. This
appeal is accordingly dismissed. There will be no costs.

**FERNANDO J.** \- I agree.

**AMARATUNGA J.** -  I agree.

_Preliminary objection upheld Appeal dismissed_ _._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/9.html_  

