##  Hariette v. Pathmasiri - SLR - 358, Vol 1 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 9; (1996) 1
Sri LR 358 (19 January 1996)

**358**

**HARIETTE  
****v** **.  
PATHMASIRI**

SUPREME COURT.  
R. N. M. DHEERARATNE, J.  
A.S WIJETUNGE, J. AND  
S. N. SILVA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 43/95.  
S.C. SPL. L/A NO. 299/94.  
C.A. NO. 52/89(F).  
D.C. COLOMBO 5302 / ZL.  
13 AND 28 NOVEMBER, 1995.

_Declaration of title ‑ Title to undivided share‑ Claim to title to
entirety‑Burden of proof._ __

Plaintiff produced title deeds to undivided shares in the land but her action
being one for declaration of title to the entirety she cannot stop at adducing
evidence of paper title to an undivided share. It was her burden to adduce
evidence of exclusive possession and acquisition of prescriptive title by
ouster.

Our law recognises the right of a co‑owner to sue a trespasser to have his
title to an undivided share declared and for ejectment of the trespasser from
the whole land because the owner of the undivided share has an interest in
every part and portion of the entire land. But such was not the case
formulated by Plaintiff.

**359**

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Rockland_ _Distilleries v. Azeez_ 52 NLR 430.

2\. _Hevawitharana v. Dangan_ _Rubber Co. Ltd., _17 NLR 49, 55.

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_T.B. Dillimuni_ with Mr. _A. Jayawardena_ for Appellant.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C.  _ with _Daya Guruge_ for Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 19, 1996.

**S. N. SILVA, J.**

This appeal is from the judgment dated 22.8.1994 of the Court of Appeal. By
that judgment the Court of Appeal reversed the judgment dated 7‑3‑1989 of the
Additional District Judge and dismissed the ac­tion of the Plaintiff without
costs.

The Plaintiff filed the above action for declaration of title to and for
ejectment of the Defendant from, the land described in schedule 2 to the
plaint. It is to be noted that the Plaintiff has pleaded title to an undivided
share of the land described in schedule 1 to the plaint called 'Galpottawatta'
alias 'Galabodawatta' in extent about 20 bushels paddy sowing area. Schedule 2
is a description of a portion of this land which is said to be in extent about
2 acres. There is no plan depicting either of the lands described in Schedule
1 or 2. According to the plaint the Defendant entered the land with leave and
licence of the Plaintiff on an unspecified date and continued to be in illegal
possession after the licence was terminated in 1983.The Defendant denied the
title of the Plaintiff and claimed that he was in possession from 1963 and
acquired prescriptive title to the land described in the schedule to the
answer which is identical with schedule 2 of the plaint. Issues were raised by
the parties on the foregoing dispute.

The Court of Appeal upheld the submission of learned President's Counsel for
the Defendant that the Plaintiff, at best adduced evidence of paper title to
only an undivided share of the land described in schedule 1 and that she
cannot maintain an action for declaration of title on

**360**

the basis of the evidence thus adduced. The Court observed that the proper
course would have been to institute a partition action in respect of the
entire land without seeking a declaration of title to an undefined portion.
The Court of Appeal also held that the Defendant's evidence of prescriptive
possession which is supported by the evidence of the Grama Sevaka has been
rejected without any basis by the learned Additional District Judge.

Learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that the Court of Ap­peal
misdirected itself when it took the view that the Plaintiff could not maintain
the action for declaration of title and possession upon proof of title to only
a share of the land. Further, it was submitted that the Court of Appeal erred
when it failed to appreciate that the learned Additional District Judge
answered Issues 3 and 4 in favour of the Plaintiff. Issue 3 is that the
Defendant came into possession with the leave and licence of the Plaintiff and
Issue 4 is that the said licence was terminated in 1983. His submission is
that the action could have been decided solely on the basis of the answers to
these two issues and possessory relief granted to the Plaintiff as prayed for
in prayers of the prayers to the plaint. On the other hand learned President's
Counsel for the Defendant submitted that the Plaintiff has filed a _rei
vindicatio_ action with a plea of title and for possessory relief as owner.
That title has been denied by the Defendant who claimed prescriptive title to
the land in question. Therefore, he submitted that the Plaintiff's action
should be dismissed if he failed to establish title to the corpus.

The Plaintiff did not give evidence in the case. A person by the name of
Celius Appuhamy claiming to be a relative of the Plaintiff gave evidence as to
title. It is to be noted, that this witness informed that he did not have a
proper recollection of the matters on which he was testifying (vide note made
by the trial judge at page 40 of the record). He stated in evidence that the
original owner of the land de­scribed in schedule 1 to the plaint was one
Alexander Appuhamy whose interests devolved on seven children namely, Carolis,
Herath, Baron, Haramanis, Sedonona, Velonona and Sudunona. He produced
certified copies of two deeds marked P1 and P2. According to his evidence the
Plaintiff inherited 1 /56 shares from her mother and purchased 12/ 56 shares
on the two deeds. There is no evidence whatsoever as to

**361**

the devolution of title of the shares that were inherited by the other
children of Alexander Appuhamy. This witness has not stated that the land
described in schedule 2 to the plaint was possessed as a divided entity by the
Plaintiff for and in lieu of her interests in the land de­scribed in schedule
1. On the other hand, it is clear from his evidence that as far as he was
aware the Defendant was residing on the land described in schedule 2 for
several years.

Learned counsel for the Appellant has stated in his written submissions that
"the Defendant did not contest seriously the Plaintiff's title to the
undivided shares". This is not a correct statement of the proceedings in the
District Court. It is clear from a perusal of the record that the evidence of
Celius Appuhamy as to title of the Plaintiff has been seriously challenged by
the Defendant. It is in the context of this challenge that Celius Appuhamy
informed Court that he had no proper recollection of the matters on which he
was giving evidence.

As correctly submitted by learned President's Counsel for the Defendant the
action being one for declaration of title and possession, the burden was on
the Plaintiff to establish his title to the land which was in dispute. The
action cannot be decided only on answers to is­sues 3 and 4 which relate only
to aspects of possession, as submitted by counsel for the Appellant. The
character and scope of a _rei vindicatio_ action which involves the question
of title and rights pertaining to own­ership is distinct from that of a
possessory action. The Plaintiff's action as presently constituted should
therefore be dismissed if she fails to establish title and the right to
possess the _corpus_ pursuant to such ownership. The Plaintiff has set out
title to an undivided 13/56 share of the land described in schedule 1 to the
plaint. Both deeds produced by her relate to the land described in schedule 1
which is said to be an extent of about 20 bushels paddy sowing area. The
Plain­tiff has not indicated anywhere in evidence the devolution of title to
the balance 43/56 share of the said land. She has also not adduced evidence
that she possessed the land described in schedule 2 exclusively for and in
lieu of her rights in the land described in schedule 1. On the contrary the
Defendant adduced uncontradicted evidence that he was residing on the land
described in schedule 2 from 1963. He produced marked V2' to V4' the extracts
from the Register of Elec­tors from the year 1967 in which he has been
registered as a voter on

**362**

the basis of residence on the land described in schedule 2. Furthermore, he
also adduced evidence of proceedings instituted by the Plaintiff against him
in 1975 before the Conciliation Board complaining of unlawful possession of
the land. Thus it is seen that the evidence of the Plaintiff's witness as to
the termination of the licence in 1983 cannot be acted upon.

Learned counsel for the Plaintiff relied on the judgment in the case of
_Rockland Distilleries v. Azeez_ (1) __ to support the proposition that the
Plaintiff should be granted remedies of declaration of title and posses­sion
upon proof of her rights to an undivided share of the co‑owned property. It is
to be noted that the Rockland Distilleries case was not a _rei vindicatio_
action. It was an action for damages filed by a co‑owner to recover the loss
caused to his property by the discharge of spent wash from the distillery of
the Defendant Company. An objection was raised that the action was bad on
account of the non joinder of the other co‑owners of the property to which
damage was caused. The Supreme Court held that one co‑owner can institute an
action for dam­ages caused to the common property without joining the other
co‑own­ers either as plaintiffs or Defendants. The questions of title and
possession were not at issue in that case. However, it has to be borne in mind
that our law recognizes the right of a co‑owner to sue a trespasser to have
his title to an undivided share declared and for ejectment of the trespasser
from the whole land. In the case of _Hevawitarana v. Dangan Rubber Co. Ltd_
(2) Pereira, J. stated as follows :‑

"I have always understood the law, both before and after the coming into
operation of the Civil Procedure Code, to be that the owner of an undivided
share of land might sue a trespasser to have his title to the undivided share
declared and for ejectment of the trespasser from the whole land, the reason
for this latter right being that the owner of the undivided share has an
interest in every part and portion of the entire land".

In this case the Plaintiff is not seeking a declaration of title to her
undivided share in the land described in schedule 1 and for the ejectment of
the Defendant from that land. She has pleaded that she possessed the land
described in schedule 2 for and in lieu of her undivided share and seeks the
ejectment of the Defendant from that land. Therefore

**363**

the case for the Plaintiff cannot stop at adducing evidence of paper title to
an undivided share. It was her burden to adduce evidence of exclusive
possession and the acquisition of prescriptive title by ouster in respect of
the smaller land described in schedule 2.

The Plaintiff has not given evidence and her witness does not claim that the
Plaintiff acquired prescriptive title to the land described in schedule 2. On
the contrary the complaint of the Plaintiff made to the Conciliation Board in
1975 clearly shows that the Plaintiff, having acquired paper title to certain
undivided shares was attempting to dispossess the Defendant who had been in
occupation from about 1963. For these reasons I hold that the Appellant has
not established any ground on the basis of which the judgment of the Court of
Appeal dismissing the Plaintiff's action could be reversed. The appeal is
accordingly dismissed. The Plaintiff‑Appellant will pay a sum of Rs 2500/ ‑ as
costs of this appeal to the Defendant‑ Respondent.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑I agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/9.html_  

