##  Dharmadasa v. Director General, Commission To Investigate Allegations of
Bribery Or Corruption and Another - SLR - 64, Vol 1 of 2003 [1995] LKSC 9;
(2003) 1 Sri LR 64 (13 October 1995)

**64**

**DHARMADASA**

**v.**

**DIRECTOR GENERAL, COMMISSION TO INVESTIGATE**

**ALLEGATIONS OF BRIBERY OR  
CORRUPTION AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT

GUNASEKERA, J.

WIGNESWARAN, J., AND

WEERASEKERA, J.

SC APPEAL No.. 28/2002

H.C.M.C.A. (Colombo 60) 2000

M.C. COLOMBO CASE No. B/6552/1/96

17TH SEPTEMBER, 2002 _  
  
Bribery Act - Conviction of a public servant for bribery - Section 19 of the
__Bribery Act - Accused's right to impartial and adequate consideration of
his_ _case - Consequence of the Magistrate's failutre to consider the
accused's evi­_ _dence in detail - Power of Appeal Court to consider such
evidence in dis­_ _missing appeal._



The accused appellant ("the accused") was a clerk attached to the District
Court of Matale. He was convicted of soliciting and accepting an illegal
gratifi­cation of Rs.400/- as an inducement for obtaining the return of money
fur­nished as bail on 4 counts alleging offences under section 19 of the
Bribery Act. In addition to prosecution witnesses the accused himself gave
evidence. His defence that the "illegal gratification" was forcibly introduced
into his trouser pocket by the virtual complainant was rejected by the
Magistrate. In appeal, the High Court affirmed the conviction but observed
that the Magistrate should have given more consideration to the evidence of
the accused. It was

65

submitted that the High Court should not have upheld the conviction in view of
the "culpable" failure on the part of the trial judge to have adequately and
impartially examined the evidence of the accused "

**Held :**

On a careful analysis of the accused's evidence no credence whatever could
have been given to the evidence of the accused. Accordingly the conviction of
the accused should be affirmed.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court

**Case referred to:**

1.                     _Chandradasa v. Queen_ 72 N LR 160 at 162

2.          _Jagathsena and others v G.D.D. Perera, Inspector, Criminal __Investigations and Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike_ (1992) 1 Sri LR 371 at 379

_Ranjith Abeysuriya,_ PC. with _Lanka de Silva_ for accused-appellant

_Mallika Liyanage_ for 1st respondent

_Riyaz Hamza,_ State Counsel for 2nd respondent

_ _

#  

# Cur. adv. vult

December 13, 2002

**GUNASEKERA, J.**



The Appellant Medagedera Dharmadasa has been charged and convicted in the
Magistrate's Court of Colombo on four counts under the Bribery Act.



(i) that on or about the 16th of December 1996 at Matale, being a public
servant to wit, a Clerk attached to the District Court of Matale did solicit a
gratification of Rs. 400/- from Jayasunderage Samy Appuhamy as an inducement
or reward for his performing an official act in assisting him in obtaining the
return of money furnished as bail, an offence punishable under Section 19(b)
of the Bribery Act.

66

(ii) that at the time and place aforesaid and in the course of the same
transaction being a public servant as aforesaid, did solicit the said
gratification, an offence under Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act.



(iii) that at the time and place aforesaid did accept the said gratification,
an offence punishable under Section 19(b) of the Bribery Act.



(iv) that at the time and place aforesaid being a public ser­vant did accept
the said gratification, an offence under Section 19(c) of the Bribery Act.



Upon conviction after trial the Appellant had been sentenced to a term of one
years' rigorous imprisonment on each count which had been suspended for a
period of 10 years and a fine of Rs. 1500/- had been imposed in respect of
each count.

The Appellant had preferred an appeal against the said con­viction and
sentence to the Provincial High Court of Colombo and after hearing the appeal
the learned Judge of the High Court had affirmed the conviction, and sentence
imposed on the Appellant in respect of counts 1 and 3 and acquitted him on
counts 2 and 4. Further the learned Judge of the High Court in addition had
imposed a penalty of Rs. 400/- in respect of count 3 in terms of sec­tion 26
of the Bribery Act.

 Upon a consideration of an application for special leave to this Court
against the judgment of the learned Judge of the High Court on 28.5.2002
special leave to appeal was granted upon the question as to whether the
learned High Court Judge erred in law in failing to set aside the Order of the
learned Magistrate, in view of the latter's failure to consider the
shortcomings in the prosecution case as well as the evidence of the Accused-
Appellant. At the trial in the Magistrate's Court Jayasuderage Samy Appuhamy,
Premaratne Jayasundera, A.M.W.M. Amarakoon, R.M. Premaratne and A. Liyanage
testified as witnesses for the prosecution whilst the Accused Appellant gave
evidence on his own behalf denying the allegations against him.



According to the evidence of the virtual complainant Samy Appuhamy he had
stood as surety for one of his brothers

67



 Premaratne Jayasundera, who had been charged in Case No. 23099 in the
Magistrate's Court of Matale and had deposited a sum of Rs. 5000/- as bail on
13.10.1995 (the receipt issued for deposit­ing bail has been produced as P1).
After his brother was acquitted in the said case he had made an application
for the release of the bail money and had met the Accused-Appellant who was a
Clerk attached to the Matale Magistrate's Court in order to have the bail
money released to him. He had asked him to come on a Friday. When he met the
Accused-Appellant on Friday the Accused-Appellant informed him that the
learned Magistrate had not yet signed the release Order. Thereafter he had met
the Accused-Appellant for two months on every Friday but had been
unsuc­cessful in getting the money released. On one occasion when he met the
Accused-Appellant he had told the complainant "these mat­ters cannot be done
for nothing" and demanded a sum of Rs. 500/-to have the bail money released.
Thereafter the virtual complainant had made a written complaint to the Bribery
Commissioner which complaint dated 28.11.1996 has been produced as 'P2'.
Thereafter some officers from the Bribery Commissioner's Department had come
and met him at his home and questioned him as to whether he had signed the
letter 'P2' and after he identified 'P2' as being the complain the made to the
Bribery Commissioner, his statement had been recorded and he had proceeded
with the Bribery Officers to the Matale Magistrate's Court. Inspector Liyanage
who led the raid­ing party had given him instructions in regard to what he
should do in implementing the trap and had been asked to accompany Police
Constable Premaratne who was to be identified as his brother. Five hundred
rupee notes, the serial numbers of which had been noted in the investigation
note book had been handed over to the decoy P.C. Premaratne and the
complainant had been asked to meet the Accused-Appellant and speak to him and
further directed that should the Accused-Appellant ask for money that he was
to collect it from the decoy Premaratne and hand it over to the Accused-
Appellant. Although the complainant had gone to meet the Accused-Appellant on
the 13th of December 1996 they had been informed that the Accused-Appellant
was on leave and would return to work on Monday.

 68



On 16.12.1996 the Bribery Officers had met the virtual com­plainant at Matale
as directed. Inspector Liyanage had given him the same instructions that was
given on the previous day and had requested him to accompany P.C. Premaratne
to meet the Accused-Appellant and hand over the money if he asked for it.
Accordingly on 16.12.1996 he had participated in the raid with the Bribery
Officers. When he accompanied P.C. Premaratne the Accused-Appellant on seeing
them had called the virtual com­plainant and asked him as to whether he had
brought that, mean­ing money, in the presence of P.C. Premaratne, the decoy.
The Accused-Appellant had informed him that the cheque had not been signed and
for them to wait for a while stating that the Magistrate was still on the
Bench and that he would get the cheque signed after he gets down from the
Bench. When he and P.C. Premaratne were seated on a bench the Accused-
Appellant had called them and asked them to go towards the canteen. When they
went there the Accused-Appellant had come near them and asked them whether the
money had been brought. When they replied in the affirmative the Accused-
Appellant is alleged to have said "give it soon". Then the decoy Premaratne
had asked the Accused-Appellant not to take Rs. 500/- but to take Rs. 400/- to
which the Accused-Appellant had agreed. P.C. Premaratne had given the vir­tual
complainant four one hundred rupee notes which money had been handed over to
the Accused-Appellant. The Accused-Appellant had put that money in his shirt
pocket and gone in to the latrine and closed the door. At this point of time
P.C. Premaratne had signalled Inspector Liyanage and the other members of the
raiding party who came near the latrine and waited there till the Accused-
Appellant came out. As the Accused-Appellant came out Inspector Liyanage had
identified himself and asked the Accused-Appellant for the money that had been
taken from the complainant. He had denied taking any money. On a search made
I.P. Liyanage had recovered the four marked hundred rupee notes together with
some other money from the Accused-Appellant's possession and he had got the
Accused-Appellant to compare the numbers of the notes recovered with the
numbers noted in the investigation note book and the Accused-Appellant had
been arrested.

69

P.C. Premaratne, the decoy, testified in regard to the instruc­tions given and
the conversation that took place between Accused-Appellant, the virtual
complainant and himself and with regard to the acceptance of the money by the
Accused-Appellant and the recovery of the money from the Accused-Appellant by
Inspector Liyanage.

Inspector Liyanage testified before the Magistrate in regard to the
instructions that were given and in regard to the manner in which the raid was
conducted successfully. Apart from the afore­said witnesses, the virtual
complainant's brother Premaratne Jayasundera testified in regard to the fact
that the virtual com­plainant had stood as surety for him in the criminal case
that had been instituted against him and furnished bail in a sum of Rs.
5000/-. After he was acquitted his brother had informed him that the officers
from the Bribery Department had arrested the Accused-Appellant when he took a
sum of Rs. 400/- in order to release the bail money.



The Accused-Appellant in his evidence stated that he joined as a Clerk in the
Judicial Service in 1984 and was first posted to the Dambulla Magistrate's
Court and was transferred to the Matale District Court in January 1995. He
further stated that the virtual complainant Samy Appuhamy first met him in the
first month of 1996 when he came to see him in connection with the release of
a sum of Rs. 5000/- which had been deposited as bail money in respect of a
case where his brother Premaratne Jayasundera was charged. According to him on
that day he had obtained a Photostat copy of the bail deposit receipt, a five
rupee stamp and a motion requesting the release of the bail money. He had then
prepared a voucher and got the virtual complainant to sign it. He also noted
the virtual complainant's National Identity Card number and informed him that
he would post the cheque when it was ready. He went on to say that before the
cheque was ready the virtual complainant came to see him in about three days'
time thereafter and then he informed the virtual complainant that this could
not be done in about two or three days' time and it may sometimes take even
five to six months and again informed the complainant that he would notify
when the cheque was ready. He further stated that the com­plainant came to see
him on several occasions thereafter but was

70



unsuccessful in getting the bail deposit released. In answer to Court the
Accused-Appellant stated that the complainant last came to see him on 15th
February 1996 and questioned him as to whether the said money was not being
released at the instance of the Accused-Appellant's brother who had a land
case against the complainant's brother in law and went away stating "that he
would see about it". It was the evidence of the Accused-Appellant that the
virtual complainant came to see him next on the day he was arrest­ed i.e. on
16.12.1996 and questioned him as to whether the cheque was ready even on that
day. He then checked up the registers and found that the cheque had been
written but the validity period of the cheque had expired and asked the
virtual complainant to wait for sometime till the Magistrate adjourned for
lunch so that he could get the Magistrate to have the validity period of the
cheque extend­ed. At about 1.30 in the afternoon he had instructed an office
Peon to take the cheque that was on his table to the Magistrate when he
adjourned for lunch and to get the signature of the Magistrate. Thereafter he
had proceeded towards the canteen with his lunch packet in his hand and when
he was climbing the steps leading to the canteen the virtual complainant
followed by another had come along from behind and suddenly the virtual
complainant had thrust something into his trouser pocket stating "keep this".
According to the Accused-Appellant he had immediately examined what had been
thrust into his pocket and had found that it was some money. He had
immediately put the money on the ground. At that stage he stated that
Inspector Liyanage identified himself as an officer of the Bribery
Commissioner's Department and asked him for the money that was taken from the
virtual complainant. He totally denied that he solicited and accepted a bribe
from the virtual complainant. His position was that he had been falsely
implicated due to a grievance the virtual complainant had owing to the land
case between the vir­tual complainant's brother in law and his brother.



At the hearing of this appeal it was submitted by learned President's Counsel
appearing for the Accused-Appellant that in the judgment of the learned
Magistrate there had been a total fail­ure to give any consideration to the
sworn evidence of the Appellant and that the only reference thereto was an
assertion in the penulti­mate sentence in the judgment that the defence
evidence had

71

failed to demolish or to raise a reasonable doubt in the prosecution case, and
contended that as observed by Samarawickrema J. in the case of _Chandradasa v.
Queen_ (1) that "an impartial and ade­quate consideration of his case by a
judge of fact is the right of every accused". In the present case it was the
submission of the learned President's Counsel that the Accused-Appellant had
been deprived of that right secured to him by the total failure of the learned
Magistrate to have considered his own evidence.



It was also submitted by learned President's Counsel that even the learned
Judge of the High Court having expressly stated that the learned Magistrate
should have examined the evidence of the Accused-Appellant erred in upholding
the conviction of the Accused-Appellant in spite of the culpable failure on
the part of the trial Judge to have adequately and impartially examined the
evi­dence of the Accused-Appellant.



It was further submitted by the President's Counsel that despite the purported
acceptance of the evidence of the prosecu­tion witnesses by the trial Court
the Appellate Courts are not relieved of the duty of testing that evidence
both intrinsically and extrinsically as observed in _Jagathsena and others v.
G.D.D. Perera Inspector, Criminal Investigations Department and Mrs. Sirimavo
Bandaranaike_ (2).



It was the contention of learned Counsel for the 1st respon­dent that the
learned Magistrate who had the opportunity of seeing, hearing and observing
the demeanour of the witnesses at the trial had quite correctly rejected the
evidence of the Accused-Appellant although he had not set out in detail the
reasons for doing so. It was submitted by learned Counsel that none of the
positions taken up by the accused in his evidence relating to the reasons for
his being falsely implicated, regarding the money being thrust into his pocket
by the virtual complainant had even been suggested to any of the witnesses who
testified for the prosecution at the trial. Learned Counsel for the 1st
respondent further submitted that the learned Judge of the High Court had
observed that the Magistrate should have given more consideration to the
evidence of the accused before rejecting it. In his jugdement the learned High
Court Judge had dealt with the evidence led and had considered the
contradic­tions in the evidence of the virtual complainant and that of the

72



 decoy P.C. Premaratne and had no hesitation in accepting the evi­dence of the
prosecution witnesses and upholding the conviction of the Accused-Appellant in
respect of counts 1 and 3.



Having regard to the submissions made, I am of view that it would be useful to
examine the evidence of the Accused-Appellant in some detail to consider as to
whether that evidence is credible. He commences the evidence by stating that
the virtual complainant first met him in the first month of 1996 in order to
get the bail money released. According to him about three days thereafter the
com­plainant had come again and on several days and the last date that he came
was on the 15th of February 1996 before he was arrest­ed on 16.12.96. During
the course of the trial the record in M.C. Matale 230/99 was produced marked
P5. The journal entries of that case record reveals that the virtual
complainant's brother had been acquitted only 20.3.1996. Thus in regard to the
date on which the virtual complainant first met him and the answer given to
Court that he met him last time on 15.2.1996 before he was arrested on
16.12.1996 does not bear scrutiny.



Although the Accused-Appellant in his evidence had taken up the position that
he got the virtual complainant to give him a motion requesting the release of
the money on the first day itself when he met him, according to the motion P5A
produced in evidence which relates to the release of the bail deposit it is to
be observed that it is dated 27.5.1996. Thus it appears that his evidence in
regard to this question is unacceptable.



Although the Accused-Appellant had taken up the position that he has been
falsely implicated owing to a land case that his brother had with the virtual
complainant's brother in law, it is to be noted from document P2, that the
written complaint made by the virtual complainant to the Bribery Commissioner
is dated 28.11.1996 and the journal entries in Case No. D.C. Matale L5293
which were produced marked VI by the accused himself shows that the land case
between the Accused-Appellant's brother and the brother in law of the virtual
complainant had been instituted on the 24th of September 1998, nearly two
years after the written com­plaint by the virtual complainant to the Bribery
Commissioner. Another significant factor that is to be noted is that although
in the evidence of the Accused-Appellant, he has testified that he would

73



 notify the virtual complainant when the cheque was ready, it is to be
observed that the application made by the virtual complainant on 27.5.1996
requesting the release of bail money has been journalised only on 25.10.1996
as evidence by P5B on which the learned Magistrate appears to have made Order
on the same day to file the application and to release the bail money upon the
sure­ty being identified. It is to be further noted that the cheque for Rs.
5000/- in favour of the virtual complainant, P3, although had been written on
30.10.1996 had been kept with the Accused-Appellant without it being posted to
the virtual complainant or with­out notifying him that the cheque was ready
until 16th December 1996 (the date of the trap) on which date the period of
validity had been extended by 30 days.



For the reasons stated I am of the view that no credence whatever could have
been given to the evidence of the Accused-Appellant. Accordingly, I affirm the
conviction of the Accused-Appellant on counts 1 and 3 and the sentence imposed
by the learned Judge of the High Court but direct that the period of
sus­pension of the term of imprisonment imposed in respect of the two counts
on which he had been convicted be reduced to a period of five years from ten.
Subject to the above variation the appeal is dis­missed.

**WIGNESWARAN, J** - I agree.

**WEERASURIYA, J.** - I agree.

_Appeal dismissed subject to variation of sentence._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/9.html_  

