##  Hewagama v. The Bribery Commissioner and Another - SLR - 405, Vol 3 of
1994 [1994] LKSC 9; (1994) 3 Sri LR 405 (21 September 1994)

405

  
HEWAGAMA  

**v.**

**THE BRIBERY COMMISSIONER AND ANOTHER**  

  
SUPREME COURT

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J.

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 55/94

HC/MC APPEAL NO. 179/92

MC COLOMBO NO. 93508

AUGUST 29, 1994.



Bribery Act sections 3(1), 4(1) and 71-Arrest without credible information of
any offence - Constitution, Article 13(1).

_ _

**Held:**

** **

A notice to furnish a statement of assets in terms of the provisions of
section 4(1) of the Bribery Act is competent only in the course of an
investigation into an allegation of bribery against any person, or after the
commencement of a prosecution of any person for bribery. The prosecution has
to establish that an allegation of bribery against some person is pending.



**Case referred to:**

** **

1 _. Piyasiri v. Fernando, A.S.P._ [1988) 1 Sri L.R. 173

_ _

**APPEAL** from judgment of the High Court.



Batty Weerakoon with Ramani Muttettuwegama for appellant.  


Respondents unrepresented. _  
 _

_Cur adv vult_.



September 21, 1994.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

This is an appeal against the judgment of the High Court dated 16.12.93
affirming the conviction and sentence of the appellant by the Magistrate for
an offence punishable under S. 71 of the Bribery Act to wit, wilful neglect to
comply with a notice dated 23.03.88  


**406**



purporting to have been sent to him under S. 4(1) (b) of the Act. The said
notice required him to furnish a sworn statement in writing (in a prescribed
form) enumerating all movable and immovable property owned or possessed by him
during the period 1952 to 1982. It was alleged that the appellant neglected to
comply with the notice by 02.11.88 which was the final date given by the
Bribery Commissioner after several extensions of time to furnish the
statement.



Special leave to appeal was granted on the question whether the High Court had
failed to consider the fact that the condition precedent for serving a valid
notice under s. 4(1) of the Act namely, the pendancy of an investigation into
an allegation of bribery against any person, has not been established by the
prosecution. The learned High, Court Judge has said that "according to the
evidence led in the Magistrate's Court, the Bribery Commissioner had been
conducting an investigation into a charge of bribery against the son of the
accused-appellant". Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted that there is
no evidence of a pending investigation into an allegation of bribery within
the meaning of S. 4(1) or S. 3(1) of the Act.



The son of the appellant referred to by the learned High Court Judge is one R.
P. Hewagama, an officer of the Customs Department. On 25.11.86 Hewagama and
several other Customs Officer were returning to Colombo, having been on duty
at the Katunayake International Airport when they were arrested at Seeduwa by
an Assistant Superintendent of Police who was accompanied by several police
officers attached to the Bribery Department. They were arrested on a general
complaint made by an informant that Customs Officers were in the habit of
soliciting and accepting bribes from passengers for waiving customs duties.



After their arrest, they were taken to the Seeduwa Police Station where they
were searched and certain moneys and other articles in their possession were
taken charge of by the Police. They were then taken to the Bribery
Commissioner's Office in Colombo where their statements were recorded. They
were released after they gave a written undertaking to appear in the
Magistrate's Court of Colombo, the following morning.

**407**



Hewagama and other Customs Officers who were so arrested filed 14 fundamental
rights applications before this Court which were consolidated and heard
together- vide Piyasiri v. Fernando (1) for the decision in that case where
this Court held that the said arrest was made without credible information of
any offence but on vague general suspicion; as such it violated the
petitioner's rights under Article 13(1).



On 11.01.87, during the pendancy of the fundamental rights applications, the
Bribery Commissioner served a S. 4(1) notice on R. P. Hewagama (who was one of
the petitioners) calling upon him to furnish a statement of his assets on or
before 31.01.87. Hewagama furnished the statement P1 as required. Among the
properties disclosed in P1 is a house which Hewagama stated had been
constructed by his father, the appellant, in or about 1957. No further action
was taken for over one year when the bribery Commissioner required the
appellant to report to the Bribery Commissioner's office on 17.02.88. As that
was the date fixed for-the judgment in Piyasiri's case (Supra) the appellant
applied for another date. He was requested to report on 22.05.88.



On 22.05.88 the appellant attended the Bribery Commissioner's office and was
questioned about the house which he constructed for his son. He told them that
it was constructed in the 1950s. He next received the notice purporting to be
under S. 4(1) of the Act, referred to at the commencement of this judgment.



Learned Counsel for the appellant drew our attention to the provisions of S.
4(1) in terms of which a notice under that section is competent only in the
course of an investigation into an allegation of bribery against any person or
after the commencement of a prosecution of any person for bribery. As regards
the second precondition, it has not been claimed that a prosecution of any
person for bribery had been commenced. So that the prosecution had to
establish that an investigation into an allegation of bribery against some
person was pending. Counsel submitted that the evidence does not establish the
existence of that precondition.

**408**



In support of his submission Counsel relied on the following passage in the
judgment in Piyasiri's case. Referring to the conduct of one of the officers
who was in the party that arrested the petitioners, H. A. G. de Silva,, J.
said -  
  
"Learned Counsel for the respondents attempted to justify the action of the
18th respondent on the basis that what the 18th respondent was doing was
investigating allegations of bribery on the order of the Bribery Commissioner,
as he was empowered to do, under S. 3 of the Bribery Act but this section
presupposes that there are allegations of bribery against definite individuals
and not allegations of a nebulous nature" ((1988) 1 Sri L.R. 173 at 184).



After ordering relief to the petitioners, the judgment went on to state -  
  
"The moneys and articles taken charge of from the petitioners could await the
results of any proceedings in the Magistrate's Court or in a departmental
inquiry that may be taken. If no such proceedings are taken the petitioners
would be entitled to have such moneys returned to them" (P. 186).



On 26.05.86 on an application made to the Magistrate, the petitioners were
discharged and the goods claimed by them were released \- (Vide exhibit V4).



Counsel argued that after the judgment of this Court and the said order of the
Magistrate, there was no basis whatsoever to justify the impugned notice; the
Bribery Commissioner was not competent to require the appellant to comply with
the said notice; as such the appellant committed no offence by his failure to
furnish the required statement.



I am in agreement with the submissions made on behalf of the appellant. I hold
that there was no legal basis for the impugned notice and hence it is invalid.
Consequently, the appellant is not guilty of an offence by reason of his
failure to furnish the required

**409**



statement. Accordingly, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the High
Court and the order of the Magistrate and acquit the appellant.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/9.html_  

