##  Coconut Research Board v. Fernando - SLR - 219, Vol 1 of 1994 [1993] LKSC
9; (1994) 1 Sri LR 219 (28 June 1993)

**219**

**COCONUT RESEARCH BOARD** ****

**v.** ****

**FERNANDO**  



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

PERERA, J.

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 2/93

H.C. NEGOMBO NO. 8/91

JUNE 28TH, 1993.



_Industrial Dispute - Jurisdiction of the Provincial High Court in Appeals
from the L. T. - Constitution, Article 154 P (3) (c) - High Court (Special
Provisions) Act No. 19, of 1990, Section 4._



The Applicant-Respondent filed an application to the Labour Tribunal in July,
1987. The employer-appellant filed the answer in September, 1987\. Both
documents referred to the "Labour Tribunal" but did not further describe the
Labour Tribunal. The parties were resident/situated within the  North Western
Province. The applicants replication referred to the "Labour Tribunal No. 21,
Negombo Circuit Chilaw."



Proceedings were held by the President, Labour Tribunal - Negombo, sitting at
Chilaw. In the course of the proceedings an order was made on a preliminary
objection and the caption of the order read "In the Labour Tribunal No. 21 -
Circuit Chilaw". In the final order made on 26.5.91 it was captioned "Labour
Tribunal 21 - Negombo" without reference to circuit Chilaw: On 1.8.1991 the
President made a correction to the earlier order but again as "President,
Labour Tribunal Negombo."



The employer-appellant appealed from the said order to the  High Court of
Western Province, and an objection was taken up by an Applicant-Respondent
that the High Court of Western Province had no jurisdiction and that an appeal
should have been filed in the High Court of North Western Province.

** **

**Held:**



Under Article 154 P(3) (c) of the Constitution Parliament was empowered to
confer additional jurisdictions and powers on the High Court for the Province.
Under Act No. 19 of 1990 the High Court for the Province was granted appellate

**220**



Jurisdiction in respect of orders made by the Labour Tribunals within that
Province. Section 4 confers the right on the party aggrieved by an order of
the Labour Tribunal to appeal to the High Court for the province within which
such Labour Tribunal is situated. Also the Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act
No. 32 of 1990 gives the right of appeal to the High Court for the Province
within which the Labour Tribunal concerned was situated. Thus the statutory
provision refers to the province within which the tribunal is 'situate'.



'Situation' is far more appropriate to refer to the physical location of the
Tribunal rather than to some other place where the President happened to
exercise some of his functions on a particular occasion. Further the Tribunal
also described itself as the Labour Tribunal, Negombo, in its order.



Therefore the order made in the present case having been made by Labour
Tribunal, Negombo, comes within the jurisdiction of the High Court of the
Western Province.



**Case referred to:**

_ _

_Jafferjee v. Subramaniam_ (1969) 71 NLR 518

_ _

**APPEAL** from order of the District Court



_Asoka de Silva D.S.G._ with _R. Nawinne S.C._ for employer-appellant.

_ _

_A. D. de Silva_ with _Namal Punchihewa_ and _ S. Weerakoon for appellant-
respondent_ _._



_Cur adv vult._





June 28th, 1993.  


**FERNANDO, J.**

** **

The applicant-respondent filed an application to the Labour Tribunal in July,
1987 and the employer-appellant filed its answer in September, 1987. Both
documents referred to the "Labour Tribunal" but did not further describe the
Labour Tribunal. The applicant-respondent was resident, and the employer-
institution was situated, within the  North-Western Province. In the
applicant's replication the Labour Tribunal was referred to as "Labour
Tribunal No. 21 Negombo-circuit Chilaw." It is the common ground that
thereafter proceedings were held by the President, Labour Tribunal-Negombo,
sitting at Chilaw. The record of each day's proceedings is headed "Labour
Tribunal circuit at Chilaw. In the course of the proceedings

**221  
 **

an order was made on a preliminary objection, and the caption to that order
reads "In the Labour Tribunal No. 21 - circuit at Chilaw" and was signed by
the President as 'Labour Tribunal No. 21 - circuit at Chilaw". It was
apparently delivered at Chilaw on 9th February, 1988. Parties also filed
written submissions. The applicant's written submissions referred to the
"Labour Tribunal, Chilaw circuit". The final order made on 25th June, 1991 is
captioned "Labour Tribunal 21 Negombo". There is no reference to the circuit
at Chilaw. The President gave his designation as President, Labour Tribunal 21
- Negombo" and the order was signed at Negombo on 25th June, 1991. Again on
1st August 1991, as "President, Labour Tribunal 21 Negombo", he made a
correction in respect of his order. The employer-appellant lodged an appeal
against that order in the High Court of the Western Province. That appeal was
taken up for consideration by the High Court Judge exercising jurisdiction at
Negombo. In the course of the submissions, an objection was taken by the
applicant that the High Court of the Western Province had no jurisdiction; and
that it was only the High Court of the North Western Province (that is, the
High Court Judge sitting at Chilaw) which had jurisdiction in respect of an
appeal against the order of the Labour Tribunal.



Under Article 154P(3) (C) Parliament was empowered to confer additional
jurisdictions and powers on the High Court for the Province. Under the High
Court (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of '90, the High Court for the Province
was granted appellate jurisdiction in respect of orders made by the Labour.
Tribunal within that province. Section 4 conferred the right on the party
aggrieved by an order of the Labour Tribunal to appeal to the High Court for
the province within which such Labour Tribunal is situated. Similarly by the
Industrial Disputes (Amendment) Act No. 32 of 1990 the right of appeal was
given to the High Court for the province within which the Labour Tribunal
concerned was situated. Mr. A. A. de Silva for the applicant contends that in
determining where the Tribunal was situated, for the purpose of these
provisions, one has to take into account firstly, the fact that the Labour
Tribunal has all-island jurisdiction; (Jafferjee v. Subramaniam (1) );
secondly the place of residence of parties, and thirdly the place where the
President functions (and in this case, the fact that all the evidence was

**222  
 **

recorded in Chilaw). He further submits that the purpose of Article 154 P was
to enable parties to have their dispute finally adjudicated in the Province in
which they reside. He therefore submits that the Tribunal whose order is
challenged in this case could be regarded as having been situated in Chilaw.



We are unable to uphold that submission. The statutory provisions refer to the
Province within which the Tribunal is 'situate'. We must assume that the
legislature intended to refer to some definite easily ascertainable, factor
rather than a vague or indeterminate factor. 'Situation' is far more
appropriate to refer to the physical location of the Tribunal (and its office)
rather than to some other place where the President happened to exercise some
of his functions on a particular occasion; it refers to a permanent physical
link, rather than to a transient or temporary presence in a place. For
instance, if pleadings were filed in one place, and the proceedings took place
in two or three other locations, and the order was made in yet another place,
there would be a considerable difficulty in determining where the Tribunal was
'situated; if situation was intended to refer to the place where it exercised
its functions.



There is also the important consideration that the Tribunal in its order
described itself as the Labour Tribunal Negombo



In these circumstances it is clear that the order made in the present case was
made by the Labour Tribunal at Negombo; that the Tribunal was situated within
the Western Province; and that the High Court Western Province functioning at
Negombo, had jurisdiction to determine the appeal. The order of the High Court
holding that it had no jurisdiction is set aside. Counsel do not- wish us to
adjudicate upon the merits of the case, on which we therefore express no view.
The High Court for the Western Province sitting at Negombo is directed to hear
and determine the appeal on the merits as expeditiously as possible. There
will be no costs of appeal.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/9.html_  

