##  Weerapura v. Heenatiyane Nanda Tissa Thero and Another [International
Buddhist Centre Case) - SLR - 76, Vol 3 of 1994 [1992] LKSC 9; (1994) 3 Sri LR
76 (31 July 1992)

**76**

**WEERAPURA  **

**V.  **

**HEENATIYANE NANDA TISSA THERO AND ANOTHER** ****

**(INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST** ******CENTRE CASE)**





SUPREME COURT.

M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.,

KULATUNGA, J., AND

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,

S.C. APPEAL NO. 4/92

C.A. NO. 560/83

D.C. MT LAVINIA NO. 270/ZL

APRIL 27 AND 28, 1992.



Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law - Trust - Constructive trust - Charitable trust -
Charitable purpose - Sanghika property - Requisites for creation of a trust -
Trusts Ordinance.



Mrs. Podileenu Fernando had 3 sons: Oliver Fernando, Somasiri Somaratne, and
Titus Fernando, the 2nd defendant and two daughters. One daughter was married
to H. D. Jinadasa. The other daughter had two sons - the plaintiff appellant
and Rev. Wellawatte Ananda \- and a daughter. Mrs. Fernando and Oliver,
Somasiri and Jinadasa (referred to as the four founders) decided to establish
a Buddhist Centre to serve as a residence for foreign priests and students
coming to Sri Lanka and for outstation priests who wished to study Buddhist
philosophy. At an auction sale under the Entail and Settlement Ordinance, the
2nd defendant was the highest bidder and (after a long delay) on 08.12.63
obtained conveyances lin his name from the heirs of the owner. By this time
the sole surviving founder was Jinadasa.



Although on the face of the deeds, the 2nd defendant became the absolute
owner, it was common ground that the 2nd defendant held the property subject
to a constructive trust in terms of section 84 of the Trusts Ordinance in
favour of the four founders.



In October 1954 an Association was formed with a set of rules under the name
International Buddhist Centre. Its objects were to put a building in Colombo
with a resident priest in charge to train bhikkus to propagate the Dhamma,
accommodate in the Centre foreign missionaries and students of diverse beliefs
who come to Sri Lanka to study Buddhist philosophy and to run a Sunday school
for teaching the Buddha Dhamma and the Buddhist way of life. On 23.01.59 the
Minister of Finance declared the International Buddhist Centre an approved
charity for income tax purposes. Several foreign and local leaders and
dignitaries visited the Centre and the invitation for these functions went out
from "the President and Members of the International Buddhist Centre" and not
by the founders or by any trustees.

**77**



On 18.11.1965 the 2nd defendant by Deed No. 1060 transferred the lands to Rev.
Ananda describing him as the Viharadipathi of the International Buddhist
Centre and declaring the dedication of the premises to the Sasana and the Maha
Sangha. There was some evidence that on 6.1.66 the land and buildings had been
dedicated to the Maha Sangha.



Rev. Ananda died unexpectedly at the early age of 42 on 11.05.77 without
pupils. The Amarapura Nikaya to which Rev. Ananda belonged appointed Rev.
Nanda Tissa Thero the 1st defendant, who had been Rev. Ananda's tutor:
Disputes arose and Jinadasa and some members of the families of the founders
were excluded from the management of the Centre. On 03.05.78 Jinadasa, Rev.
Anada's mother, brother (plaintiff) and sister executed Deed No. 674 claiming
that Jinadasa was entitled under section 75 of the Trusts Ordinance to appoint
a trustee to fill the vacancy resulting from Rev. Ananda's death.



**Held:**



Under Section 6 of the Trusts Ordinance a trust is created when the author of
the trust indicates with reasonable certainty by words or acts -



(a) an intention on his part to create thereby a trust,  
  
(b) the purpose of the trust,  
  
(c) the beneficiary,



(d) the trust property, and  
  
(unless the trust is declared by will or the author of the trust is himself to
be trustee) transfers the property to the trustee.



A trust is "an obligation annexed to the ownership of property, and arising
out of a confidence reposed in and accepted by the owner".



There is no evidence that the founders reposed any such confidence in the 2nd
defendant, or that he accepted the same. Jinadasa made no such claim.



The conduct of the four founders establishes that they had in mind a purpose
which fell within the category of the "advancement of religion and the
maintenance of religious rites and practices", and possibly also "the
advancement of education and knowledge". Their purpose was charitable. But
although the purpose is charitable, there is no charitable trust necessarily
created.



The conduct of the founders from 1954 up to 1965 at least, is quite
inconsistent with an intention to implement their purpose through a trust
imposed on the 2nd defendant. Instead they consciously decided to achieve
their objectives through **an association** subject to rules which set out
those objects.



An intention to create a charitable trust or any trust (apart from a
constructive trust under section 84) has not been established.

**78**



The 2nd defendant held the property subject to a constructive trust in favour
of the four founders; he had therefore to restore the property to them, or to
deal with it in accordance with their directions. The association had no right
or interest in regard to the title to the property; their object was " the
putting up of a building nothing was stated about the subsequent management or
administration of the building or the activities conducted therein. The
conveyances by the 2nd defendant to Rev. Ananda was in accordance with the
terms of the constructive trust by which he was bound.

The property was Sanghika.

** **

**Cases referred to:**

_ _

1 _. Wijewardena v Buddharakkita Thero,_ (1957) 59 NLR 121, 124

_ _

2 _. Wickremasinghe v Unnanse_ , (1921) 22 NLR 236.

_ _

3 _. Murugesu v. Chelliah,_ (1956) 57 NLR 463.

_ _

4 _. Mailvaganam v Ramanatha Aiyar_ (1933) 57 NLR 289.

_ _

5 _. Doraiswami Kurukkal v Thambipillai,_ (1949) 53 NLR 323.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal



_H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _Gomin Dayasiri_ and _N. M. Musafer_ for
plaintiff-appellant.

_ _

_A. C. Gooneratne, Q.C._ with _P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C._

_ _

_M. B. Peramuna_ and _Keerthi Gunawardena_ for defendant-respondent. _  
 _

_Cur adv vult._



July 31, 1992.  


**FERNANDO, J.**



Mrs. Podileenu Fernando had three sons : Oliver Fernando, Somasiri Somaratne,
and Titus Fernando, the 2nd Defendant - Appellant-Respondent ("the 2nd
Defendant") and two daughters. One daughter was married to H. D. Jinadasa; the
other daughter had two sons the Plaintiff-Respondent-Appellant, ("the
Plaintiff") and Rev. Wellawatte Ananda - and a daughter. Rev. Ananda had been
ordained prior to 1953\. He had interests and influence outside Sri Lanka; he
made regular trips abroad to create awareness and understanding of Buddhist
thought and philisophy, and was at one time a visiting lecturer at an
University in Los Angeles.



In 1953, Mrs. Fernando, Oliver, Somasiri, and Jinadasa (collectively referred
to as "the four founders") decided to purchase land "for the purpose of
establishing a Buddhist Centre in order to provide residential facilities for
missionaries of diverse beliefs and

**79**



students who come to Ceylon to study Buddhist philosophy as well as for
Bhikkus from various parts of Sri Lanka visiting the city of Colombo for short
periods". (This averment in the plaint, was admitted in the answer). They
provided the consideration and authorised the 2nd Defendant to make the
purchase. Two allotments of land were put up for sale on 10.10.1953,
consequent to a Court order upon an application made under the Entail and
Settlement Ordinance; the 2nd Defendant was the highest bidder, and was
declared the purchaser; he paid the necessary deposit, and conditions of sale
were duly executed and attested. The sale was confirmed by the Court on
15.11.53, but for some unexplained reason the owner refused to execute the
conveyances; she died in October 1963, and her heirs executed conveyances in
favour of the 2nd Defendant on 8.12.63. Although on the face of those deeds,
he became the absolute owner, it is common ground that the 2nd Defendant held
the property subject to a constructive trust in terms of section 84 of the
Trusts Ordinance in favour of the four founders. There is some evidence, and
in the circumstances it is probable, that the 2nd Defendant knew the purpose
which the four founders had in mind. The Plaintiff's position is that the
property was also subject to a charitable trust, but it is not clear whether
the trustee of that trust was the 2nd Defendant.



Mr. H. L. De Silva, P.C., for the Plaintiff, conceded that there was no direct
evidence as to the establishment of a charitable trust in 1953; it was his
contention that the subsequent events, and the conduct of the parties
concerned, upto about 1965, establish that the intention of the four founders
was to create a charitable trust the trust property, the purpose, and the
beneficiaries, were clear; accordingly, there was a valid charitable trust. It
is therefore necessary to refer to subsequent events up to 1965, and even
thereafter up to the institution of this action.



In October 1954 an association was formed with the name "International
Buddhist Centre"; its objects were **" the putting up of a building **in
Colombo which shall be in charge of a resident priest who shall with the help
of other priests train bhikkus to propagate the Dhamma, the accommodation in
the Centre of foreign missionaries and students of diverse beliefs who come to
Ceylon to study



**80**



Buddhist philosophy, and the opening of a Sunday school to teach the children
the Buddha Dhamma and to lead them in the Buddhist way of life." The rules of
the association were drafted by Oliver Fernando, who was a Proctor. There is
no evidence of any attempt to prepare a trust deed.



The minutes of that association up to 27.4.63 have been produced; there is not
a single reference therein to a trust (charitable, constructive or otherwise)
or to trustees. Apart from Mrs. Fernando, the other three founders, as well as
the 2nd Defendant and Rev. Ananda, held various offices in that association.
On 2.1.58 the association decided to open a bank account and to collect funds
from the public for the construction of the proposed buildings; commencing
from 11.2.58 funds were collected for that purpose. Prime minister Nehru of
India had laid the foundation stone on 19.5.57. Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike was
invited for the ceremonial tiling of the roof on 22.11.58. Prime Minister
Bandaranaike was invited for the unveiling of the pinnacles on 23.2.59.
President Rajendra Prasad of India-visited the Centre and gifted a Buddha
statue on 16.6.59. One Witkowsky, President of the Paderewski Foundation of
the U.S.A., was inviited for the opening ceremony on 18.10.59. For all these
functions invitations were issued by "the President and members of the
International Buddhist Centre", on behalf of the Centre, and not by the
founders or by "any trustees".  


On 23.1.59 the Minister of Finance by order published in the Gazette declared
various public charitable trusts and institutions, including the
"International Buddhist Centre", to be "approved charities" for the purpose of
the Income Tax Ordinance. There is no evidence that there was any entity by
that name other than the association formed in 1954; in particular, there is
no evidence that there was a charitable trust by the same name, or that the
trustees of such a trust applied to the Minister for such approval. That order
therefore must be taken as referring to that association. That association was
a charitable **institution** , and accordingly that order cannot be taken to
mean that it was a charitable **trust.**



The association started a Sunday school, and commenced training bhikkus for
the propagation of the Dhamma. At a meeting

**81**



held on 10.8.62, Somaratne is recorded as having exhorted the members that "in
spite of all these setbacks they should strive at all costs to carry on the
objects of the Centre as laid down in the Constitution". Looking at the period
from 1954 to 1963, the picture that emerges is that this is what they were
striving to do; nowhere does the idea of a trust emerge.



Three of the founders died before the conveyances were obtained: Mrs.
Podileenu Fernando on 15.9.55, Oliver Fernando in 1958, and Somaratne in 1962.
The sole surviving founder was Jinadasa. After conveyances were executed in
favour of the 2nd Defendant, the question arose as to how the property should
be dealt with; a draft prepared by the 2nd Defendant contained the following
provisions:



"the said (2nd Defendant) do hereby offer, dedicate and grant unto the said
SASANA AND MAHA SANGHA the lands and premises fully described ... now called
"INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST CENTRE' and do hereby appoint Rev. Wellawatte Ananda
to be VIHARADIPATHI of the said lands and premises hereby dedicate now called
the 'INTERNATIONAL BUDDHIST CENTRE' to which the Rule of Succession the
Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa shall apply.



TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the said lands and premises hereby offered, dedicated and
granted to the BUDDHA SASANA and MAHA SANGHA. AND it is further Witnesseth
that the said Rev. Wellawatte Ananda doth accept on behalf of the Sasana and
Maha Sangha the said lands and premises.



This was not acceptable to Jinadasa, who testified that he had wanted the
property transferred to Rev. Ananda as Director of the Centre, and that he (as
well as the others, including Rev. Ananda) had objected to dedication to the
Maha Sangha and to the Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa rule. Finally, the 2nd
Defendant conveyed the land and the buildings, by deed No. 1060 dated
18.11.65, to Rev. Ananda, whose acceptance appears on the deed:

**82**



"WHEREAS substantial buildings have been erected on the said lands with the
funds provided by (the four founders) and by the public with the intention and
purpose inter alia for use as a Buddhist Centre for the Buddhist Priests
arriving from all over the world to assemble for religious discourses.



AND WHEREAS it is now the intention of the (2nd Defendant) to give dedicate
and grant unto the Sasana and Maha Sangha the lands fully described ... for
the benefit of the Maha Sangha and the use of the Buddhist Priests arriving
from the four directions and for other religious purposes.



NOW KNOW YE AND THESE PRESENTS WITNESS that in consideration of the aforesaid
premises the (2nd Defendant) doth hereby offer dedicate and grant by way of
gift unto REVEREND WELLAWATTE ANANDA the Viharadipathi of the International
Buddhist Centre for the benefit of the Maha Sangha and the use of the Buddhist
Priests arriving from the four directions and for other religious purposes the
lands fully described



TO HAVE AND TO HOLD the said lands hereby offered dedicated and granted to the
BUDDHA SASANA AND MAHA SANGHA.  
  
AND it is further witnesseth that the said Reverend Wellawatte Ananda doth
hereby accept on behalf of the Sasana and Maha Sangha the said lands fully
described ..."



Jinadasa testified that he (and the others) had objected to this as well, as
he had wanted Rev. Ananda appointed **as a trustee** ; that he had suggested
litigation, and had obtained legal advice that the 2nd Defendant had no power
to execute such a deed.



There is some evidence that on 6.1.66 the land and the buildings had been
dedicated to the Maha Sangha. A newspaper notice appeared on 5.1.66 setting
out the programme of activities of the Centre for Duruthu Poya day (6.1.66),
including "11 a.m. Sanghika Dana and the offering of the International
Buddhist Centre to the Maha Sangha". One witness, Werapitiya, testified in
regard to the ceremonies that took place on 6.1.66. That evidence was not
acted upon by the learned District Judge (for reasons which the Court of

**83**



Appeal found to be unacceptable). In coming to that conclusion the learned
District Judge did not assess the evidentiary value of that newspaper notice,
or of a notice sent by Rev. Ananda in November 1966 (convening a meeting to
reorganise the Dayaka Sabha), in which he had referred to the Centre as
Sanghika property, or of a letter dated 20.4.66, signed by Rev. Ananda,
addressed to the Editor of the Daily News stating that:



"The International Buddhist Centre ... was held in trust by (the 2nd
Defendant) as part of the **private personal property** of the Family. It was
on Duruthu Poya day this year that the Centre was formally **dedicated to the
Maha Sangha** with him as Viharadhipati and Director of the Centre."



Jinadasa tested that this letter had been prepared and kept in the Centre
because Rev. Henpitagedera Gnanaseeha, a regular preacher at the Centre, had
been arrested on suspicion of conspiracy against the State; because of his
links with the Centre, it was feared that the Government might acquire the
Centre; accordingly in that letter Rev. Ananda had sought to explain that Rev.
Gnanaseeha's connection was purely religious and had falsely asserted that the
Centre had been dedicated to the Maha Sangha to prevent acquisition; the
letter had not been sent to the addressee, but had been kept in the premises
in case the Police came to investigate. Although the aforesaid newspaper
notice indicated that he was scheduled to deliver a sermon at 7.00 p.m., Rev.
Gnanaseeha testified that he had no recollection of being invited for, and did
not attend, any dedication ceremony on 6.1.66; despite the fact that he was
normally invited to all important functions at the Centre.



It appears to me that either there was some uncertainty as to the original
intention of the founders, or their original intention had undergone some
changes. The objects of the association formed in 1954 include the training of
bhikkus to propagate the Dhamma and the opening of a Sunday school; but make
no reference to the accommodation of bhikkus from the outstations. The 1965
deed recited that the original intention was that the Centre should be used
for bhikkus arriving from all over the world to assemble for religious

**84**



discourses, but made no reference to the accommodation of missionaries of
diverse beliefs, of students wishing to study Buddhist philosophy, or of
outstation bhikkus. Whatever the original intention, that deed sets out the
2nd Defendant's intention, at that point of time, as being to dedicate the
property to the Sasana and the Maha Sangha. The question arises whether that
intention was shared by Jinadasa and the other three founders at any stage
prior to 1965, and I will refer to that later.



For eleven years thereafter neither Jinadasa nor any of the heirs of the
deceased founders challenged the 1965 deed, or complained that the original
purposes had been wrongfully or improperly subverted or whittled down, or
asserted that Rev. Ananda held the property as a trustee, charitable or
otherwise. Rev. Ananda died unexpectedly, at the early age of 42, on 11.5.77,
without pupils. The Amarapura Nikaya to which he belonged, appointed as
Viharadipathi the 1st Defendant, who had been Rev. Ananda's tutor and who had
resided at the Centre for many years. Within six months disputes arose between
him and Jinadasa, in consequence of which Jinadasa and some members of the
families of the founders were excluded from the management of the affairs of
the Centre. On 3.5.78 Jinadasa (as sole surviving author of the Trust"), and
Rev. Ananda's mother, brother (the Plaintiff), and sister (as his sole heirs
or legal representatives), executed deed no 674:



"WHEREAS (the four founders) desired to purchase the two said parcels of land
for the purpose of establishing thereon a Buddhist Institute called and known
as the International Buddhist Centre for the benefit of Buddhist priests
arriving from all over the world to assemble for religious discourses and for
study, and appointed (the 2nd Defendant) as their agent to bid for the said
parcels of land at the public auction;



AND WHEREAS (the 2nd Defendant) became the successful bidder ... and the two
parcels of land aforesaid were conveyed and transferred to (the 2nd Defendant
who) thus became the holder of the legal title to the said parcels of land as
constructive trustee for the authors of the Trust; ...

**85**



AND WHEREAS on the instructions of the authors of the Trust (the 2nd
Defendant) executed deed No. 1060 .... conveying the said parcels of land
together with the buildings and other improvements standing thereon to
Reverend Wellawatte Ananda Thero to be held by him as Trustee and Director of
the International Buddhist Centre, .Wellawatte, for the benefit of the Maha
Sanga and Buddhist priests coming from the four directions and for other
religious purposes;



AND WHEREAS Reverend Wellawatte Ananda Thero accepted the aforesaid
appointment as Trustee and functioned as such until his death on the 11th May
of 1977."



Although at first sight, the phrase "on the instructions of the authors of the
Trust" seems to suggest that all four founders had been alive in 1965 and had
given such instructions, yet it is also reasonably capable of meaning that
even the three deceased founders had, prior to death, concurred in instructing
the 2nd Defendant to convey the lands to Rev. Ananda on the terms later
embodied in deed No. 1060. Certainly, it suggests that Jinadasa (whatever his
previous reservations) had accepted the terms of deed No. 1060, and this may
explain his apparent acquiescence for over eleven years.



The learned trial Judge, having referred to the evidence in great detail, held
that:



(a) the four founders had decided to establish a residence for foreign priests
and students coming to Sri Lanka to study Buddhism, and for outstation
priests:



(b) an application had been made under the Entail and Settlement Ordinance
"for the purchase of land to commence the building and also for the
appointment of (the 2nd Defendant) to purchase the land in his name for this
purpose":



(c) the land had been so purchased, and therefore it was held by the 2nd
Defendant to put up a building for that purpose;

**86**



(d) section 99(1) (c) of the Trust Ordinance includes a trust for the
advancement of religion, and the aforesaid intention of the authors "of this
movement would fall within section 99(1) (c), and "could be called a
charitable trust with (the 2nd Defendant) as the trustee of the land
purchased";



(e) the 2nd Defendant had by the 1965 deed purported to convey property held
by him "in his name as the trustee of the charitable trust" to Rev. Ananda,
although "he could only convey his legal right which is his trusteeship";



(f) the Rev. Ananda also held the property as trustee;



(g) on the death of the Rev. Ananda, the 1978 deed executed by the sole
surviving author of the trust (Jinadasa) "was valid in law to convey the
rights of trusteeship in the said premises to the Plaintiff";



(h) the Gazette notification made in 1959 shows that "the Minister of Finance
has declared the Centre a charitable trust and approved charity"; and



(i) Rev. Gnanaseeha had described what ceremonies were necessary for
dedication, that the only evidence as to ceremonies actually performed was
given by Werapitiya, but he was not "prepared to accept the bare oral evidence
of this witness on this point when considering the other evidence (not
specified) in the case", and accordingly that the property was not sanghika
property.



Reference was also made to section 107 of the Trusts Ordinance, but he did
not, in all the circumstances of the case, form and express the opinion that a
charitable trust either in fact existed or ought to be deemed to have existed.



On appeal, the Court of Appeal referred to the 1978 deed and the plaint
wherein it was alleged that by the 1965 deed the property was conveyed to Rev.
Ananda **as trustee**. Relevantly observing that

**87**



nowhere in the 1965 deed was there a reference to a trust or a trustee, and
that the 1978 deed recited that the 2nd Defendant conveyed the property on the
instructions of the "authors of the Trust", the Court of Appeal held that it
was not open to Jinadasa, and to the Plaintiff who derived title from Jinadasa
(by the 1978 deed.), to claim that the 1965 conveyance was subject to a trust.
The Court followed Wijewardena v. Buddharakkita Thero,(1) where Basnayake,
C.J., having referred to Wickremasinghe v. Unnanse,(2) held that property
given to the Sangha would become sanghika property only if dedicated in the
manner prescribed in the vinaya:  
  
"for a dedication to the Sangha there must be a donor, a donee, and a gift.
There must be an assembly of four or more bhikkus. The property must be shown;
the donor and donee must appear before the assembly and recite three times the
formula generally used in giving property to the Sangha with the necessary
variation according as it is a gift to one or more. Water must be poured into
the hands of the donee or the representative. The Sangha is entitled to
possess the property from that time onwards. No property can become sanghika
without such a ceremony. Sometimes there is a stone inscription recording the
grant or a deed is given."



According to Werapitiya's evidence, all the necessary ingredients of a proper
dedication existed. The Court of Appeal observed that "other than the bare
suggestion that was put to (Werapitiya) in crossexamination that he was
telling an untruth .... no serious attempt had been made to test (his)
veracity", and the learned trial Judge gave no acceptable reason for not
acting on his evidence, particularly in the light of the documentary evidence
(to which I have already referred), and held that the property was sanghika.



The Plaintiff appealed to this Court with special leave. It was the submission
of Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., that the property was admittedly held by the 2nd
Defendant subject to a constructive trust in favour of the four founders; that
it was also subject to a charitable trust; that section 107 of the Trusts
Ordinance required the Court to hold that in all the circumstances of the case
there was a valid

**88**



charitable trust; that there was no valid dedication to the Sangha by means of
the 1965 deed and the subsequent ceremony on 5.1.66; that if the 1965 deed did
convey title to Rev. Ananda, then in his hands it continued to be subject to
the same charitable trust; and that upon the death of Rev. Ananda the
surviving author (Jinadasa) was entitled, under section 75 of the Trusts
Ordinance, to appoint a trustee to fill the resulting vacancy.



Section 6 of the Trusts Ordinance provides:

  
"Subject to the provisions of sections 5 and 107, a trust is created when the
author of the trust indicates with reasonable certainty by any words or acts -



(a) an intention on his part to create thereby a trust,



(b) the purpose of the trust,



(c) the beneficiary,



(d) the trust property, and



(unless the trust is declared by will or the author of the trust is himself to
be the trustee) transfers the trust property to the trustee."



I will assume that the transfer of the property to the 2nd Defendant satisfied
the last of these requirements, and that there was no uncertainty as to the
purpose. A trust is "an obligation annexed to the ownership of property, and
arising out of a confidence reposed in and accepted by the owner ..." There is
no evidence that the four founders reposed any such confidence in the 2nd
Defendant, or that he accepted the same. Jinadasa made no such claim. The
conduct of the four founders establishes that they had in mind a purpose which
fell within the category of "the advancement of religion and the maintenance
of religious rites and practices", and possibly also "the advancement of
education and knowledge". Their purpose was therefore charitable. The learned
District Judge wrongly assumed that if the purpose was charitable, then
necessarily there was a charitable trust; he erred in thinking that the
application under the

**89**



Entail and Settlement Ordinance specified the purchaser and the purpose. The
existence of a charitable purpose or object does not necessarily lead to the
conclusion that the founders desired to implement that purpose, or achieve
that object, through the instrumentality of a trust. Property can be held,-or
transferred to another, with a mere wish that it be utilised for a charitable
**purpose** , without any intention to create an obligation to do so Murugesu
v. Chelliah.(3) Intention is a paramount consideration, and must be
established. Here the conduct of the founders, from 1954 up to 1965 at least,
is quite inconsistent with an **intention** to implement their purpose through
**a trust** imposed on the 2nd Defendant; instead they consciously decided to
achieve their objectives through an **association** , subject to rules drafted
by one of them, which set out those objects. From 1953 until 1978 the question
of a charitable trust or trustees never arose. An intention on the part of the
founders to create a charitable trust, or any trust (apart from the
constructive trust under section 84), has therefore not been established. On
the contrary, the documentary evidence, relating to the association and its
activities, conclusively establishes that such a trust was not intended. "A
trust can be created by any language which is clear enough to show an
intention to create it. A trust will not be imposed where the language of the
creator expressly negatives any intention to impose a trust" (Halsbury, Laws
of England, 4th ed., para 547), and this is equally applicable to the conduct
of the alleged author of a trust. This is therefore not a case where there is
an absence of evidence of the formal constitution of a trust, but one where
there is positive evidence that a trust was not intended; the conduct of all
those connected with the Centre, throughout a long period of time, was
inconsistent with a charitable trust, and this is thus the converse of the
situations in Mailvaganam v. Ramanatha Aiyar,(4) Doraiswarni Kurukkai v.
Thambipillai,(5) Murugesu v. Chelliah.(3) Section 107 is therefore
inapplicable.



Further, the learned District Judge held that by the 1965 deed the 2nd
Defendant conveyed his trusteeship to Rev. Ananda. Mr. H. L. de Silva did not
seek to support this finding. That deed purported to convey the legal title;
that was what the 2nd Defendant and Rev. Ananda intended and understood, and
Jinadasa's understanding was the same. The dispute between the parties was not
as to

**90**



whether that deed conveyed the trusteeship, but rather whether it successfully
conveyed legal title, and if so. whether it was also subject to a trust. He
submitted that the property was subject to a charitable trust, and, upon
transfer, Rev. Ananda, became bound by the same charitable trust; upon his
death, the surviving author was entitled to appoint a new trustee. This raises
further difficulties; could the 2nd Defendant, if he had been a charitable
trustee, have divested himself of his office by such a transfer? Or was he
guilty of a breach of trust, necessitating removal by the court? Could the
surviving author appoint a new trustee without a court order removing the
original trustee? As I hold that there was no charitable trust, it is
unnecessary to consider these questions.  


The 2nd Defendant held the property subject to a constructive trust in favour
of the four founders; he had therefore to restore the property to them, or to
deal with it in accordance with their directions. The association had no right
or interest in regard to the title to the property; their object was "the
putting up of a building": nothing was stated about the subsequent management
or administration of the building or the activities conducted therein. By 1963
building activities had been completed and conveyances of the lands obtained.
According to the available evidence, there was disagreement as to whether the
property should be conveyed to Rev. Ananda as trustee, or dedicated to the
Sangha. The 1965 deed was executed on the instructions, or in accordance with
the wishes, of the four founders. If, as now submitted, the terms of that deed
were contrary to their wishes, it is surprising that Jinadasa and the heirs of
the other founders did not protest and perhaps even resort to litigation. I
hold that the conveyance by the 2nd Defendant to Rev. Ananda was in accordance
with the terms of the constructive trust by which he was bound.



It remains to consider whether the property was sanghika. Mr H. L. de Silva,
PC., submitted that although the learned District Judge gave no reason for
disbelieving Werapitiya, his evidence was patently unreliable, principally
because of one answer in evidence-in chief that "Oliver Fernando who gave
evidence in this case and members of his family were present" at the
dedication ceremony held on 6.1.66. Since Oliver Fernando had died in 1958, he
could not have

**91**



been present at that ceremony, and therefore, it was submitted, Werapitiya was
untruthful. In fact Oliver Fernando's widow had given evidence, and it is
quite possible that the witness had referred to the widow, but that his answer
had been incorrectly recorded; the matter was not probed at all in cross-
examination, and the learned District Judge made no reference to it. I am
unable to hold that this was one of his reasons for rejecting Werapitiya's
evidence. The Court of Appeal was right in holding that the property was
sanghika.



I therefore dismiss the appeal with costs.

**Kulatunga, J. -** I agree.

** **

**Wadugodapitiya, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/9.html_  

