##  State Bank of India v. Edirisinghe and Others - SLR - 397, Vol 1 of 1991
[1991] LKSC 9; (1991) 1 Sri LR 397 (3 May 1991)

**397**

**STATE BANK OF INDIA  
V.  
EDIRISINGHE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
RANASINGHE, C.J.,  
TAMBIAH, J.,  
G.P.S. DE, SILVA, J.,  
KULATUNGE, J,,  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
RAMANATHAN, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
SC. APPEAL NO. 36/87  
SC. SPL. LA NO. 19/87  
CA APPLICATION NO. 1070/80  
MARCH 04, 05 AND 07, 199  
  
_Industrial Dispute - Writ of certiorari - Award of Arbitrator made on
reference under section 4(1) of Industrial Disputes Act - Award of pension -
Gratuity - Encashment of leave - Revision of salary - Power of Arbitrator.  
  
_The 3rd Respondent was employed by the Appellant-Bank as an Accountant and
resigned with effect from 1.5.75. After his resignation he claimed:  
  
(a) A monthly pension for life of Rs. 1015/-;  
  
(b) Encashment of unutilised leaves;  
  
(c) Revision of salary and allowances with effect from 1.1.70 in terms of
Staff Circular No. 15 of 31.3.75.  
  
The Minister of Labour referred these disputes to arbitration by the 1st
respondent under section 4(1) of the Industrial Disputes Act. The 1st
respondent on 5.6.81 awarded:  
  
(a) A pension at Rs. 1000/- per month with effect from 1.5.1979;  
  
(b) In the event of the award of pension being held to be unlawful:  
  
(i) Gratuity in a sum of Rs. 26,390/-  
  
(ii) A sum of Rs. 16,800/- as 'encashment of leave1  
  
(iii) A sum of Rs. 24,805/- as 'revision of salary and allowances.'  
  
The Bank applied for a Writ of Certiorari to quash the award to the Court of
Appeal. The Court of Appeal affirmed the award of the pension but quashed the
awards respecting encashment of leave and revision of salary and allowances.  
  
The Bank appealed to the Supreme Court and the 3rd respondent also filed a
cross-appeal respectively against the orders of the Supreme Court.  
  
The main contention is that an arbitrator's discretionary power to make a just
and equitable order is circumscribed by the terms of employment unlike the
powers of a President of the Labour Tribunal, the arbitrator not being
appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.

**398**

**Held:  
  
**(1) (Ranasinghe CJ and Ramanathan J dissenting) The award of pension was
just and equitable and should stand.  
  
(2) (Unanimously) The quashing of the awards respecting encashment of leave
and revision of salary and allowances should stand.  
  
Per Tambiah J:  
  
"An Industrial Arbitrator is not tied down and fettered by the terms of
contract of employment between the employer and the workman. He can create new
rights and introduce new obligate ties between the parties".  
  
"The effect of the award is to introduce terms which become implied terms of
the contract.  
  
(3) The Industrial Arbitrator creates a new contract for the future, a Judge
enforces the rights and liabilities arising out of an existing contract. An
Industrial Arbitrator settles disputes by dictating new conditions of
employment to come into force in the future when he cannot get the parties to
agree on them; a Judge determines the existing rights and liabilities of the
parties.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_1\. United Workers Union V. Devanayagam_ 69 NLR 289, 296.  
  
_2\. Ceylon Bank Employees Union V. Yatawara_ 64 NLR 49, 63  
  
_3\. Hayleys Ltd. V. De Silva_ 64 NLR 130  
  
_4\. Hayleys Ltd. V. Crossette Tambiah_ 69 NLR 248  
  
_5\. Walker Sons & Co. Ltd. V. Fry and others _68 NLR 73.  
  
_6\. Waterside Workers' Federation of Australia V. J. E. Alexander Ltd._
(1918) 25 CLR 462, 463.  
  
_7\. Federated Saw Mill V. James Moore & Son Proprietary Ltd._ (1909) 8 CLR
521  
  
_8\. Brown & Co. V. Ratnayake & 3 others Bar Association Law Journal _Vol. 1,
PV1 p. 230, 231, 232  
  
_9\. Thirunavakarasu V. Siriwardena & Others_ 1981, SULR 186, 191, 193  
  
_10\. Peiris V. Podisingho_ 78 CLW 46, 48  
  
_11\. Heath & Co. (Ceylon) Ltd. V. Kariyawasam_ 71 NLR 382.  
  
_12\. Lewis Brown & Co. Ltd. V. Periyapperuma _81 CLW 30, 32  
  
**APPEAL** from Judgement of the Court of Appeal in application for writ of
certiorari.  
  
_K. N. Choksy, P.C. with Ronald Perera and Brito Muthunayagam_ for the
appellant  
  
_H. I. De Silva P.C. with M. Bastiansz, Mrs. Premila Seneviratne, P.M.
Ratnawardena_ and Janaka Silva for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**399**

03 May 1991  
  
**RANASINGHE, C.J.,  
**  
The Appellant-Bank is a branch of the State Bank of India and carries on its
business of banking in Colombo, Sri Lanka.  
  
The 3rd Respondent had been employed by the Appellant-Bank, as an Accountant,
until his resignation with effect from 1.5.75.  
  
After his resignation from the Appellant-Bank the 3rd Respondent filed an
application, in terms of provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, claiming:
that he be paid a monthly pension of Rs. 1015/- for life with effect from
1.5.75; that he be paid in respect of the leave which he was entitled to but
which he had not utilised during the period of employment under the Appellant-
Bank: that he was entitled to a revision of salary and allowances with effect
from 1.1.70 in terms of the Staff Circular No. 15 of 31.3.1975.  
  
The aforesaid matters in dispute between the Appellant-Bank and the 3rd
Respondent, were then referred to the 1st Respondent by the Minister of Labour
by virtue of the powers vested in him under the provisions of section 4(1) of
the Industrial Disputes Act, for arbitration.  
  
After inquiry the 1st Respondent made his Award, dated 5th June 1981,
directing that the 3rd Respondent be paid: a pension at the rate of Rs. 1000/-
per month for life with effect from 1.5.79, and that, in the event of such
Award for pension being subsequently held to be wrongful by a higher tribunal,
he be paid a gratuity of Rs. 26,390/-: a sum of Rs. 16,800/- on account of
"encashment of leave": a sum of Rs. 24,805/- on account of "Revision of salary
and allowances."  
  
The Appellant-Bank thereupon applied to the Court of Appeal for a writ of
certiorari to quash the said Award made by the 1st Respondent. The Court of
Appeal, by its judgment dated 30.1.87, held that the award of a pension for
life in a sum of Rs. 1000/- was just and equitable, but that the award of a
sum of Rs. 16,800/- under the head "encashment of leave" and the award of a
sum of Rs. 24,805/- on account of revision of salary and allowances could not
be substantiated. Therefore, whilst refusing a writ to quash the Award
relating to the pension, the Court of Appeal issued a writ of certiorari
quashing the Award in respect of the other two items of payments.

**400**

The Appellant-Bank has now appealed to this Court - to have the judgment of
the Court of Appeal awarding the said pension set aside. The 3rd Respondent
has also filed an appeal - S.C. Appeal No. 37 of 1987 - against the said
judgment of the Court of Appeal setting aside the Order of the Arbitrator
awarding the two aforesaid sums of money as encashment of leave and revision
of salary.  
  
After the said appeal was filed, this matter was, upon an application made by
learned Counsel for the Appellant-Bank directed, in terms of the provisions of
Article 132(3) (Hi), to be heard by a Bench of seven judges as it was
submitted that the contention of the Appellant-Bank - that the 1st Respondent
has, in making a monetary award, exercised a power which is considered "a
traditional exercise of judicial power: that such judicial power could be
exercised only by an officer appointed by the Judicial Service Commission:
that the 1st Respondent, not having been so appointed by the Judicial Service
Commission, has thus acted in excess of his jurisdiction \- requires a re-
consideration of the correctness of the majority Judgment of the Privy Council
in the case of United Workers Union Vs. Devanayagam,  
  
When this matter was being argued before this Court, learned President's
Counsel for the Appellant-Bank did however, indicate to this Court that he was
not pressing the submission that an Arbitrator, contemplated by the provisions
of the Industrial Disputes Act, is an officer who is required to be appointed
by the Judicial Service Commission. Even so, this Court, as presently
constituted, proceeded with the hearing of this appeal as what has been
directed to be heard by this Bench is the entirety of the appeal of the
Appellant-Bank, and not a particular question of law only.  
  
The main contention of learned President's Counsel for the Appellant-Bank is
that the Arbitrator's discretion in regard to the making of a just and
equitable order, is circumscribed by the terms of employment, that the
Arbitrator cannot make an order which is contrary to the terms of employment:
that such power is granted only to a President of a Labour Tribunal, who has
expressly been given the power, under the provisions of section 31(B)(4) to
grant relief or redress which is even contrary to the terms of any contract of
service between the employee and his employer that, in any event, the grant of
a pension in the circumstances of this case, having regard to the provisions
of the Pension Rules, B4, is not "a just and equitable"  order.

**401**

Even though Rule 38 of the Rules governing the service of officers of the
Appellant-Bank, 'R8' provides that the compulsory age of retirement be fifty
five, yet according to 'R1' a local employee who has completed twenty five
years of service under the Appellant-Bank would become "entitled to a
pension." Such pension, however, will "accrue" only upon the retirement of
such employee. Retirement which will result in such accrual is dependent upon
such retirement being sanctioned by the Appellant-Bank. It was in the
background of these provisions in the Pension Rules 'R1' that the 3rd
respondent had written the letters A14 and A15, dated 30.3.75 and 2.4.75
respectively, requesting that he be allowed to retire or, in the alternative,
be treated as having resigned with effect from 1.5.75. The Appellant-Bank's
reply A16, dated 30.4.75, advising the 3rd Respondent of the acceptance of the
3rd Respondents resignation amounts to a refusal on the part of the Appellant-
Bank to sanction the retirement of the 3rd Respondent. If such refusal is
shown to be altogether unjustified, then, would an order made by one, who is
vested with the power to make a just and equitable order, granting that which
should have been granted by the employer constitute an act contrary to the
terms of the employment? In the view I take, as set out later, of the judgment
of the Court of Appeal and of the Award of the 1st Respondent, it seems to me
to be not necessary, for the purposes of this appeal, to consider what impact,
if any, the absence of a provision comparable to section 31(B)(4) of the
Industrial Disputes Act would have on the nature and the scope of the powers
of an Arbitrator to make a "just and equitable order" in respect of an
employee who had been employed on the basis of a contract of service.  
  
The 1st Respondents decision to award a pension is based mainly upon his view
that the refusal of the Appellant-Bank to grant the 3rd Respondent sanction to
retire was wholly unjustifiable and unreasonable, and that consequently a
retrial situation had arisen. The Court of Appeal in affirming the decision of
the 1st Respondent to award a pension has founded its decision principally
upon the circumstance that the 3rd Respondent had a justifiable apprehension,
in regard to the ability of the Appellant-Bank to continue its business in Sri
Lanka, which had instilled in the mind of the 3rd Respondent an uncertainty in
regard to the continuity of his own employment with the Appellant-Bank. The
Court of Appeal has also taken the view: that the statements made in the
letter A14 by the 3rd Respondent, based upon "recent legislation" was "a
factually correct statement": that, though exemptions were given later, they
were given "after the termination of the Respondents service."

**402**

A consideration of the Government Gazettes tendered to this Court- dated
8.8.74 and 18.12.74, by learned President's Counsel for the Appellant-Bank,
and dated 29.5.70, by learned President's Counsel for the 3rd Respondent - and
also the provisions of sections 3 and 85 of the Act No. 30 of 1988, clearly
show that, at the time the documents A14 and A15 were written on the 30.3.75
and 2.4.72, there was no provision of law which endangered the continuance of
the business of the Appellant-Bank in Sri Lanka, and that, at the time the
said letters were written, there was no justification for the 3rd Respondent
to have entertained any fears in this behalf. The provisions of the Companies
(Special Provisions) Law No. 10 of 1974, were brought into operating,
according to the Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 123/7 of 8.8.1974, only from
1.1.75. The "direction of exemption-issued under Sec. 3(1) of the said Law No.
10 of 1974 was published in the Gazette (Extraordinary) dated 18.12.74. The
revocation of the said exemptions, dated 21.5.90, was published in the Gazette
(Extraordinary) only on 21.5.90, after Act No. 30 of 1988 had come into
operation.  
  
The Court of Appeal has thus misdirected itself in regard to this matter. The
1st Respondent himself does not seem to have considered these documents and
the legal position arisen there from in determining this aspect of the case.  
  
Furthermore, Rule 14 of the said Pension Rules, "R11 gives the Appellant-Bank
the power, even where it has granted a pension, to withdraw such pension at
its discretion if at any time thereafter such employee finds employment in
another Bank without previously obtaining the sanction of the Appellant-Bank.
Admittedly, the 3rd Respondent has, after he resigned from the Appellant-Bank,
found employment in another Bank. It seems to me that this was a relevant
consideration to be taken into account in deciding whether the award of a
pension, in such circumstances, is "just and equitable."  
  
A Writ of Certiorari would lie, inter alia, where there is an error of law
apparent on the face of the record-Ceylon Bank Employees Union Vs. Yatawara,
(2). Hayleys Ltd., Vs. De Silva (3); Hayleys Ltd., Vs. R. W. Crossette Tambiah
(4): De Smith: Judicial Review of Administrative Action (4th Ed) p. 136, 404,
407  
  
I therefore, allow the appeal of the Appellant-Bank, and set aside the
judgment of the Court of Appeal which affirms the 1st Respondent's Award
relating to the aforesaid pension.

**403**

The grant of the gratuity referred to above was not challenged by learned
President's Counsel for the Appellant-Bank: and accordingly the grant of a
gratuity in a sum of Rs. 26,390/- to the 3rd Respondent is affirmed.  
  
The Court of Appeal has, as stated earlier, quashed the award made under the
heading of "encashment of leave." It would seem that, although the Appellant-
Bank had not granted the 3rd respondent, during his period of employment, the
leave the 3rd Respondent was entitled to and had in fact applied for before
the dispute arose, yet, the 3rd Respondent could have made use of that leave
before he actually resigned. The 3rd Respondent, however, was enxious to
relinquish his employment under the Appellant-Bank as quickly as possible and
had not even given the three months notice of termination of service which he
was required to give in terms of his contract of service. This aspect of the
matter does not seem to have been considered by the 1st Respondent in deciding
whether the grant of a sum of money under this head was "just and equitable".  
  
I am, therefore, of opinion that the order made by the Court of Appeal, that
this particular direction of the 1st Respondent be quashed, should be
affirmed.  
  
The Court of Appeal has also quashed the grant made by the 1st Respondent in
respect of the claim made by the 3rd Respondent under the heading of "Revision
of salary and allowances". The position of the Appellant-Bank has been that
such revision was confined only to the Staff Officers of the Appellant-Bank in
India and not to officers in Sri Lanka. Although such a distinction would seem
to offend against the universally accepted principle of equal pay for work of
equal value, yet, a consideration of the document A9 shows that a distinction
had been made because the Sri Lankan officers had been afforded certain
benefits not extended to their Indian counterparts. Here again this particular
document A9 does not seem to have received the attention of the 1st Respondent
in deciding whether a grant in favour of the 3rd Respondent, under this
heading, would be "just and equitable." In this view of the matter, I am of
opinion that the judgment of the Court of Appeal quashing the Award of the 1st
Respondent under this head should also be affirmed.  
  
For the reasons set out above, ! make order, in this appeal, directing that a
Writ of Certiorari do issue quashing the aforesaid Award of the

**404**

1st Respondent granting a monthly pension of Rs. 1000/- for life.  
  
Having regard to all the circumstances I direct that the parties do bear their
own costs of appeal, both of this Court and of the Court of Appeal.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J.,** \- I agree with the Judgment of My Lord the Chief Justice.  
  
**TAMBIAH, J.  
**  
These appeals were listed to be heard by a Bench of 7 Judges as the question
involved in S.C. Appeal No. 36/87 is one of general and public importance. The
question involved is whether an Arbitrator appointed by the Minister of Labour
in terms of s. 4 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act to hear and determine an
industrial dispute referred to him be appointed by the Judicial Service
Commission. Mr. Choksy, P.C., who appeared for the appellant in S.C. Appeal
No. 36/87, however, informed this Court that he was not pursuing this point.  
  
The statement of matters in dispute dated 5.4.1977 furnished to the Arbitrator
by the Commissioner of Labour states as follows:-  
  
"The matters in dispute between Mr. C. Gunawardena and the State Bank of India
are -  
  
(i) whether the refusal and or failure of the State Bank of India to pay Mr.
C. Gunawardena a pension of Rs. 1,015/- for life with effect from 1st May,
1975, is justified and to what relief he is entitled; and  
  
(ii) whether the following claims of Mr. C. Gunawardena against the State Bank
of India -  
  
(a) that he be paid in lieu of unutilised leave;  
  
(b) that he was entitled to a revision of salary and allowances with effect
from 01st January, 1970, in terms of Staff Circular No. 15 of 31st March,
1975,

are justified and to what relief he is entitled to."

**405**

The 3rd Respondent, Mr. Gunawardena, was first employed by the State Bank of
India on 01st December 1949, as a Probationery Assistant On 25th September,
1963, he was appointed a Staff Officer in the 3rd Grade of officers and on
23rd April, 1971, was promoted to the 2nd Grade of Staff Officers with effect
from 01st August, 1970. On 09th October, 1973, he was promoted to the 1st
Grade of Staff Officers with effect from 01st September, 1973. With effect
from 01st January, 1975, he was designated Accountant, in which position there
were only 2 officers superior to him, namely, the Agent and the Sub-Agent.

On 30th March, 1975, the 3rd Respondent addressed a letter to Mr. T. R.
Varadachary, Managing Director, State Bank of India, Bombay, in these terms:-  
  
"Dear Mr. Varadachary,  
  
I am venturing to write to you on this matter on the advice of the Branch
Agent, Mr. H.R.A. da Cunha.  
  
I have been offered a very senior post in the Hatton National Bank Ltd., and I
would like to accept it. I have already completed 25 years of pensionable
service with the State Bank of India on 1st December, 1974. I shall be glad if
the Bank would exercise its option under Rule 37 of the Rules governing the
Service of Officers in the Imperial Bank of India and permit me to retire from
the Bank's service as from the 1st of May, 1975.  
  
As you may be aware, there are very limited opportunities for me for
advancement in service at this Branch. I have also enumerated to Mr. da Cunha
the various reasons which prompted me to make this decision after careful
thought. The principal one is the fact that in view of the recent legislation
requiring the Bank to incorporate itself in Sri Lanka. I have no guarantee of
the continued existence of this Bank in Sri Lanka. In fact, in the matter of
the revision of salary scales of Staff Officers, Grades I, II, and HI on 26th
March, 1971, the adverse decision taken vis-a-vis me was due to my being a
Ceylonese officer in an organisation mainly staffed by Indians and to the fact
that my pension rights under the Thalgodapitiya Award would be in excess of
pension drawn by other Indian Officers.

**406**

In the event of the Bank being unwilling to extend the benefit of Rule 37 to
me, I shall be most grateful if you would sanction the payment to me of a
suitable gratuity in lieu of a pension in consideration of my long and devoted
service.  
  
I regret having to trouble you on a matter such as this, but due to the
limited time available to me to indicate acceptance of the offer made by the
Hatton National Bank Ltd., I shall thank you to advise Mr. da Cunha and me, by
cable if possible, of your willingness to release me and the quantum of relief
which you may consider appropriate in the circumstances.  
  
I am very grateful to the management of the Bank for the excellent training
afforded me as a probationer, the kindness and courtesy shown to me as an
officer, and the appreciation of my services by your promotion of me to the
First Grade of Officers,"  
  
On 02nd April, 1975, the 3rd Respondent addressed a 2nd letter to the Managing
Director, State Bank of India, Bombay, as follows:-  
  
'Dear Sir,  
  
_Retirement from Service  
_  
I have already completed 25 years of pensionable service in the Bank on 1st
December, 1974, and I shall be glad if the Bank would permit me to retire from
its service under Rule 37 of the Rules governing the Service of Officers in
the Imperial Bank of India.  
  
In this connection I have to state that I have been offered a senior
appointment with the Hatton National Bank Ltd. In the event of the Bank being
unwilling to extend the benefit of Rule 37 to me, I shall be most grateful if
you would sanction the payment to me of a suitable gratuity in lieu of a
pension.  
  
In terms of Rule 30 of the Rules governing the service of officers in the
Imperial Bank of India, I am required to give 3 months notice or termination
of service. I shall be glad if you will kindly waive this requirement and
accept in lieu thereof the unavailed leave due to me as at date and grant me
the encashment of the excess leave available. In the event of the Bank not
permitting me to retire from its service, please treat this as my letter of

**407**

resignation as from 1st May, 1975."  
  
On 30th April, 1975, the Bank's Agent in Colombo replied as follows:-  
  
Dear Sir,  
  
_Resignation from Service  
_  
With reference to your letter of the 2nd April, and with reference to
paragraph 3 thereof, we have to advise that your resignation from the Bank's
service has been accepted as at the close of business on date, and the three
months' notice period required has been set off against the unavailed of
ordinary leave due to you as desired by you.  
  
We wish you a happy future."  
  
At the time the 3rd Respondent ceased employment as from 01.5.1975, he was
about 48 years of age and had completed about 25 1/2 years service.  
  
The Arbitrator made his Award on 05th June, 1981. He took the view that the
3rd Respondent has satisfied Rule 15 of the Imperial Bank of India Pension and
Guarantee Fund (R1) which states: "No employee on the staff in India (which by
reason of Rule 2 includes Ceylon) shall be entitled to pension until he shall
have completed twenty five years' service."  
  
Twenty five years' service alone was not enough for the payment of pension, he
said. The Bank must sanction his retirement as Rule 11 says: "The retirement
of all officers of the Bank shall be subject to the sanction of the Executive
Committee of the Central Board. Any officer or other employee who shall leave
the service without the sanction as required by this Rule shall forfeit all
claims upon the fund for pension."  
  
The Arbitrator also considered Rule 38 of the Rules governing the service of
officers of the Imperial Bank of India (A62) which states: "All officers shall
retire at fifty-five years of age or upon the completion of thirty years'
service whichever occurs first Provided that the Central Bank or its Committee
may extend the period of service of an officer beyond thirty years should such
extension be deemed desirable in the interests of the Bank, subject however to
the age limit of fifty-five years which shall be an over-riding limit." He
considered other instances

**408**

where Bank employees were allowed to retire before they reached 55 years of
age or before completing 30 years service. One R.H. Daniel had completed only
25 years service and not 30 years. On 24th March, 1975, he sought the Bank's
permission to retire on medical grounds. Under Rule 19(ii) of document (R1), a
Bank employee retiring after 20 years service, irrespective of age, was
entitled to pension if he could satisfy the Bank by an approved medical
certificate or otherwise that he is incapacitated for further active service.
The Bank referred him to the Bank's Doctor to examine him and report whether
he is incapacitated for further service. The Doctor reported that he was
treated for rheumatic arthritis, was suffering from nervous tension and joint
pains and that he was not incapacitated but needed some rest and recommended 2
months leave. He again wrote to the Bank stating that he was not fit to carry
on his duties efficiently and to treat him as a special case and permit him to
retire. The Bank on 01st July, 1975, accepted his application to retire as a
special case. The Bank did not act under Rule 37 of document (A62) and call
upon him to retire upon completion of 25 years service.  
  
Similarly one S.A. Paul had 25 years service and was under the age of 50
years. On 21st November, 1967, he wrote to the Bank seeking permission to
retire and added that he was compelled to retire from the Bank's service as
the education of the children made it necessary for him to be with his family
who were residing in Jaffna. The Bank permitted him to retire and sanctioned a
monthly pension for life. So also, the Bank sanctioned the retirement of two
other officers, one Cleghera, who had 20 years service and one Jeffrey who had
14 years service in the Bank.  
  
Having considered other instances where permission to retire had been
sanctioned in the absence of specified requirements, the Arbitrator stated
that there is a clear practice at the Bank of permitting officers to retire
before reaching the mandatory age of 55 years and before completing the
mandatory period of service of 30 years. He concluded that in refusing to
sanction the retirement of the 3rd respondent,, the Bank had exercised its
discretion unreasonably and maliciously and held that the 3rd Respondent was
entitled to a pension and awarded him a pension at the rate of Rs. 1,000/- per
month for life with effect from 01st May, 1975\. The Arbitrator also concluded
that there were circumstances in the instant case which amounted to a retiral
situation carrying with it the eligibility for the payment of gratuity and
held that if the award of pension was subsequently held to be wrong by a
higher Tribunal, the 3rd Respondent be paid a gratuity of Rs.26.390/- .

**409**

On the question of payment in lieu of unutilised leave, the Arbitrator held
that the 3rd Respondent had a right to encash his leave in terms of Circular
(A36) and this right had been denied to him by the Bank. He held that the 3rd
Respondent was entitled to the total leave of 8 months and 20 days. Setting
off 2 months against notice, payment is due for 6 months and 20 days. At the
rate of Rs. 2,520/- per month, the Arbitrator awarded him a sum of Rs.
16,800/-.  
  
As regards the 3rd Respondents entitlement to revision of salary, the
Arbitrator held that in terms of Circular No. 15 of 31.3.71 (A1A) he was
entitled to Rs. 24,805/- for the period 1.1.70 to 20.4.75.  
  
The appellant then applied to the Court of Appeal for a writ of certiorari to
quash the award of the Arbitrator. The Court of Appeal was of opinion that the
Rules that govern the instant case were Rules 11 and 15 of the Pension Rules
(R1): that there is a relevant circumstance in the 3rd Respondent's letter of
30th March, 1975, which the Bank ought to have considered, but did not, before
it exercised its discretion to withhold permission to retire, namely, that in
view of the recent legislation requiring the Bank to incorporate itself in Sri
Lanka, the 3rd Respondent had no guarantee of the continued existence of the
Bank in Sri Lanka. The Court of Appeal held that the award of Rs. 1,000/-, per
month for life was a just and equitable order and refused to quash the award
of pension; and that as the award of pension was upheld, the award of gratuity
is no longer applicable.  
  
As regards the claim for revision of salary, the Court of Appeal held that the
Arbitrator had erred in acting on the contents of Circular (1A1) alone, and
that he had not addressed his mind to the correspondence between the 3rd
Respondent and the Bank. The 3rd Respondent on 20th Jury, 1971, wrote to the
Bank and stated that the Staff Circular No. 15 dated 31st March, 1971 (1A1)
does not indicate that the revised pay scales of staff officers are applicable
only in India, and that he be paid the revised salary scales. The Bank on 03rd
April, 1972 (A9), in reply, stated that the salary revisions are applicable
only to the staff officers of the Bank in India, and added "with the benefit
of higher bonus and the Bank's contributions to Provident Fund at 10% in your
case, as against 5% of the officers of your grade in India, your overall
emoluments are by and large, already better than those of your counterparts in
India. Your retirement benefits are also higher and the formula in vogue in
Ceylon for calculating the pension payable

**410**

permits larger pension to officers in Ceylon than to their counterparts in
India." By a further letter of 20th July, 1971 (A1C) the 3rd Respondent was
informed that the Board of Directors of the Bank in India had resolved that
the salary proposals were not applicable to staff officers of the Bank at
Colombo who were not India-based. The 3rd Respondent himself has accepted
these terms by his letter to the Bank dated 05.11.1968. In the view of the
Court of Appeal, the documents (A9) and (A10) represent the general policy of
the Bank for the revision of salaries of its nationals which is not within the
purview of the Arbitrator to reject and that officers in Colombo enjoyed
different terms and conditions. The award under the head of 'revision of
salary' was accordingly quashed.  
  
As regards the award of Rs. 16,300/- on account of encashment of leave, the
Court of Appeal held that the claim cannot be substantiated. The Arbitrator
had acted on the contents of the Circular (A36) alone. He has not considered
the other evidence in the case which shows that the Circular was not
applicable to him and that accumulated leave to the credit of an officer
lapsed at the time of cessation of office. Accordingly, the award of Rs.
16,300/- on account of encashment of leave was quashed.  
  
Mr. Choksy, P.C., for the Bank submitted as follows:-  
  
(i) The arbitrator has held that the 3rd Respondent is contractually and
legally entitled to a pension in terms of Rule 15 of the Pension Rules (R1).
Rule 15 should not be read per se but be read along with Rule 13 which states
that "pensions shall begin to accrue on the first day succeeding that of
retirement . . ." Pension accrues on retirement and retirement is a sine qua
non for pension. The 3rd Respondent by his letter dated 02nd April 1975,
requested the Bank to permit him to retire under Rule 37 of the Service Rules
(A62) and in case the Bank not permitting him to retire, to treat this letter
as one of resignation. The Bank opted for resignation. Upon resignation, the
3rd Respondent was not entitled to pension.  
  
(ii) Under Rule 38 of the Service Rules (A62), a person was entitled to retire
if he was 55 years of age or completed 30 years service. The 3rd Respondent
did not qualify for retirement under Rule 38 as he was 48 years of age and had
only 25 1/2 years service.

**411**

Though he had 20 years service, he did not qualify for retirement under Rule
19 (i) of the Pension Rules as he had not attained the age of 50 years nor
under Rule 19 (ii) as he was not incapacitated. Nor did the 3rd Respondent
qualify for retirement under Rule 19 (iii) of the Pension Rules as he had not
attained the age of 55 years nor permanently incapacitated by bodily or mental
infirmity. The 3rd Respondent was not entitled to pension as he was not
qualified to retire from service of the Bank.  
  
(iii) The Service Rule (A62) and the Pension Rules (R8) constituted part of
the contract of service of the 3rd Respondent. Under these Rules the 3rd
Respondent was not entitled to pension. The Arbitrator is bound by the terms
of the contract of employment. A Labour Tribunal can vary the terms of
contract of employment as s. 31 (B) (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act gives
the power to a Labour Tribunal to grant any relief or redress notwithstanding
anything to the contrary in any contract of service between a workman and his
employer. There was no such provision as regards Industrial Arbitrators. If
the terms of the contract of employment are silent on the question of
retirement and pension, the Arbitrator can create new terms which would then
become implied terms in the contract of employment between an employer and a
workman in terms of s. 19 of the Industrial Disputes Act.  
  
(iv) The Court of Appeal gave a reason, which the Arbitrator did not give, as
to why the Bank ought to have considered favourably the 3rd Respondents
application to retire, namely, in view of the recent legislation requiring the
Bank to incorporate itself under the Companies Ordinance, the 3rd Respondent
entertained an apprehension that the Bank would cease to do business in Sri
Lanka and there was uncertainty in his mind regarding his future employment.
There was no reason and basis for such apprehension. S. 2 (b) of the Companies
(Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974, enacted that on and after the 01st
of September, 1974, no Company shall carry on any undertaking in Sri Lanka
unless such Company is incorporated under the Companies Ordinance or is an
exempted Company. On the 08th of August, 1974, the Minister of Foreign and
internal Trade altered the appointed date to 01st of January, 1975. In terms
of s. 3 (i) of the said Law, by a "direction of exemption" published in
Government Gazette No. 142/9 of 18th December, 1974, the

**412**

Minister exempted certain categories of Companies and certain specified
Companies which had applied for exemption, and also any foreign Company not
falling within the abovementioned categories of Companies or specified
Companies from the application of the provisions of s. 2. The 3rd Respondents
letter to the Bank wherein he stated that he had apprehension about the
continued existence of the Bank in Sri Lanka in view of Law No. 19 of 1974 was
written after the 18th of December, 1974, i.e., on 30th March, 1975. The 3rd
Respondent had an unjustified fear or apprehension. The Court of Appeal has
misdirected itself when it stated that there is a relevant circumstance which
the Bank ought to have considered in exercising its discretion to withhold
permission to retire.  
  
(v) In the letter dated 30th March, 1975, the 3rd Respondent stated that he
had been offered a very senior post in the Hatton National Bank and that he
would like to accept it. Rule 14 of the Pension Rules (R1) requires that if an
officer entitled to pension wishes to accept employment at any other Bank
within 2 years of the date of retirement, he must obtain the previous sanction
of the Executive Committee of the Central Board. If he contravenes this Rule
it in competent for the Bank to withdraw his pension in whole or in part. It
is a good banking practice to insist on such a rule. The Bank may have taken
into consideration the fact that the 3rd Respondent was taking up employment
in another Bank in refusing permission to retire. The Court of Appeal has not
considered the provisions of Rule 14.  
  
The principal submission of Mr. Choksy, P.C. is that an Arbitrator is fettered
and constrained by the terms of contract of employment and cannot depart from
them.  
  
Under s. 17 (i) of the Industrial Disputes Act, when an industrial dispute is
referred under s. 4 (1) to an Arbitrator for settlement by arbitration, he is
required to make all such inquiries into the dispute as he may consider
necessary, hear such evidence as may be tendered by the parties to the
dispute, and thereafter make such award as may appear to him just and
equitable. The dominant duty imposed on an Arbitrator is, therefore, to make
an award that appears to him lust and equitable. Text Book writers and Judges
of this Court have discussed the extent of the power of an Arbitrator and the
kind of orders he can make.

**413**

Ludwig Teller in his 'Labour Disputes and Collective Bargaining" (Vol 1, p.
356) states:-  
  
"Industrial Arbitration may involve the extension of an existing agreement or
the making of a new one or in general the creation of new obligations or
modification of old ones, while commercial arbitration generally concerns
itself with interpretation of existing obligations and disputes relating to
existing agreement"  
  
In Walker Sons & Co. Ltd., v. Fry & others (5) the whole Court consisting of 5
judges held that an Arbitrator to whom an industrial dispute is referred by
the Minster under s. 4 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act or by the
Commissioner of Labour under s. 3 (1) (d) is not a judicial officer and does
not, therefore, require to be appointed by the Judicial Service Commission.
Sansoni, C.J., pp. 84,85) discussing the distinction between an Arbitrator's
function and a Judge's function cited with approval certain dicta in the
judgment in Waterside Workers' Federation of Australia v. J.E. Alexander Ltd.
(6) and in Federated Saw Mill v. James Moore & Son Proprietary Ltd. (7)  
  
"An Industrial Dispute is a claim by one of the disputants that existing
relation should be altered, and by the other that the dawn should not be
conceded. It is therefore a claim for new rights, and the duty of an
arbitrator is to determine whether the new rights ought to be conceded in
whole or in part.. .The arbitral function is ancillary to the legislative
function, and provides the factum upon which the law operates to create the
right or duty. The judicial function is an entirely separate branch, and first
ascertains whether the alleged right or duty exists in law, and, if it binds
it then proceeds if necessary to enforce the law .. .The arbitrator will have
to decide, not what agreement was made, but what is to be made in regard to
the future. If, however, the dispute is as to what shall in the future be the
mutual rights and responsibilities of the parties . . .thus creating new
rights and obligations . . .then the determination is essentially of a
legislative character. . .If the dispute is industrial, it is not an ordinary
legal dispute, i.e., it is not a dispute as to what are the rights and
liabilities of the parties with respect to the past or existing facts. It
necessarily looks to tie future."  
  
Sansoni, J. proceeded to say (p.84):  
  
The distinction between the two functions (arbitral and judicial) is plain to
see. The Industrial Arbitrator creates a new contract for the future,

**414**

a judge enforces the rights and liabilities arising out of an existing
contract. An Industrial Arbitrator settles disputes by dictating new
conditions of employment to come into force in the future where he cannot get
the parties to agree on them; a judge determines the existing rights and
liabilities of the parties.  
  
In Brown & Co. v, Ratnayake & 3 Others (8) Rodrigo, J. said:  
  
The function of an arbitral power in relation to industrial disputes is to
ascertain and declare what in the opinion of an arbitrator ought to be the
respective rights and liabilities of the parties in relation to each other, as
distinct from the rights and liabilities of the parties as they exist at the
moment the proceedings are instituted . . A just and equitable award is not an
ultimate finding as to whether the employer is justified in terminating the
employment of the employee hi the sense that the employer had not committed
any breach of the terms of his contract of employment with the employee . .
.The omission of the word "wrongful" in the Industrial Disputes Act in respect
of applications for relief is deliberate and significant, for an application
for relief can arise if the termination is in accordance with the terms of his
contract and not in breach of them and the arbitrator can order what he
considers to be just and equitable even though that is in excess of his legal
rights . . .In their natural and ordinary meaning what it (just and equitable
order) means is due justice between the parties to the application. That is
the dominating duty of the arbitrator and the only object of the order".  
  
In Thirunavakarasu v. Siriwardene & Others (9) Wanasundera, J., said:  
  
There are some differences between civil law arbitration and industrial
arbitration. An industrial arbitrator has much wider powers both as regards
the scope of the inquiry and the kind of orders he can make than an arbitrator
in the civil law. In short we can fairly say that arbitration under the
industrial law is intended to be even more liberal, informal and flexible than
commercial arbitration . . What the award seeks to do is to resolve the
dispute by formulating a new set of terms and conditions, which are fair and
reasonable to both parties, and imposing such terms on the parties so that
these terms and conditions will supercede the original position of the parties
and provide a new relationship that would henceforth guide the conduct of the
parties. These terms and conditions are statutorily made implied terms of the
contract of employment".

**415**

From the above observations which I have quoted, it is dear that an Industrial
Arbitrator is not tied down and fettered by the terms of contract of
employment between the employer and the workman. He can create new rights and
introduce new obligations between the parties.  
  
Mr. Choksy, P.C., relied on s. 31 P) (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act which
empowered a Labour Tribunal to grant relief or redress to a workman
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the contract of service, between
him and the employer. He said there is no such provision in the Act as regards
Industrial Arbitrators. But, one must not lose sight of s. 19 of the Act which
states that an award of an Arbitrator in force shall be binding on tie parties
and the terms of the award shall be implied terms in the contract of
employment between the employer and the workman. As was pointed out by
Wanasundera, J., in Thirunavukarasu's case (supra) what the award seeks to do
is to create new terms and conditions which are statutorily made implied terms
of the contract of employment The effect of the award is to introduce terms
which become implied terms of the contract I also see that s. 33 (i) (e)
enables an Arbitrator in his award to make an order as to the payment by an
employer of a pension, the amount of such pension and its duration. The
submission of Mr. Choksy that the Arbitrator is bound and fettered by the
terms of contract of employment is untenable.  
  
As was pointed out by the majority judgment of the Privy Council in the United
Engineering Workers Union v. Devanayagam (1) "the award has to be one which
appears to the arbitrator just and equitable. No other criterion is laid down.
He is given an unfettered discretion to do what they think is right and fair."  
  
The test of a just and equitable order is that those qualities would be
apparent to any fair minded person reading that order (per de Kretser, J., in
Peiris v. Podisingho (10).)  
  
At the time the 3rd Respondent ceased employment he was about 48 years of age
and had completed about 25 1/2 years service. From 1949 to 1975, he had
rendered loyal and meritorious service. Mr. E.R.A. da Cunha, the then Agent
for the State Bank of India, Colombo Branch, stated in evidence that he was an
efficient officer and rendered loyal and faithful service to the Bank.  
  
According to the Arbitrator, there were other officers allowed to retire
before they reached 55 years of age or before completing 30 years service K.S.
Daniel, S.A. Paul, Cleghom and Jeffrey.

**416**

Mr. Choksy P.C., submitted that Daniel was allowed to retire on medical
grounds. The man was sick and tie Bank accepted his application to retire as a
special case and the Arbitrator has not considered this aspect of his case.
But tie point to be noted is that the Bank did not call upon him to retire
under Rule 37 of document (A62). Nor could it be said that he satisfied the
Bank that he was incapacitated within the meaning of Rule 19 (ii) or (iii) of
document (R1) and therefore the Bank allowed him to retire, because the Doctor
reported that he was not incapacitated but needed two months rest The
correspondence makes it clear that he sought permission to retire and the Bank
permitted or sanctioned his retirement under Rule 11 of (R1).  
  
As regards GA Paul, Mr. Choksy, P.C., submitted that his conduct at the Indian
Club in Colombo gave cause for concern whether he could continue to work at
the Bank. He was involved in the misappropriation of funds. The Bank seized
the opportunity and permitted him to retire. The Arbitrator, he said, has not
considered this item of evidence. Here again the Bank did not act under Rule
37 of document (A62) and call upon him to retire by reason of his conduct The
ostensible reason Paul gave was that the education of his children required
him to reside with his family in Jaffna. The correspondence shows that he
asked for permission to retire and the Bank permitted or sanctioned his
retirement under Rule 15 of document (R1).  
  
It seems to me, that both cases, of Daniel and Paul, are referable only to
Rule 15 of document (R1).  
  
It would appear that in Clegnom's case, when he was Agent in Colombo, his
supervision was found wanting as there was a fraud of Rs. 126,000/-. He was
transferred to Madras and when the Bank was nationalised and the Imperial Bank
of India was seconded by the State Bank of India, his application to retire
was allowed. But the point is that Cleghom with 20 years service and Jeffrey
with 14 years service and both under 55 years of age were given permission to
retire by the Bank. It therefore, appears to me that despite Rule 38 in the
Service Rules (A52), in practice the Bank has sanctioned the retirement of
officers before they reached the mandatory age of 55 years and before reaching
the mandatory service of 30 years.  
  
Mr. Choksy, P.C., argued that the 3rd Respondent had an unjustifiable
apprehension and fear as regards his future employment because the Bank was an
exempted Company by reason of the Gazette Notification. On March 30, 1975,
after the Gazette Notification, the 3rd Respondent wrote

**417**

to the Managing Director of the Bank in India seeking permission to retire. He
stated that he was writing this letter on the advice of the Bank Agent, Mr. da
Cunha, and had discussed with him the various reasons which made him write
this letter. He stated that the principal reason was the "fact that in view of
the recent legislation requiring the Bank to incorporate itself in Sri Lanka,
I have no guarantee of the continued existence of this Bank in Sri Lanka" The
Bank in its reply on 30th April, 1975, did not put him right and say that it
was an exempted Company by reason of the Gazette Notification. Mr. da Cunha
was questioned about the Foreign Companies (Special Provisions) Act and was
asked the question, "The State Bank of India decided not to get incorporated".
His answer was "As far as I remember we had no choice, we had to get
incorporated or pack up. As a later development I remember the Governor of the
Central Bank stated that Banks (Foreign) need not be incorporated." No
reference was made by him to the Gazette Notification. His knowledge was
derived from the Governor of the Central Bank. Obviously the Bank was unaware
of the existence of the Gazette Notification. For the first time, h this
Court, a reference was made to the Gazette Notification.  
  
This being the evidence in the case, I cannot fault the Court of Appeal for
taking the view that the 3rd Respondent had fears about his future employment
in view of the provisions of Law No. 19 of 1974, as that was his impression at
the relevant time.  
  
The final submission of Mr. Choksy, P.C. was that the Bank may have had good
reason to refuse permission to retire as the 3rd Respondent was taking up
employment in another Bank.  
  
In the forefront of his letter, the 3rd Respondent frankly disclosed that he
was desirous of accepting employment at another Bank and due to the limited
time given him to accept the new appointment, he requested an early reply.
There was no reply. In his second letter of 02nd April 1975, he reiterated
that he has been offered employment in another Bank and concluded that if
permission to retire was not granted, to treat his letter as one of
resignation. The Bank in Ms reply advised him that his resignation has been
accepted and ended "We wish you a happy future". At no stage did the Bank
disapprove of his conduct in accepting employment in another Bank nor think it
would be inimical to its interests. On the contrary, the Bank wished him
happiness in the future. Mr. H.L de Silva, P.C, informed us, and this was not
denied by Mr. Choksy, P.C., that after he ceased

**418**

employment, the Stats Bank of India had used his services as a Consultant
There is no merit hi this submission.

Considering the fact that the 3rd Respondent had rendered the Bank 25 1/2
years of efficient and loyal service, and also taking into consideration other
instances where officers, less deserving, have been permitted to retire,
though not qualified to do so, it seems to me that this is a fit case where
the Bank might well have considered the 3rd Respondents application to retire
favourably and sanctioned his retirement The award of pension appears to me to
be a just and equitable order.  
  
In S.C. Appeal No. 37/87, the 3rd Respondent-Appellant wants this Court to set
aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal quashing the Arbitrator's award
allowing a payment of Rs. 24,805/- on account of revision of salary and
allowances, and a payment of Rs. 16,800/- on account of encashment of leave.  
  
The 3rd Respondent claimed a revision of salary on the basis of the Staff
Circular of 31.05.1971 (A1A) and 1he Arbitrator has made an award of a sum of
Rs. 24,805/- for the period 01.01.1970 to 20.04.1975 acting on the contents of
the said Circular able.  
  
The Arbitrator has not addressed his mind to the letters (A9) and (A10). After
the letter (A10) was sent to the 3rd Respondent, in view of further
representations made by the 3rd Respondent the letter (A10) was sent to him
where he was clearly told that the salary proposals were not applicable to
staff officers of the Bank at Colombo who are not Indian based. The 3rd
Respondent was not India-based.  
  
Mr. H.L de Silva, P.C., submitted that the resolution referred to in letter
(A10) was discriminatory and there was no rational basis for the distinction
drawn between India-based officers and Sri Lankan staff officers in the
Colombo Branch of the Bank. The answer to this is found in the letter (A9)
written by the Bank which gave a reason, namely, that the 3rd Respondent's
overall emoluments were better than those of his counterparts in India. It is
also relevant to note that both Mr. Johnpulle and the 3rd Respondent the only
two Sri Lankan Staff Officers, by letter of 28.07.1971 made a joint request
that they be paid the revised salary scales. The reply to both was the Bank's
letter (A9). It is not the 3rd Respondent's complaint that among Sri Lankan
Staff Officers there was discrimination inter se.

**419**

As regards the award of Rs. 16,800/- on account of encashment of leave, here
again, the Arbitrator has acted on the contents of Circular (A36) atone. He
has not addressed his mind to the other evidence on this matter. The Bank
Agent, Mr. da Cunha, stated that the Circular is applicable to India-based
officers only. He further stated that any accumulated leave to the credit of
any officer lapses at the time of cessation of his employment The 3rd
Respondent if he was entitled to any accumulated leave, could have utilised it
before he left the service of the Bank. However, in his anxiety to leave the
Bank's service soon in order to commence the alternate employment which he had
obtained, he could not utilise the accumulated leave, if any, to his credit.
Further Rule 30 of the Service Rules requires an officer who intends to resign
to give the Bank 3 calendar months' previous notice in writing, failing which
he shall pay to the Bank 3 months' salary. The Bank, however, by its letter of
30.4.1975, at the 3rd Respondents request set off the required 3 months notice
against his unavailed ordinary leave.  
  
Mr. H.L. de Silva, P.C., here again, submitted that there is no rational bass
for a distinction to be drawn between India based officers and Sri Lankan
officers in the Colombo Branch of the Bank in the application of Circular
(A36). It is discriminatory, he said. I am inclined to agree with Mr. Choksy,
P.C., that these are matters of policy to be decided by the Bank. There is
evidence in this case that the 3rd Respondent made representations to the
Ministry of Defence and External Affairs when he was not promoted as Assistant
Manager as he was told the post was reserved for an Indian National. He was
told that the Ministry could not intervene in the matter. Here too, it is not
the position of the 3rd Respondent that hi regard to encashment of lieu leave,
among Sri Lankan officers in the Bank, there has been discrimination inter se.  
  
The power given to an Arbitrator to make a just and equitable award is not
unlimited. In the assessment of evidence, he must act judicially (per
Sirimanne, J., in Heath & Co. (Ceylon) Ltd., v. Kariyawasam (11) at p.384).
The order of a Labour Tribunal is not a just and equitable one, if it is made
without examination and consideration of all relevant evidence adduced at the
inquiry, (per H.N.G. Fernando, C.J., in Lewis Brown & Co. Ltd. v.
Periyapperuma, (12). This observation is equally applicable to an award of an
Industrial Arbitrator.  
  
I affirm the order of the Court of Appeal quashing the award of Rs. 24,805 on
account of revision of salary and allowances and of Rs. 16,800/- on account of
encashment of leave.

**420**

In the result, both appeals are dismissed. In each of these appeals there will
be no costs.  
  
**G.P.S. DE SILVA, J. - I agree.  
  
KULATUNGA, J, - I agree.  
  
DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree.  
  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeals dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/9.html_  

