##  Sivagnanalingam v. Suntheralingam - SLR - 86, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 9;
(1988) 1 Sri LR 86 (15 February 1988)

**

86

SIVAGNANALINGAM  
v.  
SUNTHERALINGAM

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C. J., ATUKORALE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C.69/86.  
C.A. 177/79(F).  
D. C. COLOMBO CASE No.441/PC.  
FEBRUARY 8, 1988.

_

     Thesawalamai - Succession - Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance (Jaffna) - Persons to whom Thesawalami applies - Regulation of 1806 - Letters of Administration - s. 523 Civil Procedure Code (as amended by Law No. 20 of 1977_).

The Thesawalamai is a collection of the Customs of the Malabar Inhabitants of
the Province of Jaffna (collected by Dissawe Isaak) and given full force by
the Regulation of 1806. For Thesawalamai to apply to a person it must be
established that he is a Tamil inhabitant of the Northern Province.

The meaning of ordinary words is question of fact but the meaning to be
attributed to enacted words is a question of law: The meaning of the
expression "inhabitant of the Province of Jaffna" is a question of law.

Inhabitant means permanent inhabitant - One who has his permanent home in
Jaffna in the nature of a domicile in the Northern Province. There can only be
a Sri Lankan domicile and to that extent the term differs from the expression
inhabitancy. Yet the idea of permanent home underlies both concepts and rules
for identifying a person's domicile can be applied to discover whether a
family has a permanent home in the Northern Province and hence its members are
inhabitants in that Province.

**87**

There is a strong presumption in favour of the continuance of a domicile of
origin. The burden of proving a change of domicile from one of origin to one
of choice is a heavy one. With regard to the standard of proof necessary to
rebut the presumption the judicial conscience must be satisfied by evidence of
change. Otherwise the domicile of origin persists. The acquisition of a
domicile of choice is a serious matter and should not be lightly presumed. The
same presumption must be applied to resolve the question whether there was a
change of inhabitancy. There must be a clear intention of abandoning the old
inhabitancy.

The Thesawalamai is the personal law of the Tamil inhabitants of the Northern
Province. It applies to them wherever they are and to their movable and
immovable property wherever situated in Sri Lanka.

For the purpose of deciding on the rights of inheritance to the estate of a
deceased husband, the time of his death is the relevant time and not the time
of marriage.

Where the deceased was a Jaffna Tamil born in Malaya of Jaffna Tamil parents
and after his school education in Jaffna came to Colombo for technical
studies, joined Government service and worked in several pats of the island,
married a Tamil lady in Jaffna (with a substantial dowry) who predeceased him
leaving no children whereupon the deceased married a Jaffna Tamil lady in
Colombo who had a house in Point Pedro but was employed in Colombo as a
teacher, no intention of abandoning the original Jaffna inhabitancy can be
held to be established. The deceased never ceased to be a Jaffna inhabitant.
He had his permanent home in Jaffna and was in Colombo for employment. There
should be unequivocal evidence of abandonment of that inhabitancy in Jaffna.
The presumption prevails until abandonment of that inhabitancy is established.

Under the Thesawalamai the surviving spouse is not an hair of the deceased
spouse's estate. After the addition of the provisio to s. 523 of the Civil
Procedure the preferential claim of the surviving spouse to letters of
administration to the deceased spouse's estate can yield if there is good
reason for it. In certain circumstances the principle grant follows interest
can be applied where the surviving spouse has no interest in the estate and
there are no minor children whose interests she or he has to protect, in
favour of an heir with interests in the estate.

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1)  _Spencer v. Rajaratnam (1913) 16 NLR 321, 326, 327, 328, 331.

_

(2)  _Somasunderam Pillai v. Charavanamuttu (1942) 44 NLR 1, 12._

(3)  _Soundranayagam v. Soundranayagam (1917) 20 NLR 274.

_

(4)  _King v. Perumal (1911) 14 NLR 496.

_

(5) _Wellapulla v. Sitambalam (1875) Ram. Rep. (1872-76) 114._

(6)  _Tharmalingam Chatty v. Arunalasam Chettiar (1944) 45 NLR 414._

(7)  _Chetty v. Chetty (1935) 37 NLR 253._

(8)  _Nagaratnam v. Suppiah (1967) 74 NLR 54._

(9)  _Velupillai v. Sivakamipillai (1910) 13 NLR 74.

_

**88**

(10)  _Landeradale Peerage case 10 A. C. 692.

_

(11)  _Whicker v. Hume 7 HL Cases 124.

_

(12)  _Winanis v. A.G. (1904) AC 287, 290.

_

(13)  _Re Rules Estate (1966) 2 WLR 717, 726.

_

(14)  _Sethukavalar v. Alvapillai (1934) 36 NLR 291.

_

(15)  _Jamila Umma v. Jailabdeen ( 1943) 44 NLR 187.

_

(16)  _Appuhamy v. Menike (1916) 19 NLR 149, 151.

_

N.B.- _Spencer v. Rajaratnam_ (supra) not approved.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal

_

A. Mahrendrarajah P.C._ with _S. Mahenthiran_ and _S. K. Nageswaran_ for
appellant.

_

A. A. Merleen_ with _A. R. M. Azad_ and _S. Bagirathan_ for respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

February 15, 1988.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.,

**

An important question of law as to whom the Law of Thesawalamai applies arises
on the facts of this use.

One Nagalingam Suntheralingam aged fifty four years, died in Colombo on 27th
August 1974, intestate and issueless. The petitioner-appellant, who is a
brother of the deceased made an application for the grant of Letters of
Administration in respect of the estate of the deceased. According to him the
deceased was a Jaffna Tamil governed by Thesawalamai and hence the estate
should be distributed, in terms of the provisions of the Matrimonial Rights
and Inheritance Ordinance (Jaffna) Chap. 58 Vol. III, L.E. The ninth
respondent, who is the respondent to this appeal and is referred to herein as
the respondent opposed the petitioner's application and claimed Letters of
Administration as the widow of the deceased. The basic contention of the
respondent was that the deceased was not governed by the law of Thesawalamai
and that hence succession to his estate should be in accordance with the
provisions of the Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance of 1876 as
amended (Chap. 57 Vol. III, L.E.).

**89**

The matters in dispute between the petitioner and the respondent had been set
out in the form of issues numbered 1-18. The main issue on which the parties
went to inquiry was issue (i)-

viz: Was the deceased the late Mr. Nagalingam Suntheralingam governed by the
law of Thesawalamai.

The District Judge, after a protracted inquiry answered the issue in the
negative. This finding has been affirmed by the Court of Appeal. This finding
has been vehemently attacked before this court. Counsel for the petitioner-
appellant submitted that on the facts disclosed in the case, both the lower
courts had misdirected themselves in law in holding that the deceased was not,
at the relevant time viz: at the time of his death, subject to Thesawalamai.

"As the Thesawalamai is a custom in derogation of the common law, any person
who alleges that it is applicable to him must affirmatively establish the
fact" per Wood-Renton A.C.J. in _Spencer_. _v. Rajaratnam,_ (1). The burden
lay on the petitioner-appellant who alleged that Thesawalamai applied to the
deceased to establish that fact. _Somasunderam Pillai v. Charavanamuttu,_ (2)

Section 2 of the Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance (Jaffna) Chap.
58, states that-

"This Ordinance shall apply only to those Tamils to whom the Thesawalamai
applies, and it shall apply in respect of their movable and immovable property
wherever situate."

The preamble to the Thesawalamai law states that Thesawalamai is a collection
of the Customs of the _Malabar Inhabitants of the Province of Jaffna._ The
Tamil inhabitants of the Northern Province have been identified as the said
Malabar Inhabitants. For a person to claim the benefit of or be subject to
Thesawalamai, he should be a Tamil and also be en inhabitant of the Northern
Province.

"The Thesawalamai is not a personal law attaching itself by reason of descent
and religion to the whole Tamil population of Ceylon, but an exceptional
custom in force in the province of Jaffna-now the Northern Province and in
force there primarily and mainly at any rate, only among Tamils who can be
said to be inhabitants of that Province" Per Wood-Renton C.J. in 16 N.L.R. 321
at 326-327. In

**90**

_

Soundranayagam v. Soundranayagam_ (3), it was held that S. who was born in
Jaffna but whose fattier was a Colombo Chetty who had become a permanent
resident of Jaffna was not governed by Thesawalamai. In _King v. Perumal_ (4);
it was held that the Thesawalamai did not apply to Indian Tamils resident in
the Central Province.

In _Wellapulla v. Sitambalam_ (5), it was held that Thesawalamai is not
applicable to the Tamils of Trincomalee.

In _Tharmalingam Cherty v. Arunasalam Chetiiar,_ (6) it was contended by
counsel for the appellant that Thesawalamai did not apply to all Tamil
inhabitants of the Northern Province but only to such of them as were
descended from the Malabar Tamils who were inhabitants of Jaffnapatam at the
time the Dissawe Isaak's collection of customs was given full force by the
Regulation of 1806 or alternatively to other Malabar Tamils who had since
become inhabitants of the peninsula. This contention was rejected by court
which held that the father of the appellants being a Tamil, although he came
from Ramnad, India had settled permanently in Jaffna, _animo manendi et non
revertendi_ and hence the appellant was governed by Thesawalamai. Soertsz J,
thus upheld the generally accepted view that Thesawalamai applied to Tamils
inhabiting the Northern Province. "The Thesawalamai applies to Tamils with a
Ceylon domicile and a Jaffna inhabitancy." Thus Thesawalamai applies to
persons of the Tamil race who settled in Jaffna alter the enactment of the
Code of Thesawalamai. In _Chetty v. Chetty,_ (7) 37 N. L. R. 253 the parties
were Tamils belonging to the community known as the Vaniyas, who had, for
about three generationt made Jaffna their permanent home and had observed .the
customs followed by other Hindu families. It was held that the parties were
Malabar inhabitants of Jaffna to whom the Thesawalamai applied. In _Nagaratnam
v. Suppiah,_ (8) an Indian Tamil Who by his permanent residence and marriage
in Jaffna had established that he was an inhabitant of the Northern Province
was held to be subject to Thesawalamai.

Thus, for Thesawalamai to apply to a person it must be established that he is
a Tamil inhabitant of the Northern Province.

According to Wood-Renton, A.C.J.,  -

"Inhabitant" means a person who had acquired a permanent residence in the
nature of a domicile in the Northern Province" _Velupillai v. Sivakamipillai_
(9). He further stated in 16 N.L.R. 321 at

**91**

327-328 "It is not desirable or possible to lay down any general rules as to
the circumstances which will suffice to establish the existence of such a
residence. Each case must depend on its own facts. There may be, on the one
hand a residence in Jaffna which will not suffice to make a Tamil an
"inhabitant" of that province, within the meaning of the Regulation of 1806,
and, on the other hand, a residence elsewhere, even for protracted periods,
which will not deprive him of that character. An advocate practising before
the Supreme Court of Colombo or a Government Servant permanently attached to
the Kachcheri at Galle or Matara might, well, if he were a Jaffna Tamil,
retain such a connection with his native province as to entitle him to the
benefit of its customary law. But, the mere fact that a man is a Jaffna Tamil
by birth or by descent, while it is a circumstance of which account must be
taken in considering his real position, will not bring him within the scope of
the statutory definition of the class of persons to whom the Thesawalamai
applies."

Though the meaning of ordinary words is a question of fact, the meaning to be
attributed to enacted words is a question of law, being a matter of statutory
interpretation. So in this case a question of law arises as to the meaning of
"inhabitant of the Province of Jaffna," even though it arises only at a
preliminary stage in the process of determining a question of fact, namely
whether the petitioner has established the fact that the deceased was at all
relevant times an inhabitant of the Northern Province.

Middleton J., in _Velupillai v. Sivakamipillai_ (supra) construed the word
"inhabitant" as indicating a "permanent inhabitant"-one who has his permanent
home in the Province of Jaffna. He said that the question of domicile affects
the inferences as to the meaning of the word "inhabitant." He further stated
"as regards the law of domicile, the _Lauderdale Peerage_ case (10) lays it
down that a change of domicile, which, I think is very much equivalent to what
I call "inhabitancy" here, must be _sine animo revertendi,_ and I think, that
the Judge was right in holding in accordance with the ruling in that case that
every presumption is to be made in favour of original domicile, that no new
domicile can be taken to have been acquired without a clear intention of
abandoning the old". Wood Renton J., in his judgment stated that he entirely
concurred both in the reasoning and conclusion of Middleton J.,

**92**

Both Middleton J., and Wood-Renton A.C.J., were of the view that inhabitancy
connected "permanent residence in the nature of domicile." A person's
"domicile" means, generally speaking the place where he has his permanent
home. _(Whicker v. Hume)_ , (11) "Domicile' signifies connection with a
territory subject to a single system of law and hence there can be only a Sri
Lanka (Ceylon) domicile; there can be no Jaffna or Kandy domicile, in that
respect domicile differs from 'inhabitancy.' Yet the idea of permanent home
underlies both concepts; rules for identifying a person's domicile can be
applied to discover whether a Tamil has a permanent home in the Northern
Province and hence is an inhabitant in that Province. There is a strong
presumption in favour of the continuance of a domicile of origin. As
contrasted with a domicile of choice, it has been said by Lord Macnaughten
that "its character is more enduring, its hold stronger and less easily shaken
off." _Winans v. A.G._ (12). Overwhelming evidence is required to shake it
off. The burden of proving a change of domicile from one of origin to one of
choice is a heavy one. With reference to the standard of proof necessary to
rebut the presumption, Scarman, J., stated-

"Two things are clear-first that unless the judicial conscience is satisfied
by evidence of change, the domicile of origin persists; and secondly, that the
acquisition of a domicile of choice is a serious matter not to be lightly
inferred from slight indication or casual words. " _Re Rule's Estate_ (13).

Middleton J., approved in _Velupillai v. Sivakamipillai_ (9) the application
of the above presumption by the trial Judge to resolve the question whether
there was change of 'inhabitancy.' He said that-

"A change of domicile which I think, is very much equivalent to what I call
inhabitancy here must be _sine animo revertendi_ " . . . . .  "every
presumption is to be made in favour of original domicile and  that no new
domicile can be taken to have been acquired without a clear intention of
abandoning the old."

As stated earlier Wood-Renton, J., concurred both in the reasoning and
conclusion of Middleton J.,

However _Ennis J._ , in _Spencer v. Rajaratnam,_ (1) has stated :

"In questions relating to domicile there is a presumption of law that the
domicile of origin is retained until a change is proved, but it seems to me
that when the question is one of inhabitancy, for the purpose of the
application of a local custom, the presumption is not in favour of the
original inhabitancy, but of the actual residence at a particular time."

**93**

I regret that I cannot agree that no such presumption exists in favour of the
original inhabitancy. No authority has been cited by Ennis J., in support of
the proposition which is opposed to principle and authority and does not
represent the law. It is contrary to the statement of the law enunciated by
Middleton J., in _Velupillai v. Sivakamipillai_ (9) which has not been
referred to. Further Ennis J., assumes that Thesawalamai is local customary
law which is in force within the limits of Jaffna only. Both Wood-Renton and
Ennis J., were in error in thinking that Thesawalamai constitutes a local
rather than a personal law. In my view Thesawalamai is the personal law of the
Tamil inhabitants of the Northern Province. It applies to them wherever they
are and to their movable and immovable property wherever situated in Sri Lanka
(vide section 2 of the Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance (Jaffna)).
The observation of Ennis J., (quoted above) is only an obiter dictum and does
not form the ratio decided of the judgment. In that case though Naganathan,
the subject in question, was born in Jaffna, he left Jaffna when he was a few
months old and lived, carried on business, married a Tamil of Colombo and died
in Colombo and except for occasional visits was never in the Northern
Province. When his marriage was arranged, Naganathan had said "that he was a
Colombo man and domiciled in Colombo." The finding in the case was that
Naganathan's parents were not inhabitants of the Province of Jaffna. In the
context of these facts there was no question of Naganathan's inhabitancy
having originated in Jaffna and hence any reference to the presumption in
favour of domicile of origin or inhabitancy was not relevant to the facts of
the case. In fact, in that case on the facts found by the court Naganathan's
inhabitancy originated outside the Northern Province. The Court of Appeal has
misdirected itself in reaching the conclusion on the basis of this dictum of
Ennis, J., that a person should actually be residing in Jaffna at the relevant
point of time to qualify himself to be an inhabitant of Jaffna.

In the present case, it is not in dispute that the deceased was a Jaffna
Tamil. He was born in 1920 in Malaya where his father was employed. It is
common ground that the deceased's parents were Jaffna Tamils and that on the
retirement of his father, he came along with his parents to Sri Lanka and
lived in Jaffna. From 1933 to 1947 he resided in Jaffna and was educated in
Jaffna. Thereafter he came to Colombo to study at the Ceylon Technical
College. On completion of his course of studies be joined the Public Works
Department as an Inspector and worked in various parts of the Island,
including Jaffna.

**94**

He married his cousin Pushpam, a Tamil lady, in Jaffna in 1949 and lived
together till Pushpam's death in 1968. Pushpam brought by way of dowry a
residential house in Jaffna. The deceased used to go to Jaffna during
vacations and stay in the dowried house. The deceased had no children by
Pushpam. During the twenty years of his married life with Pushpam, the
deceased had made several investments in shares. In 1968 he had investments in
as many as twenty companies, situated in Colombo to the tune of Rs. 125,000.
He did not then choose to buy a house in Colombo, but lived with Pushpam in
rented out houses. After the death of Pushpam he married in 1969 the
respondent, a Jaffna Tamil. This marriage took place in Colombo. The
respondent was also employed in Colombo as a teacher. She owned a house in
Point Pedro. The evidence is that the deceased used to go and stay in that
house when he went to Jaffna. Between the registration of his marriage to the
respondent on 29.5.69 and the religious ceremony celebrating the marriage on
29.6.69 the respondent conveyed to his sister's daughter Gnanatheepam
Pushpam's house in Jaffna which had devolved on him in terms of the last will
executed by Pushpam. When he gifted the house to his niece, he reserved the
rife-interest in the property to himself. He maintained his links with Jaffna
and did not sever his connection with Jaffna where his mother lived. Though he
died in Colombo in 1974, his body was taken to Jaffna and the funeral was had
in Jaffna, the thirty-first day ceremony and alms-giving following on his
death were also had in Jaffna. The deceased did not invest in any immovable
property during the tenure of his marriage to the respondent, though according
to her he was intending to purchase a house to live in Kollupitiya.

It is against the backdrop of these facts that the question has to be decided:
was the deceased an inhabitant of Jaffna at the time of his death? Had he
abandoned his Jaffna inhabitancy and settled for good in Colombo? Can it be
said that the deceased had severed his connation with Jaffna and chosen to
have his permanent home in Colombo?

The Court of Appeal is in error in holding that the point of time relevant for
the determination of the question of the applicability of Thesawalamai to the
deceased was the time of his marriage to the respondent. The time of marriage
is relevant only to the question of deciding the applicability of Thesawalamai
to married women-vide section 3, 3(1) and 3(2) of the Matrimonial Rights and
Inheritance Ordinance Jaffna. When the issue is whether the deceased husband
is

**95**

governed by Thesawalamai, for the purpose of deciding on the rights of
inheritance to the estate of the deceased husband, the time of his death is
the relevant time and not the time of his marriage.

cannot agree with the lower courts that the evidence falls short of
establishing that "the deceased had at the relevant time, a Jaffna
inhabitancy." This conclusion cannot be supported having regard to the
totality of the evidence of record. In fact, a proper appreciation of the
relevant evidence leads to only one conclusion viz. that the deceased never
ceased to be a Jaffna inhabitant and that his permanent home was Jaffna; he
resided in Colombo only for purposes of his employment. The evidence does not
show that the deceased had given up his intention to return to Jaffna. The
reservation of life-interest in himself, when he donated Pushpam's house to
his niece militates against the unwarranted assumption that he had no
intention of returning to Jaffna to settle down. Both the lower courts had
failed to attribute proper significance to this strong item of evidence.

The evidence shows that the deceased maintained his links with Jaffna where
his aged mother lived. It was in the order of things that, though the deceased
died in Colombo, his funeral was had in Jaffna.

In view of the admitted fact that the deceased was a Jaffna Tamil who started
life as an inhabitant of Jaffna, the burden lay on the Respondent to rebut the
presumption of continuance of the inhabitancy by leading unequivocal evidence
of abandonment of that inhabitancy. The presumption prevails until abandonment
of than inhabitancy is established. The Respondent did not raise any issue
relating to abandonment. The lower courts had reached their decision that the
deceased "had left Jaffna several years ago" by attaching undue weight to his
actual residence in Colombo after he got employed. Wood-Renton A.C.J., with
reference to such employment, said in _Spencer v. Rajaratnam,_ (1) that
residence outside Jaffna for the purpose of business or employment for
protracted periods will not deprive a person of his character of "inhabitant
of Jaffna.." For such residence, to divest a person of such character, it
should have been in pursuance of an intention of remaining there permanently.
Such residence must have been voluntary, a matter of free choice and not of
constraint as being obliged to reside in a place for the purposes of his
employment, profession or business. In the present case, the deceased resided
in Colombo because his employment in Colombo required him to reside in
Colombo.

**96**

Counsel for the Respondent stressed the fact that the deceased did not make
any investment in Jaffna and that he intended to purchase a house property in
Colombo and that all his investment in shares was made in Colombo. These
circumstances do not point unequivocally to the abandonment of an intention to
return to Jaffna when the time came for his retirement from Government
Service. The deceased might have chosen to invest on shares in Colombo for
convenience or for good commercial reasons. Again he might have intended to
invest on house property in Colombo for the reason that he wanted to reside in
a house of his own rather than in a rented house. Such an investment, by
itself, is not indicative of an intention to settle down permanently in
Colombo. From an acquisition alone, of a house or other immovable property
outside Jaffna, an intention to relinquish Jaffna inhabitancy cannot be spelt
out.

Before the Court of Appeal, Counsel for the Appellant sought to produce deed
No 5516 dated 26.6.1969 which was the deed of donation by which the deceased
donated the dowry house of his deceased wife Pushpam to which he had become
entitled in terms of the Last Will of Pushpam, to his niece Gnanatheepan,
subject to his life-interest. Both Appellant and Respondent had referred to
this donation in their evidence, without producing this deed at the trial. The
Respondent admits the donation. In fact she claims credit for the transfer-
'the property was transferred on my persuasion.' The Appellant's application
to produce the document was refused by the Court of Appeal on the ground that
fresh evidence was being sought to be led in the Court of Appeal, which
evidence was available at the time of the trial and could have been led, had
the appellant exercised reasonable diligence. In my view, the court did not
exercise its discretion correctly in refusing to admit the deed of donation.
The transaction to which the deed refers was admitted by the Respondent at the
trial and the execution of the deed was not challenged. The document is not
"fresh evidence" as the latter is understood. In my view, the document should
have been admitted even in appeal; it did not take anybody by surprise. That
deed of donation was executed by the deceased and by the Respondent. They had
stated there specifically that "the donors viz: the deceased Suntheralingam
and the respondent, are both governed by the law of Thesavvalamai. "This
statement by them dispels all doubt as to whether the deceased was governed by
Thesawalamai. I must however state that though this statement confirms the
conclusion that the deceased was always

**97**

subject to Thesawalamai, even without this piece of evidence, on the material
on record, the conclusion is irresistible that the deceased was always a
Malabar inhabitant to whom the Thesawalamai applied.

Both the lower courts have arrived at this finding that the deceased had
ceased to be an inhabitant of Jaffna by placing undue weight on the component
of actual residence outside Jaffna without reference to the nature of the
intention associated with such residence, whether there was the intention to
reside permanently out of Jaffna. The fact that a person has resided or a long
period of time outside Jaffna is by itself not sufficient. In _Velupillai v.
Sivakamipillai_ (9), the deceased Alvapillai who was a native of Jaffna went
to Batticaloa about thirty five years ago. Yet the court held that he was
still an inhabitant of Jaffna, subject to Thesawalamai.

I set aside the finding of the Court of Appeal and of the District Court that
the deceased was not governed by Thesawalamai and answer issue ( _a_ ) "was
the deceased M. Nagalingam Suntheralingam governed by the law of Thesawalamai"
in the affirmative.

I am not disposed to interfere with the finding that a sum of Rs. 19,000 is
due to the 9th respondent from the estate of the deceased. Though the
respondent had claimed Rs.70,262.47 from the estate, the District Judge had
held that only a sum of Rs. 19,000 was due to the 9th respondent. I affirm the
finding.

It was admitted by Counsel for the respondent that no portion of the estate
left by the deceased constituted Thediathettam acquired subsequent to his
marriage to the respondent and that hence, the respondent has no interest in
the estate. Under the Thesawalamai the surviving spouse is not an heir of the
deceased spouse's estate. Under the Jaffna Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance
Ordinance, one spouse is not an heir of the other spouse; only one half of the
Thediathettam, if any, which belonged to the deceased spouse and had not been
disposed of, devolved on the surviving spouse (section 20).

In this case, there is a conflict of claims between the petitioner who is one
of the intestate heirs and the 9th respondent, the widow, for grant of letters
of administration. Section 523 of the Civil Procedure Code provides that the
claim of the widow should be preferred to all others. In _Sethukavalar v.
Sivapillai,_ (14) a Divisional Bench of the

**98**

Supreme Court held that the court has power to pass over the claim of the
widow in favour of another for good reasons. In _Jamila Umma v. Jailatdeen_ ,
(15) the court held that in a contest for letters of administration the
preference given by law to a widow's claim cannot be displaced merely because
her interest in the estate is small. In that case Keuneman J., observed-

"no doubt the fact that the widow has no claim or a very small claim to the
estate may be one of the grounds which the District Judge may take into
account in considering the question, but I am not satisfied that taken by
itself it is a sufficient ground to displace the preference given by law to
her claim for letters."

However section 523 of the Civil Procedure Code has now been amended by
section 71 of Law No. 20 of 1977, by the addition of the proviso "Provided
however, that the court may for good cause supersede the claim of the widow or
widower."

In the instant case, the widow has no interest as intestate heir in the estate
of her deceased husband. Further there were no children born out of the union;
whose interests, she, as their mother had to protect. In my view Keuneman 'J's
above observation states the law too broadly. It can very well apply to a case
where though the widow has no claim to the estate of the deceased, yet where
she has children who are interested in the estate and whose interests she has
to protect her preferential claim for administration should be upheld. Wood-
Renton C.J. relevantly observed in _Appuhamy v. Menike_ (16)-

"Even though a binna husband may have no pecuniary interest in his wife's
estate, he has interests of another kind. He is still her husband arid the
father of her children and it is quite right that he should have an
opportunity of seeing that his wife's estate is properly dealt with, and that
the position of the children in regard to it is adequately safeguarded."

In view of the proviso introduced by the amendment of 1977 that for good cause
the court may supersede the claim of the widow or widower I think effect
should be given to the principle 'grant follows interest' and that the
claimant who had the greatest interests in the effects of the deceased should
be granted administration and the claim of a widow or widower who has no
interest as heir in the estate of the deceased and who has no minor children
whose interests have to be protected should be superseded in favour of a
claimant who is an heir of the deceased, for letters of administration.

**99**

In the circumstances the claim of the 9th respondent, the widow of the
deceased for the grant of letters should be superseded in favour of that of
the petitioner who, admittedly is art intestate heir of the deceased and whose
claim is supported by the other heirs.

I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and of
the District Court and direct that the petitioner-appellant Nagalingham
Sivagnanalingam be granted letters of administration in respect of the estate
of the deceased in question. I dismiss the 9th Respondent's application for
letters of administration. I however hold that the 9th Respondent is entitled
to a sum of Rs. 19,000/- from the estate of the deceased, on account of her
claims against the estate. I make order that parties will bear their own costs
in the District Court, but the 9th Respondent shall pay the petitioner the
costs of the Court of Appeal and of this Court.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/9.html_  

