
_

Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law-Right of Buddhist monk though not in the pupillary
line to reside in a temple and be maintained from temple funds.

_

Once a temple is made Sanghika or offered to the Sangha, it belongs to the
entire priesthood and any priest can with the consent of the Chief Incumbent
remain in the temple though he is not in the line of pupillary succession; but
he has no right to be maintained from the temple funds. The right of residence
is to reside in the temple in a place allotted by the Chief Incumbent.

**182**

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1) _Vipulananda Terunnanse v. Sedawatte Pannasara_ -20 C. L. W 119.

(2) _Paruselle Dhammajothy Unanse v. Dkin Banda Parenatale-et al_ (1881) 4
S.C.C. 121.

(3) _Piyadasa v. Deevamitta-_ (1921) 23 N.L.R. 24, 29.

(4) _Moratota Sobhita Thero v. Am unugama Ratnapura Thero-_ [1983] Bar L.R.
151,

(5) _V. Dhammaloka Thero v. P. Saranapala Thero_ -(1956) 57 N.L.R. 618.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court Appeal.

_

Nimal Senanayake; P.C. with K, Gunaratne and, Miss S. M. Senaratne_ for
plaintiff-appellant.

_

Everard Ratnayake _for defendant-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

April 30, 1986.  
**H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.**

In this case the plaintiff-appellant instituted this action against the 1st
defendant and the 2nd defendant-respondent to have himself declared the lawful
Viharadhipathi of a temple called Sudharmaramaya at Galyaya, to have the
defendants ejected there from and for damages. After trial judgment was
entered for the plaintiff as prayed for. The 1st defendant had died during the
pendency of the action and the 2nd defendant appealed from the judgment of the
District Court. The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal of the 2nd defendant
with costs. In the course of its judgment the Court of Appeal has gone on to
state:

"But however the order of the learned District Judge ordering the ejectment of
the defendant is not to be construed as an order ejecting the defendant from
the temple itself to reside wherein, the defendant as a monk has an inherent
right".

It is from this part of the judgment of the Court of Appeal-that the plaintiff
has appealed to this Court.

Admittedly this is a temple exempted from the provisions of section 4 of the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance (Cap. 318) and succession to its incumbency
is governed by the system of succession known as Sisyanu Sisya Paramparawa. It
was the contention of the learned

**183**

counsel for the plaintiff-appellant that inasmuch as the Court of Appeal has
held that the 1st defendant himself was an importer and the 2nd defendant
could not claim any interest from him, the teamed Judges of the Court of
Appeal- were in error when they added a `rider that the decree of ejectment
should:

"not be construed as an order of ejectment of the 2nd defendant from the
temple itself where in the 2nd defendant as a monk has an inherent right''

Learned counsel conceded that had the 1st `defendant been one of the pupils of
the plaintiff's tutor. The' 2nd `defendant' being the 1st defendant's pupil,
he would have had a right to reside in this temple and be' maintained from its
funds but since the '1st defendant has been he ld to be a stranger to the line
of pupillary succession, and hence' an importer, neither the 1st defendant nor
his pupil the 2nd defendant had the right to continue to reside in the temple
once the plaintiff was declared the lawful- viharadhipathi. He relied on the
case of Vipulananda Terunnanse v. Sedawatte Pannasara (1) to support his
contention that `b person who is in the line of papillary succession would bb
entitled to be maintained out of the funds of the temple, for this care held
inter alia that the pupil of the deceased senior pupil though not entitled to
succeed to the incumbency has the' right to remain in the temple and be
maintained out of its income'.

Learned counsel for the respondent on the other hand relied on the dictum of
Caley, C.J. in Parusselle Dhammajothy Unanse v. Tikiri Banda Parenatale (2)
where he stated as follows:

"It has been more than once pointed out by this Court that a Buddhist priest
cannot be ejected from a Buddhist Vihare, except, of course, for some personal
cause irrespective of the rights of property; for a duly dedicated Vihara is
'Sanghika', the common property of the Priesthood. But the incumbency of a
Vihara and the control and management of its endowments' may undoubtedly be
vested in one or more persons to the exclusion of all others..:':.,...."

De Sampayo, J. in Piyadasa v. Deevamitta (3) refers to the dictum of Caley, CJ
.and goes on to say

"There is no doubt about this Buddhist law, and it is therefore unnecessary to
examine further the authorities on that subject. This right of the priesthood,
however surely does not mean that an individual priest can select for himself
a particular place in the vihare

**184**

independently of the chief incumbent and against his wishes. I think that any
persistent assertion of an insistence on such an alleged right is a 'personal
cause' for which he may be properly asked to leave. Such conduct would amount
to contumacy, and in the exercise of ecclesiastical discipline and order, the
incur bent has, I think, sufficient authority even to eject the offending
nest''.

The dicta of Caley, C.J. and De Sampayo, J have been referred to with approval
by Samarakoon, C.J. in Morato a Sobhita Thero v. Amunugama Ratnapura Thero
(4).

It has been held in the instant case that Galyaya Chandrajothi Thero who
belonged to the Asgiriya Chapter was at one time the lawful Viharadhipathi of
this temple and functioned as such but, two priests who belonged to the line
of pupillary succession of Chandrajothi Thero had received their higher
ordination at the Malwatte Chapter and hence forfeited their rights to the
incumbency of the temple which was a temple that belonged to the Asgiriya
Chapter. One of the two priests had in addition, by a deed, renounced his
claim to the incumbency of this temple in favour of the Maha Nayaka of the
Asgiriya Chapter who by a deed executed in 1965 had appointed the plaintiff as
Viharadhipathi. This became necessary as the line of pupillary succession had
failed and the temple vested in Sangha, or became Sanghika, and the right of
appointment of a new Viharadhipathi vested solely in the Maha Nayaka of the
fraternity which had jurisdiction over the temple in question. (V. Dhammaloka
Thero v. P. Saranapala Thero)

In my view, reversion to the Sangha of Sanghika property in this context, is
on the extinction of the line of pupillary succession, and enables the Maha
Nayaka to make an appointment, but the dictum of Caley, C.J. referred to above
still holds good, in that once a temple is made Sanghika or offered to the
Sangha, it belongs to the entire priesthood and any priest can with the
consent of the chief incumbent remain in the temple though he is not in the
line of pupillary succession, but he has no right to be maintained from the
income of the temple. (Vipulananda Terunnanse v. Sedawatta Pannasara (supra))

In the instant case the evidence is that the priests from whom the 2nd
defendant alleges he derived this rights were in possession of this temple for
nearly a hundred years and the 2nd defendant himself

**185**

succeeded to the 1st defendant who died during the pendency of this action. It
is only just and proper that the plaintiff should permit the 2nd defendant to
reside, to which he has a right, in an allotted place in the temple, if the
2nd defendant so desires. The appeal is accordingly dismissed. Parties will
bear their own costs of this appeal.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J. **\- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed._

* * *
