##  Visuwalingam and Others v. Liyanage and Others - SLR - 203, Vol 1 of 1983
[1983] LKSC 9; (1983) 1 Sri LR 203 (20 October 1983)

**203**



**VISUVALINGAM AND OTHERS**

**v.**

## LIYANAGE AND OTHERS

**No. (1)**





SUPREME COURT,

SAMARAKOON, Q.C., C.J.,

SMARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J.,

WIMALARATNE, J., RATWATTE, J.,

SOZA, J., RANANSINGHE, J.,

ABDUL CADER J., AND RODRIGO, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO.47/83,

September 8,9,19,22,23,

26 to 30,1983.

October 3 to 5, 1983.



Sixth Amendment to the Constitution ‑ Is the one month time limit for taking
oaths mandatory or directory ‑Computation of one month ‑ Interpretation of
mutatis - mutandis clause ‑ Non compliance by the judges ‑ Did they cease to
hold office? Article 157A (7) read with Article 165 and 169 (12) Time limit
for the decision ‑Whether mandatory or directory? Article 126 (5) ‑ Article 35
‑ Proceedings ‑ Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance. ‑ section 12 and Section 5
of the Judicature Act.



In purported compliance with Article 157 A (7) read with Article 165 and 169
(12) of the Constitution as amended by the Sixth. Amendment which came into
force on 8th August 1983, the Judges of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal
took the oath set out in the Seventh Schedule to the Bill before another Judge
of the Supreme Court the Judges of which are



204



also ex officio J. Ps in terms of section 45 of the judicature Act, well
within the time limit of one month stipulated in the Bill and the Act.



In the course of hearing application No. 47 of 1983 on September 8, 1983 the
question arose Whether the judges had made sufficient compliance with the
requirement of Section 157(A) of the Constitution that the judges of the
Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal should take their oaths in terms of the
Seventh schedule before the President. The sittings were thereupon adjourned.



On the 15th September 1983 all the judges received fresh letters of
appointments and took their oaths under the 4th and 7th Schedules afresh. On
resumption of the sittings the question arose whether the hearing should be de
novo or merely continued. The state argued that proceedings should be started
de novo because the judges has ceased to hold office on 9th September 1983 and
had been re-appointed afresh on 15th September, 1983. The present bench of
nine judges was constituted to hear this question.



The question for determination were whether;



(1) the judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal ceased to hold
office in terms of the sixth amendment to the Constitution;

(2) the requirement in Article 126 of the Constitution that a decision be made
within two months of the filling of the petition is mandatory or directory;



(3) the President's act of making a fresh appointment of the judges was an
executive act not questionable in a Court of Law;



(4) the court is precluded from investigating



205



matters that happened prior to the fresh appointments made on the 15th
September,



Held (Ranasinghe. ,J. and Rodrigo, J. dissenting):



(1) The principles of interpretation that govern ordinary law are equally
applicable to the provisions of the Constitution. For the purpose of deciding
whether a provision in a Constitution is mandatory one must have regard also
to the aims, scope and object of the provision. The mere use of the word
"shall" does not necessarily make the provision mandatory. The provisions of
Article 157(A) sub‑article 7(a) of the Sixth Amendment which requires the oath
prescribed therein to be taken and subscribed before such person or body if
any as is referred to in the article namely before His Excellency the
President is directory and default does not attract the sanction prescribed by
Article 165 of the Constitution.



(2) Article 126 (5) of the Constitution which states that the Supreme Court
shall hear and finally dispose of the application made under that Article
within two months of the filing of such petition is directory only and not
mandatory and failure by the Supreme Court to dispose of the application
within the pre­scribed period will not nullify the petition or the order.



(3) Actions of the executive are not above the law and certainly can be
questioned in a Court of Law. Article 35 of the Constitution provides only for
the personal immunity of the President during his tenure of office from
proceedings in any Court. The President cannot be summoned to Court to justify
his actions. But that is a far cry from saying that the

206



President is acts cannot be examined by a of law. Though the president is
immune from proceedings in Court a party who invokes the acts of the President
in his support Will to bear the burden of demonstrating that acts of the
president are warranted by law; the seal of the President by itself will not
be sufficient to discharge that burden.



(4) (per Samarakoon, C.J.)



A month in terms of section 3 of the interpretation ordinance means " calendar
month". A calendar month is reckoned not by counting the days but by looking
at the calendar. The space of time from a day in one month to the day
numerically corresponding to that day in the following month is a calendar
month.



(5) The phrase mutatis mutandis means with necessary alterations in point of
detail.



(6) On application of the principal governing the interpretation of the phrase
of mutatis mutandis, the requirement to take the oath before the President is
not mandatory but directory.



(7) The requirement to take the oath in terms of the seventh schedule within
one month of the date of the coming into force of the sixth Amendment was
mandatory but this was complied with and therefore the judges did not cease to
hold office.



**Cases referred to :**



(1)   _Ramhari vs Nilmoni Das A.I.R. 1952 Calcutta 184,186.  
 _

(2)   _State of U.P.V Babu Ram A.I.R. 1961 (SC) 765.  
 _

(3)   ****_Touriel vs. Internal Affairs Southern Rhodesia (1946) S.A.L.R.
(A.D.) 535, 544._

207

**  
 **

(4)   _Motilal v. Commissioner of Income Tax A.I.R. 1951 Nagpur 224.  
 _

(5)   _K.M. Words V.I.T. Commissioner A.I.R 1953 A.I.R. 1953 Punjab 300.  
 _

(6)   _Burne v. Munisamy 21 N.L.R. 193,195  
 _

(7)   _The Highland Tea company of ceylon Ltd., v. Jinadasa 35 C.L.W. 47.  
 _

(8)   _Dodds v. Walker [1981] 2 All. E.R. 609 H.L.  
 _

(9)   _Lissenden v. Bosh Ltd. [1940] A.C. 412, [1940] 1 All ER 405,412.  
 _

(10)  _Evans v. Bartlam [1937] 2 All ER 646, 652.  
 _

(11)  _Nippon Monkwa Kabushiki Kaisha v. Dawson's Bank Ltd. [1935] 1 LL L R,
147,150.  
 _

(12)  _Bank of England v. Cutler [1908] 2 KB 208,234.  
 _

(13)  _Maritime Electric Co. Ltd., v. General Diaries Ltd., [1937] A.C. 610.  
 _

(14)  _Southend-on-Sea Corporation v. Hodgson Ltd, [1961] 1 All Er page 46;
[1962] 1 Q.B 416.  
 _

(15)  _Johnson v. Moraton [1978] 3 All ER 37,47,49.  
 _

(16)  _Hunt v. Hunt (1862) 31 L.J. Ch. 161, 178.  
 _

(17)  _National westminister Bank Ltd. v. Halesowen Press works Ltd. [1972] 1
All ER 641,652.  
 _

(18)  _Burton v. United States 195 us 205.  
 _

(19)  _Customs & Excise Commissioner v. Hebson Ltd. [1953] 2 Lloyds Law Rep.
382.  
 _

(20)  _Society of Medical Officers of Health v. Hope[1960] 1 All ER 317.  
 _

(21)  _N.W. Gas Corporation v. Manchester Corporation [1963] 3 All ER 442.  
 _

(22)  _Welch v. Nagy [1950] 1KB 455.  
 _

(23)  ****_Basheshar Nath v. Commissioner of Income Tax AIR 1959 SC 149._

**208**

**  
 **

(24)  _Ram Gopal v. National Housing Corporation AIR 1969 Allahabad 278.  
 _

(25)  _Bhaskar Moharana v. Arjun Moharana AIR 1962 Orissa 167.  
 _

(26)  _Kushi Ram Raghunath Sahai v. Commissioner of Income Tax A.I.R. 1953
(Punjab) 300.  
 _

(27)  _Touriel v. Minister of internal Affairs Southern Rhodesia SALR (1946)
AD 535.  
 _

(28)  _The Liverpool Borough Bank v. Turner (1860) 30 LJ Ch. 379.  
 _

(29)  _In re C.P. Motor Spirit Act 1939 A.I.R. 4 Fed. Ct.p. 1,5.  
 _

(30)  _Kunasingham v. Ponnambalam 54 NLR 36.  
 _

(31)  _Imperial Tea Company Ltd., v. Aramady 25 N.L.R. 327.  
 _

(32)  _Scadding v. Lorant (1851) 3 H.L.C. 418, 10 ER 164.  
 _

(33)  _R. v. Bedford Level Corporation (1805) 6 East 356, 368.  
 _

(34)  _Bhaskara Pillai v. The State of (Travancore Cochin ) 382 (1950).  
 _

(35)  _De Bussche v. Alt (1878) 8 Ch. D. 286 (CA)_

_  _

S. Nadesan Q.C. with S. Mahenthiran And S.H.M. Reeza for petitioners.

_  _

_S. Aziz, Deputy Solicitor General with P. Karunaratne, S.C. for 1st , 2nd and
3rd respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

_  _

October 20, 1983.  


**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**

** **

Here is a classic example of the uncertainties of litigation and the
vicissitudes of human affairs. The annals of the Supreme Court do not record
such a unique event and I venture to

209



hope, there never will be such an event in the years to come. It behaves me
therefore to set out in detail the events that occurred in their chronological
order.



On the 29th July 1983 the President of the Republic forwarded to the Chief
Justice eight copies of a Bill entitled "Sixth Amendment to the Constitution"
which the Cabinet of Ministers considered urgent in the national interest in
terms of Article 122(1) of the Constitution. The Supreme Court considered this
Bill on the 3rd August and tendered its advice on it to the President and the
Speaker. This Bill was passed by Parliament with some amendments and was
certified by the Speaker on the 8th August. Each of the Judges of the Supreme
Court took the oath set out in the Seventh Schedule to the Bill before another
Judge of the Supreme Court. Similarly each of the Judges of the Court of
Appeal took the said oath before another Judge of the same Court. At this
juncture I might mention that the Judges of the Supreme Court and Court of
Appeal are ex officio J. Ps. in terms of section 45 of the Judicature Act. The
oaths of the Judges of the Court of Appeal were taken on dates prior to the
4th September, 1983, and the oaths of the Judges of the Supreme Court were
taken before‑ 31st August, 1983. They were all well within the time limit of
one month stipulated in the Bill and the Act.



I must now go back a few days in point of time. On the 22nd July, 1983, the
Petitioners in this case (Application No. 47 of 1983) instituted this
application against the Respondents complaining of an infringement of their
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 14(l)(a) and (b) of the Constitution.
This application was taken up for hearing by a Bench of Five judges of this
Court on 8th September, 1983\. The argument was not concluded on that day and
was resumed on the next day.



210





Counsel for the Petitioners was making his submissions when one of my brother
judges who was reading a copy of the Act which had reached us two days earlier
brought it to my notice that the provisions of section 157A of the Act
contained a requirement that the judges of the Supreme Court and the court of
Appeal should take their oaths in terms of the Seventh Schedule before the
President which in fact had not been done by any of the judges. The judges of
both court therefore considered this matter and wrote to the President, inter
alia that in their opinion the period of one month expired at midnight on the
same day (i.e. the 9th September ) and that they were thus prepared to take
their oaths. There was no reply from the President. However, I was informed by
the Minister of justice that he had contacted the president on this matter and
he had been told that the President had been advised by the Attorney-General
that the period of one month had expired on the 7th . In the result no oath
could be administered. On Monday the 12th I was informed that the Courts of
the supreme Court and Court of Appeal and the Chambers of all judges had been
locked and barred and armed police guards had been placed on the premises to
prevent access to them. The judges had been effectively locked out. I
therefore cautioned some of my brother judges who had made ready to attend
Chambers that day not to do so. I referred to this fact in my conversation
with the Minister of justice on the morning of Monday the 12th and he while
deprecating it, assured me that he had not given instructions to the police to
take such action. I was made aware on Tuesday that the guards had been
withdrawn. This matter was referred to in the course of the argument and the
Deputy Solicitor-General informed the Court that it was the act of a
"blundering enthusiastic bureaucrat." He apologized on behalf of the official
and unofficial Bar. On the last day of hearing the Deputy Solicitor-General
withdrew the apology and

211



substituted instead an expression of regret. The identity of the blundering
bureaucrat was not disclosed to us. However his object was clear ‑that was to
prevent the judges from asserting their rights. I must now revert to the
chronology of events. On the 15th September all Judges of the Court of Appeal
and Supreme Court received fresh letters of appointment commencing 15th
September. Two oaths were also administered to each. One was the oath of
office in terms of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution and the other was
the oath in terms of the Seventh Schedule to the Sixth Amendment.



The Bench of five Judges then sat on the 19th September to hear this
application. Counsel for the Petitioners vehemently objected to proceedings de
novo and contended that proceedings must continue from where it stopped on the
9th September as the judges had not ceased to hold office. I considered this a
matter of the greatest importance and therefore referred all points in dispute
to this Full, bench of nine Judges. The following issues were raised for
decision:‑



1\. Did the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal cease to hold
office in terms of the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution?



2\. Is the requirement in Article 126 of the Constitution that a decision be
made within two months of the filing of the petition mandatory or directory?



3\. Is the President's act of making a fresh appointment of the judges an
executive act not questionable in a Court of law?



4\. Is this Court Precluded from investigating matters that happened prior to
the fresh appointments made on the 15th September?



212

  
Issues 3 and 4 were raised, as preliminary objections by the Deputy Solicitor
General, but decided to hear all issues and make one final order. The hearing
on these issues commenced on till 22nd September which is the final date for
decision if the provisions of Article 126(5) are mandatory. I shall now
proceed to deal with the above mentioned issues.



The first question to be decided is whether the Judges of the Court of Appeal
and the Supreme Court ceased to hold office as a direct result of the failure
to observe the provisions of Article 157A of the Sixth Amendment read with
Article 165 of the Constitution. The relevant provisions of Article 157A read
as follows:‑



"(1) No person shall, directly or indirectly, in or outside Sri Lanka,
support, espouse, promote, finance, encourage or advocate the establishment of
a separate State within the territory of Sri Lanka.



(2) No political party or other association or organisation shall have as one
of its aims or objects the establishment of a separate State within the
territory of Sri Lanka.

..............................................

..............................................



(7) Every officer or person who was or is required by, Article 53, Article 61
or Article 107 or Article 165 or Article 169(12), to take and subscribe or to
make and subscribe an oath or affirmative, every member of, or person in the
service of, a local authority, Development Council, Pradeshiya Mandalaya,
Gramodaya Mandalaya or public corporation and every attorney‑at‑law shall -



**213**

#  

(a) if such officer or person is holding office on the date of coming into
force of this Article, make and subscribe, or take and subscribe, an oath or
affirmation in the form set out in the Seventh Schedule, before such person or
body if any, as is referred to in that Article, within one month of the date
on which this Article comes into force;



(b) if such person or officer is appointed to such office after the coming
into force of this Article, make and subscribe or take and subscribe, an oath
or affirmation, in the form set out in the Seventh Schedule, before such
person or body, if any, as is referred to in that Article, within one month of
his appointment to such office.



 The provisions of Article 165 and Article 169(12) shall, , _mutatis ‑
mutandis_ apply to, and in relation to, any person or officer who fails to
take and subscribe, or make and subscribe, an oath or affirmation as required
by this paragraph".



 Article 107(4) referred to in sub‑article (7) stipulates that a Judge of the
Supreme Court or Court of Appeal shall not enter upon his duties of office
until he takes and subscribes an oath in terms of the Fourth Schedule, before
the President.



Article 165(1)of the Constitution reads thus‑



"Every public officer, judicial officer and every other person as is required
by the Constitution to take, an oath or make an affirmation on entering upon
the duties of his office, every holder of an office required ,under the
existing law to take an official oath and every person in the service of every
local authority and of every public

214



corporation shall take and subscribe the oath or make and subscribe the
affirmation set out in the Fourth Schedule. Any such public officer, judicial
officer, person or holder of an office failing to take and subscribe such.
oath or make and subscribe such affirmation after the commencement of the
Constitution on or before such date as may be prescribed by the Prime Minister
by order published in the _Gazette_ shall ceased to be in service or hold
office."



It is contended that the failure of the Judges to take and subscribe their
oath, before the President attracts the sanction set out in Article 165 and
thereby they ceased to hold office. It was submitted by the Deputy
Solicitor‑General that this was a mandatory provision while Counsel for the
Petitioners contended that this was merely directory.



It is said that as a general rule "constitutional provisions are mandatory
unless by express provisions or by necessary implication, a different
intention is manifest. Some cases even go so far as to hold that all
constitutional provisions are mandatory". (Bindra \- interpretation of
Statutes Edn 5 p. 860). But this proposition is too widely stated. No doubt a
Constitution is paramount law, to the authority of which all subordinate laws
are, and indeed must be, referable. As such there is a bias towards command
but over the years this rigid interpretation has given way to a broad and
liberal approach. A Constitution is a "living and organic thing" ( Per Gwyer,
C.J. _In re Motor Spirit Act_ (29). It embodies "the working principles for
practical Government" and its "provisions cannot be interpreted and crippled
by narrow technicalities" per Mukharji, J. in _Ramhari vs. Nilmoni Das_ (1)
The principles of interpretation that govern ordinary law are equally
applicable to the provisions of a Constitute. For



215



the purpose of deciding whether a provision in a constitution is mandatory one
must have regard also to the aims, scope and object of the provision. The mere
use of the word "shall" does not necessarily make the provision mandatory.
Subba Rao,J. in the case of _State of U.P. vs. Babu Ram_ (2) stated the
position thus‑



"When a statute used the word 'shall', prima facie , it is mandatory , but the
Court may ascertain the real intention of the legislature by carefully
attending to the whole scope of the statute. For ascertaining the real
intention of the Legislature the Court may consider, inter alia, the nature
and the design of the statute, and the consequences which would follow from
construing it the one way or the other, the impact of other provisions whereby
the necessity of complying with the provisions in question is avoided, the
circumstance, namely, that the statute provides for a contingency of the
non‑compliance with the provisions, the fact that the non‑compliance with the
provisions is or is not visited by some penalty, the serious or trivial
consequences that flow therefrom, and, above all, whether the object of the
legislation will be defeated or furthered."



The sole object of the Sixth Amendment is to prohibit the violation of the
territorial integrity of Sri Lanka and thereby to preserve a Unitary State.
With that end in view it imposed penalties which are set out in Article 157A
(3)(5) and (6) of the amendment. There was a category of officers and persons
who were required by the Constitution to take an oath in terms of the Fourth
Schedule. Their allegiance to a Unitary State was compellable. Therefore
157A(7) required them to take an oath in terms of the Seventh Schedule within
a month of the Article coming into force on pain of losing the



216



office they hold. These are no doubt mandatory provisions. If the are not
obeyed the whole purpose of the Sixth Amendment will be brought to nought. But
it is argued that requires the oath to be taken before a particular person is
also mandatory, and that the Judges must take their oaths before the
President. A clue to this problem is to be found in Article 165(l) which must
be read _mutatis mutandis_ with Article 157A(7). The Deputy Solicitor General
stated that the only pertinent portion of Article 165(1) is that an officer
shall cease to hold office. He submitted that the mutation must be done in
this manner delete all the words in Article 165(1) except the words "failing
to take and subscribe such oath or make and subscribe such affirmation" and
the words "shall cease to be in service or hold office" and for those words
that have been deleted substitute the words "Any such person or officer". So
that the mutation results in the following article ‑



"Any such person or officer failing to take and subscribe such oath or make
and subscribe such affirmation shall cease to be in service or hold office."



I cannot agree. This is not a mutation but a mutilation of Article 165. The
major part of Article 165(1) is thereby abandoned. _Mutatis mutandis_ means
"with necessary alterations in point of detail" (Wharton's Law Lexicon). The
precise significance and limits of the effect that should be given to the
words was set out in the case of ' _Touriel vs. Internal Affairs Southern
Rhodesia_ (3) as follows:-

  

"Though the phrase _mutatis mutabdis_ is not infrequently used in statutes and
in other legal documents, there seems to be a dearth of authority as to its
precis significance, and the limits of the effect that should be given



217



to it. mutandum', being the gerundive form of the Latin verb _muto_ , is,
according to the meaning given to the grammatical term gerundive' in the
Oxford 'New English Dictionary','a verbal adjective, of the nature of a
passive participle, expressing the idea of necessity or fitness'. The
question, therefore, arises whether, in deciding as to, the effect of the
expression  _mutatis mutandis_ ' the test to be applied for the purpose of
ascertaining in any particular case what are mutanda' is 'necessity' or.
'fitness'. I think the answer to this question must be that necessity is the
test, and that considerations of fitness are not sufficient to justify a
change, as a change which the expression _mutatis mutandis_ requires to be
made, unless they are so cogent as to establish necessity. It fitness in a
less strict sense, i.e., fitness not sufficient in degree to show necessity,
were the test to be applied for the purpose of ascertaining what changes are
required in order to give due effect to _mutatis mutandis'_ , a wide field
would be opened up for speculation in many cases where this expression is
used, and there would be room for great differences of opinion as to whether
particular changes were, or were not'. fitting; with the result that in the
case of any provision taken from the context of one Act and applied for the
purpose of another _mutatis mutandis'_ , there would be serious risk of
uncertainty as to how it was to be construed in the context of the Act into
which it had been, so to speak, transplanted."



In the case of _Motilal vs. Commissioner of­ Income Tax_ (4) the Court was
called on to apply certain Rules of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal Bombay 
_mutatis mutandis_ ' to the provisions of

218

  
section 66 of the Income Tax Act of 1922. Section 66(1) reads as follows:‑



"Within sixty days of the date upon A he is served with notice of an order
under sub‑s.(4) of S.33 the assessee .... may, by application in the
prescribed form, ... require the Appellate Tribunal to refer to the High Court
any question of law arising out of such order, and the Appellate Tribunal
shall within ninety days of the receipt of application draw up a statement of
the c and refer it to the High Court."



Rule 36 provided that Rules 7 and 8 shall apply _mutatis mutandis_ to an
application under section 1 of section 66. Rules 7 and 8 read thus-



"7(l) A memorandum of appeal to the Tribunal shall be presented by the
appellant in person or by an agent to the Registrar at the head quarters of
the Tribunal at Bombay, or to an officer authorised in this behalf by the
Registrar, or sent by registered post addressed to the Registrar or to such
officer.



(2) A memorandum of appeal sent by post under sub‑r. (1) shall be deemed to
have been presented to the Registrar .............. on the day on which it is
received in the office of Tribunal at Bombay .....



8\. The Registrar shall endorse on every memorandum of appeal the date on
which it is presented, or deemed to have been presented under R.7."



 The application requiring the Tribunal to refer the matter to the High Court
was received on the 63rd day and a plea in bar was taken. The Court upheld
this plea and construed the rules thus -



219

  
  "(8) In reading Rr.7 and 8  _mutatis mutandis_.' every effort should be
made to adapt every part of these rules for the purposes of the application.
It is not permissible to leave out any portion arbitrarily. The Rules do not
say that sub‑r.(2) of R.7 should be left out, and hence every effort must be
made to see that that sub‑rule also can be adapted suitably. Reading Rr.7 and
8 in the light of R.36 we get the following result:



7(1) An application under S.66(1) of the Act shall be presented by the
applicant in person or by an agent to the Registrar or sent by registered post
addressed to the, Registrar .......



(2) An application under S.66(1) of the Act sent by post under sub‑r.(1) shall
be deemed to have been presented to the Registrar on the day on which it is
received in the office of the Tribunal in Bombay .......



8\. The Registrar shall endorse on every application under S.66(l) the date on
which it is presented ............ It is true that the word presentation' is
not used in S.66(1)‑. But when the legislature fixed a period of 60 days in
which the assessee (or the Commissioner) may 'require' the Tribunal to refer
to a question of law, the legislature certainly had in mind a _terminus ad
quem_ of the period. It is an elementary rule of construction of statutes that
the judicature in their interpretation have to discover and act upon the
_mens_ or _sententia legis_ Normally, Courts do not look beyond the _liters_
legis, and in this case it is not necessary to do any more."



The Court expressly refused to leave out part arbitrarily and made only one
alteration . This

220



method was approved and repeated by Kapur J. in _K.M. Works vs. I.T.
Commissioner_ (5). He stated that the phrase _mutatis mutandis_ permitted
"only such verbal changes to be made in the rules mentioned in Rule 36 as
would make the principles embodied in these rules applicable, to applications
under sub- section (1) of section 66." This fact appears to have escaped the
notice of the draftsman of the Sixth Amendment.



If necessity, and not fitness, be the test and if the principles of Article
165 are to be maintained then the only changes in Article ‑165(1) that can be
Made are‑



1\. _To substitute "Seventh Schedule" for the words "Fourth Schedule" and  
 _

2\. _To substitute the words "within one month of the date on which this
Article comes into force" for the words "after the commencement of the
constitution on or before such date as may be prescribed by the Prime Minister
by Order published in the Gazette."_

_  _

The Deputy Solicitor General contended that "as much as the form is important
the manner too is important". If importance is the guide then form, manner and
_time_ are all important. But what the law requires to be done is to apply the
provisions of Article 165 to Article 157A. They are



(1)   the oath,  


(2)   the time limit, and  


(3)   the sanction, I, i.e the loss of office.



There is nothing else that could be considered. The person before whom the
oath is to be taken

221



finds no place in the provisions of Article 165(l). It is found only in
Article 157A. There is therefore no justification for the addition of the
words "before the President". Such an amendment can be made by the Legislature
only. in the result the words "shall cease to hold office" apply only to the
failure to take the oath within one month and has no application to the person
before whom the path has to be taken. To my mind this is a clear indication
that this last provision is directory and not mandatory. There is another
factor which confirms me in this view. Article 165(l) is one of the
Transitional Provisions and in this case applies to persons who are holders of
office and have already taken an oath before entering upon their duties and
the oath in terms of the Seventh Schedule was merely meant to permit
continuance in office. The object of the Sixth Amendment was to bind the
persons to allegiance to a Unitary State and to abjure separatism. This has
been achieved by the form of the oath and to a certain extent by the time
limit of one month.



The Deputy Solicitor General contended that the oaths taken by the Judges
before their fellow Judges are not legally binding or valid even though Judges
of the Court of Appeal and Supreme Court are ex‑officio J.Ps. in terms of
section 45 of the Judicature Act (Vide the Fifth Schedule). He added that the
requirement to take the oath before the President is mandatory His reason for
stating this needs to be quoted verbatim:



"The reason for this is not far to seek. The Head of State as repository of
certain aspects of the people's Sovereignty has a constitutional obligation to
obtain from the Judges their allegiance. The personal allegiance which the
Judges owed to the Sovereign in the days of the Monarchy is continued to the
present day where the allegiance is owed to the Head of the State as

222



representing the State. The Head of the State is entitled to ensure that the
allegiance is manifested openly and in his presence."



This is a startling proposition. Sovereignty of the People under the 1978
Constitution is one and indivisible . It remains with the People. It is only
the exercise of certain powers of the Sovereign that are delegated under
Article 4 as follows:‑



(a) Legislative power to Parliament  


(b) Executive power to the President  


(c) Judicial power through Parliament to the Courts.



Fundamental Rights (Article 4(d)) and Franchise (Article 4(e)) remain with the
People and the Supreme Court has been constituted the guardian of such rights.
(Vide Chapter XVI of the Constitution). I do not agree with the Deputy
Solicitor General that the President has inherited the mantle of a Monarch and
that allegiance is owed to him. The oath in terms of the Fourth Schedule which
the Judges were required to take or affirm in terms of Article 107(4) swore
allegiance to the Second Republican Constitution and the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka. I cannot therefore accept this reasoning of the Deputy
Solicitor General.



The next reason he gives is that a J.P. has never been known to administer a
Constitutional Oaths, and judges of the Superior Courts have always taken
their oaths before the President. Let me deal first with the first part of
these argument. Chapter VIII of the Constitution deals with a Cabinet of
Ministers and the President is a member of the Cabinet. It also Provides for
the appointment of Deputy Ministers, a Secretary to the Cabinet, and a
Secretary for each of the Ministeries. All of them must take an oath in terms



223



of the Fourth Schedule before they enter upon their­ duties. (Vide Article
53). No person is designated to administer the oath. But such an oath to be
binding must be taken before a person recognised by law as one empowered to
administer a binding oath. It has been customary for the Ministers and Deputy
Ministers to take the oath before the President who is an ex‑officio J.P.
(Vide Fifth Schedule to the Judicature Act). I presume the other officials
also are sworn into office by a J.P. The various Public Officers appointed
under Chapter IX are required to take a similar oath (Vide Article 61). No
person is designated to administer such oath. For this oath to be binding it
is sufficient if it is administered by a J.P. Members of Parliament take an
oath before Parliament (Vide Article 63). Parliament duly assembled is
presided over by the Speaker and in his absence by the Deputy Speaker or the
Chairman of Committees. Whoever is in the chair administers the oath. He is an
ex‑officio J.P. (Vide Fifth Schedule to Judicature Act). The Judges take their
oath before the President who is an ex­ officio J.P. and similarly the
President takes his oath before the Chief Justice or a Judge of the Supreme
Court who are ex‑officio J.Ps. It is not a Democrat coincidence that they are
J.Ps. They are so appointed for the reason that they have a constitutional
duty to administer an oath. It is customary in this country to take oaths
before a J.P. or Commissioner of Oaths unless it is mandatory to take it
before a particular J.P. of standing. Oaths required by Article 53 and Article
61 can be administered by any J.P. It is therefore not correct to state that
Constitutional oaths are never administered by J.Ps. Judges of the Superior
Courts have taken their oaths of office before the President. Section 133 of
the First Republican, Constitution of 1972 did not require it. Article 107(4)
of the Second Republican Constitution of 1978 required it. But this, as I have
already

224



stated. is not mandatory in respect of the oath in the form out in the Seventh
Schedule. In the circumstances such an oath taken before a J.P. empowered by
law to administer an oath is a perfectly valid Oath.



The Deputy Solicitor General also referred us to the provisions of section 12
of the Oaths and Affirmation Ordinance (Cap.17) which is a reference to
commissioners of Oaths. Section 12 authorises a Commissioner of Oaths to
administer an oath "in all cases which an oath, affirmation or affidavit is
commonly administered or taken before a J.P." He seeks to interpret this
provision by reference to the provisions of section 84 of the Courts
ordinance. But this we are not permitted to do for the simple reason that the
Courts Ordinance was repealed. Section 12 of Cap.17 therefore stands alone.
What are the Oaths and Affirmation that are commonly Administered by a J.P.?
We cannot look to particular instances in a Stature. The words "commonly
administered" I understand to mean "ordinarily to administered" in day to day
affairs of the community. Many types of Oaths are required by law as well as
by private business. It is common knowledge that when any citizen desires to
make an oath or affirmation he must necessarily go to a J. P or a commissioner
of Oaths. Unless the law expressly prescribes some other manner of making such
oath or affirmation. In the absence of such compulsion of oath is taken before
a J.P. or commissioner of Oaths. It was not mandatory for a Judge to take the
oath in terms of the Sixth Amendment before the president. He was entitled to
swear or affirm in any other manner recognised by the law, viz. before a J.P.
In the result I hold that the judges of the Court of Appeal and supreme court
did not cease to hold office in terms of Article 165(1) of the constitution.



The next question to consider is the question of the time limit of one month.
Counsel for the

225



Petitioner has stated that the opinion expressed by the Judges in the letter
to the President dated 9th September stating that the 9th September was the
last date for taking the oath in terms of the Seventh Schedule was a
considered opinion of the Supreme Court on a constitutional matter, and the
Supreme Court being the final authority on the interpretation of the
Constitution, that opinion was binding on all persons in the country including
the President. I am unable to accept this proposition as correct. We did not
sit as the Supreme Court to consider and decide a disputed constitutional
issue or the interpretation of a particular provision of the Constitution. We
sat with the majority of the members of the Court of Appeal to discuss a
matter arising out of our own contract of service and expressed an opinion
which was personal to each of us. We had before us information which showed
that the Attorney­ General's opinion, as expressed to the Government,
considered the 7th September as the final date. We were of the opinion that
the last day was the 9th September. I now find that neither side was correct.
The final date appears to be the 8th September. "Month" in terms of section
3(p) of the Interpretation Ordinance (Cap.2) means "Calendar month". A
Calendar month is reckoned not by counting the days but by looking at the
Calendar. "The space of time from a day in one month to the day numerically
corresponding to that day in the following, month is a Calendar month." _Burne
vs. Munisamy_ (6), ' _The Highland Tea Company of Ceylon Ltd. vs. Jinadasa_
(6) and _Dodds vs. Walker_ (8).



Before I deal with the preliminary issues I desire to deal with the issue
raised on the time limit of two months set out in Article 126(5) which states
that the Supreme Court "Shall hear and finally dispose of any petition or
reference within two months of the filling of such petition or the making of
such reference". The Deputy Solicitor-

226



General submitted that this provision was mandatory so that even a fault of
the Court is no excuse. An examination of the relevant provisions of the
Constitution indicates that this provision is merely directory. Fundamental
Rights are an attribute of the Sovereignty of the People. The constitution
commands that they "Shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs
of Government and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied save in the
manner and to the extent (thereinafter) provided" (Article 4(d)). It is one of
the inalienable rights of Sovereignty (Article 3). By Article 17 every person
is given the right to apply to the Supreme Court to enforce such right against
the executive provided the complains to Court within one month of the
infringement or threatened infringement (Article 126). These provisions confer
a right on the citizen and a duty on the Court. If that right was intended to
be lost because the Court fails in its duty the constitution would so have
provided. It has provided no sanction of any kind in case of such failure. To
my mind it was only an injunction to be respected and obeyed but fell short of
punishment if disobeyed. I of opinion that the provisions of Article 126(5)
are directory are not mandatory. Any other construction would deprive a
citizen of his fundamental right for no fault of his. While I can read into
the constitution a duty on the Supreme Court to act in a particular way I
cannot read into it any deprivation of a citizen's guaranteed right due to
circumstances beyond his control.



I shall now deal with the two preliminary objections. The Deputy Solicitor-
General contends that the judges are estopped from denying that they now
function on a fresh appointment issued by the President on the 15th September.
It is correct that such letters of appointment were issued to each judge on
the 15th after two oaths were taken by

227



each. They are the oath in terms of the Fourth Schedule and the oath in terms
of the Seventh Schedule. Counsel for the petitioner contends that an estoppel
cannot operate because the judges had no choice as they had been locked out.
There is no doubt that Judges had been denied access to the Courts and
Chambers by a show of force. There is also no gainsaying that this act has
polluted the hallowed portals of these Courts and that stain can never be
erased. But it is unthinkable that Judges should pend an excuse against
estoppel on the act of a blundering bureaucrat. _Prima facie_ judges would be
estopped. They cannot both approbate and reprobate or to use a "descriptive
phrase" they cannot blow hot and cold. Vide Lord Atkin in _Lissenden Vs. Bosch
Ltd._ (9) If it was as simple as that then I would have had no hesitation in
holding with the contention of the State. But this goes much deeper. It is a
constitutional matter and it is contended that the judges cannot decide
whether or not they were _de jure_ Judges on the 9th September and that they
cannot decide any matter concerning their appointment as Judges. In Short they
cannot look into facts that existed or occurred befiore the 15th September. I
have already stated that the judges did not cease to hold office and therefore
on the 15th September at the time fresh letters of appointment were issued
they were _de jure_ Judges. Apart from the fact that there is no estoppel
against the statute there is the larger and more important issue _vis a vis_
the Supreme Court. To deny it the right to rule on constitutional issues is to
deny the exclusive jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme court in
constitutional matters. What is pleaded as an estoppel against the judges is
in reality an estoppel against the Supreme Court. I have no hesitation in
dismissing the two preliminary objections.



In view of the foregoing reasons I am of opinion

228



that the Judges of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal did not cease to hold
office by reason of the provisions of Article 157A of the Sixth Amendment.
Further, that the limit of two months Prescribed in Article 126(5) is
directory and not mandatory.



**S. SHARVANANDA, J.,**



The matters referred to the Full Bench involve important questions which
concern the jurisdiction, dignity and the independence of the Supreme Court
and of the Court of Appeal of the Republic of Sri Lanka. In dealing with the
questions we must keep in, mind that the objectivity of our approach itself
may incidentally be in issue. It is therefore in a spirit of detached
objective inquiry which is a distinguishing feature of judicial process, that
we need to find an answer to the questions that are raised. It is essential to
deal with the problem objectively and impersonally. If ultimately we come to
the conclusion that the contention advanced before us by Mr. Nadesan is
erroneous, we will not hesitate to pronounce our determination against that
submission. On the other hand if we ultimately reach the conclusion that the
proposition urged by Mr. Azeez, for the Attorney-General cannot be sustained,
we will not falter to pronounce a verdict accordingly. In dealing with
problems of constitutional importance and significance it is essential that we
should proceed to discharge our duty," without fear or favour, affection or
ill-will," and with the full consciousness that it is our solemn duty and
obligation to uphold the Constitution of the democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka (1978).



I agree with the Chief Justice, for the reasons stated by him, that the
provision of Article 157(A) Sub-Article 7(a) of the Sixth Amendment which
requires the oath prescribed therein to be taken



229





and subscribed before "such person or body, if any", as is referred to in that
Article (Article 107), namely before His Excellency the President, is
directory and not mandatory and a default thereof does not attract the
sanction prescribed by Article 165 of the Constitution, and that since the
Judges of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeal had duly taken the oath
in the form set out in the seventh Schedule in Terms of the Oaths Ordinance
(Ch.17), Before another judge of the respective Court, prior to the expiry of
one month from the date on which the Sixth Amendment came into force, their
failure to take their said oath before the President did not result in their
ceasing to hold office on the termination of the said one month. In my view
submission of the Deputy solicitor general that the judges of the Supreme
court and of the court of Appeal ceased to hold office in terms of Article
165(1) of the Constitution on midnight of 7th or of 78th day of September
1983, is not well founded and is erroneous; there was no change in the legal
status of the judges; the judges continue to function with all legitimacy as
judges de jure of the respective courts, without any break, conceptually or
otherwise, from the 8th day of September 1983 onwards.



It was urged by the Deputy Solicitor General that the judges by accepting the
fresh appointment issued by the President on 15th September acquired a new
lease of life and are now functioning in pursuance of the said letters of
appointment and are estopped from denying that they derive their authority
from the fresh appointment and from canvassing the propriety of the said
appointment.



The Deputy Solicitor General founded his argument on the fact that on 15th
September 1983 the judges accepted without protest fresh letters of
appointment dated 15th September 1983 from the

230



President. He Submitted that this conduct is explicable only on the basis that
the Judges had resigned themselves to the position that they had ceased to
hold office and had elected to accept from the President fresh letters of
appointment. He invoked the principle that a person cannot approbate and
reprobate at the same time in support of his proposition of estoppel.





The law of estoppel is satisfactorily stated in Halsbury's Laws of England,
2nd Ed.Vol.13, para 452 at page 400 in the following words :



"Where one has either by words or conduct made to another a representation of
fact, either with knowledge of its falsehood or with the intention that it
should be acted upon, or so conducts himself that another would as a
reasonable man, understand that a certain representation of fact was intended
to be acted on, and that other has acted on such representation and alters his
position to his prejudice, an estoppel arises against the party who has made
the representation, and he is not allowed to aver that the fact is

otherwise than he represented it to be."



The principle that a person may not approbate ­and reprobate is a species of
estoppel intermediate between estoppel by record and estoppel by conduct.



 "The phrases "approbating and reprobating" or "blowing hot and cold" must be
taken to express, first, that the party in question is to be treated as having
made an election from which he cannot resile, and secondly, that he will not
be regarded.......as having so elected unless he has taken a benefit under or
arising out of the course of conduct which he has first pursued and with which
his present action is inconsistent" ‑ Per Evershed M.R., (1950) 2 A.E.R. 549
at 552.

231



"The doctrine of approbation and reprobation­ requires for, its foundation,
inconsistency of conduct, as where a man, having accepted a benefit given to
him by a judgment cannot allege the invalidity of the judgment. which confers
the benefit" ‑ Lord Russel in _Evans Vs Bartlam_ (10).



"In cases where the doctrine of approbation and reprobation does apply, the
person concerned has a choice of two rights either of which he is at liberty
to accept, but not both. Where the doctrine does apply if the person to whom
the choice belongs irrevocably and with knowledge adopts the one, he cannot
afterwards assert the other," Per Lord Atkin in _Lissenden Vs. Bosch Ltd.,_
(9).

  

A person cannot adopt two inconsistent positions, he cannot affirm and
disaffirm; he is presumed to waive one right and elect to adopt the other.
This doctrine of waiver looks chiefly to the conduct and position of the
person who is said to have waived in order to see whether he has "approbated",
so as to prevent him from reprobating ‑ whether he has elected to get some
advantage to which he would not otherwise have been entitled, so as to deny
him a later election to the contrary.



"This doctrine of estoppel by representation forms part of the law of evidence
and such estoppel, except as a bar to testimony has no operation or efficacy
whatsoever. Its sole office is either to place an obstacle in the way of a
case which might otherwise succeed, or to remove an impediment out of the way
of a case which might otherwise fail" Spencer Bower ‑ The Law relating to
Estoppel by Representation ‑ 2nd Edition pages 6‑7.



No cause of action arises upon an estoppel.

232

  


It only precludes a person from denying the of some representation previously
made by him.



"It may (if established) assist a plaintiff in enforcing a cause of action by
preventing a defendant from denying the existence of some fact, the existence
of which would destroy a cause of action." Per Lord Russel in _Nippon Monkwa
kabushiki Kaisha vs. Dawson's Bank Ltd._ (11).

  

The representation relied upon as an estoppel is, in itself no direct or
affirmative evidence of any title or right whatsoever; it can only be used to
prevent the opposite party from denying the title or right. It cannot prevent
a third party from doing so, and therefore can confer no legal title.



"It is true that a title by estoppel is only good against the person estopped
and imports from its very existence the idea that there is no real title at
all ." Per Farwell, L.J in. _Bank of England vs. Cutler_ (12).



The plea of estoppel raised by the Deputy solicitor General involves the
admission that the letters of appointment issued on 15th September, do not in
fact confer or establish a legal title, though it is not open to the Judges
who accepted them to make that assertion. On this view of the Deputy Solicitor
General's argument, Mr. Nadesan was justified in submitting that his client
who is a third party is not bound by this estoppel and that it is open to him
to demonstrate that the legal authority of the Judges to function as such
Judges does not stem from the letters of appointment granted on 15th
September, but from their original letters of appointment and that, at all
relevant times, they functioned _de jure_.

233



Assuming that the acceptance of the letters of appointment dated 15th
September, from the President lends itself to spelling out a representation,
sufficient factually to support a plea of estoppel by conduct (there are
difficulties in the way of such assumption) the question then arises whether
such plea can be sustained in law. This doctrine of acquiescence, waiver or
estoppel is based on principles of justice and equity and hence is limited in
its operation.



Spencer Bower at page 140 states lucidly the limits of the doctrine.



"Just as it is a good affirmative defence to an action on a contract that it
cannot be performed without directly contravening the provisions of a statute
and that, by enforcing it or otherwise judicially treating it as valid, any
court would be sanctioning and condoning such contravention, so also it is a
good affirmative answer to a case of estoppel by representation that any
closure of the representor's mouth would result in a like judicial recognition
of, and connivance at a statutory illegality. The private rights and interests
of the individual must yield in such circumstances to the higher rights and
interests of the State. In accordance with these paramount considerations of
public policy, it has been held that no estoppel can be allowed which will
preclude the representor from asserting and bringing to the notice of the
Court the statutory illegality of such acts, proceedings and instruments as
are sought to be validated by the estoppel put forward."



234

  
The law precludes a Court from allowing an estoppel, if to do so would be to
act in the face of a statute and to give recognition through the admission of
one of the parties to a state of affairs, which the law has positively
declared is to not to subsist. A party cannot set up an estoppel in the face
of a statute. Thus a corporation on which there is imposed a statutory duty to
carry out certain acts in the interest of the public cannot preclude itself by
estoppel by conduct from performing its duty and asserting legal rights
accordingly. See _Maritime Electric Co. Ltd. vs. General Dairies Ltd._ (13)
and _Southend ‑on-sea Corporation vs. Hodgson Ltd._(14). Given a statutory
obligation of an unconditional character it is not open to a court to allow
the party bound by that obligation to be barred from carrying it out by the
operation of an estoppel. The question whether an estoppel is to be allowed or
not, depends on whether an enactment or rule or law relied on is imposed in
the public interest or "on grounds of a general public Policy."



(See _Re a Bankruptcy notice - Per Atkin, L.J. (1924) 2 Ch. 76 at 97)_

_ _

"The truth is that it can no longer be treated as axiomatic that in the
absence of explicit language the Courts will permit a contracting out of the
provisions of an Act of Parliament where that Act, though silent as to the
position of contracting out, nevertheless is manifestly passed for the
protection of a class of persons who do not negotiate from a position of equal
strength, but in whose well‑being there is a public as well as a private
interest. Such acts are not necessarily to be treated as simply " _Jus prose
introductum_ ", as "a private remedy and a private right" which an individual
member of the class may simply bargain away by reason



235

  
of his freedom of contract", Per Lord Hailsham in _Johnson vs Moraton_ (15).



" _Quilbet potest renunciare juri pro se introducto_ " (any one may at his
pleasure renounce the benefit of a stipulation or other right introduced
entirely in his own favour). This maxim has no application in a matter where
the public have an interest. See Brooms' Legal Maxims, 10th Ed. page 481.



"An individual may renounce a law made for his special benefit." It was
pointed out by Lord Westbury in _Hunt vs. Hunt,_ (16), that the words "pro se"
were introduced into the maxim to show that no man can renounce a right of
which his duty to the public or the claims of society forbid the renunciation.



"The key, however to the interpretation of the maxim lies, as Lord Simon of
Glaisdale pointed out in _National Westminister Bank Ltd. vs. Halesewen Press
Works Ltd._ (17), in discovering whether the particular liberty or right
conferred by the statute or rule of law is entirely for the benefit of the
person purporting to renounce it . If there is a public as well as a private
interest, a contrary Latin maxim applies."



Per Lord Hailsham at page 47 of (1978) 3 A.E.R. 37. (15) ‑

  

It is clear that the rule expressed in the maxim, has no applicability if the
matter of an alleged private waiver is one in which the public has an
interest.



 Article 107 of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka, 1978 provides :

236



(1) "Every Judge of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal Shall be appointed
by the President of the Republic by warrant under his hand.



(2) Every such Judge shall hold office during good behaviour and shall not be
removed except by an order of the President made after an address of
Parliaments, supported by a majority of the total number of Members of
Parliament (including those not present) has been presented to the President
for such removal on the ground of proved misbehavior or incapacity.



 Provided that no resolution for the presentation of such an address shall be
entertained by the Speaker or placed on the Order Paper of Parliament unless
notice of such resolution is signed by not less than one third of the total
number of Members of Parliament and sets out full particulars of the alleged
misbehavior or incapacity."



 The main aspirations of the Constitution are set down in its luminous
preamble. Rule of law is the foundation of the Constitution and independence
of the judiciary and fundamental human rights are basic and essential features
of the Constitution. It is a lesson of history that the most valued
constitutional rights pre-suppose an independent judiciary, through which
alone they can be vindicated. There can be no free society without law,
administered through an independent judiciary, It is and should be the pride
of a democratic government that it maintains and upholds independent courts of
justice where even its own acts can be tested. The supremacy of the
Constitution is protected by the authority of an independent judiciary to act
as the interpreter of the Constitution. So solicitous were the framers

237



of the Constitution to make the position of the judges independent and
entrenched that they invest them with the status of irremovability save on the
limited grounds and manner specifically set out in its provisions. The Judges
of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeal, unlike public Officers of
whatever rank, do not hold office during pleasure. The Constitution endeavours
to secure the independence of the judiciary by setting up well‑known
mechanisms to assure their security of tenure. The vital need of security of
tenure can scarcely be over-emphasised. It is significant that the Article 107
appears under the caption "independence of the Judiciary". A Judge of the
Supreme Court or of the Court of Appeal is entitled to hold office until he
attains the age of 65 or 63 respectively (Article 107(5)). He is not removable
by the Executive; the only way he can be removed is by an order of the
President in terms of Article 107(2). Of course he may resign his office ‑
resignation is a voluntary act different in quality and is far from removal.



Article 108 provides that their salaries shall be determined by Parliament and
are charged on to the Consolidated Fund and that the salary payable to and
pension entitlement of a Judge of the said Courts shall not be reduced after
his appointment. It is manifest that these provisions are designed to
safeguard the independence of the Judges by affording them security of tenure.
These provisions have not been put into the Constitution merely for the
individual benefit of the Judges; they have been put there as a matter of
public Policy. The security of tenure of Judges has been vouched to the
Judges, not only for their own protection but for the protection of the State
itself. The framers of the Constitution had Considered it to be in the
interest of the public and not merely of the individual Judges that their
security of tenure should be sacrosanct and

238



sanctioned by the Constitution. The office of a Judge has become a matter of
status rather than a creation of a contract. A Judge of the Supreme Court or
the Court of Appeal can cease to hold office only in terms of the provisions
of the Constitution and not by operation of any rule of estoppel. In this
perspective the submission of the Deputy Solicitor General that the Judges
should be deemed to have ceased to hold their office and to have elected on
15th September to accept fresh letters of appointment appears to be jarring
and is untenable. The doctrine of estoppel invoked by him is out of place in
the area of constitutional provisions. The provision of the Constitution that
confronts the estoppel represents a State policy to which the Courts must give
effect. The interest of the public, despite any rule of evidence as between
themselves that the Judges and the President may have created by their
conduct, is supreme. The basic concept of judicial independence would be
exposed to very great jeopardy if rules of estoppel are permitted to modify
it. The Judges, once they accept appointment under Article 107(l)) of the
Constitution are not free to contract out of the provisions of the
Constitution and waive the constitutional protection which is warranted to
them in order to protect their integrity and impartiality. Any such waiver is
null and void. Hence no rule of estoppel or of approbation and reprobation
precludes the Judges from referring their title to their office to their
original letters of appointment which had been issued to them by the President
on the terms and conditions of Article 107 of the Constitution.



In view of the conclusion that the Judges had not vacated their office by
reason of their omission to take the prescribed oath before the President in
terms of Article 157(A)(7) read with Article 165 of the Constitution, Article
107 ordains that their original letters of appointment

239

  
continue to be valid and binding and that the judges may continue to hold
office until they are removed under Article 107(2) or reach their age of
retirement. The new letters of appointment granted on the 15th September 1983
do not supersede the original letters of appointment and do not in any way
detract from the legal import of the earlier letters.



In my view, the Judges did not cease to hold office on the 9th September but
continued to hold office without any break and the proceedings of both 8th and
9th September are valid on the basis that the Judges who heard the proceedings
were de jure Judges.



I agree also with the Chief Justice in his reasoning and conclusion that
Article 126(3) of the Constitution that the Supreme Court should hear and
finally dispose of the application made under that Article within two months
of the filing of such petition is directory only and not mandatory, and that
failure by the Supreme Court to dispose of the application within the
prescribed period will not nullify the petition.



We have heard conflicting arguments on the computation of the time limit of
one month prescribed by Article 157(A)7(a) of the Sixth Amendment. Counsel for
the petitioner submitted that the 9th September was the last date for taking
the oath in terms of 7th Schedule, while the Deputy Solicitor General
submitted that the 7th September was the, last date, though he was prepared to
concede that, according to authorities, 8th September can also be regarded as
the last date of the month. The authorities 'relied upon by parties edify us
on how the period of a month is computed .in ordinary parlance, in the English
Common Law, in commercial transactions and under the English Interpretation
Act but no authority was cited by

240



either side on how when a month is stipulated in a written Constitution, the
period is to be calculated. In view of the fact that I have already held that
the Judges had lawfully taken oath in terms of the Schedule prior to the 7th
September. and their default in taking the said oath before the President
within the prescribed time would not have the consequence of their ceasing to
hold their office, the question whether the month stipulated by the Sixth
Amendment ended on the 7th or 9th September, is not of material importance to
call for a pronouncement thereon and I do not propose to determine that
question as it is not necessary.



"it is not the habit of the Court to decide questions of a constitutional
nature unless absolutely necessary to the decision of case." _Burton vs.
United States_ (18).



Before concluding my judgment I must refer to a preliminary objection raised
by the Deputy Solicitor General. It was contended by the Deputy Solicitor
General that this Court is precluded from directly or indirectly calling in
question or making a determination on any matter relating to the performance
of the official acts of the President. He supported this objection by
reference to Article 35 of the Constitution. I cann­ot subscribe to this wide
proposition. Actions of the executive are not above the law and can certainly
be questioned in a Court of Law. Rule of Law will be found wanting in its
completeness if the Deputy Solicitor General's contention in its wide
dimension is to be accepted. Such an argument cuts across the ideals of the
Constitution as reflected in its preamble. An intention to make acts of the
President non‑justiciable cannot be attributed to the makers of the
Constitution. Article 35 of the Constitution provides only for the personal
immunity of the President during his tenure of office from proceedings in any
Court. The President

241



cannot be summoned to Court to justify his action. But that is a far cry from
saying that the President's acts cannot be examined by a Court of Law. Though
the President is immune from proceedings in Court a party who invokes the acts
of the President in his support will have to bear the burden of demonstrating
that such acts of the President are warranted by law; the seal of the
President by itself will not be sufficient to discharge that burden.



**WANASUNDERA, J.,**



I have seen the judgment of the Chief Justice and, while I agree generally
with many of the conclusions he has reached, it seems desirable, however, that
I should briefly clarify my own position on some of the matters that were
argued before us.



First, I would like to emphasise that the issues before us are undoubtedly of
great constitutional importance having far‑reaching consequences in the
working of the Constitution. Being matters of constitutional law and in
particular, affecting the authority of the judges and the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court, these issues, because of their importance, had necessarily to
be disposed of on the first occasion they were raised or brought to our
notice. What is in issue is a direct challenge to the authority and
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in the hearing and disposal of a matter,
before These issues arise inescapably for consideration, for they could have
been raised at any time ‑ at a later stage of even these same proceedings or
in any of the other cases which had been left incomplete on 8th September,
1983.



It was the position of the learned Deputy Solicitor General that we had ceased
to be judges between the 8th September and the 15th September



242



1983\. He sought to argue that the gap between the 8th of September and the
15th of September could be bridged on the principle of _de facto_ judges for a
part of 48 of the judicature Act. None of the arguments or citations relied on
by him, I am afraid, has any direct application to the situation before us. It
is therefore idle to believe that this issue involving the constitution and
the jurisdiction of this court could have been glossed over and evaded or that
we should have proceed to hear the matter before us, leaving aside the
question of our very jurisdiction wrapped in uncertainly.



I am in total agreement with the Chief justice in his reasoning and conclusion
that the requirement that judges should take their oath before the President
is merely a directory provision. He has examined the relevant constitutional
and statutory provisions with great roughness and rightly concluded that in
circumstances such as this, whenever the law has required an oath to be
administered in this country, it has always been administered by a person in
his capacity either as a justice of the Peace or as a Commissioner of Oaths.
An oath administered by either of such persons, irrespective of his official
position, whether high or low, must have equal sanctity and operation in the
eye of the law. It cannot be otherwise for an oath is an oath. That a Justice
of the Peace holding a particular office or post is designated as the person
before whom the oath should be taken in a given instances may have something
to do with the dignity of the office of the person required to take the oath,
or to give solemnity to the occasion; but I cannot see how that fact can
increase, diminish or affect the sanctity of the oath, which has been solemnly
taken in every such case. But even in the of such designations

243



we search in vain for a consistent principle. Most of the Supreme Court Judges
took their oaths before the Chief Justice or a brother judge. His Excellency
the President took his oath, as he lawfully may, before a junior judge of the
Supreme Court. The law permits the Prime Minister or any Cabinet Minister to
take his oath before an ordinary Justice of the Peace or Commissioner of
Oaths. Every indication in the relevant provisions points to the fact that the
requirement that the Supreme Court judges should take their oath before the
President is of a directory nature. The judges therefore, by taking the oath
under the event Schedule before the Chief Justice or before a brother judge
before the expiry of the first week of September, have substantially complied
with the law.



In dealing with this particular question, Mr. Nadesan did not stop there but
went much further and sought to analyse the relevant provisions of the
Constitution in greater depth. It was his submission that, apart from whatever
view we may take as to the nature of the conditions for taking the oath, a
proper interpretation of the relevant provisions does not admit of the view
that a judge would automatically vacate his office or be removed therefrom by
a mere failure to take the oath prescribed by the Seventh Schedule. It was his
submission that only a failure which amounts to a wilful or contumacious
refusal to take the oath, and not a mere omission, may, in appropriate
circumstances, provide a ground for disciplinary action against a judge. This
argument appears to be of some substance.



The Chief Justice has already drawn our attention to the fact that Article
165(l), on which hinges the power of cessation of office, is a transitional
provision in the Constitution. It is a 'Provision dealing with a particular
state of

244



affairs that existed at the time of the coming into operation of the
Constitution. These transitional provisions, as the name indicates, were
designed primarily to connect the present state of affair with the past, so
that the new Constitution could be brought into operation without any
dislocation. Article 165, at the time it came into operation, did not have to
deal with the situation of officers already functioning or officiating in any
post. Constitution started as it were with a clean slate. In the case of
appointments to offices newly created by the Constitution like Supreme Court
Judges, a letter of appointment had to be issued. Most public officers however
continued under the new constitutional structure in practically the same form
and accordingly the provisions of Article 164 provided for the continuance in
service of the persons who were holding such offices at the time of the coming
into operation of the Constitution This was tantamount to a letter of
appointment.



Article 107(4) provides that a Supreme Court judge and a judge of the Court of
Appeal, after his appointment, "shall not enter upon the duties of his office
until he takes and subscribes or makes and subscribes before the President,
the oath or the affirmation set out in the Fourth Schedule" In the case of the
President, Article 32(l) states that -



"The person elected or succeeding to the office of President shall assume
office upon taking and subscribing the oath or making and subscribing the
affirmation, set out in the Fourth, Schedule .........."



In the case of Cabinet Ministers, Acting Ministers, Deputy Ministers, the
Secretary to the cabinet, and Secretaries to Ministries, Article 53 likewise
provides that.

  

"A person appointed to any office referred to

245



in this Chapter shall not enter upon the duties of his office until he takes
and subscribes the oath or makes and subscribes the affirmation set out in the
Fourth Schedule."



"Article 61 makes similar provision for public officers.



It would therefore be evident that a distinction has been drawn in the
Constitution between a person receiving an ‑appointment ‑ an entitlement to an
office ‑ and such appointee "entering upon the duties of his office", which
involves a further step to perfect and consolidate that appointment. What
Article 165(1) provides is a bar or hurdle between these two stages involving
the taking of an oath. Until that bar is surmounted, Article 165(1) states a
person, although he may have an entitlement to the office, "shall cease to be
in service or hold office". But, it would be noted that at no time did that
officer actually function in that office. He was never a functionary in the
true sense of the word.



Article 165(1) therefore does not purport to deal with the case of a person
who had already entered upon the functions and duties of his office. That is
the case before us and the precise situation of the Supreme Court judges.
There can be no serious objection to a person who delays entering upon his
duties being told that he is no longer wanted or that he has ceased to be in
service or hold office. Such a person has not perfected his appointment. In
fact, in such a case the office continues to remain vacant and it calls for a
declaration of this. kind to enable a new appointment to be made. But it would
be a very different thing to tell an officer functioning in an office
(especially a judicial officer whose tenure of office is assured), that he is
no longer

246



in office. In truth and fact that would amount to a vacation of office or a
removal from office. proper term in that context would be to use the word
'vacate'. This word 'vacate' however can used in a comprehensive sense even to
include both the stages indicated above. The wording of Article 165(1)
therefore is inadequate to catch up the present situation.



The correctness of this view is to some extent borne out by the other
provisions of Article 165



When we examine Article 165(2), we see that it provides that the Minister of
Public Administration "may, in his sole discretion, permit any public officer,
judicial officer, person or holder of an office to take the oath or make the
affirmation after the prescribed date, if he is satisfied that the failure to
take the oath or make the affirmation within the time prescribed was
occasioned by illness or some other unavoidable cause. On his taking such oath
or making such affirmation, he shall continue in service or hold offices as if
he had taken such oath or made such affirmation within the time prescribed
......... "



Are not the above provisions more consistent with the position of the
requirement of the oath taking being a bar or fetter on a person entitled to
an office but who has not yet entered upon his duties rather than being the
vacation of office of a person already officiating; in a post and his being
"reappointed" thereafter? In the first type of case mentioned above, a delay
in taking office is not of great moment and could be rectified without giving
rise to any complications. So, this power to remedy the situation on the two
specified grounds can be safely entrusted to the Minister of Public
Administration, and such a provision violates no provision of the
Constitution.



On the other hand, if this provisions is

247

  
intended to apply to a person who had already entered upon his duties, then it
gives rise to a number of important questions. I have already referred to the
fact that In the case of a judge there would be a conflict between Article
165(1) and Article 107(2) which ensure him continuity of tenure. If a judge
has ceased to hold office, he cannot thereafter continue in office without a
fresh appointment When the Constitution prescribes the President as the
appointing authority, could the Minister of Public Administration reinstate
him or make such an appointment? Is it consistent with the independence of the
Judiciary, entrenched by the Constitution, that the Minister of Public
Administration should be the appointing authority and in his sole discretion
be allowed to pick and choose the judges who should continue in office and
those who should not.



The distinction I have sought to draw can be tested by two obvious examples.
First, let me take the case of the President. How would the President be
affected in the event of a failure to take the Seventh Schedule oath? The
President, who is the Read of the State, the Head of the Executive and of the
Government, and Commander‑in‑Chief of the Armed Forces is selected by the
People at an election. Article 30(2) states that he "shall hold office for a
term of six years". If, after such a country‑wide election and assumption of
office, is it conceivable that the Legislature intended that the President
should be made to vacate office merely because he has omitted to take the ‑new
oath prescribed by the Seventh Schedule? Incidentally, the Fourth Schedule
oath taken by him is an undertaking to be faithful to the Republic of Sri
Lanka and to defend the Constitution to the best of his ability. Article 2 of
the Constitution already contains a statement regarding the unitary nature of
the State. The present oath is only supplementary to it and an elaboration of
that

248



Provisions, although the Sixth Amendment deals with other matters too.



In this connection an examination of the provisions in Article 38(1) can throw
some light on the resulting position. It deals with the vacation of office by
the President. One of the grounds is -



"(d) if the person elected as President wilfully fails to assume within one
month from the date of commencement of his term of office."



This provision is clearly referable to Article 32 where the President assumes
office on taking the oath of office. It would be observed even in this
situation - which should be regarded as more than a mere entitlement since the
President has already been elected by the whole of the people of Sri Lanka -
it is only a wilful failure that can give rise to the sanction.



Let us now take the case of the judges of the Supreme Court. Article 107(2)
states that a judge, once he begins to function -



"  ................ shall hold office during good behaviour, and shall not be
removed except by on order of the President made after an address of
Parliament, supported by a majority of the total number of Members of
Parliament (including those not Present) has been presented to the president
for such removal on the ground of proved misbehavior or incapacity."



This is the only provision in the Constitution dealing with the removal of a
judge who is already holding office. If the wording of Article 165(1) is held
to be appropriate to catch up the case of a functioning judge, it would then

249

  
be in clear conflict with the provision of Article 107(2), which is a special
and specific provision. There is nothing in the amending Article 157 A (7) as
for example by the use or prefatory words such as "notwithstanding any other
provision of the Constitution" to show that this provision should prevail over
any other provision of the Constitution. As in the case of the President, is
it conceivable that a judge, who may fail through an oversight or some mistake
to take the Seventh Schedule oath, should have to vacate office?



Mr. Nadesan conceded that the requirement of taking the Seventh Schedule oath
is nonetheless a legal requirement, in the sense that where a person who is
required to take the oath and has through negligence or oversight failed to do
so, should aL that stage be required to comply with the law. If however there
is a wilful refusel to take the oath, then there is undoubtedly a
transgression of the law. But, even this would not lead to an automatic
vacation of office but could only provide a ground for disciplinary action. A
wilful refusal to take the oath could amount to misconduct or misbehavior, but
not a mere omission or mistake. This, interpretation, eminently reasonable,
prevents any conflict arising between Article 157 A (7) on the one hand and
Articles 38 and 107(2) etc. on the other and would tend to reconcile the
various provisions of the Constitution, rendering them harmonious in
operation. Any other interpretation would result in upsetting a number of
basic concepts embodied in the Constitution.



I am therefore inclined to think that this is another reason, even more cogent
than the one referred to by the Chief Justice, for holding, as Mr. Nadesan
contended, that the judges could not have functioned otherwise than as _de
jure_ judges during the period under consideration.

250

In regard to the defence of estoppel, waiver or the prohibition against
approbation and reprobation (or in whatever way that defence is expressed)
taken by learned Deputy Solicitor General, in my opinion such a defence is not
tenable in the circumstances of the present case. let us remind ourselves
again that the question before us is the very constitution of the Supreme
Court, the validity of the continuation of the service of the judges, and the
legality of the acts of this court and the judges, and not with any private
right of the judges as individuals.



An examination of the case law both local and from other jurisdictions makes
it abundantly clear that the courts have uniformly excluded the application of
such a defence where an authority or person against whom the estoppel is
pleaded owes a duty to the public or a section of the public or even to some
other individual against whom the estoppel cannot fairly operate. In the case
of a constitutional provision such a presumption is generally inevitable.



Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn.) Vol. 16 at paragraph 1575 sets Out the
legal Position in England. The U.K. of course does not have a written
Constitution.



"1515\. Estoppel against Statute. The doctrine of estoppel cannot be invoked
to render valid a transaction which the legislature has, on grounds of general
public policy, enacted is to be invalid, or to give the court a jurisdiction
which is denied to it by statute, or to oust the court's statutory
jurisdiction under an enactment which precludes the parties contracting out of
its provisions. Where a statute, enacted for the benefit of a section of the
public, imposes a duty of a positive kind, the person charged

251

  
with the performance of the duty cannot by estoppel be prevented from
exercising his statutory powers ............. "



Spencer Bower and Turner in their work Estoppel by Representation (2nd Edn.)
at page 134 deal with the waiver of the protection of a statute. Where a
certain transaction or a course of action is illegal and void and absolutely
prohibited, no question of waiver can arise. In other cases it has been
contended that a statutory provision for the benefit of a party could be
waived. They state :



". The soundness of this contention in any particular case, whether of express
contract or of estoppel (for the principles which govern the former obviously
govern the latter also) depends upon the question whether the right which is
abnegated is the right of the party alone, or of the public also, in the sense
that the general welfare of the community, or the interests of the class of
persons whom it is the object of the law to protect, cannot be secured in the
manner intended without prohibiting the waiver or estoppel. In the case of
express contract to waive it has always been held that the doctrine embodied
in the familiar formula, _quilbet potest renuntiare juri pro se introducto_ ,
is subject to the limitation that the renouncing party must be able to
establish that the 'jus' was intended by the legislature for his benefit only
_pro se solo_. If the public, or a class or section of the community, are
interested, as well as himself, in the general observance of the conditions
prescribed by statute, it has always been held on the ground of public policy
that there can be no waiver, even by express contract or consent, of the right
to

252



such observance by any individual party; but where, on the other hand, no
public interest, and no interest intended to be promoted or protected by the
statute, is in the least affected by the contract or consent to waive, and the
matter is one which concerns the parties alone, such contract or consent has
never been interfered with, but on the contrary has always been enforced. So
also, in cases of waiver by conduct which gives rise to an estoppel, the same
essential distinction has always been observed. On the one side of the line
are the cases where the estoppel or waiver, if allowed, would defeat the
objects of the statute, and injure the interests of the public, or of persons
other than the immediate parties, and where therefore the affirmative answer
of illegality has prevailed, and the estoppel has been defeated. On the other
side of the line are the cases in which no interests, other than those of the
immediate parties, can possibly be affected by allowing the estoppel, which
accordingly has in such cases usually prevailed.



###### Estoppel as to Jurisdiction



142\. Not even the plainest and most express contract or consent of a party to
litigation can confer jurisdiction on any person not already vested with it by
the law of the land, or add to the jurisdiction lawfully exercised by any
judicial tribunal; it is equally plain that the same result cannot be achieved
by conduct or inaction or acquiescence by the parties. Any such attempt to
create or enlarge jurisdiction is in fact the appointment of a judicial
officer by a subject, and as such constitutes a manifest usurpation of the
Royal prerogative ............. "

253



_Vide Martime Electric Co. Ltd. vs. General­ Dairies Ltd._ ,



_Customs & Excise Commissioner vs. Hebson Ltd..  
 _

_Society of Medical Officers of Health vs. Hope.  
 _

_N.W. Gas Board vs. Manchester Corporation.  
 _

_South end ‑On‑Sea Corporation vs. Hodgson (Wick­ford) Ltd.,_

_ _

_Welch vs. Nagy._



Even in the case of legal provisions which ostensibly appear to confer rights
solely in favour of Individuals, a deeper analysis of the relevant
constitutional or statutory provisions might indicate that they contain an
element of public interest or are really based on grounds of public policy.
This is the view taken by the Indian Supreme Court in regard to the question
of fundamental rights guaranteed by the Indian Constitution. The American
courts however have taken a different view.



The leading Indian case on the subject is _Basheshar Nath vs. Commissioner of
Income Tax_ (23) in that case S.R. Das C.J., Bhagwati J., Kapur J. and Subba
Rao J. held that the fundamental right under Article 14 involved a matter of
public policy and could not be waived. Bhagwati J. and Subba Rao, J. were
prepared to extend the proposition to cover all fundamental rights.



The majority declined to follow the American decision. S.K,Das J. alone
dissenting took the view that the doctrine of waiver could apply in that case
and that there was no such vital distinction between the American and the
Indian Constitutions necessitating a different treatment of the matter.
Seervai in his well. known work Constitutional Law

254

  
of India (2nd Edn.) p.186 criticises the majority judgment. He writes ‑



"S.K.Das,J. dissented, holding that there were no such differences between the
U.S. and the Indian Constitutions as would make the doctrine of waiver
applicable to the former and not to the latter. The correct test to apply to
each fundamental right was to inquire whether it conferred a right on a person
primarily for his benefit. If it did, that right could be waived. It is
submitted that the view of S.K. Das,j. is correct".



This criticism, it would be seen is in no way directed against the legal
principles applicable to waiver enunciated earlier in this judgment. The
difference in views of the majority and the dissenting judge S.K.Das appears
to me not one of principle but in the manner of their application to a given
set of facts. Indian State Courts have followed this judgement. Vide _Ram
Gopal vs. National Housing Corporation,._ (24), _Bhaskar Moharana vs. Arjun
Moharana,_ (25).



#### The issues before us are undoubtedly matters of high constitutional law.
How can it ever be contended that this is a matter of private rights when our
very status and our capacity to function as judges are in dispute? It is the
view of the learned Deputy Solicitor General that we had ceased to be judges
between the 8th and 15th September 1983, although he was prepared to concede
for the purpose of the application before us that on the 8th and 9th September
the proceedings had before us could be treated as valid on the principle of
_de facto_ judges. The challenge to out jurisdiction nevertheless remained.

####  

####   The issues relating to the legality of the court, its judges and the
acts performed by them

####  255

####  
are issues which when presented leave us no choice but to decide them
according to law by virtue of our position as judges who are constitutionally
vested with the power and duty to decide such legal issues. Our powers of
decision in this matter are also referable to a lawful authority we held from
a time prior to 8th September which is reinforced if necessary by the
appointment of 15th September. 1983\. This fact is of decisive importance in
this case. There can be no estoppel against an authority or power vested in an
officer of State that is to be exercised in the interests of the People. Our
decision that the judges continued to hold office without interruption or
break under the original letters of appointment finally concludes this matter.



The appointment of the 15th September, in my view, does not derogate from the
authority with which we had been clothed anterior to such date. In this
context I would also like to remark that there is an ever present duty vested
in all of us, whether we be judges, public officers, or members of the public,
to uphold the Constitution and to safeguard the rights of the People in whom
alone the Sovereignty of the State is vested. It behaves all of us therefore
to take such action which we may consider lawful and proper to protect those
rights and to ensure the smooth and harmonious functioning of the machinery of
State.



In view of the rulings given earlier as regards the directory nature of the
requirement contained in Article 157A and the effect of its non-compliance, it
appears to me quit unnecessary to consider the question (which was really
raised by Mr. Aziz and not by Mr. Nadesan) determining the last date for
taking the oath prescribed by the seventh schedule. As to what are the precise
principles of the English law in regard to the computation of

256

  
time, to what extent they apply or should apply here and as to how a
constitutional provision relating to time as is contained in Article 157 A (7)
should be interpreted are difficult question on which reasonable men can
differ. In my view this question could be safely left for a future occasion.



On the second question referred to this bench, I am again in agreement with
the Chief Justice that the provisions of Article 126 are also directory and
not, mandatory.



In the result I would hold that we have continued and continue to be judges
_de jure_ from the inception of the hearing of this case until now without any
break and that it would be competent for a bench of judges nominated by the
Chief Justice comprising all or some of us to hear and dispose of this
application for relief under Article 126.



**WIMALARATNE, J.**



I have had the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by the Chief Justice
and by Sharvananda,J. I agree with them that since the Judges of the Supreme
Court and of the Court of Appeal had taken the oath in the form set out in the
Seventh Schedule before the Chief Justice or before another judge of the
respective courts prior to the expiry of one month from the date on which the
Sixth Amendment came into force, their failure to take the same oath before
the President of the Republic did not result in their ceasing to hold office
on the termination of the said one month.



The failure of the Judges to take the oath before the President was due to the
unfortunate circumstance that the printed copy of the Sixth Amendment reached
the Judges on or about 7th September 1983. The Bill which was examined

257

  
on 3.8.83 for its constitutionality by a Full Bench of the Supreme Court did
not contain a requirement that the oath should be taken by them before the
President. That requirement had been introduced by Parliament at the Committee
stage and was unknown to the Judges. Hence the failure to take the oath before
the President was not deliberate but due to unfortunate circumstances.



The above decision makes it necessary to determine the question whether the
period of one month for taking the oath ended on the 8th or the 9th of
September. There are decided cases some of which support the 8th whilst others
support the 9th. They relate mostly to computation of time limits in contracts
between parties such as tenancy agreements, or in cases where parties had been
criminally involved or to time limits imposed into statutes or Rules of Court.
But here we are called upon to interpret a time limit contained in a
Constitutional provision. The Chief Justice has taken the view that "the final
date appears to be the 8th September". I would, however, like Sharvananda, J.
prefer not to determine that question as it is now not necessary, and as it is
not the habit of the Court to decide questions of a constitutional nature
unless absolutely necessary to the decision of the case.



Both the Chief Justice and Sharvananda, J. have given cogent reasons for
overruling the two Preliminary objections raised by the learned Deputy
Solicitor General. I am in entire agreement with them and I overrule the
objections.



My conclusion on the first of the two matters referred to the Full Court is
that the Judges did not cease to hold office at any time, and that therefore
the proceedings of the 8th and 9th September 1983 are valid proceedings.

258



The second of the two questions refer relates to the legal validity of an
order that is, made after the expiration of the two month period referred to
in Article 126 (5). The Judges have so far complied with this requirement and
given their orders within the stipulated period. But there could be occasions
where unfortunate circumstances such as illness of a Judge or other unforseen
event may render compliance with this requirement not possible. I am therefore
of the view that hill provisions of Article 126(5) as to the time limit are
directory only, and not mandatory. The Court will, of course, be conscious of
its responsibility, and will undoubtedly not unnecessarily.



**RATWATTE, J ‑,**



I nave had the privilege of reading the judgments of my Lord the Chief Justice
and my brother Sharvananda, J. The circumstances which led to this Full Bench
being constituted and the issue that arose for consideration by the Full Bench
have been set out in the judgment of the Chief Justice.



I am in agreement with the Chief Justice, for the reasons set out by him, that
the provision in sub-Article 7(a) of the Article 157A of the Sixth Amendment
to the Constitution which requires the oath or affirmation set out in the
Seventh Schedule, to be taken "before such person or body if any, as is
referred to " in the Articles of the Constitution specified in sub‑Article 7
of Article 157A, by the categories of officers or persons referred to in those
Articles, is directory and no mandatory. It may be mentioned that this
provision in sub Article 7(a) of Article 157A which requires certain
categories of officers and persons to take the oath in the Seventh Schedule
before a particular person or body was not in the Bill that was referred to
this Court for its special

259

  
determination by His Excellency the President in terms of Article 122(1) of
the Constitution. This provision is contained in an amendment that had been
made at the Committee stage of the debate on the Bill. I have nothing further
to add to the reasons set out by the Chief Justice for his finding that this
provision referred to above is directory and not mandatory.



I am of the view that as the Judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of
Appeal took their oaths in the form set out in the Seventh Schedule before
each other well within the period prescribed in the Sixth Amendment, they did
not cease to hold office by reason of their failure to take the oath before
the President.



The Sixth Amendment was certified by the Speaker on the 8th of August, 1983.
Conflicting arguments were adduced by Mr.Nadesan and the Deputy
Solicitor‑General as to when the period of one month prescribed in Article
157A(7). expired. The question that arose was whether the last day was the
7th, the 8th or the 9th September. To resolve this question it is necessary to
decide how time by it "calender month" is to be reckoned. In my view a
decision on this question now is purely academic, in view of the finding that
the Judges lawfully took their oaths in terms of the Seventh Schedule long
prior to the 7th September 1983, i.e. well within the prescribed time. I
accordingly agree with Sharvananda,.J. that it is not necessary for this Court
to pronounce a finding on this question.



As regards the issue whether the requirement in Article 126(5) of the
Constitution that the Supreme Court should hear and finally dispose of an
application made under that Article within two Months of the filing of such
petition, is directory or mandatory, I concur with the finding of the Chief
Justice for the reasons given by him, that

260



the said requirement is directory and not mandatory. That does not mean that
the Judges will totally disregard the time limit of two months. They will
continue to abide by the time limit as they have hitherto done, unless they
are prevented from doing so due to circumstances beyond their control.



There now remains the preliminary objections raised by the Deputy
Solicitor‑General. The Chief Justice and Sharvananda, J. have dealt with the
matter exhaustively and I am in agreement with their findings on both the
objections. I accordingly agree that both the preliminary objections be
dismissed.



**SOZA, J.,**



I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgments prepared by the
Chief Justice and Sharvananda,J. I agree with the Chief Justice that for the
reasons given by him the stipulation in Article 157A(7) of our Constitution
that the oath in terms of the Seventh Schedule should be taken and subscribed
by the Judges of the Supreme Court and Appeal Court before His Excellency the
President is directory and that the oath in terms of the Seventh Schedule
which the Judges of these two Courts in fact took before their fellow Judges
well before the expiry of one month of the date on which the said Article came
into force is valid and sufficient compliance with the Constitutional
requirements.



On the pleas of estoppel, waiver and acquiescence I agree with what has been
said on them by the Chief Justice and Sharvananda. J I would like to emphasise
that judicial office is a status and transcends the bounds of private
contract. The principle applicable is embodied in the _maxim privatorum
conventio juri publico non derogat_. It is almost universally acknowledged
that

261



estoppel cannot operate against a statute. Much less will it operate against
provisions in a Constitution. Security of tenure of office of the Judges of
the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal is an essential component of judicial
independence and is entrenched in our Constitution as a principle of State
Policy for the benefit of the Sovereign People. No amount of waiver or
acquiescence even by the judges themselves can defeat the security of, tenure
of judicial office enshrined in the Constitution.



Accordingly I concur with the conclusion of the Chief Justice that the Judges
of the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal did not cease to hold office at any
time.



I also agree with the Chief Justice that the provision in regard to time in
Article 126(5) of our Constitution is directory.



On the controversy regarding the mode of computation of the terminal date for
taking the oath in terms of the Seventh Schedule I agree with Sharvananda, J.
that our decision that the Judges took a valid oath and did not cease to hold
office renders it unnecessary to express an opinion on the question.



The preliminary objections raised by the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General have
been dealt with by the Chief Justice and Sharvananda, J. and I agree with them
that they are unsustainable and should be dismissed. I too would dismiss these
objections.



**RANASINGHE, J.,**



I have had the advantage of perusing, in draft, the judgment of my Lord the
Chief Justice, and as I find myself in respectful disagreement with the

262



majority view of this Court, I now set down my approach to the several matter
that were argued at the hearing before this Court.



The two matters which were referred to a full Bench of this Court, are :



(1) The legal validity of the proceedings of the 8th and 9th September 1983.



(2) The legal validity of an order that is made after expiration of the period
of two months referred to in Article 126 of the Constitution.

#  

#  Are the provisions of paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b) of Article 157A of the
Constitution, as set out in the Sixth Amendment, imperative or directory?



The provisions of paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b) of the said Article 157(1) of the
Constitution, which have been brought into operation by the Sixth Amendment,
require any officer and person referred to their in to "make and subscribe, or
take and subscribe, an oath or affirmation in the form set out in the Seventh
Schedule, before such person or body if any, as referred to in that Article,
within one month of the date on which this Article comes into force"; and they
further proceed to provide that: "the provisions of Article 165 and Article
169(12) shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to, and in relation to, any person or
officer who fails to take and subscribe, or make and subscribe, an oath or
affirmation as required by this paragraph".



The provisions of paragraphs 7(a) and 7(b), in so far as the judges of the
supreme court are concerned, set forth three requirements: (1) that the oath
or affirmation set out in the Seventh Schedule be made or be taken and
subscribed, (2) that such oath or affirmation be made or be taken and
subscribed before the President of the

263



Republic, and (3) that such oath or affirmation be made or be taken and
subscribed within one month of the date on which the said Article 157(A)
comes' into force. The said Article 157(A) came into operation on 8.8.1983.



The submission put forward by learned Queeen's Counsel appearing for the
Petitioner is that, of the three requirements referred to above, only two
requirements, vizi the first ‑ relating to the making or taking and
subscribing an oath or affirmation ‑, and the third ‑_ relating to the period
of time within which such oath or affirmation is to be made or taken and
subscribed ‑are mandatory, and that the second requirement ‑relating to the
person before whom such oath or affirmation be made or taken and subscribed ‑
is only directory. This contention is founded upon the argument : that, when
recourse is had to the provisions of Article 165(l) and the necessary changes
made upon the basis of the term mutatis mutandis, what transpires is that
Article 165(l) provides the consequences only in regard to a failure to take
the prescribed oath within a specified period ; that, that being so, the
Legislature has set out a penalty for defaults in complying with only the the
first and third requirements of Article 157A(7)(a) and (b) ; that, as no
sanction has been provided for a failure to comply with the second-the
requirements of making or taking and subscribing the prescribed oath before
the President of Republic - of the three said requirements, it must in law be
held to be directory; that a substantial compliance with such direction would
suffice ; that, therefore, the oaths and affirmations made or taken and
subscribed by the judges of the supreme court, before either of the chief
justice or another of the other judges of either the supreme court or the
court of appeal within the said period of one month, are valid.

264



This contention thus requires a consideration of the meaning and the
application of the phrase "mutatis mutandis". _Wharton's Law Lexicon_ (4th
edt.) p. 677 explains the rule as : "with the necessary changes in points of
detail". _Jowitt's Dictionary of English Law_ also explains the rule the same
way.



_  Black's Law Dictionary_ (4th edt.) 1951, at p.1172, explains it as "with
the necessary changes in points of detail, meaning that matters or things are
generally the same, but to be altered when necessary, as to names, office and
the like".



Of the three authorities ‑ all of which are from the courts in India ‑ cited
to us as being relevant to this particular question, the case of ' _Kushi
Ragunath Sahai vs. Commissioner of Income Tax_ (26) decided by the Punjab High
Court is the most helpful. Falshaw, J. with whom Kapur, J. agreed, has, in his
judgment, referred to the other two authorities cited to this court at the
hearing of this matter. The provisions of law which were considered in that
case were : Rule 36, of the Appellate Tribunal Rules framed under the Income
Tax Act of 1922 provided that, inter alia, Rule 7 of the said Rules ‑ which
provided that memorandum of appeal to the Tribunal which is s by post, shall
be deemed to have been presented the day on which it is received in the office
set out therein ‑ should apply mutatis‑mutandis to application made under
sub‑section (1) of S.66(l) Sec.66(1) of the said Act provided for application
for reference to be made in the prescribed form to the Income ‑ Tax Appellate
Tribunal within six days The principal point of consideration was how the
principles set out in Rule 7, in regard to presentation of a memorandum of
appeal, should applied to an application made under Sec. 66(1) The manner in
which it should be done was set quite lucidly and succinctly by Falshaw,J. as
follows:‑

  
**265**



There would seem to be no doubt that in this context the phrase "mutatis
mutandis" has its usual meaning, that is, that only such verbal changes are to
be made in the rules mentioned in Rule 36 as would make the princi­ples
embodied in these Rules applicable to applications under sub‑section (1), S.
66. The only change which appears to me to be necessary is the substitution of
the word it application under sub‑section (1) of S. 66" for the words
"memorandum of appeal" wherever they occur. The net result would thus appear
to be that anyone who wishes to move the Tribunal under S. 66 (1) is required
to post his application in time for it to reach the office of the Tribunal
within sixty days of the receipt by him of a copy of the appellate order of
the Tribunal and, indeed, .............  I should hardly have thought that the
point admitted of any doubt, or was even capable of argument, .......... "



Feetham, A.J.A., in the case of "Touriel vs. Minister of Internal Affairs
Southern Rhodesia, (27) (which said authority I gathered from the judgment of
My Lord the Chief Justice) at page 545, cites with approval the interpretation
given in _warton's Law Lexicon_ (5th Edt.) of the phrase mutatis mutandis as
"with the necessary changes in points of detail" as supporting the view that
the test to be applied, for the purpose of ascertaining in any particular case
what are "mutanda", is necessity" rather than "fitness". The approach adopted
by me in the application of the rule _mutatis mutandis_ to the two relevant
provisions in the Constitution, 157(A)(7) and 165(l) does not in any way, in
my opinion, offend against the principles set out in the judgment of Feetham,
A.J.A. The changes made are only those that have of "necessity" to be changed,
as contemplated by the framers of the Constitution and those who adopted

266



it. No change has been made on the basis that such a change is a "fitting"
change ‑ as was done in the original court in the South African case (supra)
where changes were effected by the substitution of words, which were not found
in the enabling section, which, in that case, was Sec. 8 of the Southern
Rhodesia Naturalisation Act.



That part of paragraph (7) of Article 157(A), which is relevant to this
particular question, sets out that the provisions of Article 165 shall,
mutatis mutandis " _Apply to and in relation to_ ", a _person or officer_ "who
fails to take and subscribe, or make and subscribe, an oath or affirmation as
required by this paragraph". This provision clearly set out the nature and the
scope of the changes which should be effected in the provision of Article
165(l). Such changes should only apply to and be in relation to a person or
officer who has failed to do the act as required by this paragraph. Such
changes are not to be made to apply to and be in relation to a failure to
comply with each one of the said requirements set out in that paragraph. The
determination of the question, whether a person or officer is in default, has
to be made with reference to the provisions of Article 157A, and not with
reference to Article 165. A default under the provisions of Article 157A
arises when there is a non-compliance with any one or more of the three
requirements - detailed earlier - set out in the said Article. The failure is
to be determined by reference to the requirements set out in Article 157A and
not by reference to any requirements set out in Article 165. A violation of or
a non-compliance with any one of the three requirements set out in Article
157A would constitute a failure to take and subscribe or make and subscribe an
oath or affirmation as required by paragraph (7) of Article 157A. Once such a
failure arises, resort has then to be made to Article 165 to discover the
consequence (or consequences), if any, of such

267



Failure. The consequence - or consequence - so being looked for is the
consequence of a failure to comply with the requirements of Article 157A, and
not that of a failure to comply with the requirements of Article 165. It is
not an exercise to discover the consequence of a non-compliance with each one
of such requirements would entail. It is rather an exercise to find out what
would be the fate of a person or officer who is already in default because he
had not complied with one or more of the three aforementioned requirements of
Article 157A. The Principles set out in Article 165 are to be made applicable
not for the determination of either what constitutes a default in terms of the
provisions of the Article 157A, or what, if any, a failure to comply with each
one of the aforementioned three requirements set out in Article 157A would
entail, but for the specific determination of the consequence, if any, of the
failure of a person (or officer) to take and subscribe, or make and subscribe,
in the manner set out in Article 157A, the oath or affirmation set out in the
said Article 157A. Therefore, the changes, which are necessary to be made in
Article 165(1), would be: in the first sentence appearing therein by the
substitution for all the words "set out in the Fourth Schedule", the words "as
required by paragraph (7) of Article 157(A)"; and, in the second sentence
therein, by the substitution for all the words beginning with the words "any"
and ending with the word "Gazette", the words "any person or officer who fails
to take and subscribe or make and subscribe , an oath or affirmation as
required by paragraph 7 of Article 157A". The resulting position would be that
a person or officer, who fails to comply with even one of the aforesaid three
requirements set out in paragraph (7) of Article 157A, being a person or
officer who has failed to take and subscribe, or to make and

268



subscribe, an oath or affirmation as required by the said paragraph (7) of
Article 157A, would "cease to be in service or hold office". The second of the
three requirements set out in paragraph (7), and referred to earlier, of
Article 157A is also, therefore, a provision of law the non‑observance of
which would attract to it the penalty set out in Article 165(1).



Although in this view of this matter, it is not necessary to consider further
this question, it appears to me that, even if the penalty set out in Article
165(l) does not apply to a non‑observance of the aforementioned second
requirement set out in Article 157A (7), there is a further aspect to this
question, whether the said. requirement is in itself a mandatory provision.
The question whether a statutory provision, setting out the man in which a
particular act, ordained to be carried out, has to be done, is imperative or
directory arises for consideration only when the consequence of a failure to
comply with such direction is not set out in such enactment \- _Bindra :
Interpretation of Statutes_ _‑ 6 edt‑ps_ _546-549, 561, 565, Maxwell
:Interpretation of Statutes_ (9 edt) p.373‑4.



In this connection it seems to me to be helpful to bear in mind the following
principles which appear in _Bindra's Interpretation of Statutes (supra) page
549 et. seq_. : Whether a statutory provision is mandatory or directory
depends upon the intention of the Legislature and not upon the language in
which the intent is clothed : The meaning and intentions of the Legislature
must govern and these are to be ascertained not only from the phraseology of
the provision but also by considering its nature, its design and the
consequences which would flow from construing it one way or the other :
Further to this end, an enquiry into the purpose behind the enactment of the
Legislature must always be made : It is the

269



duty of the Court to get at the real intention of the Legislature by carefully
attending to the whole scope of the enactment ; No universal rule could be
laid down ; It depends not on the form, but upon the intention of the framers
; Where a power or authority is conferred with a direction that certain
regulation or formality shall be complied with, it seems neither unjust nor
incorrect to exact a rigorous observance of it as essential to the acquisition
of the right or authority. Lord Campbell, L.C., formulated the test to be
adopted in regard to this question, in the case of The Liverpool Borough Bank
vs. Turner (28), as : "......... in each case you must look to the subject
matter, consider the importance of the provision that has been disregarded and
the relation of that provision to the general object intended to be secured by
the Act, and upon a review of the case in that aspect, decide whether the
matter is what is called imperative or only directory."



In regard to the interpretation of a Constitution it has to be remembered
that, although a Constitution, being essentially in the nature of a statute,
the general rules governing the construction of statutes in the main apply to
the construction of Constitutions also, and that the fundamental rule of
interpretation is the same, namely that the Court will have to ascertain the
intention gathered from the words of the Constitution, yet, by reason of the
special nature of a Constitution as being the fundamental law, there are some
special rules for the interpretation Of a Constitution ‑ _Bindra (supra) pages
14, 808 et sec._ : The language of a Constitution should be interpreted as if
it were a living organism capable of growth and development, if interpreted in
a broad and liberal spirit, and not in a narrow and pedantic sense ‑ _Bindra
p.807_ ; That, although a broad and liberal spirit should inspire those who
interpret a Constitution, they are however not free

270



to interpret or pervert the language of the enactment in the interests of
legal or constitutional theory ‑ _Bindra_ ‑ 825 : Where two constructions are
possible, that one which would ensure a smooth and harmonious working of the
Constitution should be adopted, and that the Court should adopt that which
will implement, and discard that which will stultify the apparent intention of
the makers of the Constitution ‑ _Bindra_ : p 820 : That before making a
choice between two alternative meanings, the Court must read the Constitution
as a whole, take into consideration its different parts and try to harmonise
them : that the Court should proceed on the assumption that no conflict or
repugnancy between different parts was intended by the framers of the
Constitution. That, if the simplest and most obvious interpretation of a
Constitution is in itself sensible, it is then most likely to be that which
was meant by the people in its adoption ; and that words or terms used in a
Constitution must be understood in the sense most obvious to the common
understanding at the time of its adoption, although a different rule might be
applied in interpreting Statutes and Acts of Parliament ‑ _Bindra_ : _p
810,818_.



The judgment of Cwyer, C.J., in the case of In _Re C. P. Motor Spirit Act,_
(29) sets out, at page 4, several of the principles, referred to follows :



"The Judicial Committee has, observed that a Constitution is not to be
construed in any narrow and pedantic sense : per Lord Wright in 1936 AC 578 at
64 James vs. Comm. of Australia. The rules which apply to the interpretation
of other statutes apply, it is true, equally to the interpretation of a
constitutional enactment. But their application is of necessity conditioned by
the subject matter

271



of the enactment itself; and I respectfully ­adopt the words of a learned
Australian Judge:



Although we are to interpret the words of the Constitution on the same
principle of interpretation as we apply to any ordinary law, these very
principles of interpretation compel us to take into account the nature and the
scope of the Act that we are interpreting ‑ to remember that it is a
Constitution, a mechanism under which laws are to be made, and not a mere Act
which declares what the law is to be' ‑ 1908, 6 Com. L.R.469, per Higgin, J."



Where the provision of law, which has to be decided on as being mandatory or
directory, is one contained in a Constitution, the principles relevant to such
a determination have been set down by Bindra ‑ supra ‑ at pages 860‑861 as :
"It is an .established rule that constitutional provisions are to be construed
as mandatory unless, by express provision or by necessary implication a
different intention is manifest. Some cases even go so far to hold that all
constitutional provisions are mandatory. But more accurately, the test as to
whether a provision is mandatory or directory‑is the intention of those who
framed and adopted it. The intention is to be gathered not so much from a
technical construction of particular words, as from a consideration of the
language and purpose of the entire clause. There is a strong presumption in
favour of it being mandatory. But if it appears from the express terms of a
provision or by necessary implication from the language used that it was
intended to be directory only it will be so construed........ As a general
rule., all provisions that designate in express terms the time or Manner of
doing particular acts and that are silent as to performance in any other
manner

272



are mandatory and must be followed. It is from the context, along with the
other circumstances that the nature of the provisions is to be ascertained,
and the mere use of the words such as "shall" is not conclusive in this
respect.



The principles referred to above are also set out in the Corpus Juris Secundun
American Statement ‑ Vol 16 ‑ Constitutional Law Secs. 61,63 pages 174‑ 176,
177.



When the question, whether the aforesaid second requirement set out in
paragraph (7) of Article 157A ‑ dealing with the person before whom the said
oath or affirmation is to be made or taken and subscribed ‑ is mandatory or
directory, is considered upon the basis of the principles set out above, it
seems to be clear that the Legislature did intend that the judges of the
Supreme Court (and of the Court of Appeal) should make or take and subscribe
even the oath or affirmation Set out in the Seventh Schedule before the
President of the Republic and no other. A consideration of the question,
whether the aforesaid second requirement is mandatory even though no penalty
for not complying with such requirement has been expressly set out, will be on
the assumption that the consequence set out in Article 165(l) is application
only to the first and third of the aforementioned requirements and not to the
second. Even so, there are, as far as the judges of the Supreme court at any
rate are concerned, several significant circumstances the cumulative effect of
which is to indicate clearly that the Legislature did intend that the said
second requirement should also be just as imperative as the other two
requirement.



The Supreme Court is vested, under the Constitution, with a sole and exclusive
constitutional jurisdiction in respect of Bills to be exercised, inter alia,
on being invoked by the

273



President of the Republic, and also with a sole and exclusive jurisdiction in
the interpretation of the Constitution. The President of the Republic is also
entitled to refer to the Supreme Court, in order to obtain the view of the
Supreme Court thereon, any question of fact or law, which, in the opinion of
the President of the Republic, is of such nature and of such public importance
that it is expedient to obtain the opinion of the Supreme Court. The Supreme
Court alone has jurisdiction to hear &ad determine legal proceedings relating
to the election of the President of the Republic. The Chief Justice is vested
with the power to express, in certain circumstances, his opinion in regard to
the inability of the President of the Republic to exercise temporarily the
powers, duties and functions of the President of the Republic. In the
Constitution, as it stood before the Sixth Amendment, the Oath of Office ‑ as
set out in the Fourth Schedule ‑ to be taken or made and subscribed by every
person appointed to be or act as the Chief Justice, President of the Court of
Appeal or a Judge of the Supreme Court or Court of Appeal had to be taken
before the President of the Republic, who is also the person who appoints all
such judges.



One of the Articles referred to by the provisions of Sub‑Article (7) of
Article 157A is Article 32. Article 32(l) sets out the person before whom the
President of the Republic is required to take or make and subscribe the oath
or affirmation before the President of the Republic assumes office. It is not
unreasonable to suppose ‑ having regard to the circumstances in which it
Passed the Sixth Amendment ‑ that the Legislature did intend that the
President of the Republic should take or make and subscribe the oath or
affirmation, set out in the Seventh Schedule also, in the same manner as the
President of the Republic

274



 was required to do by the provisions of Articles 32(1).



A consideration of the foregoing provisions leads one to the conclusion ‑ a
conclusion which is both reasonable and irresistible ‑ that the Legislature,
even if it had failed to state expressly that the consequence of the failure
to comply with the aforesaid second requirement should be the same as that
which is prescribed for failures in regard to either the first or the third of
such requirements, did, nevertheless, intend that the judges of the Supreme
Court should take or make and subscribe the oath or affirmation set out in the
Seventh Schedule also before the President of the Republic, the same person
before whom the oath or affirmation was taken or made and subscribed, in terms
of Article 107(4), by them before they entered upon the duties of their
office.



There is yet another circumstance which also tends, though on a lower note, to
support this view of what the intention of the Legislature was. The said
second requirement was not found in the Bill that was presented to the
Parliament for discussion. It has been introduced only at the Committee stage
- a stage which is reached after a discussion on both the principles of the
Bill and the Provisions of the Bill by the members of the House.



Reference must be made to two circumstances which would seem to detract from
the view that the said requirement was intended to be strictly complied with.
One is the absence of an express direction in regard to certain very
responsible and key members of the Government, viz, the Prime Minister and the
Cabinet Ministers, that they should take or make and subscribe the oath or
affirmation set out in the Seventh Schedule in a

275



specific manner. It must, however, be noted that, as far as the persons
holding such offices are concerned, the oath or affirmation they were required
to make or take and subscribe, in terms of Article 53 of the Constitution,
before they entered upon the duties of their respective offices, was also not
required by that Article to be taken before any particular person. As far as I
have been able to discover, the only person, who has not been expressly
required to take or make and subscribe the oath or affirmation set out in the
Seventh Schedule before the "person or body" before whom such person was
required to take the official oath or affirmation under the Constitution prior
to the Sixth Amendment, is a person who was, on the date Article 157(A) came
into operation, a sitting Member of Parliament. In this connection it has to
be noted that, whilst paragraphs (a) and (b) of Sub‑Article (7) of Article
157A speak of "such person or body", not one of the Articles set out in
Sub‑Article (7) itself speaks of "a body" before whom an oath or affirmation
is to be taken or made and subscribed. It would seem that the "body" set out
in the aforesaid paragraphs (a) and (b) was meant to be the body, viz.
Parliament, referred to in Article 63 and before which body a Member of
Parliament had to take or make and subscribe the official oath or affirmation.
That being so, the non reference to Article 63 in paragraph (7) of Article
157A would seem to be an omission. Under sub-Article 10 of Article 157A
Parliament can extend the provisions of Sub-Article (7) to other categories of
persons. Be that as it may, having regard, however to the background and the
circumstances - of which this court can well take judicial notice - in which
parliament came to pass the Sixth amendment, it is quit reasonable to suppose
that parliament attached the utmost sanctity and solmnity to the oath and
affirmation set out in the Seventh Schedule, and did treat it

276



as sacrosanct and as important as the oath or affirmation that a person had to
take or make and subscribe before such person assumes the duties of his office
- whether public, judicial or otherwise.



The resulting position then is that the said requirement ‑ that the oath or
affirmation embodied in the Seventh Schedule be taken or made and subscribed
by the judges of the Supreme Court (and of the Court of Appeal) before the
president of the Republic \- is imperative, and must be strictly complied
with.



Paragraph (7) of Article 157A requires - the third of the three requirements
referred to above - an officer or person who is holding office on the date on
which the said Article comes into force to make or take and subscribe the said
oath or affirmation "within one month of the date on which the said Article
comes into force". The said Article came into operation on 8.8.83. It has been
contented before this Court, on behalf of the Attorney-General, that the last
date on which the judges of the Supreme Court could have made or taken and
subscribed the said oath or affirmation was the 8th September 1983, and that
the period of one month expired at mid-night on the night of 8-9th September,
1983\. That, in the computation of the period of one month referred to in this
Sub-Article (7) of Article 157A, the first day, namely the 8th August, the
date on which the said Article 157A came into operation, has to be excluded is
made clear by the judgement of (E.H.T.) Gunasekara,J. in the case of _S.V.
Kunasingham vs. G.G. Ponnambalam_ (30) \- a view which is sound both in
principle and in law and should be followed. The word "month" appearing in the
said sub-Article (7) should, in

277



 View of the provisions of Sec.2(1) of the Interpretation Ordinance (Chap.2),
be construed in the context in which it appears to be a calenadr month'. The
question which arises now for determination in this case is what the last date
of the said period of one calendar month was ? was it the 8th September ? Or,
was it the 9th September '83 ? Having regard to the principles embodied in the
judgments in the cases of _Burn vs. Munisamy,_ (6), _Imperial Tea Company Ltd.
vs. Armady_ (31) _Highland Tea company of Ceylon vs. Jinadasa_ (7) decided by
the Supreme Court, and also the judgement of the House of Lords in _Dodds vs.
Walker_ (8) and having also considered the submissions made by learned counsel
to this court, I am now of opinion that the last date was 8.9.83, and that the
period of the calendar month contemplated by Sub-Article (7) of Article 157A,
expired at midnight of the 8th September, on the night of the 8th-9th
September 1983. At this stage I think it fit and proper to place on record
that, when I concurred in the opinion expressed in the letter forwarded by the
judges of this Court to the president of the republic on 9.9.83 in regard to
the last date on which such oath or affirmation could be made or taken and
subscribed was the 9th September 1983, I for one, had been labouring under a
misconception in regard to the effect of the judgment of the House of Lords in
the said case of _Dodds vs. Walker_ (Supra). "It does not seem to have
appeared to me then, as it appears to me now".



Although the learned Queen's Councel contended that the said letter addressed
by the judges of this Court to the President of the Republic constitutes an
exercise of the power vested in the Supreme Court under and by virtue of the
provisions of Article 118(a) of the Constitution, suffice it to say that it
was not so intended by me, and that it cannot and must not be so construed.
Article 118 spells out, in paragraphs (a) to (g), the various

278



jurisdictions conferred upon the Supreme Court by the Constitution.
Thereafter, the Constitution proceeds to set out, from Article 120 to Article
131, in detail the manner and form in which the various jurisdictions so
conferred should be exercised. The exercise of the jurisdiction in respect of
constitutional affair, vested by Article 118(a), is provided for and regulated
the provisions by of Article 120 to 125. Similarly, the succeeding Articles
126 to 130 provide for and regulate the exercise of the other jurisdictions
vested by paragraphs (b) to (g) respectively of Article 118\. When the Supreme
Court exercises its jurisdiction under, inter alia, Article 120, 121, 123 and
125, the Supreme Court is required, by the provisions of Articles 134, to
notice the Attorney-General who has under and by virtue of the said Article
the right to be heard in all such proceedings in the Supreme Court. The
Attorney-General was not heard, nor even noticed, on the 9th September by the
Judges of this court in regard to any of the matters set out in the said
letter, before the said letter was addressed to the President of the Republic.
It was pure and simple an expression of opinion of the judges of this Court ‑
and also of several judges of the Court of Appeal. It was not, in law, a
determination made by this Court in the exercise of the jurisdiction vested in
this Court under and by virtue of the provisions of paragraph (a) of Article
118 of the Constitution.



Whether the period of the two months set out in the Article 126 (5) of the
Constitution is mandatory or directory.



A consideration of the principles, Bindra (supra) and also in the _Corpus
Secundum_ (supra) relating to the determination of whether a direction
contained in a Constitution is mandatory or directory, makes it clear that a

279



provision in a Constitution setting out in express terms the time for the
doing of a particular act, and is silent as to it being done at any other time
or in any other way, is mandatory and must be followed. Furthermore, _Bindra_
_(supra)_ also, _at page 574_ , deals with the interpretation of statutes
relating to judicial duties and proceedings, and states : that a statute
directing judicial action, although it may be expressed in positive and
imperative terms, will be read as directory only when the subject to which it
relates is embraced within the sphere of judicial discretion, for to hold that
the Legislature has the power to issue a command as to a matter involving the
excercise of judicial discretion would be to permit the Legislature to usurp
the judicial function ; that a statutory requirement relating to a matter of
practice or procedure in the Courts should be interpreted as mandatory if it
confers upon a litigant a substantial right the violation of which will injure
him or prejudice his case ; that a statutory provision regulating a matter of
practice or procedure will, on the other hand, generally be read as directory
when the disregard of it or the failure to follow it exactly will not
materially prejudice a litigant's case or deprive him of a substantial right.



The Fundamental Rights, which are declared and recognized and set out in
detail in Chapter 3 of the Constitution, have been, by Article 4(d) of the
Constitution, directed to be respected , secured and advanced by all the
organs of government. Provision is made by Article 126 (2) for a person, who
alleges that a fundamental right of his has been infringed or is about to be
infringed, to present a petition, within one month thereof, to the Supreme
Court for relief or redress. Sub‑Article (5) of the said Article 126 states
that the Supreme Court "shall hear and finally dispose of" any such petition
for relief "within two months of the

280



filing of such petition", The party aggrieved has, therefore, to come before
the Supreme Court within one month of the alleged infringement or the
threatened infringement, and I the Supreme Court itself is directed to bring
to an end all proceedings in respect of such petition within the period
specified therein, viz, within a period of two months.



The jurisdiction, in respect of Fundamental Rights, is a jurisdiction vested
in the Supreme court for the first time by the Constitution of 1978. It places
time limits in regard to the taking of steps by an aggrieved Party, and to the
performance of specified duties by the Supreme Court. The reason why such
limits in regard to time have been placed is not far to seek. The State is
immediately and considerably concerned in proceedings under Article 126. The
act or acts in respect of which relief is sought are acts of the officers of
the State. The relief granted in the ultimate analysis, is an award against
the State. it is, therefore, in the best interests of the State that such
proceedings be expeditiously proceeded with and determined once and for all
within a period, which is clearly specified and known beforehand to every
citizen and the State Officers. The most powerful argument against the fixing
of a rigid and unalterable date for the performance of the acts and duties
imposed upon the Court is that such step is bound to cause unfair and undue
hardship to those seeking relief from Court against the State, and make them
pay for the faults of others over whom they have no control and also penalise
them for no fault of their own. That such situations could and do arise does
not admit of any doubt or argument. That hardship could and would be suffered
by innocent parties is fairly clear and unquestionable. They are so plain and
obvious that it is reasonable to suppose that they would also have been
evident to those who were

281



responsible for the making of such laws, and that they would not have been
unmindful of such dire consequences. Such considerations would have received
the due attention of the legislators. Yet, the Legislature, in its wisdom, has
thought it fit and proper to lay down such directions. The Constitution has
imposed time limits for the performance of various acts by the Supreme Court
and where the Legislature considered it necessary to do so, it had mitigated
the rigours of such inflexible directions, as for instance, in Articles 122
(1)(c) and 129. True it is that members of the public are not parties to such
proceedings. Yet, it provides an insight to the intention of the Legislature.
Hapless victims of the working of such inflexible rules would often find
themselves unable to obtain the relief which they hoped to obtain. A
petitioner, who is unable to obtain the relief within the time limit imposed
by a provision of law, which also gave him the substantive right to sue for
such relief, would find himself deprived of a substantial right. That then is
all the more reason why such a direction particularly when it is a direction
embodied in a Constitution \- should be strictly complied with.



The provision contained in Sub‑Article (5) of Article 126 of the Constitution
‑ setting out a time limit of two months within which a petition or reference
referred to therein should be heard and. finally disposed of ‑ is, therefore
an imperative provision and must be strictly complied with.



No submissions were made by either Counsel as to the legal effect ‑ e.g. :
whether void, voidable, nullity ‑ of an Order made after the effluxion of the
period of two months where the direction regarding the two month period is
mandatory. The argument proceeded on the footing that, if the said provision
was mandatory, then an Order delivered after the expiry of the said period

282

would not be valid.



_Validity of the proceedings of the 8th and 9th September 1983._



When this matter was taken up for hearing, both Counsel ‑ learned Queen's
Counsel appearing for the Petitioners and the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General
appearing for the Respondents - agreed that the proceedings held on 8.9.83
were valid. There was also agreement between them as to the basis upon which
they state that such proceedings are valid. They both agreed that the five
judges of this Court, before whom the proceedings were held on 8.9.83, were
all de jure judges. In regard to the proceedings of 9.9.83, once again both
Counsel agreed that the proceedings of that date ‑ which did not last more
than half an hour at the most, and throughout the whole of which period
learned Queen's Counsel for the Petitioners was on his feet addressing Court,
and also referred to the written submissions, which he had submitted to Court
the previous day, and during which period no order was made by the Court, no
evidence recorded, and no document produced and marked in evidence ‑ are also
valid. They are, however, at variance in regard to the basis on which each
accepts such validity ; for, whilst learned Queen's Counsel accepts it on the
basis that the judges were de jure judges on the 9th as well, learned Deputy
Solicitor‑General bases his acceptance on the ground that the judges, though
not de jure, were nevertheless "de facto judges".



Although they are at variance in regard to the basis upon which they say so,
they are both, nevertheless, agreed that the proceedings in question - ie. Of
the 9th September 1983 - are valid. That being so, the answer to the question
posed, is thereby supplied. It is not, in my

283



opinion, necessary to probe further. An examination of the merits and demerits
of the respective bases upon which the answer is so supplied, is really, for
the purpose of answering the specific question referred to this Court,
superfluous. It is quite unnecessary. The Courts will ordinarily refuse to go
into constitutional questions except when such decision is necessary to the
final disposition of the case, or where the record discloses other grounds of
decision ‑, _Bindra (supra) page 882._ Although the aforesaid statements made
by both Counsel, in regard to the validity of the proceedings of the two days
referred to, would be sufficient to answer the first of the two questions
referred to this Court, yet, in view of the fact that learned Counsel did make
submissions at considerable length on several issues which were considered
relevant for a decision of this question, I shall proceed to consider them as
well.



The concept of de facto judges, upon which the learned Deputy
Solicitor‑General founds his argument, is a doctrine which does not seem to
have been considered by our Courts earlier. Yet, it is a doctrine which "has a
long history and has been applied to a wide variety of offices" for several
centuries in the United States of America and in England ‑ United States of
America even during the time of the Civil War, and England from about the
eighteenth century. Dealing with this doctrine, Rubinstein : Jurisdiction and
Illegality (1965) quotes at page 206 the following summary from the _Corpus
Juris Secundun_ : "A judge de facto is one acting with colour of right and who
is regarded as, and has the reputation of exercising the judicial function he
assumes ; he differs, on the one hand, from a mere usurper of an office who
undertakes to act without any colour of right ; and on the other, from an
officer de jure who is in all respects

284



legally appointment and qualified to exercise the office. In order that there
may be de facto judges, there must be an office which the law recognises, and
when a court has no legal existence there can be no judges thereof, either de
jure or de facto. There cannot be a de facto judge when there is a de jure
judge in the actual performance of the duties of the office". Rubinstein
thereafter proceeds to discuss the several decisions of the Courts in which
this doctrine has been applied ‑ among which is the decision of the House of
Lords in the case of _Scadding vs. Lorant_ (32). This doctrine is also
discussed in Wade : Administrative Law (4 edt) P. 287‑289, where, at page 289,
the learned author quotes the definition of a de facto' officer given by Lord
Ellenborough C . J. in the case of R.V. Bedford Level Corporation (33)



"An officer de facto is one who has the reputation of being the officer he
assumes to be and yet is not a good officer in point of law" .



This doctrine is also, discussed by A.J. Markose : Judicial Control of
Administrative Action in India (1956), where, at page 356, the learned author
states that the validity of a de facto office cannot be questioned in a
collateral proceeding and that the application of this rule is mainly to
judicial offices. The case of _Bhaskara Pillai vs . The State of Travancore_
(34), which involved a retired puisne judge of the High Court of Madras, who
was subsequently appointed to be the Chief Justice of the High Court of the
United State of Travancore and Cochin, and the dismissal of a criminal appeal
by a Divisional Bench, of which the said Chief Justice was a member, is cited
as a good illustration of this doctrine.



It seems to be clear that the essence of this



285



doctrine is that the person (who is to be regarded as a de facto judge)
should, act with colour of right, and should be regarded as and should have,
the reputation of exercising the functions of the judicial office he assumes,
and that both such person and those who regard him as having the right to hold
the office he holds should be unaware of the defect which renders such tenure
no longer.' valid. The moment the defect, which renders such tenure invalid,
becomes known ‑ either to the holder himself or to those who have regarded it
as being valid ‑ the de facto . character would .forthwith cease. If, as is
borne out by the authorities set out in the textbook referred to above, even a
defect in the original appointment is, ,not a bar to the operation of this
doctrine, then the doctrine should apply with even stronger force in the case
of an initially valid appointment which is subsequently rendered defective by
a supervening factor. Having regard to the principles underlying this doctrine
and their application to the relevant facts and circumstances of this case ‑
and also in view of the opinion I have already expressed regarding both the
mandatory nature of' the second of the three requirements set out in
Sub‑Article (7) of Article 157A, and the last date of the period of one month
referred to in the selfsame Sub‑Article (7) ‑ it seems to me that the
contention of the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General ‑ that, during the period
the five judges of this' Court sat on the Bench on 9.9.83 the said judges had
ceased to be de jure judges and were only de facto judges ‑ is entitled to
succeed, and that, at any rate by midnight of the 9th September, 1983 ‑ on the
night of the 9th‑10th September ‑ the judges had ceased to be de facto judges
as well forward.  
  
The preliminary objections put forward on on behalf of the Respondents.  
  
Several preliminary objections were put

286  


forward, on behalf of the Respondents, to the judges of this Court determining
any question relating to their status as _de jure_ judges of the Supreme Court
from the midnight of 8th September, 1983 up to the time the judges accepted
the letters of appointment from the President of the Republic on 15.9.83. The
objection, which was strongly urged, is : That the judges of this Court are
precluded from determining any question relating to their status as de jure
judges of this Court from the midnight of the 8th September to the time at
which fresh letters of appointment were given by the President on the 15th
September, by reason of their conduct on the 9th September, and up to and
including the 15th September, and also by reason of the fact that, as they now
derive their authority from the letters of appointment granted by the
President on the 15th September, they cannot seek to exercise their judicial
power on some other basis.

  

This particular question really does not arise to be considered by me in view
of the opinion I have already expressed in regard to the several issues
already dealt with by me. Yet, I would very briefly indicate my views on this
matter too. The letter addressed by the Judges of this Court to the President
of the Republic on the afternoon of the 9th September, 1983 ‑ and which is
said to have been delivered to the President of the Republic around 3.30 p.m.
‑ has been referred to at the argument before this Court, and it speaks for
itself. The first step in this "transaction" , which commenced around 11 a.m.
on 9.9.83 and ended shortly after 8.30 a.m. on 15.9.83, was, in fact taken by
the judges themselves. It is also a fact that the oath or affirmation, set out
in the Seventh Schedule, was not taken or made and subscribed by the judges
before the President of the Republic even on the 9th September. It is indeed
profitless now to consider why the judges

287



could not in fact do so. Indeed, several facts and circumstances relevant and
necessary for a full and effective determination of it are not before this
Court, and may indeed not be legally available and admissible. Thereafter, on
the 15th September, 1983 the judges of this Court took or made and subscribed
both the Fourth Schedule oath or affirmation and the Seventh Schedule oath or
affirmation before the President of the Republic, and the President of the
Republic issued to each of the judges a fresh Act of Appointment, in terms of
Article 107 of the Constitution, as a Judge of the Supreme Court with effect
from 15.9.83. This appointment was accepted by me, without demur. No
indication was given by me to the President of the Republic that I considered
myself still a judge of the Supreme Court under and by virtue of the earlier
Act of Appointment, which had earlier been issued by him, and that that
Warrant was still valid and effective. If that were my position, it behaved me
at least to acquaint the President of the Republic, who was taking steps to
appoint me afresh with effect from that day, of my position. Furthermore, if
that were my position, then my conduct amounted to no more than this : I,
being aware that my earlier appointment was still valid, stood by silently,
whilst the President of the Republic, purporting to act under the provision of
the Constitution under which the President of the Republic could appoint
judges to the Supreme Court, took steps to appoint me afresh with effect from
that date, and then, without any form of demur or even any indication of my
position, I proceeded to accept such appointment. That being the factual
position ‑ quite apart from the legal position ‑ I entertain grave doubts
about the propriety of thereafter proceeding to maintain that I derive
authority to function as a Judge of this Court not from the appointment made
on the 15th September 1983. but from the earlier appointment made on 7th
September 1978.

288





Learned Deputy Solicitor‑General relies mainly on Estoppel to support his
contention this point. _At paragraph_ 1515 _Halsbury_ .( _4 edt_ ) refers to
the non availability of a plea of estoppel as against a Statute. Having regard
to the discussion contained in that paragraph, I do not think that the matter
before us is covered by that principle. In regard to the principles of
Estoppel it has to be noted that, although Estoppel has often been described
as a rule of evidence, the modern approach has been to view the whole concept
at a substantive rule of law, and as a principle of justice and equity ‑
Halsbury (4 edt) Vol.16 paragraph 1501, page 1008, note 4\. At paragraph 1507,
Halsbury ( _supra_ ) discusses the species of Estoppel known as "approbation
and reprobation"; and sets out the two propositions expressed by this
principle viz : the person having a choice between two courses of conduct, is
to be treated as having made an election from which he cannot resile, and that
he will not be regarded, in general at any rate, as having so elected unless
he has taken a benefit under or arising out of the course of conduct which he
has first pursued and with which his subsequent conduct is inconsistent.



_Halsbury (supra)_ also discusses, under the chapter on Equity, at _Paragraph
1473,_ the term "acquiescence" , and states that this term is properly used
"where a person having a right and seeing another person about to commit or in
the course of committing an act infringing upon that right, stands by in such
a manner as really to induce the person committing the act, and who might
otherwise have abstained from it, to believe that he assents to its being
committed; a person so standing by cannot afterwards be heard to complain of
the act. In that sense the doctrine of acquiescence may be defined as
quiescence under such circumstances that assent can be reasonably

289



inferred from it, and is no more than an instance of the law of estoppel by
words or conduct, the principle of estoppel by representation applying both at
law and in equity, although its application to acquiescence is equitable,".
_Spencer Bower and Turner_ _on Estoppel by_ _Representation_ ( _2 edt_ ) in
discussing the principles relating to the concept of "acquiescence" , at page
263, quotes the following passage from the judgment of Thesiger, L.J. in the
case of _De Bussche vs. Alt_ (35):



"If a person having a. right and seeing another person about to commit, or in
another person about to commit, or in the course of committing an act
infringing upon that right, stands by in such a. manner as really to induce
the person committing the act, and who might otherwise have Abstained from it,
to believe that he assents to it being committed he cannot afterwards be heard
to complain of the act. This, as Lord Cottenham said in the case Already
cited, is the proper sense of the term 'acquiescence' and in that sense it may
be defined as quiescence under such circumstance as that assent may be
reasonably inferred from it, and is no more than an instance of the law of
estoppel by words or conduct".



The Act of Appointment granted by the President of the Republic, and accepted
by me, on 15.9.83 does affect my rights under the original Act of Appointment
granted to me on the 7th September 1978 ; for, it expressly states. that it is
an appointment with effect from 15.9.83.



The principle urged by the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General does not affect
the Supreme Court as such, it only affects the judges, who constitute this
Bench, individually.



Having regard to the facts and circumstances

290



relevant to this matter, and to the principles relating to the legal concepts
of "approbation and reprobation", and "acquiescence", it seems to me that, had
it been necessary for me to rule on the preliminary objection raised on behalf
of the Respondents by the learned Deputy Solicitor‑General ‑ that I cannot be
heard to say that I am exercising my authority as a Judge of this Court, from
and after 15.9.83, upon an appointment other than the appointment granted to
me by the President of the Republic on 15.9.83 ‑ I would have been inclined to
hold that it is entitled to succeed.



_Re removal of judges as set out in Article 107_ (2) and (3) of the
Constitution.



It was submitted that, even if a Judge of the Supreme Court "shall cease to
hold office", the procedure set out in Article 107 (2) and (3) had to be
followed to remove such judge, and that, if such procedure is not followed,
such judge still remained a judge. Article 107 of the Constitution is a
provision which guarantees the independence of the judiciary by assuring
security of tenure , and lays down that a judge is removable only "on the
ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity", and that too only by following
the procedure so laid down. This Article, therefore, provides for the
"removal" of a judge. This is the only way in which a judge, who is in office,
could be removed. Upon being so removed the judge would cease to hold office.
This was the position until the Sixth Amendment brought in paragraph (7) of
Article the operation of the rule mutatis mutandis provides for a situation in
which a judge would "cease to hold office". Such cessation is by operation of
law. It does not call for the intervention of another agency. The law itself
states that, the moment a certain situation arises, it would result in a of
office. It is an automatic result brought about by operation of law.

291



The result is a total deprivation of all the authority which is attached to
such office. It is not merely a case of ceasing to discharge the functions of
the office. Thus the Sixth Amendment provided an additional ground upon which
a judge would cease to hold office ‑ in addition to the cessation brought
about by a removal from office in terms of Article 107. A judge who, by
operation of the Sixth Amendment, has, in law, ceased to hold office, does not
have to be "removed" by the procedure laid down in Article 107\. He has
"removed" himself ; and no further "removal" is required. These two Articles ‑
107 and 157A ‑ are not inconsistent with one another. There is no conflict as
between them. They can both stand together, and work and be worked
harmoniously.



###### Answers to the two questions referred to this Court‑



1\. The proceedings of both 8th and 9th September, 1983 are valid.



2\. The provisions of Article 126(5) of the Constitution ‑ relating to the
period of two months ‑ being imperative, an Order, delivered after the
expiration of the said period will, in law, be invalid.



**ABDUL CADER, J.**



Though the Judges of this Court had taken their oaths under the Sixth
Amendment before themselves in August, they wrote to the President intimating
that fact, but, nevertheless, offering to take the oath before him (the
President) on the 9th, stating that that was the last date within which this
oath can be taken. In this letter, there was no suggestion whatsoever that the
requirement to take the oath before the President was directory.

292



The Deputy Solicitor‑General told us at the hearing that the Attorney‑General
had advised the President that since the oath had not been taken before the
President on or before the 7th, the Judges had ceased to hold office in terms
of Article 165 (1) of the Constitution.



It was in these circumstances that the President decided to re‑appoint the
same Judges on fresh warrants of 15.9.83 and administered the two oaths, one
under Article 107 (4) as on assumption of office and the other in terms of the
Sixth Amendment. Clearly this act was intended to be a fresh appointment on
the basis that we had ceased to hold office for failure to take the Oath in
terms of the Sixth Amendment before the President though we had taken this
oath before ourselves.



When the Chief Justice referred the two matters in issue to the Full Bench, in
respect of the question whether the oath before the President is mandatory or
directory, the task of deciding the basis of our own status came up for
consideration.



It is an unpleasant task to sit as a Judge in my own cause and to discuss the
proprieties of my own conduct.



The Deputy Solicitor‑General raised two preliminary objections:



(1) The Court is precluded from discuss the conduct of the President (Article
35); and



(2) The Judges cannot look behind their fresh appointments and decide whether
they hold appointments in any capacity other than their fresh appointments.



I wish I could have accepted these

293



objections, but the law appears to be otherwise and it has become necessary to
discharge my duty, however unpleasant it be. In doing so, I have attempted to
consider the matters in issue with the utmost objectivity "without fear or
favour, affection or ill‑will."



As regards the first objection, I agree with Sharvananda,J. To hold otherwise
will negate the fundamental concept of the sovereignty of the people.



As regards the second Objection, when the question as regards the mandatory
nature of the oath comes up, whatever time it be, as it is the Supreme Court
that alone is empowered to decide this issue, it is the Judges of this Court
who will he called upon to decide it. While the Deputy Solicitor‑General
conceded that a bench of new Judges can hear this question, he maintained that
we cannot hear it.. Now that the question has been raised at this present
moment, we are the only Judges available to decide this dispute. Therefore,
the capacity in which the Judges hold office gives way to the duty of the
Court to decide the issue. It is the Court that decides it, though it consists
of Judges who hold office on the appointments of the 15th September.



The principal judgments of the Chief Justice and Sharvananda,,J. deal with the
nature of the oath extensively. If will be sufficient if I add the following:



(Craies on Statute Law at pp.266 and 267)



"Where a statute does not consist merely of one enactment, but contains a
number of different provisions regulating the manner in which something is to
be done, it often happens that some of these provisions are to

294



be treated as being directory only, while others are to be considered absolute
and essential; that is to say, some of the provisions may be disregarded
without rendering invalid the thing to be done, but others not. For "there is
a known distinction", as Lord Mansfield said in _R. v Loxdale_ "between
circumstances which are of the essence of a thing required to be done by an,
Act of Parliament and clauses merely directory." In _Bearse v. Morrice_
Taunton J said that he understood "the distinction to be, that a clause is
directory where the provisions contain a mere matter of direction and nothing
more, but not so where they are followed by such words as, that anything done
contrary to these provisions shall null and void to all intents'."



He states as follows at pp. 532 and 534:



Where there is an enactment which may entail penal consequence, you Ought not
to do violence to the language in order to bring ­people within it, but ought
rather to take care that no one is brought within it who is not brought within
it by express language."



"If the words have a natural meaning, that is their meaning and it is not to
be extended by any reasoning based on the substance of the transaction. If the
language of the statute is equivocal and there are two reasonable meanings of
that language, the interpretation which avoids the penalty is to be adopted."



Taking all these into consideration, I agree with the Chief Justice that the
oath to be taken before the President is directory and not mandatory.

295

I agree with the order made by His Lordship the Chief Justice that the two
months provision in Article 126 (5) is directory.



As I have said earlier, the date 9th we gave the President was wrong. This was
done inadvertently as there was absolutely no time to refer to the various
authorities. The date of certification being the 8th August, it was considered
that a calendar month from 9th August (excluding the 8th August which the
Deputy Solicitor‑General conceded was correct computation) would be 9th
September. I now know that the correct last date will be 8th September.
However, this has now no bearing on the question of the nature of the oath.



In the letter of the 9th there was no suggestion whatsoever that the oath was
anything other than mandatory.



A quotation from Hidayatullah,C.J. is apt:



"This Court does not claim to be always right although it does not spare every
effort to be right according to the best of the ability, knowledge and
judgment of the judges. They do not think themselves in possession of all
truth or hold that wherever others differ from them, it is so far error. No
one is more conscious of his limitations and fallibility than a judge but
because of his training and the assistance he gets from learned counsel he is
apt to avoid mistakes more than others..."



**RODRIGO, J.,**



The matters that have arisen for decision in these proceedings relate to the
jurisdictional capacity of this Court to continue the hearing of the
application before us which alleges a breach of certain alleged fundamental
rights of the petitioners

296



on its merits. The application commenced its hearing on 8th Sept. 1983 on a
preliminary matter of law and adjourned at the end of the day to be resumed on
the following day, namely, 9th September, without any premonition of the
"Cassan­dra Crossing" to which it was to be diverted by circumstances
completely extraneous to the application itself.



A copy of the Sixth Amendment to the Constitution that had reached the Judges'
Chambers on 8th September, was discovered by the Bench after 20 minutes of
hearing of the application on 9th September, to require the Judges to take the
prescribed Seventh Schedule oath before His Excellency. They had taken, every
one of them, this ­oath much earlier before fellow Judges, being, unaware of
this particular requirement. The Bench" then adjourned to resume its sittings
at 1 p.m. on, the same day to enable them (and the other Judges to take the
oath before the President in the meantime. This was, however, not to be for
reasons appearing later on. The Bench resumed its sittings, only on 19 Sept.
when it became evident that the deadline of 22 Sept could not be met which was
the last date of the two month period stipulated in the Constitution for the
final disposal of this application. See Art 126(5). So, Counsel for the
petitioners, not" surprisingly, contended that the said stipulation is only
directory and accordingly the Court had jurisdiction to continue to hear the
application and deliver its order after the expiry of the two months' period.
Counsel for the respondents, the Deputy Solicitor‑General (D S.G.) would not
agree. In the upshot, the point became crucial. A subsidiary point questioning
the validity of the proceedings of 20 minutes on. 9th September was also
raised. Both sides agreed that the short proceedings on this day were valid
but each for a different reason and the reason it was that became
controversial. In the result, My Lord

297



the Chief Justice, referred both these points and two others for consideration
by a 9‑Judge Bench. Hence these proceedings.



The 9‑Judge Bench sat on 22 Sept. (which was the deadline specified as stated
earlier) to hear the four preliminary matters of law referred to it for
decision and not to hear the petition on its merits. If the matter of the 2
month period is decided against the petitioners it will finally dispose of
this application without a hearing on its merits. Besides, the other
subsidiary matters raised will not need to be decided for disposing of the
application.



A preliminary objection was taken by the Deputy Solicitor‑General to the Court
hearing submissions from the petitioners' Counsel in support of the reasons
advanced by him for his submission that the proceedings of 9th September were
valid. To understand this contention it is necessary to elaborate what was
foreshadowed earlier as to the nature of the interruption of the proceedings
of 9th September. The 5‑Judge Bench adjourned its sitting in the morning of
9th September intending to resume its sitting at 1 p.m. I have referred to
this earlier. The appointment with the President requested for oath‑taking
before him on 9th September did not materialize, His Excellency being advised
by the Attorney-­General (A/Gen), as it transpired subsequently, that the
Judges were tardy by two days, the last lawful point of time being the
midnight of 7th September. The President by a separate warrant dated 15th
September restored the Judges or so it seems to their office in the morning of
15th September at 9 a.m.



Now this simple act of restoring the Judges to their office is looked at in
opposing ways by the two Counsel. One would think that it did not

298



matter how each looked at it as long as both would agree that the proceedings
of 9th September were valid. For a matter of that the proceedings of both 8th
and 9th September might well have been written off, it being remembered that
the hearing started initially only on 8th September, one day before the 9th
September and the hearing itself was only into submissions of a preliminary
nature. The inquiry whether as a continuation or de novo could not be
completed in the circumstances within the period of the two months prescribed.
Any way, each would stick to his ground and each for a different reason and
the reason now becomes more important than the validity of the proceedings
itself which it had been meant to support. The reason advanced by petitioners'
Counsel which I will set out presently was observed by His Lordship the Chief
Justice to stir up a hornet's nest and the Deputy Solicitor- General would
rather avoid, if he could, that kind of controversy.



The hornet's nest is this. The Sixth Amendment it is argued, states with
reference to Judges of the Supreme Court ( and of the Court of Appeal ) that
if they failed to take the Seventh Schedule oath or coke the affirmation
within a calendar month of the date on which the new Article 157(A) comes into
force before the President they shall cease to hold office, See Art.157(A)(7)
and Art.165 of the Constitution. The "month" mentioned here is understood as a
calendar month. See t­he Interpretation Ordinance s.2(p). Assuming that the
oath taken before the President on 15th September is not an oath taken within
a calendar month specified in the Article, petitioner's Counsel contends that
notwithstanding such non-compliance the judges never ceased to hold office as
they had admittedly taken the oath itself well within time and the requirement
that it should be taken before the President, being only directory, no
forfeiture

299



of office resulted therefrom. To support and develop this contention, it was
rightly feared by the Deputy Solicitor‑General, his opponent would have to
make long and arduous excursions into fields of law covering a wide range and
resurrect facts which he would rather let lie in their graves. Hence his
preliminary objection to stirring up a hornet's nest. The Deputy
Solicitor-­General, would therefore object to any argument that the Judges did
not cease to hold office on 9th September and support his objection on the
prin­cipal ground (he had three grounds of objection) that the Judges were new
appointees deriving their new appointments from the warrants dated 15
September and, they having accepted their new warrants without so much as even
a murmur, are now precluded from reprobating it, asserting or rather adopting
a submission which so asserts, that they continued in office without a break
throughout.



It must be recalled that the whole body of Judges of the two Courts
communicated in writing to the President that they were within time when
seeking to take oath before him on 9th September. The President on receipt of
this communication acted constitutionally by putting it before the Cabinet.
The Cabinet left the matter in the hands of the President. Thus the President
had the authority of the Cabinet to do what he eventually did. He was now
faced with the opinion of the two Courts expressed in the communication
addressed to him.



The President may have accepted this opinion in issuing fresh warrants to the
Judges, to everyone of them, on 15th September. True they Were dated as of
that date. That may be as a true record of the event, and may not have been
meant to break the continuity in office of the Judges. Be that as it may. We
now know that 9th September was too late by one day, the calendar month
reckoned from 8th

300



August ending as it does in law on 8th September midnight. See _Kunasingham v.
Ponnambalam_ (30), _Dod v. walker_ (8). We are however not unanimous in this
view. Therefore the question whether it was mandatory to take the oath before
the President becomes crucial on this aspect of the case. It was the easiest
thing for the Draftsman to have add just another line at the end of each
paragraph (a) and (b) of s.7 of Art.157 (A) of the Sixth Amendment to say that
"where such oath or affirmation is not taken, such officer shall cease to hold
office." Instead, a "mutatis mutandis" provision is introduced at the end of
the two paragraphs making the limits of the effect to be given to them
uncertain and controversial. See _Touriel v. Internal Affairs Southern
Rhodesia_ (27). What is applied to the two paragraphs is Art.165. This Article
is a transitional provision in the Constitution and when once its transit was
over it was meant to be ineffectual and dead. It at no time applied to Judges
of the Superior Courts. That this is so becomes abundantly clear from
Art.165(2) as it is the Minister of Public Administration that can exercise
his discretion in excusing non-compliance and the Minister is not the proper
authority to exercise his discretion in respect of Judges of Superior Courts.
I am of the view however that the proviso to the two paragraphs (a) and (b) of
Art. 157(A) makes a difference in so far as it seeks to apply Art. 165 to
Judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal. "Mutatis mutandis" means
"with necessary alterations in point detail". See Wharton's Law Lexicon. It
may be still more different if what is made applicable is Art, 157(A)(7) to
Art.165, assuming Art.165 was a permanent provision. When a transitional
provision has served its purpose it ceases to exist. It is no longer a living
provision of law in Constitution. In effect it is like a repealed statute or
law. But an enactment cannot seek to revive a provision of a repealed law

301



 mutatis _mutandis_ or otherwise to one of its provisions. However, neither
side rested his submission on that basis and, I will, therefore leave it out
of account. So I will look at this problem in the way it was put: Art.165(1)
speaks of a judicial officer who fails to,



(a)   take the oath  


(b)   within a time and,  


(c)   losing office.





There is no reference to the person before whom it is to be taken in this
Article. The opening words are it every............judicial
officer..........as is required by the Constitution to take the oath". It is
significant that it does not say " to take the oath as required by the
Constitution". But Art.165, is made applicable to such a person holding office
on the date of coming into force of this Article (157(A)) ‑ , _who must_ make
the oath in the form set out in the Seventh Schedule before such
person..............as is referred to in that Article.



The person to whom Art.165 is to be applied is given namely, a person who has
failed to take the oath as required by the paragraph 7(a)(b) of Art.157(A).
What then is the detail in Art.165 that has to be applied to this person who
has failed to take the oath as required in the paragraph.? What is the
requirement in the paragraph? That is that he should take the oath ( where he
is a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Court of Appeal ‑ Art.107) before the
President. Given then that the person has not met the requirement the only
detail is the one relating to the penalty prescribed under Art.165. That
penalty is forfeiture of office.



The "test to be applied for the purpose of ascertaining in any particular case
what are "mutanda" is "necessity" or "fitness". I think the answer to

302



this question must be that "necessity" is the test and that considerations of
"fitness" are not sufficient to justify a change ... unless they are so cogent
as to establish "necessity". See the case _Touriel_ referred to. It is said
again that " it is an elementary rule of construction of statutes that the
judicature in their interpretation have to discover and act upon the _mens or
sententia legis._ Normally Courts do not look beyond the _litera legis._ See
_Motilal v. Commissioner of Income Tax_ (4) When we examine the _sententia
legis_ of the proviso and indeed of the Sixth Amendment, it does seem so
obvious that the legislature intended to penalise persons who did not take the
Seventh Schedule oath in the time prescribed and this when coupled with the
proviso containing the _mutatis mutandis_ clause brings in the _litera legis_
element unavoidably making it unnecessary to do anything more than to give
effect to what the words plainly say. In the result I reached the view that
the Judges ceased to hold office on 9th September.



In view of the opinion I have already reached as stated, it is a futile
exercise, though argued at length, to consider the position arising from the
D.S.G.'s submission that the oaths already taken by judges before fellow
judges who are exofficio J.Ps are also not valid since J.Ps (Justices of
Peace) do not administer constitutional oaths or that arising from the
submission that the judges are estopped from considering their status on 9th
September by their conduct in accepting warrants of appointment dated 15th
September.



There is still to be considered the two months requirement specified in Art.
126. It is said on behalf of the petitioners that this is only a directory
provision and that it must necessarily be so firstly because no sanction is
prescribed for non-compliance and secondly the legislature could

303



not have been so unreasonable as to visit a Petitioner with the extreme
penalty of no‑relief if relief is not obtained within the two months for no
fault of his where his application has not been disposed of within the said
period owing to the conduct of the Court over which he has no control and, as
in this instance, over which even the Court had no control. What has happened
on this occasion is said to be a classic illustration of the need for
flexibility in the application of this pro­vision.



Art. 126 appears in a Chapter (Chap. XVI) that contains Article 121, 122, 125
and 129 each of which stipulates time limits for the thing specified therein
to be done. Art, 121 requires the President or a citizen to invoke the
jurisdiction off the Supreme Court, if he is so minded, within one week of a
Bill placed on the Order Paper of , the parliament and the Supreme Court is
required to make and communicate its determination on such reference within 3
weeks of the making of the reference. Art. 122 requires the Supreme Court to
make and communicate its decision within 24 hours or such longer period not
exceeding three days as the President may specify on an urgent Bill referred
to it for determination. Art. 125 provides for determination by the Supreme
Court of any question of a constitutional nature referred to it by any
judicial tribunal within two months of the date of reference. Art. 129(l)
states that the Supreme Court shall give its opinion on any matter of public
importance, be it a matter of law or fact, referred to it by the President for
its Opinion within the time specified by him in such reference. In all these
cases the Attorney‑General is required to be noticed and heard; what is more,
party to any proceeding under any of these sections is also given the right to
be heard either in person or by an Attorney‑at‑Law. What is still more
noticeable is that any other person who is

304



neither a party nor the Attorney‑General also may have the right in the
discretion of the Court to be heard in person or by his legal representative.
If the time limits specified in the said sections are mandatory and are meant
to be strictly obeyed them... so are the requirements that the various persons
and parties referred to must also be heard.



These are weighty considerations. As against this, I cannot ignore the feel,
as it were, of the provisions in the Chapter on Fundamental rights that the
legislature was so obsessed with a passion to protect and safeguard the
fundamental rights of the citizens of this country, that it was basic to their
thinking that relief delayed and not given within the time stipulated is no
relief at all to the extent of making it an article of faith that the Courts
will find a way of giving relief within the specified time. This is the first
time that the Court was not able to meet the deadline through fortuitous
circumstances and a philosophical way of looking at it is that one or two may
fall by the wayside but the procession will continue .



I am accordingly of the view that the time limit of two months specified in
Art. 126 is mandatory and we have no jurisdiction to entertain this
application any longer.



Preliminary objections overruled.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/9.html_  

