##  Senerath, P.M. v. Mahadevan, V. - SLR - 417, Vol 1 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 9;
(1982) 1 Sri LR 417 (18 May 1982)

# 417

_  _

#### SUPREME COURT

####  

#### P.M. Senerath

**vs.**

**V. Mahadevan**

_ _

S.C. Appeal No. 16/81 ‑ CA (LA) 2/81 (SC) ‑ CA Appeal 433/79 ‑ M. C.
Maligahakande No 54532 with CA Application No. 2178/80



S.4 Brothels Ordinance ‑ Section 22(l) Rent Act ‑ Availability of  rights
under either Section to evict tenant for use of  premises for immoral purposes
‑ election



A was convicted in the Magistrate's Court for running a brothel and fined Rs.
200/‑ under the Brothels Ordinance. The landlord of the premises where the
brothel was run filed a petition in the Magistrates' Court praying for an
order of ejectment of the tenant in terms of Section 4 of the Brothel's
Ordinance. The Magistrate ordered eviction. On appeal the Court of Appeal
affirmed the Magistrate's Order.



Appellant appealed to the Supreme Court on the grounds that Section 22(l) of
the Rent Act prohibited the bringing of an action for ejectment under any
other law.



_Held_ that Section 22(1)d of the Rent Act preserves the common law right of
ejectment for use of premises for immoral purposes and consequently it was
open to the landlord **either to resort to a civil action under Section 22(1)d
of the Rent Act or invoke the** powers of the Magistrate under Section 4 of
the Brothels Ordinance.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



Before: **              **Samarakoon, Q.C., C.J.,

Wanasundera, J., and

Ratwatte, J.

Counsel: **            **_A. A de Silva_ with _S.A. Dassanayake_

and _P. Samararatne_ for Appellant.

_K. N. Choksy, S.A.,_ with _J. Joseph_ and

_Miss R. Rajapakse_ instructed by

_A. Srinivasan_ for Respondent.

Argued on: **        **18th May, 1982.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**  **

Decided on: **       **25.5.82



**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**



The Appellant was convicted in case No. 36251 of the Magistrate's Court of
Maligakanda on a charge of running a brothel at premises



# 418



No. 108/1, Rosmead Place, Colombo 7, and fined Rs. 200/‑. On the date of
offence the Appellant was the contractual tenant of the premises under the
Respondent, who was the owner of the premises. On the 16th December, 1976, the
Respondent filed petition in the Magistrate's Court of Maligakanda praying for
an order of ejectment of the Appellant from the said premises in terms of
section 4 of the Brothels Ordinance (Chapter 31). The Respondent pleaded inter
alia the conviction of the Appellant in the said case No. 36251 for an offence
under the Brothels Ordinance. After inquiry the Magistrate ordered the
eviction of the Appellant from the said premises. The Appellant then
unsuccessfully appealed to the Court of Appeal. He has now appealed to this
Court with the leave of the Court of Appeal.



Before I deal with the main contention of Counsel for the Appellant I should
like to dispose of two other arguments of Counsel. He contends that this being
an application made under section 4 of Chapter 31, the Respondent was obliged
in law to make an application to the Magistrate in the same case upon the
conviction being entered. He seemed to suggest that this must be done at the
time the conviction is entered of record because of the use of words "upon
conviction" in section 4. Section 4 reads thus:



"4(1) Upon the conviction of the tenant, lessee, or occupier of any premises
of any offence under this Ordinance, it shall be lawful for the court, on the
application either of the prosecuting party, or of the owner, or lessor, or,
if it so thinks fit, of its own motion, to declare that the tenancy or
occupation of the said premises under the lease or agreement under which the
same are held or occupied shall be terminated from such date and subject to
such conditions as may be defined in the order of the court, and may by the
same or a further order direct that the possession of the said premises shall
be delivered to any person entitled to the possession thereof as from any date
specified in the order.



(2) In the event of any owner or lessor of any premises failing to exercise
his right of application to the court under this section, and of the tenant,
lessee, or occupier so convicted being subsequently convicted of an offence
under this Ordinance in respect of the same premises, such landlord or lessor
shall be deemed to have knowingly abetted the said offences, and



# 419



shall be liable to be prosecuted and punished accordingly, unless he proves
that he had taken all reasonable steps to prevent the recurrence of the
offence."



I am unable to accede to this argument. The words "upon conviction" in the
context only means "Following a conviction". Thereafter the remedy provided by
this section becomes available. Furthermore it must be noted that the parties
to the prosecution were the Officer‑in‑Charge of the Vice Squad, Cinnamon
Gardens Police Station and the Appellant. The Respondent was not a party to
proceedings and therefore could not have made any application at the time of
conviction. He may not have been aware of the conviction at the time it was
entered. Section 4(1) is an empowering section giving the Magistrate power to
order eviction of an accused convicted of an offence under this Ordinance. The
Magistrate could act _ex mero motu_ or on the application of the prosecution
or later on the application of the landlord. It does not require that the
application should be filed in the record of the case in which the conviction
was recorded. It can very well be a separate application though I find that
the application tendered by the Respondent to the Magistrate's Court purported
to be and was intended to be filed and heard in the very same case. The Court
appears to have given it a separate number and heard it as a separate case
which it was entitled to do. Counsel for Appellant also complained that the
application was made by the Respondent after the lapse of over 11 months. The
Ordinance does not impose a time limit and this contention also fails.



The main contention of the Appellant was that in view of the provisions of
section 22 of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1971 an order of eviction under the
provisions of section 4(1) of the Brothels Ordinance was bad in law and
illegal. He drew our attention to the fact that the Rent Act was the later
Act. The relevant parts of section 22(1) and (d) read as follows:‑



22 (1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law, no action or proceedings for
the ejectment of the tenant of any premises the standard rent (determined
under section 4) of which for a month does not exceed one hundred rupees shall
be instituted in or entertained by any court, unless where ‑

           

....................................................

....................................................

....................................................

....................................................

**420**



(d) the tenant or any person residing or lodging with him or being his
subtenant has, in the opinion of the court, been guilty of conduct which is
nuisance to adjoining occupiers or has been convicted of using the premises
for an immoral or illegal purpose, or the condition of the premises has, in
the opinion of the court, deteriorated owing to acts committed by or to the
neglect or default of the tenant or any such person."



Section 22(1) is a general provision which has the effect of wiping out all
common law and statutory rights of action which were then available to a
landlord for the ejectment of his tenant. Four exceptions to the general rule
are set out in sub‑sections 1(a), 1 (b), 1(c) and 1(d) of that section which
preserve the landlord's common law fight of action in ejectment. In particular
sub‑section 1(d) preserves the common law right of a landlord to maintain an
action in ejectment when the tenant has been convicted of using the premises
for an immoral purpose. In other words the prohibition contained in the
provisions of section 22(1) is not applicable in a case of immoral usage of
premises. In the result not only common law rights but any statutory provision
providing for the ejectment of such a tenant will not be covered by the
provisions of section 22(1) of the Rent Act. The provisions of section 4(1) of
the Brothels Ordinance and the power given by it to eject upon conviction was
one that has stood since 1919 along with the common law right of action. These
provisions of section 4 are not affected or nullified by the words
"notwithstanding anything in any other law" in section 22(1) of the Rent Act.
In the result it was open to the Respondent either to resort to a civil action
under the Common Law taking advantage of the provisions of section 22(1)(d) of
the Rent Act or else to invoke the powers of the Magistrate under the
provisions of section 4 of the Brothels Ordinance. He has chosen  the latter
which in the circumstances is certainly the  speedier and wiser course.



I therefore dismiss the appeal with costs.



**WANASUNDERA, J**. ‑ I agree.



**RATWATTE, J.** ‑ I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/9.html_  

