##  Wadigamangawe and Others v. Wimalasuriya - SLR - 287, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981]
LKSC 9; (1981) 1 Sri LR 287 (13 July 1981)

**287**

**WADIGAMANGAWA AND OTHERS  
 v.  
 WIMALASURIYA**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAKOON C. J., ISMAIL L J.,  
WEERARATNE J., SHARVANANDA J.,  
WANASUNDERA J., WIMALARATNE J.,  
RATWATTE J.  
S. C- ELECTION PETITION  
APPEALS 1/81 to 3/81  
JUNE 1, 2 and 3, 1981.  
**  
_Election Petition-Security -Does appeal from interlocutory order lie ?
Section 82A(1)(b) and 101(2) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in
Council - Special leave to appeal - Article 128(2), 127 and 130 of the
Constitution  
_  
The questions being (1) whether an appeal from an order of the Election Judge
overruling an objection to security would be governed by Section 82A (1 )(b)
of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council or Articles 128, 127
and 130 of the Constitution (2) whether the procedure to be followed in
appealing is to be found in the provisions of the Order in Councilor in
Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution -  
  
**Held  
**  
An election case is a civil matter or proceeding in which the civil appellate
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court could be invoked. Article 130(b) of the
Constitution has superseded Section 82A (1) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order in Council 1946 in regard to the scope of the right of appeal
in election petition cases and the jurisdiction vested in the Supreme Court
under Article 130(b) of the Constitution does not suffer from the limitations
imposed by s.82A(1) of the Order in Council. Jurisdiction in respect of
election petitions dealt with in Article 130 is thus referable to Article
118(e) and is in the nature of a special jurisdiction.  
  
Article 130 gives a right of appeal from an order or judgment of the Court of
Appeal in an election petition. The word 'order' is an appropriate term for
interlocutory orders and is used in Article 130 unqualified and without any
limitations and is much wider in scope than s. 82A of the Order` in Council.
The present matter involves a question of law and could have, had the effect
of finally disposing of the election petition if the objection had been
upheld. The present case falls within the provisions of Article 130(b) of the
Constitution. This Article does not contain the limitations found in s.
82A(1)(b) of the Order in Council.  
  
Held further (Samarakoon C. J: Weeraratne J. and Sharvananda J. dissenting) on
the question of procedure (in contradistinction to appellate jurisdiction
itself), sections 82A, 82B and 82C of the Order in Council continue to apply
rather than Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution and as the appeals were
not preferred under section s. 82A(2) which is the only mode of access to the
Supreme Court the appeals have to be rejected.

**288**

**Cases referred to**  
  
_(1) Minister of Home Affairs v. Fisher_ [1973] All. E. R. 21, 26  
  
_(2) In re Goonesingha_ (1942) 44 NLR 75  
  
_(3) Rao v. Baskararao_ A I R 1964 AP 185 ..  
  
_(4) Senanayake v. Navaratne_ (1954) ,56 NLR 5  
  
_(5) De Silva v. Senanayake_ (1972)75 NLR 265  
  
_(6) De Silva v. Attorney-General_ (1949) 50 NLR 481  
  
_(7) Pilapitiya v. Muttettuwegama_ S. C. Application No. 15 of 1979, SC.
Minutes of 25.5 1979  
  
_(8) Ramalingam v. Kumarasamy_ (1953) 55 NL R 145  
  
_(9) Dissanayake v. Abeysinghe_ (1972) 75 NLR 12  
  
**_APPEALS_** from the orders of the Court of Appeal in Election Petitions
1/81, 2/81 and 3/81 ,  
  
_K. N. Choksy with V. Basnayake, H. Jayamaha, S. Ruthramoorthy, R. Perera, S.
Peiris and A. Kasturiaratchi_ for 1st respondent-petitioner in Appeal No. 1/81
who is 1st respondent-respondent in Appeals. Nos.2/81 and 3/81.  
  
_N. Satyendra with D. Pelpola and P. Sunderalingam_ for 2nd and 3rd respondent
- respondents in Appeal No. 1/81 who are respectively 2nd respondent-
petitioner in Appeal No. 2/81 and 3rd respondent -petitioner in Appeal No.
3181  
  
_K. Shanmugalingam with L. B. R. Fernando and G. Dayasiri_ for petitioner-
respondent:

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 13, 1981  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.**  
  
This is a matter that arises out of an Election Petition filed in the Court of
Appeal, A bye-election was held of 7th May, 1980, to . elect a member of
Parliament for the Electoral District No. 104 - Anamaduwa- At the said bye-
election the. 1st Respondent Petitioner hereinafter referred to as. 1st
Respondent) was declared elected. That election was challenged in the Court of
Appeal in these proceedings by the Respondent-Petitioner (hereinafter referred
to as the Petitioner) on various charges. Charges were also laid against the
2nd and 3rd Respondent-Respondents (hereinafter referred to as 2nd and 3rd
Respondent respectively). At the hearing before the Court of Appeal the
Respondent took objection to the sufficiency of the security deposited by the
Petitioner. The details of such objection d re not relevant for the present
inquiry. Suffice. it to state that the Court of Appeal held that the security
deposited by the Petitioner was sufficient in law. The 1st Respondent appeals
to this Court from that decision. The 2nd and 3rd Respondents support the
contention of the .1st Respondent. The Petitioner has by way of a preliminary
objection challenged the right of the 1st Respondent to appeal from the order
and the right of this Court to hear and determine an appeal on an
interlocutory

**289**

 order. Counsel for the Petitioner contends that the provisions of section
82(1) (b) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council (Chapter
381) do not pen-nit such an appeal. Counsel for the 1st Respondent and Counsel
for the 2nd and 3rd Respondents both contend that the provisions of the
Constitution which govern this appeal permit the appeal. It is necessary
therefore to decide which of the provisions referred to, apply to this appeal.  
  
The provisions of the Order in Council 1946 as amended by Act No. 19 of 1948
(Chapter 381) permitted appeals in election petitions to the Supreme Court
constituted under the Courts Ordinance (Chapter 2). The petition itself was
heard by a single Judge of the Supreme Court who was nominated by the Chief.
Justice (and referred to as 'Election Judge') and an appeal. lay to the
Supreme Court in terms of section 82A. The Administration of Justice Law No.
44 of 1973 which came into operation in 1973 vested the jurisdiction to hear
and determine election petitions in the High Court. (Vide section 22
Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973). Appeals from the decision of
the High Court continued to be filed in terms of section 82A of the Order in
Council in the Supreme Court which by then had been constituted under the
Administration of Justice Law. That Supreme Court was abolished by the
provisions of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution). The Constitution
vested jurisdiction to hear Election Petitions in a newly created Court of
Appeal. The President of the Court of Appeal nominated the Election Judge to
hear a particular petition. The Supreme Court created under the Administration
of Justice Law ceased to exist and a new Supreme Court came into being under
the Constitution. The Application for special leave to appeal has been filed
in this case in terms of Article 128(2) of the Constitution'. Counsel for the
Petitioner contends that this Article is not applicable to this election
petition and that the provisions of section 82A of the Order in Council must
be observed.  
  
Section 82A (1) and (5) of the Order in Council read as follows:  
  
"82A (1) An appeal to the Supreme Court shall lie on any question of law, but
not otherwise, against  
  
(a) the determination of an Election Judge under section 81, or  
  
(b) any other decision of an Election Judge which, has the effect of finally
disposing of an election petition.

**290**

(5) Every appeal under this section shall be heard by three Judges of the
Supreme Court and shall, as far as practicable, be given priority over other
business of that court. The court may give all such directions as it may
consider necessary in relation to the. hearing and disposal of each appeal."  
  
It is clear from these provisions that-  
  
(a) an: appeal lies only on a question of law,  
  
(b) on a determination under section 81 (which is a final order),  
  
and (c) on any other decision which has the effect of finally disposing of the
Election Petition.  
  
It is also clear that the decision now appealed from is neither one under
section 81 nor a decision, which finally disposes of the petition. If, section
82A applies this appeal must be dismissed. Counsel for 1st Respondent,
supported by Counsel for the other Respondents, contends that Article 128(2),
127 and 130 of the Constitution govern the matter and therefore the appeal is
properly made and constituted in law. Article 128 reads as follows:  
  
"128 (1) An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court from any final order,
judgment, decree or sentence of the Court of Appeal in any matter or
proceedings, whether civil or criminal, which involves a substantial question
of law, if the Court of Appeal grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex
mero motu or at the instance of any aggrieved party to such matter or
proceedings;  
  
(2} The Supreme Court may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal to
the Supreme Court from any final or interlocutory order, judgment, decree, or
sentence made by the Court of Appeal in any matter or proceedings, whether
civil or criminal, where the Court of Appeal has refused to grant leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court, or where in the opinion of the Supreme Court, the
case or matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court  
  
Provided that the Supreme Court shall grant leave to appeal in every matter or
proceedings in which it is satisfied that the question to be decided is of
public or general importance."

**291**

Article 130 which confers appellate jurisdiction on the Supreme Court in
Election Petitions reads as follows:  
  
"130\. The Supreme Court shall have the power to hear and determine and make
such orders as provided for by law on:  
  
(a) any legal proceeding relating to the election of the President;  
  
(b) any appeal from an order or judgment of the Court of Appeal in an election
petition case.  
  
Provided that the hearing and determination of a proceeding relating to the
election of the President shall be by at least five Judges of the Supreme
Court of whom, unless he otherwise directs, the Chief Justice shall be one."  
  
This follows Article 118(e) which confers a general jurisdiction in the
Supreme Court in election petitions. Which, then, is the enactment that
prevails-the Order in Council or the Constitution?  
  
Article 101 of the Constitution empowers Parliament to make provision in
respect of elections. They are specified in Article 101 (1) (a) to (b).
Article 101 (1) (i) reads as follows:  
  
(i) the manner of determination of disputed elections and such other matters
as are necessary or incidental to the election of Members of Parliament."  
  
This permits rules to be made for the hearing and final disposal of Election
Petitions. Article 101(2) makes provision for the interim period as follows:  
  
"101(2.) Until Parliament by law makes provision for such matters, the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946 as amended from time to time,
shall, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, mutatis mutandis,
apply."  
  
Counsel for 2nd and 3rd Respondents laid great stress on the words "subject to
the provisions of the Constitution." It is therefore clear from this sub-
section that until Parliament expressly makes provision for such matters as
are set out in Article 101(1) the provisions of the Order in Council must be
read, with the necessary alterations, so as to make it workable and have legal
effect. This Article must be read. together with Article 169(2) which reads as
follows:

**292**

"169(2) the Supreme Court established by the Administration of Justice Law,
No. 44 of 1973, shall, on the commencement of the Constitution, cease to
exist, and accordingly the provisions of that Law relating to the
establishment of the said Supreme Court, hall be deemed to-have been repealed.  
  
 Unless otherwise provided in the Constitution, every reference in any
existing written law to the 'Supreme Court shall be deemed to be a reference
to the Court of Appeal."  
  
We are then faced with an apparent difficulty. Whereas it is possible to read
"Court of Appeal" instead of "Supreme Court" in section 79 and- section 82 it
is impossible to read "Court of Appeal" in section 82A, section 8213, section
82C and in section 82D for the simple reason that appeal is permissible under
Article 130 of the Constitution only to the Supreme Court created by the
Constitution. Counsel for the Petitioner who contended for section 82A of the
Order in Council continuing intact argued that the provisions of Article
169(2) by including the words "unless otherwise provided in the Constitution"
saved the operative effect of section 82A of the Order in Council because the
Constitution itself by Article 130 conferred such jurisdiction on the Supreme
Court created by it. Counsel for the 1st Respondent contended that the
provisions of Article 130 impliedly repealed section 82A. He stated that
section 82A "goes out of the law" and that it has now "no place in law. In its
place is Article 130." Counsel for the 2nd and 3rd Respondents did not go to
that extent. He said that section 82A must be read subject to the
Constitution.  
  
In considering this matter one must be mindful of the fact that the Court of
Appeal and the Supreme Court are both new Courts created by the Constitution.
The Supreme Court that hitherto existed ceased to exist. New jurisdictions
have been conferred on each of them with the primary object of affording a
litigant the choice of a second appeal to the Supreme Court. The Court of
Appeal has not been granted power to entertain appeals from the judgments of
its own Judges. One cannot therefore read "Court of Appeal" instead of
"Supreme Court" in section 82A of the Order in Council. Furthermore appellate
jurisdiction in election cases which is conferred only on the Supreme Court by
the provisions of Article 130 of the Constitution is entirely different to the
jurisdiction conferred by section 82A of the Order in Council. In its original
form section 82A is at complete variance with the Constitution. Section
82A(1)(b) permits an appeal from any decision of an Election Judge (other than
that referred to in section 81)

**293**

 only if that decision finally disposes of the petition. This appeal is not
from a decision of that kind. The Constitution has made the Supreme Court the
final Appellate Court (Article 118(c)) and it is the final Court of Civil and
Criminal appellate jurisdiction in the Republic (Article 127(1)). It has sole
and exclusive cognisance by way of appeal "from any order judgment, decree or
sentence made by the Court of Appeal" (Article 127(2)). Whereas section 82A
permits an appeal only from an order finally disposing of an Election
Petition, Article 127(2) grants a right of appeal, inter alia, from any order.
Interlocutory orders are therefore appeasable in terms of Article 127(2):
There is another fundamental and vital difference. Section 82A of the Order in
Council grants a right of appeal direct to the Supreme Court. The Constitution
has prescribed the converse \- it is indirect. An appeal lies from a final
order, judgment' decree or sentence of the Court of Appeal only if that Court
grants leave to appeal to the Supreme Court (Article 128 (1)), or else, where
the Court of Appeal has refused to grant such leave the Supreme Court may
grant special leave to appeal (Article 128(2)). Article 128(2) refers
expressly to an interlocutory order as well, a type of order not referred to
in Article 128(1). It is clear therefore that the Constitution took away and
did not countenance a direct right of appeal to the Supreme Court. That this
was deliberate necessarily stems from the fact that the Constitution sought to
make available a second right of appeal where none existed under the law
existing at the time of enactment of the Constitution. This. contention is
fortified by the fact that Article 128(4) makes provision for a right of
direct appeal to the Supreme Court in the future. It reads thus -  
  
"128(4) An appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court on any matter and in
the manner specifically provided for by any other law passed by Parliament."  
  
Such legislation has now been passed by Parliament (Vide section 102 of
Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981). It seems to me that in this
confrontation the Constitution must prevail. As was stated by Lord Wilberforce
in Minister of Home Affairs v. Fisher (1973) (3 A.E.R. 21 at 26)(1) a
Constitution is a document sui generis "calling for principles of
interpretation of its own, suitable to its character ... . ., without
necessary acceptance of all the presumptions that are relevant to legislation
of private law." One of the salient facts is that this Constitution sought to
efface the existing structure with regard .to appeals and created in its stead
a new one by the creation of two different Courts and at the same time
.removing altogether a direct right of appeal to the Supreme Court. There is
also the admonition contained in Article 101(2) that the provisions of the
Order in Council must be read

**294**

subject to the Constitution. The Constitution is the "Supreme Law of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka" (Vide preamble to the
Constitution). That supremacy cannot tolerate confrontation by subordinate
legislation. Such legislation if not in harmony with the Constitution must
necessarily give way to the Constitution. Section 82A of the Order in Council
and the Constitution cannot stand together. The only appellate jurisdiction in
Election cases existing at the relevant time was that conferred on the Supreme
Court by Article 130 of the Constitution. The manner of exercising that
jurisdiction was set out by Article 128 of the Constitution. One cannot accept
the former and disregard the latter:  
  
Counsel for the Petitioner contended that the provisions. of the Constitution
were not applicable to an appeal in an Election Petition because an election
case was not a civil matter within the meaning of Article 127 or Article 128.
Article 128 refers to a right of appeal from any final order etc. in any
matter or proceedings "whether civil or criminal." It seems to me to grant
power in the widest possible terms by the use of the words "any matter or
proceedings." Where there is a final order, judgment, decree or sentence of
the Court of Appeal an appeal lies to the Supreme Court. Its object is to
permit an aggrieved party the right to canvas any determination of the Court
of Appeal of the kind referred to provided it is done in the manner set out it
that Article. As l see it the words "whether civil or criminal" are
parenthetical, are not intended to be an exhaustive 'enumeration, and cannot
therefore detract from the plenitude of power given by that Article. For the
purposes of the appeals (Privy Council) Ordinance (Chapter 85) an application
to the Supreme Court for a Writ of Certiorari to quash the order of an
election Judge. was held to be a civil suit or action within the meaning of
section 3 of the Ordinance. The Supreme Court called in aid the definition of
"action" in section 3 and section 6 of the Civil Procedure Code (Chapter 86).
In re Goonesinha (44 N.L.R. 75)(2). The words used in the Constitution are
'"civil matter or proceeding." These are of wider import than "civil suit or
action." In terms of section 81 the Election Judge has to determine whether
the 1st Respondent was duly returned or whether his election was void. The
right to be elected, like the right to vote, is a right of a civil nature and
the judgment in an election case decides the rights of parties derived. from
the Constitution. Vide Rap v. Bhaskararao (1964 A.I.R. .185 A. P.)(3). The
Election Judge is not deciding criminal liability. In fact the Order in
Council requires a prosecution to be launched for any alleged offence,
disclosed at the hearing of, an election case, and that can only be done with
the sanction of the Attorney-General.

**295**

I am of the opinion that an election case is a civil matter or proceeding in
which the civil appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court could be invoked.  
  
I overrule the objection taken by the Petitioner and hold that the 1st
Respondent's appeal is properly constituted and therefore maintainable in this
Court. The Respondents will be entitled to the costs of this inquiry.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J. - I** agree.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
I agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice.  
  
Since the interpretation of certain provisions of the Constitution is involved
in the question to he decided, I am setting down below my own judgment on the
matters in issue.  
  
The 1st respondent-petitioner contested the Anamaduwa seat in Parliament at
the bye-election held on the 7th of May 1980 and was declared to be elected by
a majority of 1787 votes to represent the Electoral District of Anamaduwa in
Parliament.  
  
The petitioner-respondent presented an election petition in the Court of
Appeal challenging the validity of the said bye-election and the election of
the petitioner to the said seat on several grounds et out in his petition. A
sum of Rs. 25,000/-was tendered on behalf of the petitioner-respondent as
security for the payment of all costs, charges and expenses that may become
payable by him. The 1st respondent-petitioner filed a statement objecting to
the petition being entertained by the Court of Appeal and praying for its
dismissal in limine on the grounds that -  
  
(a) the said petition had not been filed within the prescribed time; and  
  
(b) the security furnished was. insufficient in terms of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council 1946 and the rules made there
under.  
  
The 2nd and 3rd respondents were also made parties to his petition by the-
petitioner-respondent. They also filed statements of objection on the same
grounds.

**296**

By its order dated 8th October 1980, the Court of Appeal rejected the
preliminary objections and held that the said petition had been filed within
time and that the security that had been furnished was adequate.  
  
The 1st respondent-petitioner and the 2nd and 3rd respondents each filed
applications for special leave under Article 128(2) of the Constitution to
appeal to the Supreme Court from the said order of the Court of Appeal dated
8th October 1980. By its order dated 21st January 1981, this Court granted
special leave to appeal, but reserved to the petitioner-respondent the right
to raise any preliminary objection to the jurisdiction of this Court to hear
the appeal from the aforesaid order made by the Court of Appeal dated 8th
October 1980.  
  
When, in pursuance of the leave granted by this Court, the 1st respondent-
petitioner's appeal came up for hearing on 1st June 1981, Counsel for the
petitioner-respondent raised a preliminary objection to the hearing of the
appeal by this Court on the ground that Article 130 of the Constitution does
not enable this Court to entertain and hear this appeal, as the order appealed
from was not an order from which an appeal lay to the Supreme Court under
section 82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in Council 1946\.
According to him, under Article 130 the Supreme Court had the power to hear
and determine only an appeal from an order or judgment of the Court of Appeal
as specified in section 82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in
Council 1946, and since the said section 82A provided only for an appeal on a
question of law against the decision of an Election. Judge which had the
effect of finally disposing of an election. petition, no appeal lay to this
Court from the order made by the Court of Appeal in this case, as the said
order did not have the effect of finally disposing of the election petition.
The burden of his argument was that the jurisdiction of this Court to hear
appeals in election petitions was confined to the determination or a decision
referred to in the said section 82A and that Article 130 of the Constitution
did not enlarge that jurisdiction.  
  
The preliminary objection raised by Counsel for the petitioner-respondent
involves consideration of certain sections of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council 1946 (herein after referred to by the number of
the section) and certain Articles of the Constitution of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka- hereinafter referred to by the number of the
Article).

**297**

Section 82A provides as follows:  
  
"(1) An appeal to the Supreme Court shall :lie on any question of law, but not
otherwise against -  
  
(a) the determination of an Election Judge under section 81, or  
  
(b) any other decision of an Election Judge which has the effect of finally
disposing of an election petition.  
  
(2) Any such appeal may be preferred either by the petitioner or by the:
respondent in the election petition before the expiry of a period of one month
next preceding the date of the determination or decision against which the
appeal is preferred.  
  
(5) Every appeal under this section shall be heard by three Judges of the
Supreme Court."  
  
Section 82B(5) declares that the decision of :the Supreme Court on any appeal
shall be final and conclusive.  
  
Article 101(1) provides for Parliament making provision in respect of
elections, including, inter alia, the manner of determination of disputed
elections and such other matters as are necessary or incidental to the
election of Members of Parliament.  
  
Article 101(2) states that "until Parliament bylaw makes provision for such,
matters, the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in  Council 1946 as
amended from. time to time shall, _subject to the provisions of the
Constitution, mutatis mutandis,_ apply.  
  
Article 169(2) reads as follows:  
  
"The Supreme Court established under the Administration of Justice Law, No.
44. of 1973, shall, on the commencement of the Constitution,. cease to exist.
: .. Unless otherwise provided in the Constitution, every reference in any
existing written law to the Supreme Court shall, be deemed to be a reference
to the Court of Appeal." \-  
  
Thus, when sections 82A and 82B are read with Article 169, 'Court. of Appeal'
has to. be substituted for the 'Supreme Court' in the said sections 82A and
82B, and it would appear that the appellate jurisdiction that was vested in
the outgoing Supreme Court stands transferred to the present Court. of Appeal.
But, according to the scheme of the Constitution, the appellate jurisdiction

**298**

of the Court of Appeal is confined only to the correction by way of appeal of
all errors committed by a court of first instance (vide Art. ;138) and does
not extend to the correction of any error: committed by itself when trying
election petitions under Article 144\. Article 130 has vested the Supreme
Court with the appellant jurisdiction in election petitions.  
  
Article 118 spells the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. It states that the
Supreme Court shall be the highest and final superior court of record in the
Republic and shall, subject to the provisions of the Constitution,, exercise,
inter alia, final appellate jurisdiction and jurisdiction in election
petitions. Articles 127 and 128 deals with the appellate jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court. Article 130 sets out the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
election petitions. It states: "The Supreme Court shall have the power to hear
and determine and make such orders, as provided for by law on -  
  
(a) a legal proceeding relating to the election of the President; (b) any
appeal from an order or judgment of the Court of Appeal in an election
petition case...  
.  
'Law' is defined in Article 170 to mean any Act of Parliament and any law
enacted by any legislature at any time prior to the commencement of the
Constitution. The Constitution which was enacted prior to the commencement of
the Constitution but came into force on .7th September 1978, the day appointed
by the President by Proclamation (Art. 170 and 172) comes within the ambit of
the definition of 'law' and since it is the Supreme Law of the Republic (vide
the Preamble to the Constitution); its provisions supersede all earlier law.
Accordingly, on the terms of Article 130, "the power to hear and determine and
make such orders as provided by law" can refer only to the appellate
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court set out in Articles 127 and 128. Articles
118,' 127,.130 and 138 taken together make manifest that the Supreme Court
established by the Constitution alone is endowed' with appellate jurisdiction
in election petitions and not the Court of Appeal. Article 130 sets out the
amplitude of such jurisdiction. This jurisdiction is not limited to appeal "on
any question of. law, but not otherwise, against the determination of an
Election Judge or, any, other decision of an Election Judge which has the
effect of finally disposing of an election petition" as provided by section
82A. ' The appellate jurisdiction under. Article 130 embraces

**299**

appeals from any order or judgment of the 'Court of Appeal in an election
petition case. This jurisdiction does not suffer from the limitations imposed
by section 82A(.1). The 'order' referred to in Article 130 thus includes an
order such as the order appealed from, namely an order overruling the
preliminary objection with respect to the sufficiency of security for costs.
For the above reasons, the objection raised by Counsel far the petitioner-
respondent cannot be sustained. However, the matter does not end there. Though
Article 130 spell's the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in
election petitions, it does not indicate how such jurisdiction is to be
invoked by an aggrieved party. For an answer to that question, one has to look
to Article 128 which enacts how the appellate jurisdiction vested in the
Supreme Court can be- invoked and how the right of appeal to the Supreme Court
is to be exercised. Article 128 is the gateway through which a party aggrieved
by an order or judgment of the Court of Appeal must pass to get the Supreme
Court to exercise its appellate jurisdiction, whether under Article 127 or
under Article 130 (b), on an appeal from an order such as the one appealed
from In the present case. In terms of Article 128(2), the petitioner will have
to obtain the leave of the Supreme Court to appeal. The petitioner does not
have an absolute right to. appeal; it is only a conditional right. This Court
may, in its discretion, grant special leave to appeal only when in its opinion
the case or matter is fit for review by the Supreme Court, when it is
satisfied that the question to be decided is of public or general importance.
Thus, though the Supreme Court, may, under Article 130, have plenitude of
appellate jurisdiction from any order or judgment of the Court of Appeal in an
election petition, whether on a question of law or otherwise. yet, since that
jurisdiction can be reached only via Article 128, the petitioner must satisfy
the conditions prescribed by this Article to enable him to appeal to the
Supreme Court. Under the provisions of Article 128, until Parliament passes a
new law specifically making such provision, no appeal lies direct to the
Supreme Court; it is only with the leave of the Court itself or with the leave
of the Court of Appeal that an appeal lies to that Court Since in `the context
of the Constitution 'Parliament' must mean the Parliament constituted under
.the provisions of the Constitution (vide Art. 62, 162(1) 75), when Article
128(4) states that an appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court on any
matter and in the manner specifically provided for by any other law passed by
Parliament, the 'law' there car. have reference only to anew law passed by
Parliament after the coming into operation of the Constitution. The earlier
provisions of Article 128, prescribing the condition of obtaining leave to
appeal to that Court would thus continue to operate as condition precedent in
all cases of appeal to that Court

**300**

until a new law such as. the Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981
(certified on 2.1.1981) which provides for direct appeal to the Supreme Court
in election. petitions came into operation. Article 128(4) militates against
the contention that under existing law, such as: the amended Ceylon.
(Parliamentary Elections) Order- in-Council 1946, an appeal will lie direct to
the Supreme Court. Only a new law enacted by Parliament established by the
Constitution can provide for a departure from the mandatory leave steps: The
appeal provisions of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council
1946 which are inconsistent with Article- 128 have to yield to the provisions
of the Constitution (Art. 101(2). `Thus, it was nothing but proper for the 1st
respondent-petitioner to have obtained the leave of this Court to appeal to
it. It was not competent for him to have directly appealed to this Court: The
impact of Article 102(2) on the appeal-provisions of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council 1946 was to render inoperative sections 82A, 82AA
and 82B of the Order-in-Council. When the limited appellate jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court established under the Courts Ordinance/Administration of
Justice Law was abolished, the rules prescribed to invoke that jurisdiction
ipso facto became defunct and could not be deemed to survive to , regulate the
enlarged jurisdiction of the new Supreme Court, especially when the
Constitution has made the new Supreme Court the final court exercising
appellate jurisdiction in respect of any order or judgment of the Court of
Appeal in election petitions and prescribed the procedure for the invocation
of such appellate jurisdiction. An appellant invoking such jurisdiction
therefore must-conform to that procedure.  
  
Article 127(1) sets out the width of the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court. Counsel for the petitioner-respondent vehemently contended that
Articles 127 and 128 confines the area' of the Supreme Court's appellate
jurisdiction to civil and criminal appellate jurisdiction only. He submitted
that election jurisdiction is sui generis and is not embraced within "civil
and criminal jurisdiction" of the Court. In support of his submission,. he
referred us to the judgments of the Privy Council in Senanayake v. Navaratne
(56 N. L. R. 5)`(4), De Silva v. (50 N. L. R. 48 1) (6). and to the judgment
of the Court of Appeal in De Silva v. Senanayake (75 N.L.R. 265) (5). In
`refusing special leave to appeal to Her Majesty in Council in the cases
reported in 5&N. L. R.'5(4) and 50 N.L.R. 48 1(6), the Privy: Council based
its decision on the fact that section 82B of the Parliamentary Elections
Order-in Council made the decision of the Supreme Court final and conclusive
:and stated that Her Majesty's prerogative to entertain an appeal would not be
exercised when it was not the intention of

**301**

the Order-in-Council to create a tribunal with the ordinary incident of an
appeal to the Crown. The Privy Council did not go into the question whether
election jurisdiction partook of the nature of civil or criminal jurisdiction,
but was concerned only with the question whether Her Majesty's prerogative to
grant leave to appeal should be exercised when the Order-in-Council made
manifest that the judgment of the Supreme Court should be final in election
matters.  
  
The Court of Appeal as it existed in 1972, by its judgment reported in 75
N.L.R. 265(5) when rejecting an application for leave to appeal to that Court,
laid stress on the provision in section 82B(5) that the decision of the
Supreme Court on any appeal shall be final and conclusive and further held
that an Election Judge in determining an election petition was not dealing
with a civil cause or matter within the meaning of section 8(1) of the Court
of Appeal Act, No. 4 of 1971\. In my view, the words in Article 127, "the
Supreme Court shall be the final Court of civil and criminal appellate
jurisdiction", are not words of limitation restricting the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court, but are words of amplitude descriptive of the comprehensive
jurisdiction of the Court. In the context in which they are used, the two
categories of jurisdiction, civil and criminal, were intended to comprehend
all jurisdictions of whatever nature. It is to be noted that Article 118
states that "the Supreme Court shall be the highest and` final superior court
of record and shall exercise final appellate jurisdiction." In my view, the
Constitution intended the dichotomy of "civil and criminal jurisdiction" to be
exhaustive and that between them embraced all proceedings of whatever nature.
An election proceeding is, in any event, a civil proceeding, as was held by
the Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court , in Rao v. Bhaskararao
(A.I.R. (1964) Andh. Pra. 185)(3) Rights of a civil nature are in issue in an
election petition.  
  
Article 127(2) sets out what the Supreme Count can do in the exercise of its
appellate jurisdiction.  
  
I agree with the view expressed by Samarakoon CJ. with the concurrence of
Thamotheram J. and Wanasundera J. in rejecting a similar preliminary objection
as was raised in this appeal on an application for leave to appeal in the
Kalawana Election Petition case in Pilapitiya v. Muttettuwegama (S. C.
Application No. 15 of 1979; S. C. Minutes of 25th May 1979)(7) that Article
128 applies to interlocutory orders of the Court of Appeal in election
petitions.

**302**

For the reasons set out above, I overrule the preliminary objection of Counsel
for the petitioner-respondent and I hold that an appeal lies under the
Constitution to this Court from the order of the Court of Appeal and that the
respondent-petitioner had correctly applied for and obtained the leave of this
Court to appeal to this Court and that it was not competent for him to have
preferred an appeal direct to this Court.  
  
The petitioner-respondent will pay the 1st respondent-petitioner in S.C.
Appeal 1/81 and the 2nd and 3rd respondent- petitioners in S C. Appeal 2/81
and 3/81 the costs of the inquiry into the preliminary objections.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
These three petitions of appeal before us are by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents to the election 'petition (hereinafter called respondents), filed
against them by the petitioner-respondent in respect of the Anamaduwa Seat
(Electoral District No.104). They are consolidated and taken up for hearing
together. The respondents had earlier come before this Court and sought
special leave, in terms of Article 128 (2) of the Constitution, to canvass an
order made by the Election Judge, relating to the adequacy of security. At the
hearing of the application for special leave, counsel for the petitioner-
respondent indicated to Court that he wished to take up a preliminary
objection. He submitted that the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to hear
appeals in election matters is restricted to the grounds set out in section
82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946 and that
there is no right of appeal in regard to an interlocutory order of the, Court
of Appeal which does not have the effect of finally disposing of an election
petition. This Court, on that occasion, while granting special leave to the
respondents reserved the right to the petitioner-respondent to raise this
point when the appeals are taken up for hearing. Our grant of leave was
therefore conditional.  
  
Mr. Shanmugalingam has now taken up this objection again before us. He has
submitted that jurisdiction in respect of election matters is in the nature of
a special jurisdiction conferred on the courts. The powers of the present
Supreme Court in respect of election matters, he points out, are to be found
in the provisions of Article 118 (e) and Article 130 (b) of the Constitution.
These provisions, he submits, relate to the forum for hearing the appeal, but
do not deal with the right of appeal as such. His position is that we must
look to the provisions of section 82A of the Ceylon

**303**

(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946 to find out the extent of the
right of appeal given to an aggrieved person. This provision, he states, sets
out in detail the precise kind of order from which an appeal will lie to the
Supreme Court. Under section 82A, an appeal is granted only on a question of
law against -  
  
(a) the determination of an Election Judge under section 81, or  
  
(b) any other decision of an Election Judge which has the effect of finally
disposing of an election petition.  
  
He developed his arguments by referring to the provisions of Article 101 of
the Constitution which provides for keeping alive the provisions of'-the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946. He stated that the
operation of the provisions of Article 169 (2) of the Constitution, when'
applied to the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, merely
substitutes one forum for another and should not be read so as to imply any
alteration in the conditions of appeal laid down in section 82A. Mr.
Shanmugalingam submitted that the general appellate provisions contained in
Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution have no application to an election
petition proceeding, because an election petition proceeding is neither a
civil nor a criminal matter, but a proceeding sui generis.  
  
Mr. Choksy for the 1st respondent has submitted that Articles 118, 127, 128
and 130 of the Constitution are interconnected and they set out various
aspects of the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court, which is a general
jurisdiction. He has submitted that, since the previous Supreme Court has
ceased to exist, the provisions of section 82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order in Council, which applied to that Supreme Court, have now
been superseded by the. provisions of Article 130 of the present Constitution.
That Article 130 (b) contains no limitations on the right of appeal unlike 82A
of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council. Mr. Choksy contends
that an appeal will now lie to the Supreme Court from any order or judgment of
the Court of Appeal in an election petition case. Such an order can be any
interlocutory order and is not confined to the kind of order that section 82A
contemplated. His position is that, while the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court is contained in Article 118 (e) and Article 130 (b) of the Constitution,
the provisions relating to the exercise of that jurisdiction, namely the
manner of appealing and the nature of the powers of the Supreme Court in
regard to such appeals, are found in Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution.
He submits that an election proceeding is a civil matter and distinguished a
number of local cases which suggested a contrary view. He submitted that the
procedure to come to this Court by way of

**304**

Article 128(2) of the Constitution taken by him is the proper manner of
preferring an appeal.  
  
Mr. Satyendra who appeared for the 2nd and 3rd respondents stressed the
primacy of the constitutional provisions over the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order in Council and submitted that Article 118 merely contains a
general statement of jurisdiction area-wise or function-wise and that that
jurisdiction is specifically vested in the Supreme Court by Article 130.
Though jurisdiction over election petitions are contained in Article 118 (e)
and Article 130, it is necessary to look to Articles 127 and 128, as Mr.
Choksy had already pointed out, to find out as to how that jurisdiction can be
invoked. He relied on the Indian decision of Rao v. Bhaskararao (1964 A.I.R.
185, A.P.) (3) to show that an election proceeding, whether in its original
capacity or in appeal, is a civil suit or action so as to bring it within the
wording of Articles 127 and 128\. Alternatively, he submitted that whether or
not the provisions of section 82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections)
Order in Council continued in force, the Supreme Court is vested by the
Constitution with the power to grant Special Leave under Article 128 (2),
where the conditions set out there are satisfied, and that this overriding
power' cannot be taken away or affected by anything contained in the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, which must be regarded as ordinary
legislation.  
  
Upon a consideration of these arguments, it seems to me that there are two
main issues that arise for our consideration. The first is whether Article 130
(b) of the Constitution has superseded section 82A (1) of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council as regards the kinds of orders from
which an appeal can be brought before the Supreme Court. The second question
is as regards the procedure to be followed in appealing and whether we have
now to look to the provisions of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in
Council or to Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution for this purpose. Both
these questions are matters of considerable complexity.  
  
The Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946 was part and parcel
of the constitutional documents relating to the devolution of independence on
this country. Much of the provisions relating to elections in this enactment
followed earlier legislation, which provided for a disputed election to be
challenged by way of an election petition before an Election Judge. Neither
the earlier law nor the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council
1946, when originally enacted, gave a right of appeal from a determination of
an Election Judge. Not balked by this, parties who lost at the trial and
believed they had a lawful grievance,. tried

**305**

every effort to get redress. The ingenuity of their legal advisers had
suggested writ proceedings and applications for leave and special leave to the
Privy Council to canvass the determination of the Election Judge, but none of
these methods had succeeded. The decided cases were to the effect that the
jurisdiction given to the courts to entertain, election petitions was of a
peculiar nature and that the relevant legal provisions did not evince an
intention on the part of the legislature of creating a tribunal with the
ordinary incident of giving a right of appeal or review from its orders. G. E.
De Silva v. Attorney-Genera/ (50 N.L.R. 481) (6)  
  
By Act No. 19 of 1948, however, a right of appeal on a question of law from
the final determination of an Election Judge was conceded for the first time
when it appeared to the legislature that a party to an election petition may
be unjustly treated in consequence of an erroneous decision on a question of
law by the Election Judge. Later, in consequence of the decision in Ramalingam
v. Kumaraswamy (55 N. L. R. 145(8) which called for remedial action, amendment
No. 19 of 1959 was enacted, bringing in the provisions of section 82 A (1)(b)
which widened the appellate powers by providing an appeal also on a question
of law from any other decision of an Election Judge, which has the effect of
finally disposing of an election petition; i.e. from a particular kind of
interlocutory order.  
  
The effect of this provision was one of the matters that was debated in the
case of Dissanayake v. Abeysinghe (75 N.L.R. 12)(9). This case dealt with the
adequacy of security given by a petitioner. The Election Judge held that the
security was adequate and then proceeded to hear the petition and declared the
election of the respondent void. The appeal was argued on the basis that an
interlocutory appeal did not lie in that case. At the conclusion of the trial
and after the determination under section 81, the respondent in his appeal to
the Supreme Court under section 82A (1)(a) sought also to canvass the
interlocutory decision regarding the adequacy of the security. Sirimane and
Samarawickrema JJ., in a majority judgment, held that an incorrect decision of
the Election Judge at the preliminary stage that the security is -sufficient
has nothing to do with the determination at the conclusion of the trial
referred to in section 82 (1)(a) from which alone an appeal lay, and denied
the appellant the opportunity of canvassing that after in the appeal.  
  
G. P. A. Silva, S. P. J., in a strong dissent, took a different view, He said
that when an appeal from a determination under section 82A (1)(a) is before
the appellate court, the Supreme Court is

**306**

empowered to look into any errors of law committed by the Election Judge
culminating in the determination, particularly if they are of a jurisdictional
nature. He referred to Rule 12 (3), which contained a prohibition against
further proceedings in an election petition if the required security has not
been given by a petitioner.  
  
The constitutional changes of 1972 brought no further changes except for one
brought about by the Administration of Justice Law, which was an enactment
altering the structure of the courts in terms of the Republican Constitution
of 1972\. The jurisdiction to try election petitions came to be vested in the
new High Court established under the Administration of Justice Law and was to
be exercised by a High Court Judge nominated by the Chief Justice - vide
section 22, Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973. The appellate
powers remained where they were.  
  
When we look at the present Constitution, we see that it contains a number of
provisions relating to election law. By Article 144, the Court of Appeal is
now vested with the jurisdiction to try election petitions. The appellate
jurisdiction is vested in the present Supreme Court by Article 118 (e).
Article 130 has spelt out that jurisdiction. Article 101 (2) keeps alive the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946 until Parliament makes
provisions in respect of elections. This provision reads -  
  
"Until Parliament by law makes provision for such matters, the Ceylon
(Parliamentary. Elections) Order in Council, 1946 as amended from time to
time, shall, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, mutatis mutandis,
apply."  
  
It has been submitted that the statement in Article 130 that "the Supreme
Court shall hear and determine and make such orders as provided for by law. .
." and the last two lines of Article 144, which states that the Court of
Appeal shall exercise its jurisdiction to try election petitions "in terms of
any law for the time being applicable in that behalf," are referable to the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council.  
  
8y Article 101 (1), the Constitution has expressly reserved the power to
Parliament to substitute new legal provisions for the matters provided in the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council. Parliament has recently
enacted Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981, covering that same ground.
This new Act is prospective in operation and does not touch the present case.

**307**

Counsel have also referred to Article 169(2). This appears in the chapter
relating to Transitional Provisions. It is worded as follows:  
  
"(2) the Supreme Court established by the Administration of Justice Law, No.
44 of 1973, shall, on the commencement of the Constitution, cease to exist,
and accordingly the provisions of that Law relating to the establishment of
the said Supreme Court, shall be deemed to have been repealed. Unless
otherwise provided in the Constitution, every reference, in any existing
written law to the Supreme Court shall be deemed to be a reference to the
Court of Appeal."  
  
This provision appears tautologous in so far as its application to the present
case. The Constitution has, in express terms, vested jurisdiction in regard to
election petitions in two new courts created by the Constitution -- the
original jurisdiction in Appeal Court and the appellate jurisdiction in the
new Supreme Court. To that extent the question of the forum for the hearing of
appeals from such petitions can be said to be "otherwise provided in the
Constitution." Article 169 (2) thus has little bearing on this matter.  
  
On a careful examination of all these provisions, it seems to me that our
present Constitution has vested the Supreme Court, in express terms, with
jurisdiction in respect of appeals from election petitions. This is one of the
several jurisdictions given to the Supreme Court and itemised in Article 118
(e) and later expressed more elaborately in Article 130. An examination of
Article 118 . will show that seven different and varied kinds of jurisdiction
have been vested in the Supreme Court, among which is this jurisdiction in
election petition proceedings. That these are several jurisdictions: is made
evident by the fact that the term 'jurisdiction' is used in each and every one
of the items (a) to (g) in Articles 118. There is no common denominator as it
were in respect of these different jurisdictions. They are varied in nature,
though vested in one institution, and appear to be separate facets of the
authority of the Supreme Court. These different jurisdictions itemised in
Article 118 are separately spelled out in greater detail in the succeeding
Articles in sequence, so that each of these Articles is clearly referable to
the items set out in Article 118 in that same order. Jurisdiction in respect
of election petitions dealt with in Article 130 is thus referable to Article
118 (e) and is in the nature of a special jurisdiction.  
  
It is only item (c). of Article 118 that was traditionally associated with the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court. The others are

**308**

additions of recent times by virtue of express provision, and items (b) and
(d) show that the adding of new jurisdictions has continued under the present
Constitution. When we consider the historical background, we find that the
original section 82A (1) merely introduced a right of appeal to the Supreme
Court and section 82A (5) enjoined three judges of the Supreme Court to hear
such appeals. This was because the Courts Ordinance or the prevailing
enactments that dealt with the structure of the courts did not expressly
provide for an election petition jurisdiction as part of the ordinary
jurisdiction of the courts. This appellate power was thus in the nature of a
special reference to three Judges of the Supreme Court.  
  
The position then is that the jurisdiction in respect of appeals from an
Election Judge in contradistinction to the manner or method of exercising that
right of appeal must now be found in Article 130 of the Constitution. Article
130 pre-empts the entire field of jurisdiction and there is no room to drive a
wedge to separate the. forum from its jurisdiction as Mr. Shanmugalingam
sought to do. Article 130 gives a right of appeal "from an order or judgment
of the Court of Appeal in an election petition." In contrast, the terminology
in section 82A (1) is different and uses the terms 'determination' and
'decision.' The 'decision' however is of the limited kind that is described
there. The word 'judgment' is not found in Part V of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order in Council, but is presumably intended to include the
'determination' mentioned in section 80C, 81 and 82A. The other word 'order'
is an appropriate term for interlocutory orders and is used in Article 130
unqualified and without any limitations. This is a significant innovation
which counsel for the respondents rightly stressed. There can be little doubt
that Article 130 is a constitutional pronouncement in regard to the appellate
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in election petition proceedings. It has
brought about a significant change in the law and appears to be much wider in
scope than section 82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in
Council:  
  
In my opinion, a ruling on the precise ambit of Article 130 is not called for
in the present case. It would be sufficient to observe that the present matter
involves a question of law from an interlocutory order which could have had
the effect of finally disposing of the election petition if the objection had
been upheld. The present case falls within the provisions of Article 130 which
on the face of it does not contain the limitations found in section 82A
(1)(b). The wording of Article 130 is probably the result of the decision in'
Dissanayake v. Abeysinghe (supra), where several

**309**

shortcomings in section 82A (1) were pointed out by the Judges. G. P. A:
Silva, S. P. J., referred to "the palpable injustice of one party to a suit
being given a right of appeal against an erroneous decision, while the other
party is denied such a right:" On the other hand, Sirimane J. asked
pertinently, "if, at the conclusion of a trial, it has been conclusively
proved that a candidate has been guilty of bribery, intimidation and other
corrupt and illegal practices, would it not be an anomaly if he is entitled to
sit in Parliament, if it could be successfully argued in appeal that the trial
Judge had erred on the question of security."  
  
Admittedly, the previous state of the law had room` for improvement. When one
considers the history of election law, one finds that the evolution of
appellate rights in election petition proceedings has been both a piecemeal
and a trial and error process. One answer to the criticism contained in
Dissanayake case (supra) was to give either party to an election petition a
right of appeal to the Supreme Court both from an interlocutory order and also
from the final determination. It may therefore not be accidental that the
wording' of Article 130 of the Constitution and section 102.(1) of the new
Parliamentary Elections Act is suggestive of this.  
  
In fact, the new Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981, referred to more
fully later, sets out the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in terms very
similar to those contained in Article 130. The language used in section 102
(1) of the new Parliamentary Elections Act shows that Parliament itself has
understood Article 130 in the same manner as I have done and proceeded to
legislate on that basis. The task of interpreting the law and the Constitution
is, no doubt, assigned to this Court and though we are not bound by the views
of Parliament on a matter of construction, we can legitimately have regard to
its views when such views can be shown to have some relevance, as I shall show
later in this judgment. For these reasons I am of the view that the objection
raised by Mr. Shanmugalingam in the manner he has formulated it, is not
entitled to succeed.  
  
The second question before us relates to the procedure of appealing in
contradistinction to appellate jurisdiction itself. Is the prevailing
procedure to be found in Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution or, do
sections 82A, 82B and 82C of Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council
continue to apply ? The appellants have had recourse to the appellate
procedure provided in Article 128 of the Constitution. In the course of his
arguments, Mr. Shanmugalingam referred in passing to the fact that if the

**310**

provisions of Article, 128 do not apply to the manner of filing an appeal,
then the appellants have misconceived their remedy and consequently there is
no valid petition of appeal before Court. Although this point has not been
specifically stated in the initial objections, it has emerged before us in the
course of the hearing. It is in a way consequential to the preliminary
objection and is also a question of law of a fundamental nature. This court, l
think, is obliged to consider it and make a pronouncement.  
  
I have earlier referred to the fact that jurisdiction vested in the Supreme
Court in respect of election petitions is a separate and special jurisdiction
and should not be subsumed under a concept of a general appellate
jurisdiction. Both Mr. Choksy and Mr. Satyendra contended in favour of such a
common jurisdiction and, submitted that Articles 1,27 and 128 provided the
manner of the exercise of that common jurisdiction. They were accordingly at
pains to show that an election petition is .a civil or criminal matter \- so
as to bring election petition proceedings within the wording of Articles 127
and 128.  
  
It seems to me to be profitless to embark on an inquiry to ascertain whether
or not an election petition proceeding could be designated as a civil or
criminal matter, because it is made on an assumption which does not appear to
be sound. I am inclined to the view both according to the canons of
interpretation and on historical ground that the appellate power given to the
Supreme Court in election petition proceedings is a special and separate
jurisdiction. The real question is, having regard to the nature of the special
jurisdiction involved, whether it was also not intended that the special
provisions relating to the manner of appealing contained in the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council should apply as against the more
general provisions of Articles 127 and 128 of the Constitution which are
undoubtedly referable to the final appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
in respect of its ordinary civil and criminal jurisdiction. When the
arrangement and the sequence of the Articles in Chapter XVI of the
Constitution are examined, one sees that Articles 127 and 128 are referable to
item (c) of Article 118 and not to item (e) which deals with election petition
jurisdiction.  
  
There are other grounds for discounting the application of Articles 127 and
128 to election petition proceedings. If Article 130, which is substantive in
nature, is subordinated to Article 128, which is of a procedural kind, then
the plenary jurisdiction set out in Article 130 would be whittled down
considerably. In place of the free and. full right of appeal promised by
Article .130, an

**311**

aggrieved person would be given only a limited and conditional right. Article
130 -gives no indication that a petition of appeal should be conditional on a
prior application for leave. No such constraint obtained in election petition
appeals until now and an aggrieved party had always come before the court of
appeal as a matter of right More significantly, the application of Article 128
to Article 130 means the raising of the qualifying threshold for an appeal. To
satisfy Article 128 it would now be necessary to have e substantial question
of law or a grave miscarriage of justice whereas Article 130 contains no such
requirement and the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council gives a
right of appeal on a bare question of law.  
  
Since Article 130 deals with jurisdiction and is the controlling Article; the
subordination of this Article to a procedural Article like 128 is also
impermissible unless there is an indication to that effect in the
Constitution. I have found no such indication. On the contrary, when we
contrast Article 127, which corresponds to Article 130 but deals with the
vesting of the ordinary civil and criminal jurisdiction in the Supreme Court,
we find an express statement that Article 127 should apply "subject to the
Constitution." It is this reservation that attracts Article 128 to Article 127
and the absence of such reservation in Article 130 makes the vital difference.
It is also difficult to believe that the legislature intended any such
limitations in regard to appeals from election petitions when the trend in
recent times has been for a progressive liberalisation of election petition
procedure. To subordinate Article 130 to Article 128 would undoubtedly be a
retrograde step.  
  
The grant of a direct appeal to the Supreme Court, provided by the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, is not something that does
violence to the constitutional provisions relating to the arrangement of the
appellate procedures. In fact, the Constitution recognises the possibility of
having direct appeals as a method of access to the Supreme Court. Article 128.
(4) states  
  
"An appeal shall lie directly to the, Supreme Court on any matter and in the
manner specifically provided for by any other law passed by Parliament."  
  
In my view,. an appeal to the Supreme Court in election petition proceedings
is one instance of such direct appeals which has been kept alive by Article
101 (2)' of the Constitution. The new Act, which deals with the identical
matter and which the Constitution contemplated, provides for such a direct
appeal.

**312**

I have earlier referred to the opening words of Article 130. Article 130
begins-  
  
"The Supreme Court shall have the power to hear and determine and make such
orders as provided for by law ...  
  
I do not agree with counsel for the respondents that the words "as provided
for by law" qualifies only the word 'orders'. I am inclined to take the view
on grammatical considerations that it qualifies also the words 'hear and
determine'. Again, the word 'law' here, having regard to the definition of
that term in Article 170, is another pointer to the provisions of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council. It certainly cannot include the
Constitution. The expression 'law' is defined as follows :  
  
 'law" means any Act of Parliament, and any law enacted by any legislature at
anytime prior to the commencement of the Constitution and includes an Order in
Council."  
  
I think Mr. Satyendra overtaxed his ingenuity when he submitted that the word
'law' here can include the Constitution. I confess that I find it difficult to
imagine how the Constitution can be. regarded atone and the same time also as
a separate and independent law which has been enacted prior to this selfsame
Constitution. His submission was based on an erroneous view and a failure to
recognise the distinction between, what may be termed, the constituent powers
of Parliament` and its ordinary legislative powers:  
  
An examination of the provisions of section 82A (2) and the succeeding
sections up to section 85 shows that the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections)
Order in Council contains a complete code of provisions in regard to the
"hearing, determining and for the making of orders in respect of election
petition$." There are no equivalent provisions in the Constitution covering
this same ground and what exists in the Constitution seems inadequate or
inappropriate to deal comprehensively with an election' petition appeal, in
particular, with the kinds of orders which are peculiar to election petition
proceedings:  
  
It was Mr. Choksy who brought to our notice the Parliamentary Elections Act;
No. 1 of 1981, enacted this' year. This is in fact the legislation
contemplated by Article 101 (1)' of the Constitution in respect of
Parliamentary elections, which is intended to replace the existing Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946. This new Act No. 1 of 1981
has provision:: for the repeal of

**313**

the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council and for the new Act to
take its place. The case before us however continues to be governed by the
former law. Mr. Shanmugalingam, I rather think, objected to our looking at
this new material for the purpose of interpreting the provisions of the
Constitution.  
  
As stated earlier; the function of interpreting the Constitution is vested
solely in this Court and in this task we must primarily go by the wording of
the Constitution, itself. It should be borne in mind that the new Act is
specifically envisaged by the Constitution and has been enacted in furtherance
of that legislative plan. Further, the Constitution and this new Act are
interconnected and have an interacting effect. The language of the new Act in
its ordinary meaning appears to reflect a certain understanding or
construction of the provisions of the Constitution. The fact that this
legislation has been validly enacted and is final and conclusive and cannot be
called in question, would tend to give that understanding some relevance if
an. issue arises as to whether or not any of its provisions is in accord with
the provisions of the Constitution. In fact it is incumbent on us prima facie
to regard this raw Act as being in consonance with the provisions of the
Constitution and to interpret its provisions so that they are in harmony with
the Constitution:  
  
Accordingly, the provisions of this new Act could have some bearing on both
the issues which I formulated in the course of this judgment. Regarding the
first issue, the fact that section 102 (1) of the new Act No. 1 of 1981
declares the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in very much the same .terms
(though not in the identical words) as in Article 130 (b) and without the
limitations contained in section 82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections)
Order in Council is an item in favour of Mr. Choksy's submission. If the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is contained in section 82A, as contended by
Mr. Shanmugalingam, or if Article 130 (b) has to be construed in the light of
the limitations contained in section 82A, then what was the need for a
provision like section 1.02 (1) of the new Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1
of 1981 ? On the other hand; section 102 (1) appears to reflect what is
contained in Article 130 of the Constitution and blends harmoniously with it.
This goes to fortify the conclusion I have already arrived at, that the right
of appeal from a decision of an Election Judge is no longer subject to the
limitations contained in section 82A of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections)
Order in Council.  
  
The bearing this new legislation has on the second issue seems to be even more
decisive. We find in this new Act No. 1 of 1981 a

**314**

reproduction, practically in their entirety, of the provisions of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council that relate to the time limit for
appealing, procedures for appealing, parties to such appeal, the grant of
security, the kind of orders that can be made, etc. If, as contended by the.
respondents, these matters are all now governed by the Constitution (in fact
there is no reference whatsoever to many of these matters in the
Constitution), then what was the necessity, for reproducing them in the new
law when those provisions of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in
Council had already been superseded by the Constitution ? A more relevant
question is, could the legislature have enacted the new Act as ordinary
legislation (and it has been duly enacted in terms of the Constitution), if
the matters contained therein are already embodied in the Constitution and
enjoy the dignity of constitutional provisions ? `Would it not be more
reasonable to take the view that what is now enacted in Act No. 1 of 1981 was
never a part of the constitutional provisions and therefore it was competent
for Parliament to legislate for these matters in the form of ordinary
legislation  
  
The above views give further support to my earlier conclusions which were
based on a pure analysis and construction of the constitutional provisions. In
my view, we have to look to the provisions of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order in Council for the appropriate procedures for appealing.
These provisions provide for a direct appeal to the Supreme Court and for
other subsidiary matters. This, as I have shown earlier, is a procedure that
was within the contemplation of the draftsman of the Constitution. In the
present case these procedures have not been followed due to misapprehension of
the law.'  
  
Before I conclude, I should like to say one word about the judgment in
Pilapitiya v. Muttettuwegarna (S.C. 15 of 1979) (7). The application for
Special Leave under Article 128.(2) of the Constitution was refused by Court
and I concurred in that judgment. One of the matters referred to in the
judgment is the right of an aggrieved party in an election petition proceeding
to come to this Court byway of Article 128 (2). But as far as] can recall, the
matter was not argued as fully as in the present case and in any event that
judgment is not binding on this bench.  
  
In the result, the respondents have failed to comply, with the provisions of
section 82A (2). of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council,
which was the only mode of access to this Court. The purported appeal before
us is therefore invalid. We have then no option but to reject this petition of
appeal, even though

**315**

the preliminary objection taken by Mr. Shanmugalingam related to a question of
the appellate jurisdiction of this Court and did not specifically deal with
this-matter:  
  
The appeals are therefore rejected. I would order that half costs of appeal be
paid to the petitioner-respondent by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents jointly,  
  
**ISMAIL, J. I** agree.  
  
**WIMALARATNE, J.  
**  
Article 101(2) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka ordains that until Parliament by law makes provision for such matters
the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order- in-Council, 1946 as amended from
time to time, shall, subject to the provisions of the Constitution, mutatis
mutandis, apply. These appeals relate to the extent to which the Constitution
has superseded those provisions of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-
in-Council, in the matter of appeals in election petition cases. I have had
the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by My Lord the Chief Justice and
by my brother Wanasundera, J. They have both taken the view that Article 130
of the Constitution has superseded section 82A(1) of the Order-in-Council in
the matter of the scope of the right of appeal in election petition cases.
Whereas that section is limited in scope in that it gives a right of appeal
only from a determination of an election judge under section 81, or from any
other decision which has the effect of finally disposing of an election
petition, Article 130 is wider in scope acid empowers the Supreme Court to
hear and determine an appeal from any order or judgment of the Court of Appeal
in an election petition case. As observed by Wanasundera, J; this -expansion
of the scope of the right of appeal may be due to the anomaly resulting from
the decision in Dissanayake v. Abeysinghe (75 NLR 12)(9). I am in respectful
agreement with the view expressed in both judgments that in the context of
Article 130, there could be no doubt that the Supreme Court is now empowered
to hear and determine any appeal from any order, final or interlocutory, made
by an election judge. As to the repercussions this extension would have on the
e speedy hearing and conclusion of election petitions is another matter, to
which I shall revert later.  
  
There is disagreement between the C- Justice and Wanasundera, J. with regard
to the procedure in appeal. The Chief Justice, has taken the view that section
82A of the Order-in-Council and

**316**

the Constitution cannot stand together. As regards section 8213, C & D he
states that when the term "Court of Appeal" is substituted for the term
"Supreme Court" in compliance with Article 169(2), we are faced with further
difficulty. The procedure in appeal and the powers of the Supreme Court in
appeal, in his judgment, are now contained in Articles 127, 128 and 130 of the
Constitution. Wanasundera, J. takes the view that the procedure in appeal from
a judgment or order of an election judge is still contained in sections 82A(2)
to (5), 8213, C & D, and that those provisions are not inconsistent with the
Constitution. That into say, a party dissatisfied with an order of an election
judge has to prefer an appeal to the Supreme Court in terms of section 82A(2)
of the Order in Council. When an appeal is so preferred the powers of the
Supreme Court are exercised in terms of Section 82B. The remedy of an
aggrieved party therefore is not to invoke the powers of the Supreme Court
under Article 128(2) by seeking leave to appeal, but to prefer an appeal in
terms of section 82A(2).  
  
I regret I am unable to agree with My Lord the Chief Justice on this aspect of
the appeals. I am in entire agreement with the conclusion reached in the
judgment of Wanasundera, J. In view, however, of the importance of the issue
raised I wish to add a few observations of my own to the cogent reasons given
for his conclusion that as no appeals have been preferred by the appellants
according to law, these appeals should therefore be rejected.  
  
The Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council governed the hearing of
appeals in election petition cases from the time a right of appeal was first
granted by Act No. 19 of 1948, for a period of about a third of a century.
Notwithstanding changes in the Constitution and in the laws establishing the
several Courts and vesting jurisdiction in them, namely, the Courts Ordinance
(Cap. 6) and the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, the Order-in-
Council was the law which, with amendments from time to time, set down the
scope of the right of appeal, the procedure in appeal and the procedure to be
followed after the conclusion of an appeal. It was a special law, with a
special procedure, a special set of rules, and imposing consequences of a
special nature. Whenever amendments were considered to be necessary, for
example, extending the scope of the right of appeal, they were effected not by
amending the basic law or the law vesting jurisdiction prevalent at the
particular time, but by amending the Order-in-Council. That the present
Parliament also desires to pursue the same appeal procedure is apparent when
one peruses the provisions of the Parliamentary Elections Act; No. 1 of 1981,
which has been certified by the Speaker on 22.1.81 and which is

**317**

to come into operation on such date as may be specified by the President by
Order published in the Gazette. Section 130 of that Act expressly repeals Part
VI of the Order-in-Council, in which Part is contained provisions relating to
election petitions and appeals. On such date as the Order-in-Council is so
repealed, almost identical provisions containing appeal procedure are to
replace the present appeal procedure. It is my view that until Act No. 1 of
1981 comes into force, the provisions of the Order-in Council pertaining to
procedure in appeals will continue to apply. It is necessary to emphasise in
particular the consequences that will inevitably ensue if the provisions of
the Order-in-Council relating to appeals are not strictly complied with.
Sections 82A(2) and the subsequent sub-sections constitute the special
provisions relating to the procedure in appeal. Section 828 contains the
powers of the Supreme Court in such appeals. It is only upon an appeal
preferred under section 82A that sub-section (2) of section 82B empowers the
Supreme Court to decide "whether the member whose return or election was
complained of, or any other and what persons, was duly returned, or whether
the election was void." It also requires the Supreme Court "to issue a
certificate of such decision." These are special powers and duties. One cannot
but note the absence of such special powers and duties in the appeal procedure
and powers contained in the Articles of the Constitution or in the Supreme
Court Rules, 1978. What is more, section 82C provides that where the Supreme
Court either allows or reverses the determination of the election judge, "the
Court shall transmit to the President the Certificate of the decision issued
under section 82B." This "follow up" procedure is contained in section 82D,
which gives effect to the certificate so transmitted. It is only on such
transmission that the decision of the Supreme Court takes effect. It is only
on such transmission of the Certificate that His Excellency is empowered to
order by notice published in the Gazette, the holding of a fresh election
within one month of the receipt by him of the Certificate, and "in accordance
with such certificate." Such certificate could be issued by the Supreme Court,
only by virtue of the powers vested in it by section 8213; and these powers
could be exercised by the Supreme Court only in the event of an appeal being
preferred under section 82A. If, then, these special provisions contained in
the Order-in Council are not strictly complied with, a member who is unseated
by the decision of the Supreme Court in appeal, may yet find himself not
unseated. If the certificate contemplated in section 82C is not transmitted to
the President, His Excellency may not be empowered to order the holding of a
fresh election, in the event of such step becoming necessary.

**318**

It is probably to overcome these difficulties that Mr. Choksy argued that in
Article 130- the words "as provided for by law" qualified only the word
"Orders" but not the words "hear and determine"; that is, that whilst the
Supreme Court is empowered to make "orders" under sections 82B and C, yet the
hearing and determination of the appeal has to be in compliance with Article
128(2). I am unable to agree. The context in which the words appear leave no
room for 'doubt in my mind that not only the orders made, but also the hearing
and determination of an appeal have all to be "as provided for by law". "As
provided for by law" can have no other meaning in the context than "as
provided for by the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council, 1946 as
amended" ; because "law" ` is defined in Article 170 as meaning "any Act of
Parliament, and any law enacted by any legislature at any time prior to the
commencement of the Constitution, and includes an Order-in-Council".  
  
Mr. Satyendra's contention that "law" in the context means "the Constitution"
would, if accepted, lead to startling results. One such result that
immediately comes to mind is that if "law" is equated to "the Constitution",
then any "question relating to the interpretation of the Constitution" would
not be different from any "question relating to the interpretation of the law"
and such questions may be decided by any of the Courts in the hierarchy of
Courts. But the Constitution vests that jurisdiction of interpretation of the
Constitution exclusively in the Supreme Court.  
  
Mr. Shanmugalingam's explanation for the necessity for Article 130 in the
Constitution, when that power is already vested by the Order-in-Council, is
that otherwise an absurdity would arise as a result of the application of
Article 169(2) to section 82A. There seems to be some force in this
submission, but it does not provide an explanation as to why in Article 130
the powers of the Supreme Court in appeal have been enlarged so as to enable
the Court to entertain an appeal from any order, final or interim.  
  
Reverting to this enlargement of the scope of the right of appeal I wish to
state that the very laudable object in the form of an exhortation that "every
endeavour shall be made to conclude the trial of such petition within a period
of six months from the date of presentation of such petition." and introduced
as section 80C(2) by an amendment dated 1.3.70, would be almost impossible to
achieve, even with the best of endeavours on the part of the election judge,
if a right of appeal is permitted from every interim order made by him. This
exhortation is repeated in section 99(2) of Act No. 1 of 1981 as well.

**319**

In this connection it must be remembered that the election judge is a judge of
a Superior Court; and a solution to the anomaly arising from the decision in
Dissanayake v. Abeysinghe (9) would be to give an aggrieved party a right of
appeal to the Supreme Court from any interim order, but to be exercised only
at the conclusion of the trial of the petition. That, of course, is a matter
for the legislature, not the Courts. We can only point out such anomalies for
consideration by the legislature.  
  
I am, therefore, of the view that whilst section 82A(1) of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council, 1946 as amended, is inconsistent
with Article 130 of the Constitution, the other provisions of the Order-in-
Council relating to appeals, namely, sections 82A(2) to (5) 828, 82C and 82D
are not inconsistent. As there are no appeals preferred in compliance with
section 82A(2) I agree with the judgment of Wanasundera, J. that the three
appeals should be rejected.  
  
**RATWATTE, J.  
**  
I have had the advantage of reading the Judgments prepared by my Lord the
Chief Justice and by my brothers, Sharvananda, J., Wanasundera, J., and
Wimalaratne, J. The two main questions that arise for consideration on these
three appeals have been succinctly formulated, if I may say so with respect,
by Wanasundera, J. in his Judgment. In respect of the first question, that is,
whether Article 130(b) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred to as the Constitution) has
superseded Section 82A(1) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in
Council 1946 (hereinafter referred to as the Order in Council), as regards the
kinds of orders made by an Election Judge from which an appeal can be taken to
the Supreme Court, l am in respectful agreement with the views expressed in
the Judgments of the Chief Justice, Sharvananda, J., Wanasundera, J. and
Wimalaratne, J. They have taken the view that Article 130(b) of the
Constitution has superseded Section 82A(1) of the Order in Council as regards
the scope of the right of appeal in election petition cases, and that the
jurisdiction vested in the Supreme Court under Article 130(b) of the
Constitution does not suffer from the limitations imposed by Section 82A(1) of
the Order in Council, and that therefore the Supreme Court is empowered to
hear and determine an appeal from an order of an Election Judge even though
such an order does not have the effect of finally disposing of an election
petition.  
  
As regards the second question formulated by Wanasundera, J., that is, in
regard to the procedure to be followed when one

**320**

appeals in election petition cases, the Chief Justice and Sharvananda, J. have
come to the conclusion that the procedure to be followed is contained in
Article 127 and 128 of the Constitution and that the three Applications for
Special Leave to appeal to the Supreme Court filed in terms of Article 128(2)
by the three Respondents to the election petition, have been properly filed
and that the appeals are maintainable. I regret I am unable to agree with this
view.  
  
On this question I am in respectful agreement with the view expressed by
Wanasundera, J. and Wimalaratne, J. that the procedure in appealing against a
judgment or order of an Election Judge is still contained in Sections 82A(2)
to (5), 82B, 82C and 82D, and that those provisions are not inconsistent with
the provisions of the Constitution and that therefore the remedy of an
aggrieved party in an election petition case is not to invoke the powers of
the Supreme Court by asking for Special Leave to appeal in terms of Article
128(2) of the Constitution, but by filing an appeal in terms of Section 82A(2)
of the Order in Council. When that is done the Supreme Court can exercise its
powers under Section 82D. Wanasundera, J. and Wimalaratne, J. have given
cogent reasons for their views a and I have nothing further to add.  
  
As there are no appeals preferred in compliance with Section 82A(2) of the
Order in Council, I agree with the Judgments of Wanasundera, J. and
Wimalaratne, J. that the three appeals should be rejected. I also agree with
Wanasundera, J. that there should be no costs.  
  
_**Appeals rejected.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/9.html_  

