##  Ekanayake (R.P.C 9503) v. Reserve Sub Inspector, Hewawasam and Others -
SLR - 209, Vol 1 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 9; (2003) 1 Sri LR 209 (17 March 2003)

**209**

**EKANAYAKE (R.P.C 9503)** ****

**v.** ****

**RESERVE SUB-INSPECTOR,** ****

**HEWAWASAM AND OTHERS** ****

** **

** **



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

ISMAIL, J., AND

WIGNESWARAN, J.

SC NO.34/2002 (FR)

13th JANUARY, 2003

_Fundamental Rights_ \- _Torture of petitioner \- Test of probability-
Credibility of_ _police version - Complaint under Rule 44(7) of the Supreme
Court Rules,_ _1990._



The petitioner, a Reserve Police Constable who was attached to the Settikulam
Police Station was on five days leave to attend a funeral. The 1st respondent
who was a Reserve Sub Inspector of Police attached to the Galnewa Police
Station claimed to have been on duty out of the police station on 8.11.2001
with a police party removing flags, banners and cutouts etc. According to his
"in" entry he had accompanied unidentified army officers in search of a
deserter. The 1st respondent noted that he saw someone about to throw
something. The respondent arrested him. The man was drunk. So the 1st
respondent brought him to the police station and released him next morning. As
a police constable said that the man was working at the police station, he was
not charged.



In terms of section 69 of the Police Ordinance a man who is drunk and
disor­derly is guilty of an offence and may be arrested without a warrant and
detained in custody until sober. However the petitioner's condition was not
medically examined.



According to the petitioner, when he was passing the police station that day,
the 1st respondent alighted from a police jeep and questioned him in obscene
language and asked him where he was going. Before he could reply he was
arrested, taken to the police station and severely assaulted by the 1st
respon­dent. When a police constable identified him as a Reserve Police
Constable, he was chased away from the police station. He was hospitalized for
four days due to the assault. The Judicial Medical Officer's report of the
examination of the petitioner on 12.11.2001 showed that the petitioner had
lacerations and abrasions.



The petitioner, instituted proceedings in the Supreme Court by a complaint
under Rule 44 (7) of the Supreme Court Rules, 1990. The State Counsel took

210



a preliminary objection that the petitioner's complaint was bad for lack of
ref­erence to Rule 44 (7) or petitioner's lack of means which makes a person
eli­gible to relief under that Rule.

** **

**Held :**



1.                     A complaint under Rule 44 (7) is competent where a Judge of the Supreme Court is satisfied of the petitioner's apparent lack of means to pursue a claim. The Rule does not require the petitioner to expressly plead lack of means or to make specific reference to the Rule. As such both objections fail.

2.                     Upon a scrutiny of the 1st respondent's entry and the supporting affi­davits for the 1st respondent, the petitioner's version is more proba­ble than the respondent's version; by reason of the alleged arrest and assault the petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 11 and 13 (1) have been infringed by the 1st respondent.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_M.R. Sharmila_ for petitioner

_K.R. M Abdul Raheem_ for 1st respondent

_R. Hamza,_ State Counsel for 4th and 5th respondents.

#  

# Cur. adv. vult

March 17, 2003

**FERNANDO, J.** ****

The Petitioner, a resident of Galnewa, is a Reserve Police Constable attached
to the Settikulam Police station. He complains that his fundamental rights
under Articles 11 and 13 (1) were infringed by the 1st Respondent (a Reserve
Sub-Inspector attached to the Galnewa Police) by reason of his arrest on
8.11.2001 and assualt, both at the time of arrest and later at the Galnewa
Police station.

On 3.11.2001 the Petitioner obtained five day's leave to attend a funeral in
Galnewa. According to the Petitioner, at about 6.45 p.m. on 8.11.2001, as he
was passing the Galnewa Police sta­tion, a Police jeep stopped near him. The
1st Respondent got down from the jeep and questitioned him, in obscene
language, as to

211



where he was going, and without waiting for an answer assaulted him with hands
and feet, continuing to do so despite the Petitioner stating that he was a
Police officer. He even kicked him in the chest. The Petitioner was then taken
in the jeep to the Police station, where the 1st Respondent slapped him and
took him through the charge room to the rear. There were many civilians
present who saw the degrading manner in which he was being treated. Two Police
officers then identified the Petitioner as being a Reserve Police Constable,
whereupon he was chased away from the sta­tion. He was hospitalized for four
days, from 10th to 13th, and again from 23rd to 29th November. He was not
informed of the reason for his arrest. The report of the Judicial Medical
Officer who examined him on 12.11.2001 disclosed eleven lacerations and
abrasions.



The 1st Respondent's version is set out in the affidavits of himself and six
others, as well as information book ("IB") entries made at 11.30 a.m. and 8.00
p.m. on 8.11.2001. Other IB extracts recorded that at 4.45 a.m. Sergeant 90963
Premasiri of the Military Police handed over two alleged deserters (named
Premasiri and Prasanna) to the Galnewa Police to be kept in safe custody; that
at 4.32 p.m. Sergeant 90963 Premasiri took charge of another alleged deserter
(Upali) from the Galnewa Police; and that at 7.00 p.m., on the orders of the
Officer-in-Charge, the alleged deserter Premasiri was handed over to Lance
Corporal 90935. The IB extracts relied on by the 1st Respondent contain the
"out" entry made by him at 11.30 a.m. when he and two Police officers left the
station in a Police jeep No. 32 -7136 driven by a Police driver. There was no
corresponding "in" entry - at 7.00 p.m. or even later \- in regard to the
return of that Police party, vehicle and driver. The 1st Respondent made what
purported to be his "in" entry at 8.00 **** p.m., which is to the effect that
the Police pary had removed flags, banners, cutouts, etc, in various areas;
that he had returned to the station at 7.00 **** p.m.; that the 1st Respondent
then went in civil clothes in an (unspecified) Army van together with
(unidentified) Army officers in order to assist them to arrest a deserter
named Karunatilleke; **** that when returning, at about 7.45 p.m., the 1st
Respondent saw someone _about to throw something_ which was in his hand at
their vehicle; that when the vehicle was stopped and the 1st Respondent went
up to that person - who was quite drunk - he

212



said that he had thought they were People's Alliance supporters; that the 1st
Respondent brought him in the van to the station; that when the 1st Respondent
was taking him to the charge room P.S. 31533 identified him as a Police
officer serving at Settikulam; that because P.S. 31533 and P.C. 7376 **** had
stated that he was working at that Police station the 1st Respondent refrained
from charging him; and that the 1st Respondent directed P.S. 31533 to keep him
until he sobered and to send him off the next morning when he was sober. He
also directed P.C. **** 34968 to go on patrol again. That entry did not record
the name, number, rank or address of the person brought to the station, and he
was not sent for examination as to his sobriety.



Learned State Counsel could not point out any significant inconsistency or
intrinsic improbability in the Petitioner's version. In order to ascertain
whether his version is more probable than the Respondent's version, it is
necessary to scrutinize the 1st Respondent's "In" entry as well as the
supporting affidavits.



There are many unsatisfactory features in that "in" entry. If the 1st
Respondent did return at 7.00 p.m., there should have been an "in" entry at
7.00 p.m., and that should have referred to the return of the Police party,
which had left the station at 11.30 a.m., including the jeep and the driver.
Indeed, even the "in" entry made at 8.00 p.m. did not specifically state that
the other two Police offi­cers, the driver and the jeep had returned to the
station. It neither identified the person brought to the station nor stated
the basis on which he had been brought. Further, that entry suggests that the
1st Respondent left the station without obtaining permission from (or even
informing) the Officer-in-Charge although it is evident from the IB entry made
at 7.00 p.m. in relation to the deserter Premasiri that the Officer-in-Charge
was present at the station. That entry did not mention the time at which he
left the station after changing into civil clothes, or the names of any Police
officer who accompanied him; nor did it disclose the names of the Army
officers and the num­ber of the Army vehicle. It is significant that at 7.00
p.m. there was an Army officer \- Lance Corporal 90935 - present at the
station but that was not the officer whom the 1st Respondent claims to have
accompanied soon after 7.00 p.m.; coincidentally, Sergeant Premasiri turned up
in another vehicle at the very same time on

213



another errand concerning a deserter. Finally, there was no entry regarding
the release of the person brought to the station.



The 1st Respondent produced affidavits from four persons alleged to have
accompanied him in the Army vehicle, namely Sergeant Premasiri, a soldier, the
driver and PC. 34968, as well as from P.S. 31533 and P.C.7376. Although P.C.
34968 (and others) stated that he was in the group, the "in" entry made at
8.00 p.m. did not state that he left in the Army vehicle. Although that entry
made no mention of the Officer-in-Charge, P.C. 34968 (but not the others)
claimed that the trip was on the instructions of the Officer-in-Charge. While
that entry stated that the purpose of the trip was to arrest Karunatilleke,
none of the affidavits mentioned him, but merely referred to "arresting
deserters".



Those shortcomings may perhaps be discounted as being relatively minor
inconsistencies, of a kind which are often inevitable even in the case of
truthful witnesses. However, there are serious discrepancies in regard to the
main incident itself. Although in his "in" entry the 1st Respondent only
referred to an attempt **** to throw something **** at the Police jeep, yet in
his affidavit he claimed that the Petitioner was throwing stones **** at
passing vehicles, and asserted that that was the reason for arrest given to
the Petitioner. But that reason was not mentioned by any of the others.
Sergeant Premasiri stated that the 1st Respondent said that the Petitioner had
claimed to be a Police officer, and that he was being taken into the vehicle
for his own protection as he was so drunk that he could not look after
himself. No one claimed that anything had occurred which could have caused the
injuries which the Petitioner undoubt­edly had, and the 1st Respondent gave no
explanation as to how they might have occurred. Finally, although the "in"
entry suggests that by 8.00 p.m. P.C. 7376 had already identified the
Petitioner, P.C. 7376 stated that in fact he came to the station only later,
at 8.15 p.m.



Under section 69 of the Police Ordinance a person who is found drunk and
incapable of taking care of himself in any public place is guilty of an
offence, and a person who is guilty while drunk of disorderly behaviour in any
public place may be apprehended without warrant and kept in custody until
sober: While the 1st Respondent and the other Police and Army officers
unanimously



214



state that the Petitioner was quite drunk, it is difficult to accept that
position, firstly, because no attempt was made to have him med­ically
examined, and secondly because of the serious shortcom­ings and
inconsistencies in the "in" entry and in the affidavits. I therefore find it
impossible to treat the 1st Respondent as having acted under section 69 - to
which he made no reference \- and I consider the Petitioner's account to be
much more plausible and probable than the Respondent's.

Learned State Counsel took two preliminary objections. The petition filed in
this case resulted from an informal complaint under Rule 44(7) of the Supreme
Court Rules, 1990. Such a complaint may be treated as a petition under Article
126 (2) where a Judge of this Court is satisfied that "such person does not,
or may not, have the means to pursue such complaint in accordance with" the
Rules, and may be referred to specified persons for the purpose of the
preparation and submission of proper pleadings. Learned State Counsel
submitted that in the pleadings filed there was no refer­ence to Rule 44 (7),
and to the Petitioner's lack of means. Rule 44(7) requires a Judge to be
satisfied about the petitioner's appar­ent lack of means, and does not require
further that the lack of means be pleaded specifically thereafter. It is
reasonable to infer that a Reserve Police Constable cannot afford the expenses
of a fundamental rights application. Further, if the initial complaint and the
subsequent pleadings are in fact in conformity with Rule 44 (7), specific
reference to that Rule is not required. Both objections fail.



I hold that the Petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 11 and 13 (1)
have been infringed by the 1st Respondent, and award him a sum of Rs 50,000 as
compensation, of which Rs 40,000 shall be paid by the State, and Rs 10,000 by
the 1st Respondent personally, on or before 30.4.2003



**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree



**WIGNESWARAN, J.** \- I agree





_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/9.html_  

