##  Dharmasena and Another v. The People'S Bank - SLR - 122, Vol 1 of 2003
[2002] LKSC 9; (2003) 1 Sri LR 122 (11 September 2002)

**122**

**DHARMASENA AND ANOTHER** ****

**v.** ****

**THE PEOPLE'S BANK** ****

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

WIGNESWARAN, J., AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC LA 10/2002

COMMERCIAL HIGH COURT (CIVIL)

CASE No. 13/2002(1)

11TH SEPTEMBER 2002



Civil Procedure Code \- Section 84 of the Code - Failure to file proxy or
enter an appearance on summons returnable date - Pre-requisites for ordering
ex parte trial - Natural justice.

The plaintiffs ('the petitioners") filed action against the defendant ("the
respon­dent") on 1.2.2002. Notice of interim injunction was granted and
summons was issued returnable 5.4.2002. Summons was actually served on the
defendant

123  


only on 3.4.2002. On 5.4.2002 an attorney-at - law appearing on behalf of the
defendant stated that the proxy was not ready. The judge gave a date for
proxy, objections and answer to be filed namely, on 10.5.2002. The plaintiffs
raised no objection; nor applied for _ex parte_ order on 5.4.2002.

On 29.4.2002 the plaintiffs moved for an order for _ex parte_ trial on the
ground that the defendant failed to appear on 5.4.2002 and the defendant's
attorney-at-law who was not duly authorized was not entitled to move for time.
On 10.5.2002 the judge refused that application.

** **

**Held :**



There was proof that the defendant had been duly served with summons as
required by section 84 of the Civil Procedure Code ("the Code"). Hence the
order granting time on 5.4.2002 and the refusal of the application for _ex
parte_ trial on 10.5.2002 were correct.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"The Code must be interpreted as far as possible, in consonance with the
prin­ciples of natural justice, and the court can only be satisfied that
summons had been "duly served" where the defendant has been given a fair
opportunity of presenting his case in his answer. If not, the court has the
power to give fur­ther time for answer even if the defendant does not ask."

**APPLICATION** for leave to appeal from the order of the High Court

_Kuvera de Soysa_ with _Malini Rajapaksha_ for plaintiffs petitioners.

_M. Ronald Perera_ for respondent

_ _

# Cur. adv. vult

September 11,2002

**FERNANDO, J.**

The Plaintiff-Petitioner ("the Plaintiff') filed action against the Defendant-
Respondent Bank ("the Defendant") on 1.2.2002. Notice of interim injunction
was granted and summons was issued, return­able on 5.4.2002. Summons was
actually served on the Defendan

124

 only on 3.4.2002. On 5.4.2002 an attorney-at-law appeared on behalf of the
Defendant and stated that the proxy was not yet ready. Without any further
inquiry the learned trial Judge gave a date for proxy, objections and answer
to be filed, namely 10.5.2002. The Plaintiff neither objected nor moved for
_ex parte_ trial on 5.4.2002. On 29.4.2002 the Plaintiff filed a motion
seeking an order for _ex_ _parte_ trial. On 10.5.2002 the learned trial Judge
refused that appli­cation.

Learned counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that where a defendant does not
appear in person or by an authorized represen­tative, and is not represented
by an attorney-at-law holding a vaild proxy, an attorney-at -law is not
entitled to appear on behalf of the Defendant and move for time to file proxy
and answer, and _ex parte_ trial must be ordered.



The principal question is whether the order of 5.4.2002 was contrary to the
provisions of section 84 of the Civil Procedure Code, which insofar as this
case is concerned, provides that "if the defen­dant fails to file his answer
on or before the date fixed for the filing of the answer... and if the court
is satisfied that the defendant has been duly served with summons....the court
shall proceed to hear the case _ex parte... " _The first point to note is that
this section does not apply to a default in filing proxiy. Secondly, _exparte_
trial can be ordered only if the court is satisfied that the defendant has
been duly served with summons. The question then is whether the court shall
proceed to hear the case ex _parte_ even where the summons is served so soon
before the date for answer that it is not reason­ably possible for the
defendant to prepare and file his answer. The Code must be interpreted, as far
as possible, in consonance with the principles of natural justice, and the
court can only be satisfied that summons has been "duly" served where the
Defendant has been given a fair opportunity of presenting his case in his
answer. If not, the court has the power to give further time for answer even
if the Defendant does not ask. In this case summons was served at such short
notice that the Defendant hardly had time even to grant a proxy to an
attorney-at-law. An attorney-at-law having actual authority to appear was
entitled to move for further time to file a proxy, and any irregularity in
that regard was cured by the subse­quent filing of a proxy **** within the
time granted by the court.

125

The orders made on 5.4.2002 and 10.5.2002 were correct. There is no question
of law for determination, and leave to appeal is refused without costs.

**WIGNESWARAN, J.** \- I agree

**WEERASURIYA, J.** \- I agree.

_Leave to appeal refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/9.html_  

