##  Narendra v. Seylan Merchant Bank Ltd. and Others - SLR - 1, Vol 2 of 2003
[2001] LKSC 9; (2003) 2 Sri LR 1 (4 May 2001)

1

NARENDRA  
v.  
SEYLAN MERCHANT BANK LTD.  
AND OTHERS

SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA, C.J.

BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND

YAPA, J.

SC APPEAL (CHC) NO. 10/2001

HC CIVIL NO. 183/97(1)

7TH OCTOBER, 2002

_Civil Procedure Code - Dismissal of action on grounds of want of a cause of_
_action and prescription - Civil Procedure Code, sections 5 and 40 -_
_Prescription Ordinance, section 9._

The plaintiff instituted action against the defendant bank and its Directors
alleging:

(i) Firstly, the plaintiff having been misled by a prospectus issued by the
defendant company he purchased 1,456,000 shares of the bank on 03.06.1994 at
R.10/= per share.

(ii) Secondly, when the defendant bank decided to underwrite the public share
issue of a company "C" and the public share issue failed, share value of the
defendant bank dropped by reason of the bank's liabilities incurred on account
of such failure.

(iii) Thirdly, the plaintiff had taken a loan from two companies having
pledged 265,000 of the aforesaid shares held by the plaintiff in the defendant
company which shares were sold by the lending companies, for default of the
loan, at a devalued price. The said two companies were not even made
defendants to the action.

(iv) Fourthly, in view of the devaluation of the balance of 1,200,000 shares
held by the plaintiff in the defendant bank, the plaintiff will suffer
prospective damages in a sum of Rs. 294,000,000 on the assumption that the
market value of a share had since reduced to Rs.5/-. The plaintiff pleaded the
matter at (i) above as the 1st cause of action and the matter at (iv) above as
the 2nd cause of action.

**2**

**Held :** ****

Although the plaint makes out a tale of woe on behalf of the plaintiff, there
is no cause of action formulated in terms of section 9 and as required by
section 40(d) of the Civil Procedure Code which could be the basis of an
action.

Per S.N. Silva, C.J.

"........ There is a tendency now to set out extensive facts in pleadings
hop­ing to formulate a cause as you go along. This tendency should be reversed
in order to prevent a party from being denied appropriate redress that he may  
secure according to law if the pleading is correctly presented"

2.                     The 1st cause of action refers to the sale of shares on 03.05.1994 based on alleged wrongful statements in the prospectus. Hence the action filed against the defendant on 21.08.1996 is prescribed in terms of section 9 of the Prescription Ordinance as the same filed after the lapse of two years.

3.                     The 2nd cause of action relates to a loss that the plaintiff may suffer in the event of the balance shares being sold, viz, a possible loss in future which is clearly not actionable at this stage.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.

_Douglas Premaratne,_ P.C. with _Hemantha Situge_ for plaintiff-appellant.

_C.V. Vivekananthan_ with _P. Joseph_ and _V. Sasitharan_ for 3rd defendant-
respondent.

_Romesh de Silva,_ P.C. with _Hiran de Alwis_ for 1st, 2nd and 4th to 10th
defendants-respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 12,2003

**SARATH N. SILVA, C.J.** ****



The plaintiff-appellant has filed this action on 21.8.1996, against the 1st
defendant bank and its directors being the 2nd to 10th defendants, claiming
damages in respect of two causes of

3

action. Five of the issues raised by the defendants were taken up as
preliminary issues of law. The Commercial High Court has held with the
defendants and by its judgment dated 04.05.2001, dismissed the action without
costs. The appeal is from that judgment.



According to the averments in the plaint, in October 1993, the 1st defendant
bank issued a prospectus inviting members of the public to invest in shares of
the bank. The plaintiff has placed the contents of the prospectus in the fore-
front of his case. Paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the plaint refer extensively to
the contents of the prospectus. In paragraph 6 it is stated that the plaintiff
relying on the credibility and veracity of the representations made in the
prospectus purchased a total of 1,456,000 of the shares of the bank valued at
Rs. 10/- each. It is revealed that the plaintiff financed this purchase partly
on a loan that he had obtained.



Paragraphs 10-20 of the plaint refer to action on the part of the 1st
defendant bank where the bank decided to underwrite the public share issue of
M/s Connaissance De Ceylan Ltd., at a premium of Rs. 30/- per share and the
liability incurred by the bank due to the failure of the public issue. The
plaint states that the share value of the 1 st defendant bank dropped as a
result of this trans­action. After a narration of the foregoing matters the
plaintiff has set out the 1st cause of action in paragraphs 26 to 28. It
states "that from 04.05.1995 to 15.05.1995 M/s Vanik Incorporation Services
Ltd, and M/s Vanik Incorporation Ltd, acting jointly and wrongfully, and
unlawfully sold 265,000 of the plaintiff's shares for a sum of Rs. 2,731,126
whereas the value should have been Rs. 66,250,000/-. It is pleaded that a
cause of action has accrued to the plaintiff to 30 sue the 1st to 10th
defendants to recover the said amount that was lost by the plaintiff. The 2nd
cause of action states that the balance 1,200,000 shares would fetch only
about Rs. 5/- per share in the current market and thereby the plaintiff will
suffer prospective dam­age in a sum of Rs. 294,000,000/-.



The preliminary issues of law that have been raised are on the basis that, the
plaint does not conform to the imperative provi­sions of the Civil Procedure
Code; that there is a misjoinder of par­ties and/or causes of action; that
there is no cause of action prop­erly set out in the plaint; that the
averments are vague; that the 40 plaint is prolix and that the plaintiff's
action is prescribed.

  
**4**



Learned judge of the High Court has come to findings in favour of the
plaintiff in respect of all issues.



President's Counsel for the appellant, whilst conceding that there are some
defects in the plaint, submitted that the dismissal itself is referable to the
findings on prescription, since the other defects are curable. The finding on
prescription is on the basis that the cause of action dates from the
statements in the prospectus, that induced the plaintiff to purchase the
shares. It was submitted that is an erroneous computation of the time period
and that the 50 cause of action should stem from the date the plaintiff
suffered loss by the sale of shares at a low price.



An examination of the plaint the contents of which have been set out briefly
in the preceding paragraphs reveals that it has been presented without a
proper notion of the cause of action in respect of which the action is filed.



I would pause at this point to refer to certain salutary provi­sions of the
Civil Procedure Code that have been observed in the breach in presenting this
plaint.



In terms of the Civil Procedure Code an action can be instituted for the
prevention or redress of a wrong described in section 5 as the cause of action
and to include, a denial of a right, the refusal to fulfil an obligation, the
neglect to perform a duty and the infliction of an affirmative injury. This
elaboration of what constitutes an actionable wrong covers the gamut of civil
law in relation to rights in respect of property, obligations arising from
contract, duties that arise from status and damage resulting from delict.



It is incumbent on any person presenting a plaint being the means of
commencing a regular civil action, to have proper per­ception of the cause of
action in respect of which the action is filed. If the plaint is not
structured in this way, the subsequent proceed­ings in the action may become
clouded and disoriented and the party may ultimately be denied relief in
respect of the wrong per­ceived by him.

The need to have a proper perception of the cause of action in respect of
which the case is filed is brought forth in section 40 which sets out the
requisites of the plaint.

**5**

Paragraph (d) of this section requires the plaint to contain;

"a plain and concise statement of the circumstances consti­tuting each cause
of action, and where and when it arose, so Such statement shall be set forth
in duly numbered para­graphs; and where two or more causes of action are set
out, the statement of the circumstances constituting each cause of action must
be separate, and numbered."

  
This requirement of a properly formulated cause of action being contained in
the plaint is linked up to the other provisions which deal with the later
stages of the action.

Section 146 deals with the determining of issues and sub­section (2) requires
the court to formulate issues "upon material propositions of facts or law the
parties are at variance". The core of so such material propositions of fact or
law would be the cause of action set out in the plaint. The sequence follows
upto explanation 2 to section 150 which sets out the manner in which the party
hav­ing the right to begin should state his case. This useful explanation
which sets out the parameters of the trial itself provides as follows:



"The case enunciated must reasonably accord with the party's pleading, i.e.
plaint or answer, as the case may be. And no party can be allowed to make at
the trial a case mate­rially different from that which he has placed on
record, and which his opponent is prepared to meet. And the facts pro- 100
posed to be established must in the whole amount to so much of the material
part of his case as is not admitted in his opponent's pleadings."



I have set out the relevant provisions in some detail in order to emphasize
the need for pleading the cause of action properly in the plaint.



The plaintiff in this case has set out a whole sequence of events commencing
from what induced him to purchase shares and ending at the point where he
claims to have suffered loss. It is to be generally observed that there is a
tendency now to set out 110 extensive facts in pleadings hoping to formulate a
case as you go along. This tendency should be reversed in order to prevent a
party from being denied appropriate redress that he may secure according

6



 to law if the pleading is correctly presented. The sequence of events set out
in the plaint commences with the prospectus that was issued by the company.
Then it leads to the decision in respect of the "Connaissance transaction"
which would have been taken by the Board of Directors. The loss pleaded as the
cause of action in paragraphs 27 and 28 of the plaint results from alleged
wrongful action of two other companies in selling the plaintiff's shares. It
120 appears that the shares have been pledged in respect of a loan taken by
the plaintiff from these companies and the companies sold the shares because
the plaintiff defaulted on the loans. These two companies are not even named
as defendants in the action. The 2nd cause of action relates to a loss the
plaintiff may suffer in the event of balance shares being sold. The wrong that
is contemplated is something that may occur in the future and is clearly not
actionable at this stage. Thus it is seen that although the plaint makes out a
tale of woe on behalf of the plaintiff there is no cause of action that is
formulated which could be the basis in an action for 130 damages.  


As regards the submission in respect of prescription it is seen that the
plaint sets out a series of events described as wrongful. The first, is the
narration with regard to wrongful statements in the prospectus which led the
plaintiff to purchase shares of the 1st defendant bank. If some sense is to be
made out of the plaint, it is  
this purchase which resulted in what is claimed as a loss. Therefore the High
Court cannot be faulted for computing the period of pre­scription from the
date of the purchase of shares being 3.6.1994. An action to recover any loss
or damage should be commenced so within 2 years, in terms of section 9 of the
Prescription Ordinance. On that basis the action that has been filed on
21.08.1996 is pre­scribed. Learned counsel contended that the cause of action
is made out when the plaintiff suffered the loss by the shares being sold at a
lower price and that the period should be computed from the date of the sale.
It is seen that the sale was done by two com­panies who are not even parties
to the action. Hence the date of sale cannot possibly be taken as the date on
which the cause of action arose for the purpose of computing the period of
prescrip­tion. The argument therefore does not bear scrutiny.

**7**

For the reasons set out above I see no merit in the appeal.

The appeal is dismissed. No costs.



**BANDARANAYAKE, J**. - I agree.



**YAPA, J.** \- I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/9.html_  

