##  Merchant Bank of Sri Lanka Ltd. v. Amarasiri De Silva - SLR - 220, Vol 1
of 2001 [2000] LKSC 9; (2001) 1 Sri LR 220 (29 November 2000)

**220**

**MERCHANT BANK OF SRI LANKA LIMITED  
V.  
AMARASIRI DE SILVA**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, C.J.  
BANDARANAYAKE., J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC (APPEAL) NO. 79/99 (A)  
SC (HC) LA APPLICATION NO. 9/99  
(HC/ARB/34/97)  
AND (HC/ARB/127/98)  
29TH NOVEMBER, 2000  
  
_Arbitration - Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 - Requirement to deliver a copy
of the award to each party - Section 25(4) of the Act \- Application for
enforcement of the award under section 31(1) of the Act - Whether the
registered article postal receipt must be attached to such application to
proof of the communication of the award under section 25(4).  
  
_In arbitration proceedings between the appellant and the respondent, the
Registrar of the Sri Lanka National Arbitration Centre had sent a letter dated
13.12.1996 to the appellant with the original of the award dated 27.11.1996.
The letter stated that a copy of the award was sent to the respondent's
address. The appellant made an application on 17.07.1997 for enforcement of
the award in terms of section 31(1) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995
("the Act")  
  
The High Court of Colombo refused to enforce the award on the ground that the
registrated postal article receipt in proof of the communication of the award
was not attached. Thereafter the appellant filed a petition and affidavit with
a motion dated 4.11.1998 in the High Court tendering the relevant postal
article receipt dated 17.12.1996 but submitted that it was not mandatory to
attach the receipt. The High Court disallowed the appellant's application for
non-compliance with section 25(4) of the Act which required that a copy of the
award shall be delivered to each party.  
  
**Held :  
  
**The delivery of the award to the parties is mandatory. However, in the
circumstances the appellant had adduced sufficient evidence of compliance with
section 25(4) as to the delivery of the award to the respondent. Hence the
High Court should take action in terms of section 31(6) of the Act.

**221**

**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the High Court of Colombo.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P.C_. with _Hiran de Alwis_ for appellant.  
  
_Jefry Zainudeen_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March, 27, 2001.  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**This is an appeal from the judgment of the High Court of Colombo dated
24.04.1998. Leave to appeal was granted by this Court by Order dated
22.09.1999 The facts are briefly as follows:  
  
The appellant entered into a lease agreement, bearing No. 94/2501 dated
23.09.1994 with the respondent in Colombo. In terms of clause 16 of the said
lease agreement, provision was made for recourse to arbitration, in the event
of any dispute between the appellant and the respondent. In April 1996, the
appellant informed the respondent that a sum of Rs.712,826/ 79 was due from
him as at 31st October 1995. The appellant then informed the respondent that
he is referring this dispute that had ensued, for arbitration and in terms of
clause 16 of the lease agreement, requested the respondent to nominate an
arbitrator within a week from the date of his letter. The respondent failed
to, nominate an arbitrator and the sole arbitrator, nominated by the
appellant, fixed arbitration proceeding for 07.10.1996. The respondent was
informed of the commencement of the arbitration proceedings.  
  
By his letter dated 07.10.1996, respondent undertook to settle his dues and
wanted time to meet the Bank officials but had failed to do so. When the.
proceedings commenced on 05.11.1996, the respondent was absent and
unrepresented and the arbitrator proceeded with the inquiry ex -parte.  
  
The arbitrator made an award dated 27.11.1996 and the Registrar of the Sri
Lanka National Arbitration Centre, had sent

**222**

a letter dated 13.12.1996, to the appellant with the original of the award. In
that letter it is stated that a copy of the award was sent to the address of
the respondent. The appellant made an application on 17.071997 for the
registration and enforcement of the said arbitral award in terms of section
31(1) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995.  
  
The High Court of Colombo refused to enforce the arbitral award on the ground
that the registered postal article receipt, in proof of the communication of
the arbitral award to the respondent was not attached. The appellant
thereafter filed a petition and affidavit with a motion dated 04.11.1998 in
the High Court of Colombo tendering the relevant postal article and submitted
however that it was not mandatory to attach the registered postal article
receipt. The High Court Judge, by order dated 04.11.1998, disallowed the
appellant's application for non-compliance of section 25(4) of the Arbitration
Act, No. 11 of 1995.  
  
Section 25(4) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 states that,  
  
After the award is made, a copy signed by the arbitrators constituting the
arbitral tribunal in accordance with subsection(1) of this section shall be
delivered to each party."  
  
According to Russell,  
  
" **. . .** a requirement that the award be delivered will be satisfied when
it has been notified to the parties by service of a copy on each one of them
(Russell on Arbitration, 21 edition, 1997, pg.275)."  
  
Thus section 25(4) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995, clearly requires
that a signed copy of the arbitral award be delivered to each party after it
is made by the tribunal. Such delivery of the award to the parties, in my
view, is mandatory considering the consequential steps that could be taken by
the parties in relation to the enforcement of the award thus communicated,
viz, to

**223**

enforce or to set it aside in terms of section 31 or 32 of the Arbitration
Act, No. 11 of 1995.  
  
It appears that at the time this matter was taken up at the High Court,
Colombo, the original registered postal article receipt in proof of the
communication of the arbitral award to the respondent, was not attached to the
petition. However, by motion dated 04.11.1998, the appellant had produced the
original registered postal article receipt dated 17.12.1996 and the pink slip,
certifying the registered postal article receipt. In fact the appellant had
brought it to the notice of Court by his petition dated 04.11.1998 that the
original of the registered postal article receipt was filed in a similar
application in High Court Arbitration case No. 26/97.  
  
In these circumstances, I hold that the appellant has adduced sufficient
evidence of compliance with the requirement in section 25(4) of the
Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 as to the delivery of the award to the
respondent. The appeal is accordingly allowed and the judgment dated
24.04.1998 of the High Court, Colombo is therefore set aside. In all the
circumstances, there will be no costs.  
  
This matter is referred back to the High Court for action to be taken in terms
of section 31(6) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995.  
  
**S.N. SILVA, C.J. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/9.html_  

