##  Gunawardene and Wijesooriya v. Minister of Local Government, Housing and
Construction and Others - SLR - 263, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 9; (1999) 2 Sri
LR 263 (9 March 1999)

**263**

**GUNAWARDENE AND WIJESOORIYA  
v.  
MINISTER OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT, HOUSING AND  
CONSTRUCTION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 55/97 WITH  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 56/97  
C.A. NOS. 453/86 AND 489/86  
JUNE 18 AND JULY 10, 1998

_Writ of Certiorari - Divesting of a house - Section 17A of the Ceiling on
Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973 - Appeal to the Board of Review - Section
39 of the Law - Duty of the Commissioner to communicate to the parties the
decision to divest - Natural justice._

In terms of section 8 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973,
the 3rd respondent declared that premises Nos. 41 1/2 and 43 2/2, Gregory's
Road, Colombo 07, were 'surplus houses' of which he did not wish to retain
ownership. The 3rd respondent gave notice to the petitioners of that
declaration. The petitioners who were tenants of the said premises which had
since vested in the Commissioner of National Housing (2nd respondent) applied
to the Commissioner with notice to the 3rd respondent in terms of the Law to
purchase the premises. The Commissioner entertained the applications.
Consequently, the petitioners signed agreements whereby the Commissioner
agreed to sell the premises to the petitioners. As directed by the
Commissioner, the petitioners commenced making monthly payments towards the
purchase price to the Commissioner. They also paid all municipal rates and
taxes due on the said premises.

However, in 1976 the 3rd respondent applied to the Commissioner for a
divesting of the ownership of the premises under section 17A of the Law. The
Commissioner refused the application. An appeal by the 3rd respondent was
disallowed by the Board of Review. In 1979 a further application was made by
the 3rd respondent for a divesting of the premises. This too was refused by
the Commissioner. The 3rd respondent did not appeal therefrom to the Board of
Review. In 1981, the 3rd respondent made yet another application, for a
divesting of the premises. That application was inquired into despite
objections

264

by the petitioners. Thereafter, the Commissioner decided to divest himself of
the ownership of the two premises and with the prior approval of the 1st
respondent (the Minister) by order published in the Gazette No. 365 dated
30.8.85 divested himself of the ownership of the premises. By letters dated
18.2.86 the Commissioner notified the petitioners of the divesting.

**Held :**

1\. The petitioner had duly applied to the Commissioner under section 9 of the
Law to purchase the premises. Hence, they had locus standi to seek writs of
certiorari (Perera v. Karunaratne (1997) 1 Sri LR 148 distinguished)

2\. The Commissioner failed to communicate his decision to divest himself of
the ownership of the premises prior to obtaining the Minister's approval for
such divesting in terms of s. 17A of the Law. Such failure deprived the
petitioners their right to appeal to the Board of Review under section 39 of
the Law against the Commissioner's decision. That failure occasioned a breach
of the principles of natural justice. It followed that the impugned divesting
order is null and void.

_Per_ Wadugodapitiya, J.

'It appears that in terms of section 39 (3) of the Law, the determination of
the Board of Review upon the appeal made by the 3rd respondent in respect of
his first application to divest was final and that the 2nd respondent was
wrong to have entertained the 3rd respondent's second and third applications
for divesting.

**Cases referred to :**

1. _Perera v. Karunaratne_ (1997) 1 Sri LR 148.  
_  
_ 2. _Caderamanpulle v. Pieter Keuneman_ SC appeal No. 15/79 SC minutes 19
September, 1980.  
  
3. _Julian v. Sirisena Cooray_ (1993) 1 Sri LR 238.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera,_ PC with _Keerthi Sri Gunawardena_ for the appellant.

_K Sripavan,_ DSG for the 1st and 2nd respondents.

_Romesh de Silva,_ PC with _Palitha Kumarasinghe_ for the 3rd respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**265**

March 9, 1999.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

It is regretted that the delay in writing this judgment was due to matters
beyond my control. The briefs were misplaced and the judgment has been written
no sooner they were found.

It was agreed that both these appeals be taken up for hearing together, since,
expect for the identity of the premises, the facts are identical.

The appellants in both these appeals were the tenants of premises Nos. 41 2/2
and 43 2/2, Gregory's Road, Colombo 7; of both of which, the 3rd respondent
was the owner on the date of commencement of the Ceiling on Housing Property
Law, No. 1 of 1973 (the Law) **. . .** In terms of section 8 of the above Law,
the 3rd respondent declared both premises as 'surplus houses" which he (3rd
respondent) did not wish to retain ownership of. The 3rd respondent gave
notice to the two petitioners of the above declaration. Thereupon, both
petitioners made applications in terms of the Law, to the 2nd respondent, with
notice to the 3rd respondent (which the 3rd respondent does not deny), for the
purchase of premises Nos. 41 2/2 and 43 2/2, Gregory's Road, Colombo 7, which
had now vested in the 2nd respondent. It is important to point out that the
2nd respondent filed affidavits in the Court of Appeal, which affidavits have
been marked A9 and A7, respectively. According to these affidavits, the 2nd
respondent admits in paragraph 5 thereof that applications were made to him by
the petitioner for the purchase of the premises in question. Thereafter, the
said premises were offered by the 2nd respondent to the petitioners for
purchase, which offer was accepted by the petitioners; in pursuance of which,
on 18.3.77, the 2nd respondent purported to enter into Agreements of Sale with
the petitioners for the sale to them of the said premises, and, as directed by
the 2nd respondent the petitioners duly made the requisite monthly payments
towards the purchase price to the 2nd respondent (which he accepted and
acknowledged) and also paid all Municipal rates and taxes to the

266

Colombo Municipal Council. Although these directions were given, the 2nd
respondent whilst not denying the existence of the Agreements, says that the
said Agreements of Sale were, however, not signed by him or by any of his
officers. It appears, however, that the 2nd respondent in fact offered the
premises to the appellants for purchase, whereupon they accepted the said
offer and, at  the office of the 2nd respondent, signed their respective
Agreements in the presence of two witnesses each, for the purchase of the
premises. The 2nd respondent however has not signed the Agreements, but has
accepted all payments made by the appellants towards the purchase price and
issued the necessary receipts therefor. His not signing the Agreements is, of
course, his own fault and not that of the petitioners, and the petitioners
cannot be made to suffer for this omission on the part of the 2nd respondent.

However, all this notwithstanding, it appears that in 1976 the 3rd respondent
made an application to the 2nd respondent to divest ownership of the said
premises under section 17A (1) of the Law, which application was refused by
the 2nd respondent. The 3rd respondent thereupon appealed to the Board of
Review which disallowed the appeal and upheld the order of the 2nd respondent.
Undaunted, the 3rd respondent in 1979, made a further application to the 2nd
respondent to divest ownership of the said premises under section 17A (1) of
the Law. This too was refused by the 2nd respondent. The 3rd respondent did
not appeal there from to the Board of Review. It, however, appears that by
letter dated 8.7.81, the petitioners were informed that the 3rd respondent had
made yet another application to the 2nd respondent to divest ownership of the
premises. and further that the 1st respondent would hold an inquiry on 25.8.81
to determine whether the ownership of the premises should be divested. In this
connection, it appears that in terms of section 39 (3) of the Law, the
determination of the Board of Review upon the appeal made by the 3rd
respondent in respect of his first application to divest was final and that
the 2nd respondent was wrong to have even entertained the 3rd respondents
second and third applications for divesting. The petitioners on their part
objected to the holding of such an inquiry. This, however, was not a matter on
which leave to appeal was granted in the instant Appeals.

267

After unsuccessful litigation by the petitioners (in the Court of Appeal
Applications Nos. 958/81 & 963/81) to stop the 2nd respondent from holding the
inquiry and to give effect to the terms of the Agreements of Sale between the
petitioners and the 2nd respondent, the inquiry into the question of divesting
the premises commenced. The petitioners state that the reasons set out by the
3rd respondent requesting divesting were never made known to them although
they asked for them. Written submissions were tendered by both parties and the
petitioners continued to make their payments to the 2nd respondent for which
official receipts were issued. Thereafter, the petitioners received letters
dated 18.2.86 (A5 and A3) from the 2nd respondent informing them that the
premises had been divested. The relevant Gazette notification appeared in
Gazette No. 365 of 30.8.85 (A6 and A4), stating, inter alia, that the
divesting had been done "with the prior approval of the Minister" (1 R). It
appears that although the Gazette is dated 30.8.85, the letters of the 2nd
respondent notifying the petitioners of the -divesting are dated 18.2.86.

The petitioners complain that as the decision of the 2nd respondent to divest
was not communicated to them by the 2nd respondent (prior to obtaining the
Minister's approval; and prior to the publication of the order in the Gazette)
they were deprived of their statutory right to appeal to the Board of Review
under section 39 of the Law.

They, thereupon, made applications to the Court of Appeal for writs of
Certiorari to quash the orders of the 2nd respondent divesting the said
premises.

Before the Court of Appeal, the 2nd respondent, in paragraphs 12 and 13 of his
affidavits, admitted that his decision to divest was not communicated to the
petitioners before publication in the Gazette and went on to state: " I
consent to have the documents. marked P3 and P4 (now A5 and A3 and also A6 and
A4) quashed by Your Lordships' Court".

It is of significance also, that the 3rd respondent (the owner) in his
affidavits in the Court of Appeal himself agrees with the 2nd

268

respondent and says, "I agree with the averments contained in paragraphs 12
and 13 of the affidavit of the 2nd respondent". Thus, both the 2nd and 3rd
respondents consented to the quashing of the divesting Order. This is
precisely what the two petitioners had asked the Court of Appeal to do.
However, this notwithstanding the Court of Appeal dismissed both applications,
on the grounds that:

(a) "the petitioners have no legal right to have been informed of the
reasons/decisions of the Commissioner to divest the said premises,"

(b) "Nor have they any legal rights which could be enforced by an appeal from
such a decision to the Board of Review", and

(c) the 2nd respondent has exercised his statutory authority lawfully,

(d) in terms of the decision in Perera v. Karunaratne (post), the applications
had to be dismissed.

Having erroneously found as a fact that, "Admittedly they (the appellants)
have not made applications to purchase the premises under section 9 of the
Law", the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal proceeded to base himself on
the decision in _Perera v. Karunaratne_ (1) (which I shall advert to later,
and which in my view does not apply to the appeals before me) and hold against
the appellants.

The appellants appealed to this Court against the decision of the Court of
Appeal upon the following main grounds:

i. the failure of the 2nd respondent to communicate his decision or
determination in respect of the 3rd respondent's application to divest the
ownership of the premises after inquiry and, before seeking the approval of
the 1st respondent in terms of section 17A (1) of the Law; was wrong in law.

269

ii. the consequential depriving and denial to the appellants of their
statutory right of appeal to the. Board of Review against any "decision or
determination of the Commissioner" was a violation of their statutory right of
appeal;

iii. the 2nd respondent divested the ownership of the premises only upon the
3rd application of the 3rd respondent, which he had no power to do, having
refused the first two applications. The appellants complain that the learned
Judge of the Court of Appeal did not deal with this matter at all; and

iv. the Court of Appeal had erroneously proceeded on the basis that although
the premises were declared to be surplus, the appellants had not made any
applications for the purchase of the said premises, despite the express
admission by the 2nd respondent in his affidavits where he states: I only
admit that an application was made to me by the petitioner for the purchase of
the premises in question".

The 3rd respondent on the other hand prays that the appeals be dismissed for
the reason that:

i. the appellants have not made any application to the 2nd respondent for the
purchase of the premises within the time prescribed in section 9 of the law,
(viz within 4 months of the commencement of the Law) and that, therefore, the
appellants have no locus standi to make an application for Writs of
Certiorari, and

ii. that the decision of the 2nd respondent to divest was duty communicated to
the appellant by a writing dated 18th February, 1986, by the 2nd respondent
and therefore the appellants could have appealed to the Board of Review under
section 39 of the Law.

Special leave to appeal was granted by this Court in respect of the following
questions only:

270

1\. Was there evidence that the tenant had made an application in terms of
section 9, and if not, had he locus standi?

2\. Was the Court of Appeal in error when it held that the petitioner
admittedly had not applied for the purchase of the premises, and thereupon
proceeded to hold that the petitioner had no right to be informed of the
Commissioner's decision to divest?

3\. Was the Commissioner. under a duty to communicate the fact of divesting to
the petitioner?

4\. Was the Commissioner under a duty to communicate his order to divest under
section 17(A), to the petitioner?

5\. If so, has there been a failure to communicate such decision to the
petitioner?

6\. What was the order which was required to be communicated to the parties?

If I may first take up questions Nos. 1 and 2 above, it appears that the most
important matter upon which the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal
proceeded, was his erroneous finding of fact that, "Admittedly they (the
appellants) have not made applications to purchase the premises under section
9 of the Law;" the consequence being that they had no locus standi to question
the validity of the 2nd respondent's decision to divest.

He does not say, however, where or in what context or by whom this alleged
admission was made. Nowhere were we able to find any such admission; nor was
learned President's Counsel able to enlighten us as regards this mystery.
Certainly, it is clear that neither of the appellants has stated anywhere that
they ever made any such admission. On the contrary each of the appellants
stoutly maintains that, "I duly made application to the Commissioner of
National Housing (2nd respondent) with simultaneous notice to the 3rd
respondent for the purchase of premises No. 41 2/2, (and No. 43 2/2) Gregory's
Road, Colombo 7" (paragraph 5 of appellant's affidavit). By way of answer,

271

the only other person who would know about this matter (viz the 2nd
respondent) says in paragraph 5 of his affidavits: "Answering the averments
contained in paragraph 5 of the affidavit (of the appellants), I only admit
that an application was made to me by the petitioner for the purchase of the
premises in question." (The numbering of the paragraphs in the appellant's
affidavit in the Court of Appeal is the same). The 3rd respondent, in his
affidavits refrains from answering the said paragraph 5. In any event he does
not deny it; nor does he seek to question or cast doubts upon it. Further, it
appears that the 2nd respondent has expressly admitted the -averments of the
appellants where the latter state: "Thereafter the said house was offered by
the 2nd respondent for purchase, which offer was accepted by me". In any
event, it is clear that nowhere has the 2nd respondent stated that the said
applications were defective or invalid or, not duly made, or that they were
found wanting in any particular in terms of section 9 of the Law. The contrary
seems to be the true state of things, where the said applications were in fact
accepted by the 2nd respondent, and were followed up with Agreements to Sell,
which were drawn up by him and signed by the appellants in his office before
the necessary witnesses, but which he himself neglected to sign. Payments as
directed by the 2nd respondent towards the purchase price were also made by
the appellants and accepted by the 2nd respondent who issued official receipts
therefor. All these steps were quite unnecessary and uncalled for if the
appellants had not made the requisite applications to purchase the premises.

What appears to have happened seems to be that the learned Judge of the Court
of Appeal, having erroneously found as a fact that, "Admittedly they (the
appellants) have not made applications to purchase the premises under section
9 of the Law.", proceeded to base himself on the decision in Perera v.
Karunaratne (supra) and held against the appellants. It appears that the facts
in the above case (otherwise known as the Baur's case) were quite different to
those in the instant case. In the Baur's case, the tenants of the Flats in
question had not made applications to the Commissioner of National Housing to
purchase any of the Flats (except for one who applied, not to the
Commissioner, but to the Board of Review nearly 8 years after the stipulated
four months). Further, the Flats had not

272

been offered for sale by the Commissioner to any of the tenants and none of
them was making any payments to the Commissioner towards the purchase price.
On the contrary, the tenants continued to pay their monthly rent to their
landlord. In the circumstances the Court rightly held that the tenants had no
locus standi to question the validity of the Commissioner's decision. All they
had were rights of tenancy. They had no legitimate expectation of becoming
owners of the Flats. It is thus quite clear that Baur's case is quite
different, and has no application to the two Appeals before us. The Court of
Appeal was in error in holding that the decision in Baur's case applied to the
applications before him, and erred in adopting the following dictum from that
case, viz "In the absence of proper applications before him, the 1st
respondent (Commissioner) was under no administrative duty to notice the
appellants or give them a hearing prior to divesting". (emphasis mine). But
having done so, and despite the fact that there were in fact two applications,
the Court of Appeal in the instant cases, went on to hold as follows: "Thus,
the petitioners have no legal right to have been informed of the
reasons/decisions of the Commissioner to divest the said premises. Nor have
they any legal rights which could be enforced by an appeal from such a
decision to the Board of Review". This conclusion is clearly wrong.

Therefore, for the reasons set out above, I hold:

(i) that the appellants in these two cases did in fact make applications to
purchase the said premises and that they were in conformity with the law as
set out in section 9 of the Law;

(ii) that the appellants did have locus standi to file applications for Writs
of Certiorari;

(iii) that the Court of Appeal erred when it held that the petitioners
admittedly had not made applications to purchase the premises, and proceeded
to hold that the petitioners had no right to be informed of the 2nd
respondent's decision to divest.

273

I now turn to the other questions on which leave to appeal was granted.

As referred to earlier, the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal held (inter
alia) that the petitioners did not have "any legal rights which could be
enforced by an appeal from such a decision to the Board of Review". In other
words, in the mind of the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal, no question of
a right to appeal to the Board of Review ever accrued to the appellants, and
section 39 of the Law did not therefore apply to them. Thus, if they had no
right of appeal, then it followed that they had no right to be told of the
decision of the 2nd respondent, and so, the 2nd respondent was under no duty
to inform the appellants of his decision to divest. I am unable to agree with
this line of reasoning of the Court of Appeal which stems from the erroneous
application to these appeals before us, of the decision in Baur's case.

As set out above, what Baur's case was, "in the absence of proper applications
before him, the 1st respondent (Commissioner) was under no administrative duty
to notice the appellants **. . .** prior to divesting". In the instant Appeals
there were in fact two applications and, it would follow that the 2nd
respondent was indeed under a duty to inform the appellants of the fact that
he had taken a decision to divest. In fact, the dictates of the principles of
natural justice would demand as much. The facts clearly show that the
appellants did in fact have a legitimate expectation of purchasing the
premises in question and that a decision to divest would have affected them
adversely. It is also clear that they had locus standi to question the
validity of the 2nd respondent's decision to divest, and therefore were
clothed with a right of appeal to the Board of Review under sec. 39 of the
Law. Thus, if the 2nd respondent refrained from informing the appellants, they
would surely be deprived of their legitimate right of appeal.

The 2nd respondent in fact admits that he did not inform the appellants of his
decision to divest, when in paragraph 12 of his affidavits he says: "I admit
the averments contained in paragraph 25 of the affidavit (of the appellants)
and state that the decision to divest

274

the premises in question has not been communicated to the petitioner before
such order was Gazetted''

It is clear then, that there has in fact been a failure to communicate, and
that this failure has resulted in the appellants being deprived of their right
to appeal to the Board of Review under section 39 of the Law. I am of the
view, therefore, that the 2nd respondent was indeed under a duty to inform the
appellants of his decision to divest, so as to enable them to appeal.

In fact, it has been held that the Commissioner is under a duty to inform the
parties of his decision to notify the Minister, so that any party may exercise
his right of appeal to the Board of Review. The failure to so inform the
parties rendered the Commissioner's notification to the Minister and the
subsequent vesting null and void. _Caderamanpulle v. Pieter Keuneman_ (2).

The case of _Julian v. Sirisena Cooray_ (3) is of much relevance in this
connection. Here, the Commissioner of National Housing, after inquiry, made a
decision not to vest the premises in question; thus preventing the appellant
(tenant) from purchasing it. He made his recommendation to the Minister
accordingly, whereupon the latter having agreed, decided not to vest the
premises, and made order accordingly, rejecting the appellant's application.
It was only thereafter that the Commissioner informed the appellant by letter,
of the Minister's decision to reject his (appellant's) application. What is of
importance is the fact that after the Commissioner made his decision not to
vest the premises, he had failed to communicate such decision to the appellant
before making his recommendation to the Minister against the vesting. Agreeing
with and following the decision in Caderamanpulle v. Keuneman, the Court held
that such failure on the part of the Commissioner to communicate his own
decision to the appellant vitiates the decision of the Minister to reject the
appellant's application. Accordingly, the Court quashed the order of the
Minister, and directed the Commissioner to communicate his own

275

decision to the appellant to enable the appellant to prefer an appeal to the
Board of Review in terms of section 39 of the Law if he so desired.

I, therefore, hold that the 2nd respondent was in fact under a duty to
communicate his decision to divest to the appellants before obtaining the 1st
respondent's approval and that his failure to have done so has occasioned a
failure on his (2nd respondent's) part to observe the principles of natural
justice and was clearly wrong. It follows, and I so hold, that the subsequent
divesting order by the 2nd respondent (A6 and A4) is null and void.

I must, before concluding, make reference once more, to paragraph 13 of the
2nd respondent's affidavits, in which he says : "Answering the averments
contained in paragraph 26 of the affidavit (of the appellants), I state that I
consent to have the documents marked P3 and P4 (A5 and A3 and also A6 and A4)
in the appeals before us) quashed by Your Lordships' Court". (Letters A5 and
A3 dated 18.2.86, inform the appellants that the two premises in question have
already been divested and that the divesting order has been published in
Gazette No. 365 of 30.8.85; which Gazette is marked A6 and A4). The 2nd
respondent continued to maintain this position at the hearing before us, and
learned DSG appearing for him consented to the quashing of A5 and A3 and also
A6 and A4.

Thus, the 2nd respondent of his own volition admits to his having made a
mistake and consents to its being rectified, and, it is of no small
significance that even the owner of the premises (3rd respondent) agrees, when
he says in paragraph 4 of his affidavits: "I agree with the averments
contained in paragraphs 12 and 13 of the affidavit of the 2nd respondent".
This, notwithstanding, learned President's Counsel for the 3rd respondent
stoutly resisted the quashing of A5 and A3, and also A6 and A4, and
strenuously contested these two appeals before us, insisting that they be
dismissed, which submission, I have, of course, found to be without merit.

276

For the reasons aforesaid :

(i) I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 30.4.96 and allow
both appeals;

(ii) I issue a mandate in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the
order of the Commissioner of National Housing (2nd respondent) divesting
himself of the ownership of premises Nos. 41 2/2 and 43 2/2, Gregory' 's Road,
Colombo 7, which order is published in, Government Gazette No. 365 of 30.8.85
(marked A6 and A4) respectively, and

(iii) I direct the 2nd respondent to communicate to each of the appellants
forthwith, his decision to divest (in respect of premises Nos. 41 2/2 and 43
2/2, Gregory's Road, Colombo 7) to enable the appellants to appeal to the
Board of Review in terms of section 39 of the Law, if they so desire.

The appellants in both appeals will be entitled to their costs payable by the
3rd respondent.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeals allowed, certiorari issued._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/9.html_  

