##  Seynath Umma v. Rajabdeen - SLR - 134, Vol 2 of 1997 [1995] LKSC 17;
(1997) 2 Sri LR 134 (31 July 1995)

134

SEYNATH UMMA  

v.

RAJABDEEN



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J.

AND RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 129/94.

C.A. NO. 333/86 (F).

D.C. NEGOMBO NO. 3074/L.

JULY 31, 1995.



Civil Procedure Code - Vacation of ex parte Decree - Section 86(2) of the Code
- Misdirections of fact and law by the trial judge.

** **

**Held:**



In rejecting the medical certificate produced by the defendant in support of
her application to vacate the ex parte judgment and decree, the trial judge
misdirected himself on the law when he faulted the defendant for failing to
come into court and produce the medical certificate prior to the date fixed
for the ex parte trial. In terms of section 82(2) of the Civil Procedure Code,
the defendant could not have come into court prior to the entering of the
judgment against her for default.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_M. 1. Q. M. Gazzali_ with _Ms. S. M. Senaratne_ for defendant-appellant.



M. Y M. Fatz for plaintiff-respondent.

_ _

_Cur. adv vult._



July 31, 1995.  


**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

** **

The plaintiff instituted these proceedings in the District Court for the
ejectment of the defendant from the land described in the schedule to the
plaint. The plaintiff pleaded that the defendant's occupation of the land was
with his leave and licence. In her answer, the defendant denied the
plaintiff's claim.



The first date on which the case was taken up for hearing was 2.1.85. On that
date issues were framed and the case was

**135**



postponed for further trial on 1.4.85. The defendant was absent and the
registered Attorney-at-Law for the defendant informed the court that he had no
instructions. Thereupon the court fixed the case for ex parte trial on
21.6.85. On 21.6.85 judgment was entered against the defendant for default and
a copy of the decree was served on the defendant on 5.9.85. On 19.9.85 the
defendant made an application to set aside the judgment and decree entered
against her for default, pleading that she was unwell and hence was unable to
attend court on 1.4.85. The District Court, however, refused to set aside the
judgment entered upon default. Against this order, the defendant appealed
unsuccessfully to the Court of Appeal. The defendant has now preferred an
appeal to this Court.



The defendant was a woman of 75 years of age. Prior to 2.1.85 the case had
been fixed for trial on no less than four dates and on all those dates the
defendant had been present in court. Moreover, on 3.2.84 the defendant had
filed her list of witnesses and documents. On 21.5.84 an additional list of
witnesses and documents was filed by the defendant.



It was the position of the defendant, at the inquiry before the District
Court, that she could not attend court on 1.4.85 because she was unwell. In
support of her case, she produced a medical certificate and also called as a
witness the medical practitioner who had issued the medical certificate. The
medical certificate is dated 27.3.85 and states that the defendant "is under
treatment for hypertension." The medical certificate further states "I
recommend her ten days bed rest from 27th March 1985. She is not fit to attend
courts on 1st April 1985." It is right to add that at the hearing before us
Mr. Faiz for the plaintiff respondent very properly did not challenge the
medical certificate, though counsel strenuously contended that the District
Court and the Court of Appeal had correctly rejected the evidence of the
defendant that she was unfit to attend court on 1.4.85.



On the other hand, Mr. Gazzali for the defendant-appellant, contended that the
District Court had misdirected itself both on the facts and on the law.
Turning first to the facts, the District Judge in his order states that he
cannot accept the position that the defendant received treatment on 1.4.85,
the reason being that the doctor did not maintain any document in proof of
that assertion. This statement is

**136**



clearly contrary to the evidence on record. The doctor's evidence was that he
examined the defendant on 27.3.85 and not on 1.4.85; nor was it the claim of
the defendant that she took treatment on 1.4.85. Again, the District Judge
rejects the defendant's evidence that she was unable to submit the medical
certificate to court on 1.4.85, notwithstanding the defendant's uncontradicted
evidence that none of her children were available to have the medical
certificate sent to court on that date.



What is even more. serious is the error of law apparent on a reading of the
order. The District Judge held that the failure of the defendant to come into
court and produce the medical certificate prior to the date fixed for the ex
parte trial (21.6.85), showed a lack of diligence on her part. In so holding,
the District Judge has clearly overlooked the provisions of the Civil
Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, No. 53 of 1980 whereby section 86(1) of the
Civil Procedure Code was repealed. It was the **repealed** section 86(1) which
enabled a defendant to come into court "... at any time **prior** to the
entering of judgment against him for default ..." with the repeal of section
86(1), the defendant could not have come into court prior to the entering of
judgment against him for default. The stage at which the defendant could have
come into court is set out in section 86(2). And it was precisely in terms of
section 86(2) that the defendant made the application. Moreover, the
misreading of section 86 of the Civil Procedure Code influenced the District
Judge's evaluation of the oral testimony.



The Court of Appeal in affirming the Order of the District Court failed to
address itself to the infirmities in that order both on the facts and on the
law, adverted to above.



For these reasons, the appeal is allowed and the judgment of the Court of
Appeal and the order and decree of the District Court are set aside. The
District Court is directed to permit the defendant to proceed with her defence
as from the stage of default. The plaintiff must pay a sum of Rs. 500/- to the
defendant as costs of appeal.



**KULATUNGA, J**. - I agree.

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J**. - I agree.



_Appeal allowed_ _._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/17.html_  

