##  Premachandra v. Major Montague Jayawickrema and Another (Provincial
Governors Case) - SLR - 90, Vol 2 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 17; (1994) 2 Sri LR 90
(1 January 1994)

**90**  

  **PREMACHANDRA**

**v.**

**MAJOR MONTAGUE JAYAWICKREMA AND ANOTHER**

**(PROVINCIAL GOVERNORS' CASE)**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

BANDARANAYAKE, J.,

FERNANDO, J.

S.C. REFERENCE NOS. 2/93 & 3/93.

C.A. APPLICATION NOS. 376/93 & 377/93.

S.C. REFERENCE NOS. 4/93 & 5/93.

C.A. APPLICATION NOS. 378/93 & 379/93.

JULY 07, 08 AND 09, 1993.



_Provincial Councils ‑ Governors' duty to appoint the Chief Ministers ‑
Constitution Article 154F ‑ Appointment of UNP contenders as Chief Ministers ‑
Quo Warranto, Certiorari and Mandamus ‑ Article 154F (4) of the Constitution
excluding the proviso ‑ Article 154F (2) and (6) of the Constitution ‑
Reference under Article 125 of the Constitution ‑ Governor's powers ‑
Justiciability of the exercise of the Governor's power and discretion ‑
Judicial review ‑Infringement of fundamental rights ‑ Constitution, Article
12(1) and (2) ‑ Reference under Article 126(3) to Supreme Court of only the
"question" of infringement of a fundamental right ‑ Validity of such
reference._



Three recognised political parties ‑ the United National Party (UNP), the
Democratic United National Front (DUNF) and the Podujana Eksath Peramuna (PEP)
‑ contested the North‑Western and Southern Provincial Council Elections held
on 17.5.93. No party gained an absolute majority. In the North‑Western
Province Elections the UNP won 25 seats, the PEP won 18 seats and the DUNF won
9 seats. In the Southern Province the UNP won 27 seats, the PEP won 22 seats
and the DUNF won 6 seats.



The Governors of the two Provinces (Major Montague Jayawickrema, Governor of
the North‑Western Province and M. A. Bakeer Markar, Governor of the Southern
Province) were required to appoint Chief Ministers under Article 154F of the
Constitution. The Governors of the two Provinces were faced with rival claims
for appointment as Chief Minister ‑ between G. M. Premachandra of the DUNF,
Petitioner and Gamini Jayawickrema Perera of the UNP (2nd respondent) in the
North ‑Western Province Provincial Council (S.C. Reference 2/93 & 3/93) and
between Amarasiri Gardiyage Hewawasam Dodangoda of the PEP (Petitioner) and M.
S. Amarasiri of the UNP (2nd  respondent) in the Southern Province



**91**  

Provincial Council. (S.C. Reference 4/93 & 5/93). On 21.5.93 the Governor of
the North‑Western Province (Major Montague Jayawickrema) and the Governor of
the Southern Province (M. A. Bakeer Markar) appointed the UNP contenders as
Chief Ministers of the two Provinces.



Each Petitioner thereupon filed two applications in the Court of Appeal: one
for **Quo Warranto** questioning the 2nd respondent's legal right to hold
office as Chief Minister and the other for **Certiorari** to quash the
appointment of the Chief Minister and **Mandamus** to compel the Governor to
appoint the Petitioner as Chief Minister. The four applications were taken up
for hearing together in the Court of Appeal.



As questions of constitutional interpretation arose, the following questions
for reference under Article 125 to the Supreme Court were agreed on:



"1\.        Whether the exercise of the power vested in the Governor of a
Provincial Council (sic) under Article 154F (4) of the Constitution (excluding
the proviso) is solely a matter for his subjective assessment and judgment and
therefore not subject to review by Court?



2.         Whether the power exercised by such Governor under Article 154F (4) of the Constitution (excluding the proviso) and any act done in consequence thereof is not justiciable, and is essentially a matter political in nature?



3.         Whether a decision made by such Governor under Article 154F (4) of the Constitution (excluding the proviso) as to the appointment of a Chief Minister of a Provincial Council could be called in question or set aside by any Court by reason of the provisions of Article 154F (2) of the Constitution?



4.         Whether the decision of the Governor under Article 154F (4) of the Constitution (excluding the proviso) is not subject to judicial review on the basis that such decision does not deny or infringe any legal right of the petitioner in each case?



5.         Whether the Court should not exercise such review on the basis that there is an alternative remedy provided by the Constitution whereby the Governor's decision can be tested in the Council?





**Held:**



1.     There was no proper reference of the matter under Article 126(3) as it was not of the entire "matter" and only the reference under Article 125 required consideration by the Supreme Court. On the objection taken in the Court of Appeal that Court should at least have inquired whether the Chief Ministers wished to furnish additional affidavits, and being an _inter partes_ proceeding, the Court should not have reached a finding that there was _prima facie_ evidence of an infringement of a fundamental right without hearing submission on behalf of the Chief Minister. 

**92**

 2.         It is a cardinal maxim that every power has legal limits, however wide the language of the empowering Act. If the Court finds that the power has been exercised oppressively or unreasonably,  or if there has been some procedural failing, Such as not allowing a person affected to put forward his case, the act may be condemned as unlawful.



3\.         There are no absolute or unfettered discretions in public law;
discretions are conferred on public functionaries in trust for the public, to
be used for the public good, and the propriety of the exercise of such
discretions is to be judged by reference to the purposes for which they were
so entrusted.



4\.         The Governor is given a discretion in order to enable him to
select as Chief Minister the representative best able to command the
confidence of the Council, and thereby to give effect to the wishes of the
people of the Province. That discretion is not given for any other purpose
personal or political.



5\.         Answers to reference under Article 125:



(i)         The exercise of the powers vested in the Governor of a Province
under Article 154F (4), excluding the proviso, is not solely a matter for his
subjective assessment and judgment: it is subject to judicial review by the
Court of Appeal. In applications for _Quo Warranto, Certiorari_ and
_Mandamus,_ the Court of Appeal has power to review the appointment, _inter
afia_ , for unreasonableness, or if made in bad faith, in disregard of the
relevant evidence, or on irrelevant considerations or without evidence.



(ii)        The Governor's selection of a person for appointment as Chief
Minister, under Article 154F (4), excluding the proviso, may require the
consideration of political factors, nevertheless it is not an act which is
purely political in nature, it involves the determination of legal rights,
flowing from constitutional provisions concerning the allocation and exercise
of powers (relating to the administration of the affairs of the Province) by
the elected representatives of the people of the Province. The appointment of
a Chief Minister is justiciable, and there is no self­imposed rule or judicial
restraint which inhibits judicial review.



(iii)       Where a question arises as to whether the Governor must act on
advice, or in his discretion, Article 154F (2) requires him to decide that
question; Article 154F (2) makes his decision on that question final and
precludes anything thereafter done by the Governor being called in question in
any Court on the limited ground "that he ought or ought not to have acted in
his discretion"; that provision does not apply to the appointment of a Chief
Minister under Article 154F (4).



(iv)       The Governor's decision involves a constitutional power and
the duty of the Governor, and a constitutional right of the Petitioners (in
common with

**93**  

the other Councillors) to the proper exercise of such power and duty; judicial
review is not excluded.



(v)        This does not raise any question relating to the interpretation  of
the  Constitution.



**Cases referred to:**



1\. Chandrasekeram v. A.G. - SC References 1-3/92, SC Minutes of 29.6.92.  
2\. Baker v. Carr (1962) 369 US 186.  
3\. Associated Provincial Picture Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corporation [1948]
1 K. B. 223  
4\. Bhut Nath v. State of West Bengal AIR 1974 SC 806, 811.  
5\. Rooke's Case (1598) 5 Co. Rep. 99 b.  
6\. Roberts v. Hopwood [1925] AC 578, 613.  
7\. United States v. Wunderlich [1951] 342 US 98, 101.  
8\. Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale [1971] 75 NLR 67, 82.  
9\. Liversidge v. Anderson (1942) A. C. 206.  
10\. R. v. LR.C. ex. p. Rossminister Ltd. [ 1980] A.C. 952.  
11\. Secretary of State for Education v. Tameside [1977] A.C. 1014, 1047.  
12\. Adegbenro v. Akintola [1963] 3 All E.R. 544, 551.  
13\. Dinesh Chandra v. Charan Singh AIR 1980 Delhi 114, 117.  
14\. Madan Murari v. Charan Singh AIR 1980 Calcutta 95.  
15\. Dissanayake v. Kaleel SC (Special) Nos. 4-11/91 S.C. Minutes of 3.12.91.  
16\. State of Rajasthan v. Union of India AIR 1977 SC 1361, 1412 - 13.  
17\. Nixon v. Harndon (1926) 273 US 536.  
18\. Brown v. Board of Education (1953) 347 US 483.  
19\. Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for Services [1985] 1 AC 374,
418.  
20\. U.N.R. Rao v. Smt. Indira Gandhi 1971 (Supp. S.C.R. 46)  
21\. R. v. Governor of Wormwood Scrubbs Prison [1920] 2 K. B. 305.  
22\. The King v. Halliday [ 1917] A.C. 160, 170.  
23\. Jogendra Nath v. State ofAssam AIR 1982 Gauhati 25, 34.  




Reference under Article 125 and 126(3) of the Constitution (see Judgment of
Court of Appeal reported in [1993] 2 Sri L.R. 294.



_H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _R. K. W Goonesekera, Gomin Dayasiri, Nihal
Jayamanne, PC., Nimal Siripala de Silva, Nigel Hatch, Elmo Perera, N. M.
Musafer and M. N._

_Amerasinghe_ for the Petitioners.



_Tilak Marapana, P.C., Attorney ‑General, _ with _K. C. Kamalasabayson,
D.S.G., Kumar Paul S. C., W. D. D. de Alwis S. C_. for the __ 1st  Respondent
(Governors).



**94**

  _L. C. Seneviratne, P.C._ with _S. C._ _Crosette ‑Thambiah, D. H. N.
Jayamaha, Daya Pelpola, Naufel Abdul Rahuman, Lakshman Perera, Ronald Perera
_and _A. Brito­Muthunayagam_ for __ the 2nd Respondent.

_Cur. adv vult._

 August 16, 1993.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J. READ THE FOLLOWING ORDER OF THE COURT:**



**ORDER OF THE COURT**



Three recognised political parties ‑ United National Party ("UNP"), the
Democratic United National Front ("DUNF") and the Podujana Eksath Peramuna
("PEP") ‑ contested the North‑Western and Southern Provincial Council
Elections held on 17.5.93. No party gained an absolute majority. The official
results announced on 19.5.93 were:



North ‑Western Province                                  Southern Province



UNP                                                   25
27

PEP                                                    18
22

DUNF                                                  9
6





The Governors of the two Provinces were required to appoint Chief Ministers,
under Article 154F of the Constitution, which provides:



"(1) There shall be a Board of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head
and not more than four other Ministers to aid and advise the Governor of a
Province in the exercise of his functions. The Governor shall, in the exercise
of his functions, act, in accordance with such advice, except in so far as he
is by or under the Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of
them in his discretion.



(2) If any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as
respects which the Governor is by or under this Constitution required to act
in his discretion, the decision of the Governor in his discretion shall be
final, and the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called
in question in any Court on the ground that he ought or ought not have acted
in his discretion. The exercise of the Governor's discretion shall be on the
President's directions.

**95**  

(3). The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by the
Ministers to the Governor shall not be inquired into in any Court.



(4) The Governor shall appoint as Chief Minister, the member of the Provincial
Council constituted for that Province who, in his opinion, is best able to
command the support of a majority of the members of that Council;



Provided that where more then one‑half of the members elected to a Provincial
Council are members of one political party, the Governor shall appoint the
leader of that political party in the Council as Chief Minister.



(5) The Governor shall, on the advice of the Chief Minister, appoint from
among the members of the Provincial Council constituted for that Province, the
other Ministers.



(6) The Board of Ministers shall be collectively responsible and answerable to
the Provincial Council."



The proviso to Article 154F (4) did not apply as the UNP did not have more
than one half of the total number of Councillors in both Provinces. The
Governors of the two Provinces were faced with rival claims for appointment as
Chief Minister; in the North‑Western Province, between the Petitioner in CA
Application Nos. 376/93 and 377/93, a DUNF Councillor, and the 2nd Respondent,
a UNP Councillor; in the Southern Province, between the Petitioner in CA
Application Nos. 378/93 and 379/93, a PEP Councillor, and the 2nd Respondent,
a UNP Councillor.



Between 19.05.93 and 21.05.93, the Petitioners repeatedly asserted, both
orally and in writing to the respective Governors, that they were able to
command the confidence of the respective Councils; each submitted documentary
evidence consisting of a letter dated 19.05.93 signed by the Secretaries of
the two parties that their Councillors had decided to work together to form
the Provincial Council administration, as well as written declarations and
affidavits from all those Councillors manifesting their support for the
Petitioners.

**96**  



The 2nd Respondent, in each case, submitted a letter dated 19.05.93 to the
Governor, in which he claimed that he was able to command the support of a
majority of the members of the Council, but did not explain how he expected to
obtain this majority; however, he orally informed the Governor that he had
discussions with (unidentified) Councillors from the other parties and that he
was confident of obtaining additional support from a few Councillors; on the
morning of 21.05.93 he again met the Governor, and asserted that he was
certain of obtaining the necessary additional support, as some Councillors
(again unidentified) had assured him of their support that same morning; he
gave the Governor a letter referring to these matters, and requested that he
be appointed Chief Minister and given the opportunity to prove, in the
Council, that he commanded the support of the majority of the Council. On the
same day, both Governors appointed the UNP contenders as Chief Ministers of
the two Provinces.



Each Petitioner thereupon filed two applications in the Court of Appeal; one
for _Quo_ _Warranto_ questioning the 2nd  Respondent's legal right to hold
office as Chief Minister, and the other for _Certiorari_ to quash the
appointment of the Chief Minister, and _Mandamus_ to compel the Governor to
appoint the Petitioner as Chief Minister.



The four applications were taken up for hearing together in the Court of
Appeal on 21.06.93. On the next day, in response to an inquiry from the Court,
Mr. L. C. Seneviratne, P.C., appearing for the Chief Ministers, made his
submissions in regard to certain preliminary objections of law. The Court and
all Counsel agreed that questions of constitutional interpretation arose, and
Counsel were invited to assist Court by framing those questions. At this
stage, for the first time and without prior notice to the Respondents, Mr. H.
L. de Silva, P.C., appearing for the Petitioners, submitted that he desired to
make an application for a reference under Article 126 (3) as well. After a
short adjournment, the questions for reference under Article 125, as agreed to
by all Counsel, were read out in open court, and then finalised as follows:



"(1)      Whether the exercise of the power vested in the Governor of a
Provincial Council [sic] under Article 154F (4) of the Constitution (excluding
the proviso) is solely a matter for his subjective assessment and judgment and
therefore not subject to review by Court ?



**97**  

(2)        Whether the power exercised by such Governor under Article 154F (4)
of the Constitution (excluding the proviso) and any act done in consequence
thereof is not justiciable, and is essentially a matter political in nature?



(3)        Whether a decision made by such Governor under Article 154F (4) of
the Constitution (excluding the proviso) as to the appointment of a Chief
Minister of a Provincial Council could be called in question or set aside by
any Court by reason of the provisions of Article 154F (2) of the Constitution?



(4)        Whether the decision of the Governor under Article 154F (4) of the
Constitution (excluding the proviso) is not subject to judicial review on the
basis that such decision does not deny or infringe any legal right of the
petitioner in each case?



(5)        Whether the Court should not exercise such review on the basis that
there is an alternative remedy provided by the Constitution whereby the
Governor's decision can be tested in the Council?



Thereupon, Mr. de Silva made a formal application for a reference under
Article 126(3) stating that the evidence disclosed that the Governors' acts
involved an infringement of Article 12 (1) and (2). Mr. Seneviratne pointed
out that an allegation of the infringement of a fundamental right under
Article 12 had neither been pleaded, nor even referred to in the oral
submissions made on 21.06.93; he further submitted that the Court of Appeal
should hear all parties before coming to a finding (for the purpose of making
a reference under Article 126(3)), that there was _prima facie_ evidence of an
infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right.



Without any such hearing, the Court of Appeal recorded the submissions made on
behalf of the Petitioners, and made the following order:



"Having considered the submission of Counsel, we are of the view that there is
_prime facie_ evidence of an infringement of the fundamental rights of the
Petitioners as submitted by learned President's Counsel for the petitioners.
We accordingly refer the

  **98**  

infringement for determination by their Lordships of the Supreme Court, in
terms of Article 126 (3) of the Constitution."



It is manifest that the Court of Appeal did not refer the four pending
applications in their entirety, but only the "question" of the
**infringement** of a fundamental right.



**1\. VALIDITY OF THE REFERENCE UNDER ARTICLE 126(3)**



A reference can be made under Article 125 only of a "question" of
constitutional interpretation; the Court making the reference retains
jurisdiction in respect of the case, and would ultimately decide the case,
applying the interpretation given by this Court. However, a reference under
Article 126 (3) is not of "question", but of the "matter" in its entirety (see
_Chandrasekeram v. A.G_., (1)). The Court of Appeal did not refer the four
pending applications, or "matters", in their entirety. The jurisdiction of
this Court is defined by the Constitution. This Court has no original
jurisdiction over these four pending writ applications, and could acquire such
jurisdiction only if those "matters" were properly referred by the Court of
Appeal.



It was suggested that this was only a technical irregularity, and that this
Court should proceed as if the Court of Appeal had intended to refer the
entire matter. It is clear from the proceedings of 21.06.93 and 22.06.93 that
the Court of Appeal was troubled by the preliminary objections, particularly
the preclusive clause. It was a reference under Article 125 that the Court was
primarily concerned about ‑ and that is consistent with an intention to retain
its jurisdiction to hear and determine the four applications. When the
question of the infringement of a fundamental right was suddenly raised, the
Court seems to have desired the advantage of having that question too finally
determined by this Court; but there is nothing to suggest that the Court of
Appeal even at that stage wished to divest itself, totally, of its
jurisdiction over the pending applications. Such an intention to divest itself
of jurisdiction cannot lightly be attributed to the Court of Appeal. We are
faced with two inconsistent references. Upon the reference under Article 125,
the Court of Appeal retained jurisdiction in respect of the "matter", which
this Court could not determine; upon



**99**  

a proper reference under Article 126 (3) the "matter" would have come for
determination to this Court, which would not have had to advise the Court of
Appeal upon the questions which troubled them. We have therefore to act on one
or the other. We hold, that there was no proper reference of the matter under
Article 126 (3), and that only the reference under Article 125 requires our
consideration.



Even if this Court did have some discretion to treat the reference under
Article 126 (3) as being of the entire "matter", there are good reasons why
that discretion should not be exercised. The writ jurisdiction is
traditionally available to review the decision‑making process, and not the
correctness of the decision itself ‑ except, to a limited extent, on the
ground of unreasonableness. It may well be, as Article 126 (3) suggests, that
today the writ jurisdiction under Article 140 of the Constitution has expanded
to permit a direct challenge to the merit of a decision, even on the facts,
for infringement of fundamental rights; if so, an allegation that the
Governors had exercised their discretion under Article 154F (4) in a manner
violative of Article 12 could properly have been included in the applications
for _Certiorari._ But the Petitioners did not plead this at the outset, nor
did they seek to amend their pleadings, and thus the issues of fact and law
arising for determination were not made clear; nor were the Respondents given
the opportunity of answering that specific charge. It is true, as submitted on
behalf of the Petitioners, that it was the Governors acts that were being
impugned as violative of fundamental rights; and that the learned
Attorney‑General, on their behalf, did not complain of any lack of opportunity
to tender additional evidentiary material, and invited this Court to determine
the whole matter. But it was not the Governors alone who had an interest in
defending their acts, for the Chief Ministers (being parties claiming rights
flowing from such acts), were also entitled to be afforded a proper
opportunity of justifying those acts. Mr. Seneviratne objected to the
reference both in the Court of Appeal and in this Court. We are of the view
that when that objection was taken in the Court of Appeal, that Court should
at least have inquired whether the Chief Ministers wished to furnish
additional affidavits; and being an _inter partes_ proceeding, the Court
should not have reached a finding that there was _prima facie_ evidence of an
infringement of a fundamental right without hearing submissions on behalf of
the Chief Ministers.

**100**

  **2\. REFERENCE UNDER ARTICLE 125**



The questions referred to this Court primarily involve two basic issues. Is
the exercise of the power vested in the Governor of a Province (and not of the
Provincial Council as stated in the reference) under Article 154F(4),
excluding the proviso, immune from judicial review, either because it is a
purely subjective discretion, or because it is intrinsically of such a
(political) nature that it is not fit for judicial review ? In any event, has
judicial review been excluded by Article 154F(2) or Article 154F(6)?



It is unfortunate that these questions have not been framed with greater
precision, to enable this Court to express its opinions on the real matters
which arise in the case. As framed, the answer "No" to questions (1) and (2)
will be of little assistance to the Court of Appeal in determining the grounds
on which judicial review is permissible. The function of this Court under
Article 125 is not to attempt to provide comprehensive answers (to abstract or
academic questions) setting out all the available grounds of judicial review,
but rather to provide answers for the questions which actually arose in the
course of the proceedings in the Court of Appeal. It would have been far more
satisfactory if, after hearing parties, the questions had been framed with
specific reference to the grounds of challenge relevant to, and arising from
the facts of, the pending applications. However, the learned Attorney‑General
and Mr. de Silva urged that this Court should proceed to elaborate a negative
answer by indicating, although not exhaustively, at least some of the relevant
grounds of review. To avoid further delay, in a matter of undoubted urgency
and public importance to two Provinces, we will endeavour to answer the
questions with some degree of elaboration.



**3\. GOVERNOR'S DISCRETION UNDER ARTICLE 154F(4)**



The Petitioners' first contention was that the exercise of the Governor's
discretion was subject to review according to the same norms, principles and
tests applicable **** in public law to other discretions; thus, it was
reviewable, _inter alia,_ for unreasonableness, or if made in bad faith, or in
disregard of the relevant evidence, or on



**101**  

irrelevant considerations, or without evidence. Secondly, the fact that the
exercise of that discretion involves political considerations does not make it
a "political question", of the kind which in U.S. Constitutional law (cf.
_Baker v. Carr_ (2)), _is_ sometimes regarded as not justiciable; in any
event, that doctrine was evolved in the context of the strict separation of
powers in the U.S. Constitution, as a means of ensuring that each organ of
government accords a measure of deference to the decisions of the others,
within their legitimate spheres of competence. Our Constitution does not
embody a separation of powers; judicial power is vested in Parliament, and
exercised through the Judiciary; thus there are some matters wherein the
judicial power is exercisable directly or exclusively by Parliament. Finally,
the Constitution expressly provides for certain matters wherein the Judiciary
is required to consider matters with a political flavour (e.g. Articles
38(2)(d), 99(13)(a)), thereby indicating that our law does not recognise any
such exclusion or restriction.



On behalf of the Chief Ministers it was submitted that the phrase "in his
opinion" conferred on the Governor a purely subjective discretion; whom to
appoint as Chief Minister was a matter solely and exclusively for the
Governor's subjective assessment and judgment. In any event, the decision was
essentially political in nature, and for that reason, too, was not reviewable;
it could be tested only by means of a vote in the Provincial Council; and, by
virtue of Article 154F(6) that was the only remedy.



The learned Attorney‑General submitted that while there was a right of review
on the ground of want or excess of jurisdiction (including error of law),
there was only a very limited right of review on other grounds. Article
154F(4) conferred on the Governor a purely subjective discretion, which could
be challenged on the ground of _Wednesbury_ (3) __ unreasonableness (in a
broad sense, including "no evidence", and violation of fundamental rights).
Further, this was a political question beyond review (of _Bhut Nath v. State
of West Bengal_ (4)) not because of a constitutional taboo, but because of the
inadequacy of the Court to decide it; it was a discretion inherently
unsuitable for judicial review; it was a restraint not imposed by law, but
judicially self‑imposed because the judicial process is not

**102**

 equipped to deal with such issues (Clive Lewis, Judicial Remedies in Public
Law, p. 123).



When considering whether the exercise of a statutory power or discretion,
especially one conferred by our Constitution, is subject to review by the
judiciary, certain fundamental principles can never be overlooked. The first
is that our Constitution and system of government are founded on the Rule of
Law; and to prevent the erosion of that foundation is the primary function of
an independent Judiciary .



". . . The rule of law has a number of different meanings and corollaries. Its
primary meaning is that everything must be done according to law. Applied to
the powers of government, this requires that every government authority which
does some act which would otherwise be a wrong (such as taking a man's land),
or which infringes a man's liberty (as by refusing him planning permission),
must be able to justify its action as authorised by law . . .



That is the principle of legality. But the rule of law demands something more,
since otherwise it would be satisfied by giving the government unrestricted
discretionary powers, so that everything that they did was within the law . .
. The secondary meaning of the rule of law, therefore, is that government
should be conducted within a framework of recognised rules and principles
which restrict discretionary power . . ." (Wade, Administrative Law, 5th ed.,
p. 22).



". . . If merely because an Act says that a minister may 'make such order as
he thinks fit', or may do something 'if he is satisfied' as to some fact, the
court were to allow him to act as he liked, a wide door would be opened to
abuse of power and the rule of law would cease to operate.



It is cardinal axiom, accordingly, that every power has legal limits, however
wide the language of the empowering Act. If the court finds that the power has
been exercised oppressively or

**103**  

unreasonably, or if there has been some procedural failing, such as not
allowing a person affected to put forward his case, the act may be condemned
as unlawful. Although lawyers appearing for government departments often argue
that some Act confers unfettered discretion, they are guilty of constitutional
blasphemy. Unfettered discretion, cannot exist where the rule of law reigns.
The notion of unlimited power can have no place in the system. The same truth
can be expressed by saying that all power is capable of abuse, and that the
power to prevent abuse is the acid test if effective judicial control . . ."
(Wade, 5th ed., p. 37).



The second principle seems to flow from the first. As Wade observes:



. . . Statutory power conferred for public purposes is conferred as it were
upon trust, not absolutely ‑ that is to say, it can validly be used only in
the right and proper way which Parliament when conferring it is presumed to
have intended. Although the Crown's lawyers have argued in numerous cases that
unrestricted permissive language confers unfettered discretion, the truth is
that, in a system based on the rule of law, unfettered governmental discretion
is a contradiction in terms. The real question is whether the discretion is
wide or narrow, and where the legal line is to be drawn. For this purpose
everything depends upon the true intent and meaning of the empowering Act.



The powers of public authorities are therefore essentially different from
those of private persons. A man making his will may subject to any rights of
his dependants, dispose of his property just as he may wish. He may act out of
malice or a spirit of revenge, but in law this does not affect his exercise of
his power. In the same way a private person has an absolute power to release a
debtor, or, where the law permits, to evict a tenant, regardless of his
motives. This is unfettered discretion. But a public authority may do neither
unless it acts reasonably and in good faith and upon the lawful and relevant
grounds of public interest. Unfettered discretion is wholly inappropriate to a
public authority, which possesses powers solely in order that it may use them
for the public good.

**104  **

. . . It is only where powers are given for the personal benefit of the person
empowered that the discretion is absolute. Plainly this can have no
application in public law." (pp. 353‑354).



But _Rooke's case_ (5), __ suggests that, independently of the Rule of Law,
discretions are also limited by the "rule of reason":



". . . and notwithstanding the words of the commission give authority to the
commissioners to do according to their discretions, yet their proceedings
ought to be limited and bound with the rule of reason and law. For discretion
is a science or understanding to discern between falsity and truth, between
wrong and right, between shadows and substance, between equity and colourable
glosses and pretences, and not to do according to their wills and private
affections . . ."



In _Roberts v. Hopwood_ (6),Lord Wrenbury said:



"A person in whom is vested a discretion must exercise his discretion upon
reasonable grounds. A discretion does not empower a man to do what he likes
merely because he is minded to do so ‑ he must in the excercise of his
discretion do not what he likes but what he ought. In other words, he must, by
the use of his reason, ascertain and follow the course which reason directs.
He must act reasonably."



Justice Douglas of the United States Supreme Court observed, dissenting, in
_United States v. Wunderlich,_ (7);



"Law has reached its finest moments when it has freed man from the unlimited
discretion of some ruler, some civil or military official, some bureaucrat.
Where discretion is absolute, man has always suffered. At times it has been
his property that has been invaded; at times, his privacy; at times, his
liberty of movement; at times, his freedom of thought; at times, his life.
Absolute discretion is a ruthless master. It is more destructive of freedom
than any of man's other inventions."



**105**  

There are no absolute or unfettered discretions in public law; discretions are
conferred on public functionaries in trust for the public, to be used for the
public good, and the propriety of the exercise of such discretions is to be
judged by reference to the purposes for which they were so entrusted.



We have no doubt whatsoever as to the purpose for which Article 154F(4) gave
the Governor a discretion. By the exercise of the franchise the people of each
Province elect their representatives, for the purpose of administering their
affairs. The Governor is given a discretion in order to enable him to select
as Chief Minister the representative best able to command the confidence of
the Council, and thereby to give effect to the wishes of the people of the
Province. That discretion is not given for any other purpose, personal or
political. On behalf of the Chief Ministers Mr. Seneviratne contended that the
phrase "In his opinion" made the Governor's discretion completely subjective
and immune from review. He was asked whether the Governor's decision could be
questioned if ‑ motivated by bribery, nepotism, or other improper
considerations, or influenced by a foreign power ‑ the Governor appointed as
Chief Minister a person whom he did not in fact consider to be best able to
command the confidence of the Council. His reply was that such an appointment
would be no appointment at all, similar to an appointment procured by duress,
and could be declared void. But it is a court which must decide such issues,
and it is because judicial review is available that a court can so decide.
Further, Mr. Seneviratne's reply demonstrates that the exercise of the
Governor's discretion **is** subject to Judicial review on the ground that he
did not in fact entertain the requisite opinion. This has long been
recognised, even in relation to a power which can be exercised merely because
of the opinion that it is necessary to exercise it; thus in _Hirdaramani v.
Ratnavale_ (8) it __ was held that such a decision could be challenged by
showing that the stated opinion was incorrect, untrue or manifestly absurd or
perverse (p. 79) or "unreasonable or irrational" (p. 82). And that was before
the authority of _Liversidge v. Anderson_ (9), was finally swept away by _R.
v. I.R.C., ex P. Rossminister Ltd._ (10), __ precluding undue judicial
deference to subjective executive opinion. I am also in agreement with Mr. H.
L. de Silva, P.C., that in

**106**  

this case we are not called upon to consider an intrinsically subjective
opinion ‑ such as "the member who, in his opinion, is best suited to be Chief
Minister" or "best able to serve the Province"; that might have approached the
realm of "pure judgment" ( _Secretary of State for Education v. Tameside._
(11)). __ It is true that the requisite opinion does not relate to past facts,
and calls for "judgment", i.e. an assessment of future support; but it is not
"pure judgment", for that assessment of support cannot be made in total
disregard of existing facts. It necessarily requires a consideration of
expressions of support or opposition by Councillors, whether made in the
Council or outside (cf. _Adegbenro v. Akintola._ (12)). _That opinion_ thus
involves an objective element, and is more readily subject to judicial review
than "opinion" of the kind considered in _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ (8).



Mr. Seneviratne cited several Indian cases in support of his contention that
the Governor's decision was purely subjective. However, there are three
significant differences between the Indian and Sri Lankan provisions. Article
154F(4) lays down the criterion which must guide the Governor's decision ‑ the
ability to command the support of a majority ‑ but the Indian Article 163 does
not specify any guideline; further, under the latter provision "Ministers
shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor"; and Article 361(1)
precludes judicial review of the Governor's acts. In any event, none of those
cases support the proposition contended for. They dealt with situations in
which the Governor acted in his discretion; it was contended that he should
have acted on advice (of a Chief Minister who had lost the confidence of the
State Assembly); applying Article 163(2) ‑ which corresponds to our Article
154F(2) ‑ it was held that the Governor's act could not be questioned on that
ground that he should have acted on advice, because Article 163(2) entrusted
that decision to him alone.



Mr. Seneviratne also cited _Dinesh Chandra v. Charan Singh_ (13), and _Madan
Mural v. Charan Singh_  (14) _,_ which dealt with the exercise of the
President's powers, under Articles 74 and 75 of the Indian Constitution, in
respect of the appointment of the Prime Minister. These are of very little
assistance for several reasons. The relationship between President and Prime
Minister, is not necessarily the same as that between Governor and Chief
Minister, especially in



**107**  

a non‑federal system. Further, in those cases there is not even an _obiter
dicta_ that the Presidents' act was outside review; on the contrary, the
propriety of the President's act was examined by reference to conventions and
precedents, and upheld. In that respect, the Privy Council decision in
_Adegbenro v. Akintola_ (12), is similar. Although the Governor was invested
with responsibilities that require of him "delicate political judgment", the
Privy Council did not, for that or any other reason, hold that judicial review
was excluded.



(b). **" POLITICAL QUESTIONS"**



We have next to consider the submission that the appointment of a Chief
Minister was a "political question" and that Article 154F(6) provided the
appropriate remedy to test a Governor's decision as to the person best able to
command the confidence of a Provincial Council.



We are unable to accept the Petitioners submission that the exclusion of
"political questions" from judicial review in the U.S. being a consequence of
the separation of powers, there is no similar exclusion under our law because
there is no separation of powers under our Constitution. Although Article 4(c)
vests judicial power in Parliament, yet there is a functional separation of
powers inasmuch as judicial power can only be exercised by courts and other
judicial tribunals, subject only to one exception in regard to Parliamentary
privilege. And even in that field, when Parliament acts as an institution
directly exercising judicial power, there is no express exclusion or exemption
from judicial review under Article 140 (cf. _Dissanayake v. Kaleel_ (15)). The
Superior Courts are thus **functionally a** separate and co‑ordinate organ of
government; its power of judicial review cannot be less than that of a body to
Parliament; it is illogical to contend that "political questions" are excluded
from review by the Judiciary if it is an organ of government co‑ordinate with
the other organs of **** government, but are reviewable by the Judicary if it
is a subordinate organ.



Mr. Seneviratne relied on _Baker v. Carr_ (2), where the U.S. Supreme Court
laid down certain guidelines for indentifying "political questions" excluded
from judicial review:



**108** _ _

"Prominent on the surface of any case held to involve a political question is
found a textually demonstrable constitutional commitment of the issue to a
coordinate political department; or a lack of judicially discoverable and
manageable standards for resolving it; or the impossibility of deciding
without an initial policy determination of a kind clearly for non-judicial
discretion; or the impossibility of a court's undertaking independent
resolution without expressing lack of the respect due coordinate branches of
government; or an unusual need for unquestioning adherence to a political
decision already made; or the potentiality of embarrassment from multifarious
pronouncements by various departments on one question."



With regard to the first and the fourth of these guidelines, we must
unhesitatingly reject any suggestion that a Provincial Governor may be
regarded as a branch of government "co‑ordinate" to either of the Superior
Courts, although the position would be different in the case of the President
and Parliament. No policy decision of the kind contemplated by the third
guidelines arises here: the Governor is to be guided not by any considerations
of policy, but solely by an assessment of support in the Council. Certainly
there is no "political decision already made" to which "unquestioning
adherence" is needed; "multifarious pronouncements" on this matter and
consequent embarrassment are not possible; thus the fifth and sixth guidelines
are inapplicable. In regard to the second guideline, standards for determining
political support are certainly elusive, but that matter for judicial decision
here is not whether the Governor's assessment was correct, but only whether
his decision‑making process was flawed, and there is no "lack of judicially
discoverable and manageable standards" for resolving that question. Not only
does _Baker v. Carr_ not support the contention that the Governor's decision
was purely political, but the majority in that case held to be justiciable a
question relating to the delimitation of electoral districts, although that
was a matter having a long (U.S.) history of political involvement.



All statutory powers have legal limits; "the real question **** is whether the
discretion is wide or narrow, and where the legal line is to be drawn"; and it
is the Judiciary which is entrusted with the



**109  **

responsibility of determining those questions. When it comes to powers and
discretions conferred by the Constitution, it is the special responsibility of
the Judiciary to uphold the constitution by preventing excess or abuse by the
Legislature or the Executive. Any exception to these principles must be
clearly and expressly stated. We are in respectful agreement with the
observations of Bhagwati, J., as he then was in _State of Rajasthan v. Union
of India_ (16), in regard to judicial review of "political questions" in the
context of constitutional powers and duties:



". . . it is true that if a question brought before the Court is purely a
political question not involving determination of any legal or constitutional
right or obligation, the Court would not entertain it, since the Court is
concerned only with adjudication of legal rights and liabilities. But merely
because a question has a political complexion, that by itself is no ground why
the Court should shrink from performing its duty under the Constitution if it
raises an issue of constitutional determination. Every constitutional question
concerns the allocation and exercise of governmental power and no
constitutional question can, therefore, fail to be political . . . It was
pointed out by Mr. Justice Brennan in the Opinion of the Court delivered by
him in _Baker v. Carr_ (2) an epoch making decision in American Constitutional
history, that the mere fact that the suit seeks protection of a political
right does not mean that it presents a political question. This was put in
more emphatic terms in _Nixon v. Harndon_ (17), __ by saying that such an
objection 'is little more than a play upon words . . . Even before _Baker v.
Carr,_ courts in the United States were dealing with a host of questions
'political' in ordinary comprehension. Even the desegregation decision of the
Supreme Court in _Brown v. Board of Education_ (18), __ had a clearly
political complexion . . . The Supreme Court in _Baker v. Carr_ held that it
was within the competence of the Federal Courts to entertain an action
challenging a statute apportioning legislative districts as contrary to the
equal protection **** clause. This case clearly decided a controversy which
was political in character, namely, apportioning of legislative districts, so
because a constitutional question of violation of the equal protection clause

**110**  

was directly involved and that question was plainly and indubitably within the
jurisdiction of the Court to decide. It will, therefore, be seen that merely
because a question has a political colour, the Court cannot fold its hands in
despair and declare 'Judicial hands off'. So long as a question arises whether
an authority under the Constitution has acted within the limits of its powers
or exceeded it, it can certainly be decided by the Court. Indeed it would be
its constitutional obligation to do so . . . No one however highly placed and
no authority howsoever lofty can claim that it shall be the sole judge of the
extent of its power under the Constitution, or whether its action is within
the confines of such power laid down by the Constitution. This Court is the
ultimate interpreter of the Constitution and to this Court is assigned the
delicate task of determining whether it is limited, and if so, what are its
limits and whether any action of that branch transgresses such limits. It is
for this Court to uphold the constitutional values and to enforce the
constitutional limitations. That is the essence of the rule of law . . ."



However, there are matters which undoubtedly do not involve legal or
constitutional rights, powers and duties, and which may therefore be regarded
as purely "political". Mr. Seneviratne referred to _Council of Civil Service
Unions v. Minister for Service_ (19).



"Prerogative powers such as those relating to the making of treaties, the
defence of the realm, the prerogative of mercy, the grant of honours, the
dissolution of Parliament and the appointment of ministers as well as others
are not, I think, susceptible to judicial review because their nature and
subject-­matter are such as not to be amenable to the judicial process."



As observed in that case, the controlling factor is not the source of the
power but its subject‑matter. The fact that in the U.K. the appointment of
ministers by the Queen, in the exercise of the prerogative, is beyond review
does not conclude the question under our law: as indeed it did not under the
laws of Nigeria and India. In _Adegbenro v. Akintole_ (2), the Privy Council
did not regard the subject‑

**111**

 matter of the removal of a Prime Minister by the Governor as beyond review,
and scrutinized the propriety of that removal. In India, too, the Courts have
not declined to review the appointment of the Prime Minister by the President
on this ground _‑ Dinesh Chandra v. Charan Singh _(13).



"Our Supreme Court has, however, had to decide seemingly political questions
since the Constitution or a statute had to be interpreted to answer them,
ordinarily a duty which courts **** will not shun. We are not, therefore, able
to decline jurisdiction to **** consider the questions raised in the present
writ petition ...



In _U.N.R. Rao v. Smt. Indira Gandhi_ (20), the construction of Article 75(3)
came up directly for consideration. The Supreme Court did not indicate any
difficulties in its way of regarding the case as justiciable by the court, but
straightaway went to decide the issues ..."



In the absence of a written Constitution, defining the jurisdictions and
powers of the several organs of government, there may well be reasons why the
acts of the Sovereign, particularly in relation to what is historically the
"High Court of Parliament", cannot be questioned in the Sovereign's own
Courts. In Sri Lanka, however, it is the Constitution which is supreme, and a
violation of the Constitution is _prima facie_ a matter to be remedied by the
Judiciary. Further, no judicial deference or self‑restraint is owed to
subordinate executive or legislative bodies, such as the Governor and the
Provincial Council. The appointment of a Chief Minister by a Provincial
Governor is not a purely political matter excluded from judicial review by the
Court of Appeal. We are not called upon to express any opinion as to the
extent to which the Court of Appeal may take these political factors into
consideration under and in terms of the law and procedure relating to its writ
jurisdiction) in deciding whether or not to exercise its discretion to grant
and issue, according to law, orders in the nature of writs of _Quo_ _Warranto,
Certiorari,_ and _Mandamus._



_Bhut Nath's_ case (4) cited by the learned Attorney‑General, dealt with a
question of national security, namely, the proclamation of emergency:

**112**

 "...It was argued that there was no real emergency and yet the Proclamation
remained unretracted with consequential peril to fundamental rights. In our
view, this is a political, not justiciable issue and the appeal should be to
the polls and not to the courts. The traditional view, sanctified largely by
some American decisions, that political questions fall outside the area of
judicial review, is not a constitutional taboo but a pragmatic response of the
court to the reality of its inadequacy to decide such issues and to the scheme
of the Constitution which has assigned to each branch of government in the
larger sense a certain jurisdiction. Of course, when a problem ‑ which is
essentially and basically constitutional ‑ although dressed up as a political
question, is appropriately raised before court, it is within the power of the
judges to adjudicate. The rule is one of self‑restraint and of subject‑matter,
practical sense and respect for other branches of government like the
legislature and the Executive. Even so, we see no force in the plea. True, an
emergency puts a broad blanket blindfolding of the seven liberties of Article
19 and its baseless prolongation may devalue democracy. That is a political
matter _de hors our ken,_ for the validity of the proclamation turns on the
subjective satisfaction of the President that a grave emergency, of the kind
mentioned in Part XVIII, or its imminent danger exists. In _R. v._ _Governor
of Wormwood Scrubbs Prison_ (21), the Earl of Reading observed, on a similar
contention:



... even if it is material to consider whether the military emergency has come
to an end, it is not a matter which this court can consider; whether the
emergency continues to exist or not is for the executive alone to determine
...



The argument of abuse of power was urged in England but repelled. In _The King
v. Halliday_ (22), Lord Dunedin, met it thus:



'That is true. But the fault, if fault there be, lies in the fact that the
British Constitution has entrusted to the two Houses of Parliament, subject to
the assent of the King, an absolute power untrammelled by any written
instrument obedience to which may be compelled by some judicial body. The
danger of abuse is

  **113**  

theoretically present; practically, as things exist it is in my opinion absent
...'. And Lord Wright in (1942) A. C. 206 added effect to the point in these
words:



The safeguard of British liberty is in the good sense of the people and in
the system or representative and responsible government which has evolved. If
extraordinary powers are here given, they are given because the emergency is
extraordinary and are limited to the period of the emergency.'



Of course, the British have no written constitution, but the argument
remains."



The appointment of a Chief Minister does not involve matters comparable to
considerations of national security; further, neither the executive nor the
legislature have "an absolute power untrammelled by any written instrument
obedience to which may be compelled by some judicial body"; and we are not
dealing with the acts of the head of the executive, but only concerned with a
subordinate executive body.



**(c) EXCLUSION OF JUDICIAL REVIEW BY ARTICLE 154E (6)**



It was submitted on behalf of the Chief Ministers that the Constitution
provided an appropriate alternative remedy because Article 154F (6) made the
Board of Ministers collectively responsible and answerable to the Provincial
Council; if a Chief Minister was not able to command the support of a majority
in the Council, that would be revealed by a vote in the Council; a Chief
Minister who lacked the confidence of the Council would have no option but to
resign; if he did not, the Governor had the power to remove him (this power of
removal being implied from the power of appointment); while this was a
discretionary power, it should be presumed that the Governor would act
properly; and if the Governor did not, the President could dismiss the
Governor. In answer to the Petitioners submission that the Governor might
refrain from removing a defeated Chief Minister, Mr. Seneviratne, submitted
that since the Governor could not carry out his duties in regard to the
administration of the affairs of the Province, with a Chief Minister who had
lost the confidence of the Council, he would have no option but to appoint as
Chief Minister the

**114**

 Councillor who enjoyed the support of the majority. It was pointed out on
behalf of the Petitioners that the Governor might dissolve the Council
instead. I am inclined to agree with Mr. Seneviratne that we should not assume
that the Governor would not act properly. However, the question is whether
Article 154F(6) assures the Petitioners of an alternative remedy which is
effective and expeditious; the procedure of a vote in the Council is not such
a remedy. Firstly, there is no certainty that even if the Council immediately
expresses a lack of confidence in the Chief Minister, the Petitioner would be
appointed to succeed him; litigation may become necessary. Secondly, a more
fundamental difficulty is that a vote in the Council is a means of
ascertaining whether the Chief Minister has the support of the Council, i.e.
whether the Governor's decision was right on the merits. Such a vote does not
even attempt in any way to determine the propriety of the Governor's
decision‑making process, which is what the Petitioners sought to review in the
pending applications.



**4\. EXCLUSION OF JUDICIAL REVIEW BY ARTICLE 154E (2)**



Mr. **** de Silva and the learned Attorney‑General submitted that Article 154E
(2) does not apply to the appointment of a Chief Minister by the Governor, but
Mr. Seneviratne contended that it precluded judicial review of any exercise of
discretion by the Governor.



In order to determine whether Article 154F (2) excludes from judicial review
the exercise of the Governor's discretion under Article 154F (4), it is
necessary to consider Article 154F in its entirety, and in the context of
Chapter XVIIA. Article 154F (1) expressly lays down a general rule that the
Governor must act in accordance with the advice of the Board of Ministers; but
provides that he must act in his discretion where he is required to do so by
or under the Constitution. It is not inconceivable that a genuine doubt or
difficulty may arise, in regard to a particular function, whether the Governor
must act on advice, or in his discretion. Normally any such question of
interpretation would have to be judicially determined. Article 154F (2) is
found immediately after Article 154F (1); was it intended to exclude judicial
review only in that situation? Or was it intended to deal with every exercise
of discretion by the Governor ? The phrase "if any question arises whether ...
the Governor is by or

**115**

 under this Constitution required to act in his discretion" clearly indicates
that Article 154F (2) applies only to the Governor's decision as to whether he
should act on advice or in his discretion. Judicial interpretation is
excluded, and instead the Governor is empowered to decide that matter in his
discretion; and that decision is made final. Where the Governor having decided
such a question (e.g. that it is one where he may act in his discretion)
thereafter proceeds to the next step, and exercises his power, by taking some
decision or doing some act, there arises the possibility that such
(subsequent) decision or act may be challenged (e.g. on the ground that he
should have acted on advice). Article 154F (2) precludes such a challenge
because "the validity of anything done by the Governor shall not be called in
question in any **Court on the ground** that he ought or ought not have acted
in his discretion"; plainly it does not preclude a challenge on any other
ground. In _Jogendra Nath v. State of Assam_ (23), __ cited by Mr.
Seneviratne, the corresponding Indian Article 163 (2) was interpreted to make
the Governor "the sole and final Judge whether any function is to be exercised
in his discretion or on the advice of the Council of Ministers". Even if there
had been some ambiguity, being a preclusive clause it must be given a narrower
rather than a wider interpretation.



Chapter XVIIA applies to all Provincial Councils; it would therefore be
undesirable that in respect of the same function the Governor of one Province
should take the view that he is required to act on advice, while another
Governor decides that he must act in his discretion. In the absence of
judicial determinations, since one Governor would not be bound by the decision
of another, there would be no way of ensuring uniformity. Consistency is
achieved by the provision in Article 154F (2) that "the exercise of the
Governor's discretion shall be on the President's directions". Taken in
isolation, this may suggest that the Governor's discretion must **always** be
exercised on the President's directions; taken in the context of Chapter
XVIIA, however, this provision is restricted to the exercise of the Governor's
discretion in deciding the question specifically referred to in the opening
clause of Article 154F (2).



**5\. CONCLUSION**



We therefore answer the questions referred to this Court as follows:

**116  **

1.         The exercise of the powers vested in the Governor of a Province under Article 154F (4), excluding the proviso, is not solely a matter for his subjective assessment and judgment; it is subject to judicial review by the Court of Appeal. In applications for Quo _Warranto, Certiorari_ and _Mandamus,_ the Court of Appeal has power to review the appointment, _inter alia,_ for unreasonableness, or if made in bad faith, or in disregard of the relevant evidence, or on irrelevant considerations, or without evidence.



2.         The Governor's selection of a person for appointment as Chief Minister, under Article 154F(4), excluding the proviso, may require the consideration of political factors; nevertheless it is not an act which is purely political in nature; it involves the determination of legal rights, flowing from constitutional provisions, concerning the allocation and exercise of powers (relating to the administration of the affairs of the Province) by the elected representatives of the people of the Province. The appointment of a Chief Minister is justiciable, and there is no self-imposed rule of judicial restraint which inhibits judicial review.



3.         Where a question arises as to whether the Governor must act on advice, or in his discretion, Article 154F (2) requires him to decide that question; Article 154F (2) makes his decision on that question final, and precludes anything thereafter done by the Governor being called in question in any Court on the limited ground "that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion"; that provision does not apply to the appointment of a Chief Minister under Article 154F(4).



4.         The Governor's decision involves a constitutional power and duty of the Governor, and a constitutional right of the Petitioner's (in common with the other Councillors) to the proper exercise of such power and duty; judicial review is not excluded.



5.         This does not raise any question relating to the interpretation of the Constitution.



_Case sent back to the Court of Appeal with determination of the Supreme
Court._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/17.html_  

