##  Julian v. Sirisena Cooray, Minister of National Housing and Construction
and Others - SLR - 238, Vol 1 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 17; (1993) 1 Sri LR 238 (16
March 1993)

**238**

**JULIAN** **  
v.** **  
SIRISENA COORAY, MINISTER OF NATIONAL HOUSING AND  
CONSTRUCTION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
KULATUNGA, J.,

RAMANATHAN, J., AND  
GOONEWARDENA, J.,  
CA APPLICATION NO. 424/91.  
SC APPEAL NO. 79/92.  
MARCH 16th, 1993.

_     Ceiling on Housing Property - Tenant's right to purchase - Ceiling on
Housing Property Law, No. 1 of 1973 sections 13 and 17 - Ceiling on Housing
Property (Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1988, sections 3 and 4._

The appellant was the tenant of premises No. 54, Cripps Road, Galle, under one
Samad. On 16.02.73 the appellant applied to purchase the house. However, on
09.02.73 Samad had gifted the house to the 8th respondent. On 26.04.76 the 2nd
respondent (Commissioner for National Housing) rejected the appellant's
application on the ground that the owner (8th respondent) had withheld consent
to the sale under the proviso to section 13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property
Law. On appeal, under section 39 of the Law the Board of Review by its order
dated 02.11.78 held that the owner (8th respondent) was not a person entitled
to withhold his consent and set aside the order of the 2nd respondent and
directed that the tenant be permitted to purchase the house, if the other
requirements are in order. An application by the 8th respondent to have the
order quashed by Certiorari was dismissed. The 8th respondent filed a suit for
declaration of title and ejectment in respect of the premises in dispute
against the appellant in DC Galle and this suit too was dismissed.

In the meantime the 2nd respondent held an inquiry into the appellant's
application as directed by the Board of Review; and although all the
preconditions of section 17 of the Law were satisfied, the 2nd respondent
recommended that the " equities are more in favour of the landlord than the
tenant '. Consequently the 1st respondent Minister decided not to vest the
house and the 2nd respondent informed the appellant that the house would not
be vested. The appellant believing that this was the decision of the 2nd
respondent appealed to the Board of Review. On 21.02.90 the 2nd respondent
clarified to the appellant that the decision was the Minister's. In the
meantime on 26.01.90 the appellant had also appealed to the Minister to
reconsider his decision. This was replied by the 2nd respondent to the effect
that no further action could be taken in the matter. On 15.10.90 the Board of
Review made order dismissing the appellant's appeal on the ground that it had
no jurisdiction to quash a decision of the Minister.

On 23.05.91 the appellant applied for Certiorari and Mandamus for quashing the
decisions of the Board of Review and the 1st and 2nd respondents and to compel
a sale of the house to the appellant.

239

**Held**

(1) Before the 2nd respondent made his recommendation to the 1st respondent
against the vesting of the house, he should have communicated his decision
against the vesting to the appellant. Failure to do this vitiates the decision
made by the 1st respondent to reject the appellant's application.

(2) In the absence of a cross appeal against the judgment of the Court of
Appeal, the 8th respondent would have to pursue his claim, if any, afresh
before the Board of Review, at the appropriate time.

**Case referred to**

_Caderamanpulle v. Keuneman SC Appeal No. 15/79 SCM of 19.09.1980._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Petitioner in person.

_K. Siripavan SSC for 1st and 2nd respondents.  
_  
_M. Farook Thakur with M. Z. M. Hilamy for 8th respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 13, 1993.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

In this appeal, the appellant being the tenant of premises No. 54, Crips Road,
Galle, seeks reliefs from this Court to enable him to purchase the said
premises in terms of the provisions of s. 13 read with s. 17 of the Ceiling on
Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973\. S. 3 of the Ceiling on Housing Property
(Special Provisions) Act No. 4 of 1988 removed the right of a tenant to
purchase a house under the said provisions from, or after 01.01.87 but s. 4
expressly preserved the right in proceedings which had been commenced under
the principal enactment and pending or incompleted on 01.01.87 and provides
that such proceedings may be carried on and completed as if the principal
enactment had not been amended by the said Act.

The appellant first became a tenant of this house on 01.01.58. His landlord
was one Sameem until November, 1970 when the house was sold to one Samad and
others after which the appellant accepted the said Samad as the landlord. On
16.02.73 he applied under s. 13 to purchase the house. However, on 09.02.73
Samad had by deed No. 1530 dated 09.02.73, gifted the house to the

240

8th respondent. Consequently, the 8th respondent was made a party to the
proceedings before the Commissioner for National Housing (the 2nd respondent)
at the inquiry held into the appellant's application on 25.03.76. Thereafter,
the 2nd respondent by his letter dated 26.04.76 (P1) addressed to the
appellant, rejected his application on the ground that the owner had withheld
consent to the sale of the house under the proviso to s. 13. On an appeal by
the appellant under s. 39 of the Law, the Board of Review, by its order dated
02.11.78 (P2), held that the owner (the 8th respondent) is not a person
entitled to withhold his consent to the proposed sale, set aside the 2nd
respondent's determination (P1) and, directed that the tenant be permitted to
purchase the house, if the other requirements are in order. An application by
the 8th respondent to have the said order quashed by way of Certiorari was
dismissed by the Court of Appeal, by its judgment dated 28.06.85 (P3). The 8th
respondent also sued the appellant in DC Galle case No. 11272 for a
declaration of title and ejectment. That action was dismissed by the District
Court by its judgment dated 19.01.90 (P4).

In the meantime, on 17.08.88 the 2nd respondent held an inquiry into the
appellant's application as directed by the decision of the Board of Review and
made his recommendation to the Minister (the 1st respondent) to enable the 1st
respondent to make his decision in terms of S. 17 of the law as to whether the
house may be vested in the 2nd respondent for the purpose of sale to the
appellant. The said recommendation dated 06.12.89 (vide minutes sheet No. XVII
in the file maintained by the department) shows that all the pre-conditions
set out in s. 17 for a vesting of the house are satisfied, but the 2nd
respondent states that he does not recommend a vesting for the reason that "
equities are more in favour of the landlord than the tenant ". Consequently,
the 1st respondent by his order dated 28.12.89 (appearing on the minutes sheet
No. XVIII in the file) decided not to vest the house; and the 2nd respondent
by his letter dated 03.01.90 (P6) informed the appellant that it has been
decided to reject his application. P6 does not state that the decision against
the vesting had been made by the 1st respondent. Whereupon on 17.01.90 the
appellant appealed to the Board of Review against the said decision on the
assumption that it was a determination of the 2nd respondent. In view of this,
the 2nd respondent by his letter dated 21.02.90 (P7), addressed to the
appellant, clarified that the appellant's application had been rejected by the
1st respondent. On 26.01.90, the appellant

241

appealed to the 1st respondent to reconsider his decision. This was replied by
the 2nd respondent by his letter dated 21.02.90 (P9) stating that no further
action can be taken in the matter.

On 15.10.90 the Board of Review made its order (P9) dismissing the appellant's
appeal holding that it had no jurisdiction to quash a decision of the 1st
respondent and to direct the 2nd respondent to sell the house to the
appellant. The Board so decided presumably for the reason that. s. 39 of the
law provided an appeal to the Board against a decision or determination of the
Commissioner and the Board had been informed that the appeal before the Board
was in fact in respect of a decision of the Minister; whereupon on 23.05.91
the appellant made an application to the Court of Appeal (p10) in which he
sought the following reliefs :

(a) a Writ of Certiorari quashing the order of the Board of Review dated
15.10.90;

(b) a Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the 2nd respondent dated
03.01.91;

(c) a Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision of the 1st respondent
communicated by the letter dated 22.01.90;

(d) a Writ of Mandamus directing the 1st and the 2nd respondents to take
immediate action to sell the house to the appellant giving effect to the
previous decisions of the Board of Review dated 02.11.78 and the judgment of
the Court of Appeal dated 28.06.85.

The Court of Appeal accepted the submission that the appellant's appeal to the
Board of Review was in respect of determinations made by the 2nd respondent
and not against a decision of the 1st respondent and accordingly quashed the
order of the Board of Review dated 15.10.90. However, the Court did not grant
any of the reliefs referred to at (b), (c) and (d) above.

The appellant is aggrieved by the failure of the Court of Appeal to grant the
several reliefs as prayed for by him. The appellant submits.

242

(a) that unless the communication of the 2nd respondent against a vesting of
the house and the decision of the 1st respondent not to vest the house are
also quashed, it would not be possible to effectively prosecute his claim
before the Board of Review on its merits;

(b) that the order of the Board of Review dated 02.11.78 affirmed by the Court
of Appeal judgment dated 28.06.85 Constitutes an enforceable directive to vest
the house and to sell it to the appellant, binding on the 1st and 2nd
respondents; and hence the Court of Appeal should have directed such sale; and
that in the circumstances he is entitled to obtain such a direction from this
Court.

During the argument before us, the learned Senior State Counsel representing
the 1st and the 2nd respondents brought to our notice the fact that before the
2nd respondent made his recommendation to the 1st respondent against the
vesting of the house, the 2nd respondent had failed to communicate to the
appellant his decision against the appellant's application to purchase the
house. The Counsel conceded that in the light of the decision in
_Caderamanpule v. Keuneman_ (1) such failure vitiates the decision made by the
1st respondent to reject the appellant's application. In the circumstances, he
agreed to a quashing of the impugned communication by the 2nd respondent and
the decision of the 1st respondent. As regards the prayer for a direction to
sell the house to the appellant relying on the previous order of the Board of
Review, Counsel submitted that the said order (affirmed by the Court of
Appeal) only declares that the appellant is eligible to make an application to
purchase the house and that it cannot be construed as a direction to effect a
sale.

The learned Counsel for the 8th respondent submitted that the order of the
Board of Review dated 15.10.90 is correct. However, in the absence of a cross-
appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal I am unable to entertain
this submission. The 8th respondent would have to pursue his claim, if any,
afresh before the Board at the appropriate time.

I am in agreement with the submission made by the Senior State Counsel.
Accordingly, I allow the appeal and grant (in addition to the relief already
granted by the Court below) a Writ of Certiorari quashing the order of the 2nd
respondent contained in his letter dated 03.01.90 and a Writ of Certiorari
quashing the order of the 1st respondent communicated by the 2nd respondent's
letter dated 22.01.90. I further direct the 2nd respondent to communicate to
the appellant the decision dated 06.12.89 (appearing on the minutes sheet No.
XVII in the departmental file) to enable the appellant to prefer an appeal to
the Board of Review in terms of s. 39 of the law, if he so desires. The
appellant is also granted costs in a sum of Rupees seven hundred and fifty
(Rs. 750) payable by the 2nd respondent.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

  
**GOONEWARDENE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/17.html_  

