##  Actalina Fonseka and Others v. Dharshani Fonseka and Others - SLR - 95,
Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 17; (1989) 2 Sri LR 95 (27 April 1989)

**

95

ACTALINA FONSEKA AND OTHERS  
v.  
DHARSHANI FONSEKA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
H. A. G DE SILVA, J.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, J. AND KULATUNGA. J  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 23/87  
S.C. SPECIAL. LA. NO. 147/86  
C.A./L.A. NO. 62/84  
D.C. GAMPAHA NO. 24975/M  
APRIL 27, 1989.

_

Last Will - Probate - Separate suit to recall probate on ground of fraud,
alleged forgery of last will - Non-disclosure of heirs - Sufficiency of cause
of action to maintain suit - Civil Procedure Code, section 46.

_

The plaintiffs - respondents fifed an action against the defendants -
appellants to have the probate issued in another case No. 1322/T recalled on
the ground that it had been obtained by fraud - the Last Will propounded n
that case being a forgery and all the heirs of the testator not having been
made parties.

**

Held -

**

The plaint discloses a cause of action founded on fraud by forging a will and
non -disclosure of heirs. The law does not require that the plaint should make
out a prima facie case nor carry the evidence by which the coats would be
proved. Hence the case

must be heard.

**

_Per_ Kulatunge J..

**

I am of the view that categories of fraud are not closed and that it should be
left to the Court to decide whether any particular contrivance constitutes a
fraud on the Court having regard to the facts and circumstances of such case".

If the real grievance of the defendant - appellant is that the plaint does not
contain sufficient particulars or even in a case where it is alleged that the
plaint does not disclose a cause of action the correct procedure under s.
46(21 of "the Civism! Procedure Code is to move, before pleading to the
merits, to have the plaint taken off the file.

**

Cases referred to;

**

1\. _Adoris v. Perera_ 17 NLR 212

2\. _Reid v. Samsudin_ 1 NLR 292

3\. _Biyanwila v. Amarasekera_ 67 NLR 488

4\. _Mudali Appuhamy v, Tikarala_ 2 CLR 35

**96**

5\. _Tissera v. Gunatilleke Hamine_ 13 NLR 261

6\. _Tissera v. Gunatillake_ 15 NLR 379

7\. _Priestman v. Thomas_ (1884) 9 P.D. 210

8\. _Srirangammal v. Sandammai_ 23 M 216, 219

9\. _Jonesco v. Beard_ [1930] AC 298

10\. _Flower v. Lloyd_ 10 Ch. D 327

11\. _Laxmi Narain v. Mohd. Shafi_ 1949 EP 141

**APPEAL** against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_H. L de Siiva. P.O._ with _Geethananda de Sllva_ and _Miss. L N. A. de Silva_
for appellants.

_S. Gunasekera_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. cult._

June 6. 1989.

**

KULATUNGA, J.

**

The Defendants-Appellants appealed to the Court of Appeal against the order of
the learned District Judge made on 30th April, 1984, in which he answered the
preliminary issue No. 5 in favour of the Plaintiffs-Respondents and directed
that the trial should proceed on the remaining issues. The Court of Appeal by
its judgment dated 2nd September, 1986 dismissed the appeal and directed the
return of the record to the District Court to proceed with the trial. The
Defendants-Appellants have appealed to this Court against the judgment of the
Court of Appeal.

The Defendants-Appellants contend that the above action in which the
Plaintiffs-Respondents have sought to obtain a declaration that the probate
issued in DC Gampaha case No. 1322AT is void on the ground of fraud is not
maintainable on the facts pleaded in the plaint. I am of the opinion that the
instant case is not one that may be disposed of on the issue of law only and
that the appropriate course would be to allow the case to proceed to trial.
The question which was argued at length before us really arises under issues
Nos. 2 and 3 which are issues of both law and fact and can only be decided
after hearing the evidence in the case. I now proceed to set out the matters
relevant to this appeal.

**97**

According to the averments contained in the plaint in the action which is the
subject matter of this appeal instituted on 22nd September, 1982, the 1st
Plaintiff-Respondent is the only daughter of the deceased Merennege Kithsiri
Wijesoma Fonseka who was a divorcee and the 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent was his
wife by habit and repute. The plaint alleges that the deceased died of a
sudden heart attack on 3rd November, 1977, and had no opportunity of making a
last will.

It is alleged that on 28th September, 1977, the 1st, 2nd and the 3rd
Defendants-Appellants forged a will purporting to be by the deceased devising
his entire estate to the 4th, 5th and 6th Defendants-Appellants who are the
children of the deceased's sister, the 3rd Defendant-Appellant.

It is also alleged that the 1st and the 2nd Defendants-Appellants instituted
DC Gampaha case No. 1322H" joining only the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th Defendants-
Appellants when they knew that the 1st Plaintiff-Respondent is the only
daughter and the 2nd Plaintiff-Respondent is his wife by habit and repute and
fraudulently obtained an Order Nisi on 12th May, 1978 and probate on 17th
March, 1981 in their favour.

The plaint further alleges that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Defendants-Appellants
fraudulently propounded the said forged will and obtained probate in DC
Gampaha case No. 1322/T by misleading the Court and seeks a declaration
accordingly and for a decree declaring the probate void.

The Defendants-Appellants in their answer only admit that the 1st Plaintiff-
Respondent is the daughter of the deceased and deny the other averments. The
answer proceeds to state that even assuming the truth of all the facts averred
therein the plaint does no1 disclose a cause of action.

The following issues were adopted when the action came up for trial:

(1) Was the 2nd Plaintiff the wife of Merennege Kithsiri Wijesena Fonseka by
habit and repute from 1965 until his death?

(2) Did the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Defendants forge the signature of

**98**

Merennege Kithsiri Wijesena honseka and execute a will on 28th September,
1977?

(3) Did the 1st, 2nd and 3rd Defendants propound the said will in DC Gampaha
case No. 1322/T and fraudulently obtain an Order Nisi dated 12th May, 1978 and
probate dated 17th March, 1981 having misled the Court?

(4) If the above issues are answered in the affirmative, is the Plaintiff
entitled to the reliefs prayed for?

(5) In any event as the Order Nisi has been issued and it has been made
absolute can the Plaintiffs maintain this action on the facts pleaded in the
Plaint?

By consent of parties, issue No. 5 was heard as a preliminary issue and the
learned District Judge answered it in favour of the Plaintiff-Respondents and
ordered the action to proceed on the remaining issues. This order was affirmed
by the Court of Appeal.

Mr. H. L. de Silva, PC learned Counsel for the Defendants-Appellants submitted
that the Full Bench decision in Adoris v. Perera (1) is exactly in point. I am
unable to agree. In that case the Plaintiffs who were not parties to the
testamentary action, sued for the recall of the probate of the will of Ran
Etana granted to her husband, the defendant. The ground of action assigned in
the plaint was that the will produced in Court "was not the act and deed of
Vithanage Ran Etana, and probate should not have been granted in respect
thereof".

It was held that the plaintiffs could not maintain the action, because, if the
circumstances were such that probate could be recalled under Section 536 of
the Civil Procedure Code (which was not the case), application should have
been made for the purpose by way of summary procedure in the testamentary
action, and apart from Section 536 and 537, because the plaint does not aver
such fraud as is necessary to impeach a judgment.

De Sampayo A.J. agreed that when the issue of probate has followed upon an
Order Nisi the provisions of Section 537 do not apply, and all parties are
concluded by the issue of probate and added:-

"There might, of course, be fraud in connection with the

**99**

obtaining of probate even upon an Order Nisi, in which case an independent
action might in analogy to the English practice be brought to set aside the
probate. There is, however, no fraud in this case".

I think that the dismissal of the action in Adorls v. Perera (1) in limine was
warranted by the provisions of Section 46(2)(i) of the Civil Procedure Code on
the ground that it was a suit for the recall of the probate which was barred
by the provisions of Sections 536 and 537 of the Code. The power under Section
46(2)(i) can be exercised at any stage, whether before or after the
commencement of the trial -Reid v. Samsudin (2). No fraud was alleged in the
plaint and as such it could only have been entertained after an amendment
consequent upon an order under Section 46(2). During the argument of the
appeal Counsel for the Plaintiffs-Respondents applied to be allowed to rectify
the plaint but this was not entertained by the Full Court.

In the instant case, the pleadings are entirely different and in my view
complies with Section 40 of the Civil Procedure Code. As required by Section
40(d) it contains a plain and concise statement of the circumstances
constituting the cause of action. It alleges the forgery of a will and its use
in the testamentary case without disclosing the 1st Plaintiff-Respondent who
is the only daughter of the deceased and who along with the 2nd Plaintiff-
Respondent appears to have been residing with the deceased at the time of his
death. It alleges that the Defendants misled the Court to granting probate.

Mr. H. L. de Silva, PC cited the decision in Biyanwila v. Amarasekera (3)
which held that the requirements of Section 524 of the Civil Procedure Code to
mention the names of the heirs of the deceased are only directory which only
means that the failure to disclose an heir would not make the probate void on
account of such non-compliance. However, such failure is a relevant fact in
determining whether probate had been obtained by fraud.

Learned Counsel also submitted that notice of Order Nisi was advertised in the
Newspaper as required by Section 532. That may be adequate in law. However,
for determining whether probate was obtained by fraud it would be relevant to
know whether having regard to the circumstances of the plaintiffs, such notice
afforded to them an adequate opportunity of being aware of the case and
whether the

**100**

Defendants-Appellants kept the Plaintiff-Respondents out of the case being
aware of the fact that the Plaintiff-Respondents were not likely to have read
the Newspaper and become aware of the testamentary case.

On the allegations contained in the plaint the Court has to determine upon
evidence whether the Plaintiff-Respondents were deliberately kept in the dark
about the existence of the testamentary action to make it appear to the Court
that there was no opposition to the grant of probate, whether the will is a
forgery and whether probate had been obtained by fraud.

The law does not require that the plaint should make out a prima facie case
which is what the Defendants-Appellants appear to insist on, nor are the
Plaintiffs required to state their evidence by which the claim would be
proved. The plaint in the action discloses a cause of action and if as it
appears to me, the real grievance is that it does not contain sufficient
particulars, the defendants should, before pleading to the merits, move to
have the plaint taken off the file for want of particulars - Mudali Appuhamy
v. Tikarala (4). Under Section 46(2) of the Civil Procedure Code this is the
correct procedure even in a case where it is alleged that the plaint does not
disclose a cause of action.

Although the above findings are sufficient to dispose of this appeal, in
deference to the submission of the learned Counsel for the Defendants-
Appellants, I wish to deal with some of the points taken by him.

Learned Counsel submitted that the Court of Appeal placing reliance on a
statement of Monir "The -Principles and Digest of the Law of Evidence" (4th
Edition - Volume I), has misconceived the law as to the kind of fraud which
may vitiate a decree. This statement which also appears in the 14th Edition of
that work at page 639 is "If the claim in the previous suit was false and the
falsity of the claim was necessarily known to the party putting forward the
claim, the decree in that suit is liable to be set aside". Counsel argued that
Monir made an incorrect statement of the law with reference to cases cited as
authority for that statement.

I do not think that Monir has misstated the law. The author does not say that
a false claim knowingly made would necessarily vitiate a

**101**

decree. All that he has stated is that the decree in such a case is 'liable'
to be set aside. Whether the decree is void and may be set aside would depend
on the totality of the evidence in the case and any such decision would have
to take into account the entirety of the rules applicable in this sphere. The
relevant principles have been fully stated in Monir (14th Edition) pages 634 -
641.

The most salient principles are as follows:-

(a) In order to get rid of a former judgment it is not sufficient for a person
to prove constructive fraud, he must prove actual positive fraud, a meditated
and intentional contrivance to keep the parties and the Court in ignorance of
the real facts of the case and the obtaining of that judgment by that
contrivance.

(b) Fraud must be extraneous to the decree, it must be fraud vitiating the
proceedings in which the decree was passed. The decree should have been
obtained by fraud practised upon the Court.

(c) It must be a fraud that is extrinsic or collateral to everything that has
been adjudicated upon and not such as has been or must be deemed to have been
dealt with by the Court.

(d) It is not possible to show that the Court in the former suit was mistaken,
it may be shown that it was misled. In other words where the Court has been
intentionally misled by the fraud of a party and a fraud has been committed
upon the Court with the intention to procure its judgment, it will vitiate its
judgment.

(e) The decree cannot be set aside merely on the ground that it has been
procured by perjured evidence. It is not sufficient to allege that the
judgment was obtained by false evidence as the judgment sought to be vacated
must be taken to have decided the question whether the testimony of any
witness was true or false and whether the document produced in evidence was
genuine or not.

The Court of Appeal in its judgment refers to the rules (b), (c) and (d) above
and was fully seized of the applicable principles and as such has not
misconceived the law.

**102**

Learned Counsel for the Defendants-Appellants submitted that in substance the
allegation in this case is that probate had been obtained on perjured
evidence. I cannot agree. An allegation that a will was forged intentionally
to mislead the Court to granting probate for the administration of an estate
which has in fact devolved on intestate heirs and that probate has been
obtained by persons who forged such will without disclosing the heirs has to
be viewed differently from an allegation that probate has been obtained by
mere perjury. If it were otherwise it is not clear why our Courts have held
that the proper procedure to impeach probate obtained on a forged will is by
separate action - Tissera v. Gunatilleke Hamine (5); Adoris v. Perera (1);
Biyanwila v. Amarasekera (3). If the Plaintiff succeeds in such action he
cannot apply for letters of administration but would be entitled to sue for
his share of the estate without obtaining letters - Tissera v. Gunatilleke
(6).

Woodroffe and Amir Ali's Law of Evidence 14th Edition at page 1264 cites the
following case. 'B' in an action brought in the Probate Division had
propounded a will and 'A' had propounded the substance of a later will
alleging that the earlier will had been obtained by undue influence. A
compromise was effected under which the alleged earlier will was admitted to
probate. Afterwards 'A' discovered that the last mentioned alleged will was a
forgery and that 'B' was a party or privy to the forgery and brought an action
to get the compromise declared as having been procured by fraud and obtained
judgment in that action - Priestman v. Thomas (7).

In Srirangammal v. Sandammal (8) the plaintiff sued for the partition of the
property comprised in the estate of the deceased. The Plaintiff derived title
to the property upon a sale of the property to him in execution of a decree
obtained by him against the deceased on a promissary note allegedly executed
by her. The Defendants successfully resisted the action on the ground that the
former decree was obtained by fraud and was null and void in that the
promissary note upon which it was obtained was a forgery and the Plaintiff had
no rights as purchaser under it. The Court held that the defendants were
entitled to set up this defence under Section 44 of the Evidence Act.

Mr. H. L. de Silva PC, submitted that the fraud should relate to the actual
business of the Court and the ground of setting aside a decree should be
strictly limited to frauds such as the suppression of

**103**

process, concealment of the knowledge of the suit or disabling a party from
defending it. I am of the view that categories of fraud are not closed and
that it should be left to the Court to decide whether any particular
contrivance constitutes a fraud on the Court having regard to the facts and
circumstances of each case.

In Jonesco v. Beard (9) cited by the learned Counsel for the Defendants-
Appellants, the House of Lords held that the proper method of impeaching a
completed judgment on the ground of fraud was by action in which the
particulars of the fraud must be exactly given and the allegation established
by the strict proof such a charge requires. If, however, for any special
reason departure from the establishment practice is permitted, the necessity
for stating the particulars of the fraud and the burden of proof are in no way
abated and all the strict rules of evidence apply.

This was a decision in appeal from an order of the Court of Appeal setting
aside a judgment and ordering a new trial on the ground that the judgment had
been obtained by fraud. At the hearing before the Court of Appeal affidavit
evidence was filed in support of the appeal. It was on these affidavits that
the new trial was ordered. Having examined the available evidence the House of
I orders reversed the order of the Court of Appeal.

In Flower v, Lloyd (10) the fraud alleged in the action was that the
Defendants had wilfully and with corrupt intention deceived and misled an
inspector who had conducted an inspection of the defendants process on an
order of Court. The Vice-Chancellor considered the fraud to be established and
gave judgment for the Plaintiff. The Court of Appeal having examined the
evidence reversed the judgment of the Vice-Chancellor on the ground that the
charge of fraud had not been substantiated.

James L.J. (Obiter) dwelt at length on the dangers of setting aside a final
judgment by a fresh action on the ground that perjury had been committed in
the first action - in particular the danger of proliferation of litigation
which might go on ad infinitum. However, Bagallay L.J. observed -

"Whilst I am fully sensible of the evils and inconveniences which must arise
from reopening what are apparently final judgment between litigant parties, I
desire to reserve myself an opportunity of fully considering the question how,
having regard to the general

**104**

principles and authority, it will be proper to deal with cases, if and when
any such will arise, in which it shall be clearly proved that a judgment had
been obtained by the fraud of one of the parties which judgment- but for such
fraud, would have been in favour of the other party. I should much regret to
feel myself compelled to hold that the Court has no power to deprive the
successful but fraudulent party of the advantages to be derived from what he
has so obtained by fraud".

I think that the observations of Bagailay L.J. are appropriate to the case
before us. The decisions cited are generally those in which the allegations of
the parties have been tried. It is very rarely that a suit is rejected in
limine and on this basis too I take the view that the case before us is one
which should be heard lest the Plaintiffs would be left with a grievance that
they have been deprived of the opportunity of a trial.

In the circumstances of this case there is no warrant for the apprehension as
expressed by James L.J. in Flower v. Lloyd (10) that our decision would
encourage frivolous litigation. Having regard to the hazards and expenses of
litigation in our time it may be assumed that ordinarily no person would
embark on litigation unless he has a serious grievance. We should be slow to
demise such a grievance in limine.

It is also relevant to note that fraud like any other fact, can be proved by
circumstantial evidence and if the circumstances are such as from which no
other inference except that of fraud can be deduced, it would not be right to
throw out the plea merely because no direct proof of it was furnished. Laxmi
Narain v. Mohd Shafi (11). I would therefore leave it to the District Court to
hear the evidence and reach a decision having regard to all the circumstances.

For the above reasons, I affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
dismiss the appeal with costs.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. - **I agree. **  
  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

_

_

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/17.html_  

