##  Sri Krishna Corporation Limited v. General Sales Company Limited - SLR -
19, Vol 1 of 2005 [2003] LKSC 17; (2005) 1 Sri LR 19 (14 November 2003)

**19**

**SRI KRISHNA CORPORATION LIMITED  
V.  
GENERAL SALES COMPANY LIMITED**

SUPREME COURT,  
BANDARANAYAKE. J  
DE SILVA, J, AND  
JAYASINGHE. J  
SC. (CHC) NO. 25/99A  
H.C. (CIVIL) NO. 47/96(1)  
28TH MARCH, 9TH AND 31ST JULY  
AND8TH AUGUST, 2003  
  
_Landlord and Tenant - Erroneous dismissal of plaintiff's action for damages
on the ground of unsuitability of the premises for the agreed purpose -
Failure of the High Court Judge to consider the counter claim of the
defendant.  
_  
This is an appeal by the defendant against the High Court Judge's order in H.
C. (Civil) No. 47/96(1) decided in SC (CHC) Appeal No. 25/99, where the
Supreme Court reversed the High Court Judge's judgment which had dismissed the
plaintiff's appeal. In this appeal the defendant appealed against the same
judgment particularly on the ground the High Court had failed to consider the
defendant's counter claim for recovery of expenses incurred by him to effect
improvements to the premises to enable its use as a warehouse for storing rice
brought in by lorries and to recover rents alleged to be due from the
plaintiff.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. The High Court judgment against the plaintiff was reversed when the
Supreme Court upheld the plaintiff's appeal. The court also directed the High
Court Judge to assess the damages based on the plaintiff's claim as well as
the defendant's counter claim on the rent and to enter decree accordingly.  
  
2\. The order made on the plaintiff's appeal in S.C. (CHC) appeal No.25/99 is
affirmed.  
  
**APPEAL** against the judgment of High Court  
  
_S.L. Gunasekara_ with _Kushan de Alwis_ for defendant - appellant.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, P.C._ with _Geethaka Goonawardane_ for plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

**20**

November 14, 2003  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the High Court dated 12.05.1999. By the
judgment while dismissing the plaintiff-respondent's (hereinafter referred to
as the plaintiff) action against the defendant-appellant (hereinafter referred
to as the defendant), the defendant's claim in reconvention against the
plaintiff was also dismissed. The defendant appealed against that order to
this Court.  
  
The plaintiff instituted action against the defendant, praying inter alia for
the recovery of a sum of Rs. 8,488,000 together with legal interest thereon
from the plaint till date of decree and thereafter on the aggregate amount of
the decree till payment in full. In his plaint the plaintiff had pleaded that
he had taken a warehouse from the defendant on rent which later he found not
to be suitable for the purpose of storing rice. Due to the non-suitability of
the said premises, the plaintiff claimed that he suffered loss and damage
which was estimated at Rs. 7,000,000/-. He further claimed that the defendant
did not return the deposit of Rs. 1,488,000 though it was demanded.  
  
The appeal of the plaintiff was decided and delivered today in a separate
application S.C. (CHC) No. 25/99, which deals in detail, the issues pertaining
to that appeal.  
  
The contention of the defendant is that while the High Court had arrived at
the correct conclusion by dismissing the plaintiff's action that the learned
Judge of the High Court was in error when he dismissed the defendant's
application in reconvention, inter alia, for the following reasons :  
  
(a) learned Judge of the High Court erred in holding that the defendant had
notice from P2 onwards that trucks laden with rice and/or trucks laden with
unlimited quantities of rice would be driven inside the said warehouse;  
  
(b) learned Judge of the High Court in holding that the purported knowledge of
the defendant that trucks laden with unlimited quantities of rice would be
driven into the said warehouse precluded the defendant from claiming any
damages for the losses caused to the defendant by reason of such trucks being
driven into and or inside the said warehouse;

**21**

(c) there having been no dispute whatsoever between the parties that all such
damage as was caused to the defendant's said warehouse was caused by lorries
of the plaintiff with loads of rice being driven inside the said warehouse the
learned Judge of the High Court erred in failing to give the defendant
judgment as prayed for by the defendant in respect of its claim in
reconvention in the prayer of its answer.  
  
In appeal No. SC (CHC) 25/99, on a consideration of the material placed before
Court, it was held that, at the time the plaintiff and defendant entered into
the agreement (P2) the defendant was fully aware that the warehouse would be
used for the purpose of storage of rice and in order for such storage, heavy
vehicles would be driven into the warehouse. Moreover, the defendant being the
owner of the warehouse, should have known whether the construction of the said
warehouse would stand the rigours of storage of rice and more importantly
whether the floor of the warehouse is built to withstand the loads of a lorry
laden with rice. These factors are within the knowledge of the defendant and
not of the plaintiff, he being a total stranger to the premises. It is
pertinent to note that a mere visual inspection would not be sufficient to
determine the intrinsic deficiencies of the interior of a building. Therefore
the plaintiff cannot be held responsible for the damage to the building which
apparently had a deficient floor that could not sustain heavy loads.  
  
In these circumstances for the reasons given in the judgment in SC (CHC)
Appeal No. 25/99, this Court held with the plaintiff and those reasons apply
to this appeal, which is based on identical facts and issues, as well.
Accordingly this appeal is dismissed and the relevant part of the Judgment of
the High Court which refers to the claim in reconvention of the defendant
against the plaintiff dated 12.05.1999 is affirmed.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**DE SILVA, J.** -I agree  
  
**JAYASINGHE, J.** -I agree  
  
**_Order in S.C. (CHC) Appeal No. 25/99 to assess damages on plaintiff's claim
and defendant's counter claim on rent affirmed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/17.html_  

