##  Tennekoon v. Somawathie Perera Alias Tennekoon - SLR - 90, Vol 1 of 1986
[1986] LKSC 17; (1986) 1 Sri LR 90 (31 January 1986)

**

90

TENNEKOON  
V.  
SOMAWATHIE PERERA alias TENNEKOON

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., COLIN-THOME, J., RANASINGHE, J., TAMBIAH, J.  
AND DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 51/84.  
C.A. No. 287/79 (F).  
D.C. COLOMBO No. 10740/D.  
SEPTEMBER 18 AND 19, 1985.

_Divorce - Seven-year separation - Summary Procedure - Section 608 (1) and (2)
of the Civil Procedure Code - Has matrimonial fault to be proved even where
there has been a seven-year separation? Marriage Registration Ordinance.

_ **

Held-** (Tambiah, J. dissenting)

The words -either spouse in section 608 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code must
be understood as referring only to the -innocent. spouse for the purpose of
the relief of divorce under section 608(2) (a) or section 608(2) (b) of the
Civil Procedure Code.

It is incumbent on a spouse seeking a divorce under section 608(2) of the
Civil Procedure Code on the :ground of separation for a period of seven years
to establish matrimonial fault. Only a procedural change enabling summary
procedure to be used instead of a regular action-was effected by section
608(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

_

Muthuranee v. Thuraisingham_ (1984) 1 SRI L. R. 381 overruled.

**

Cases referred to:

**

1 _Muthuranee v. Thuraisingham_ (19841 1 Sri L. R. 381.

2 _. Keerthiratne v. Karunawathie_ (1938) 39 NLR 514, 575, 516.

3 _. Joseph v. Joseph_ (1940) 42 NLR 119.

4 _. National Assistance Board v. Wilkinson_ [1952] 2 Q. B. 648.

5 _. R. v. Sheen_ 28 L.J.M. 9.

6 _. Kish v. Taylor_ [1911] 1 K. B. 625, 634.

7 _. Plumstead Board of Works v. Spackman_ [1884] 13 Q.B.D. 878.

**91**

_

8\. Re Brocklebank [1889] 23 Q. B. D. 461.

9\. Quebec Railway v. Vandry AIR 1920 P. C. 181, 186.

10\. Orr v. Orr (1920) 22 NLR 57, 61.

11\. Frugtneit v. Frugtneit (1941) 42 NLR 547.

12\. Chapman v. Chapman [1972] 2 All E. R. 1089.

13\. Kruger v. Kruger [1980] 3 S.A. L. R: 283.

14\. Ebert v. Ebert (1939) 40 NLR 388.

_**

APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal ([1984) 2 SLR 217).

_

Eric Amerasinghe, P. C., with D. R. P.Goonetileke _ for the plaintiff-
appellant.

_

E. R. S. R. Cumaraswamy, P. C. with Prins Gunasekera and R. K. Suresh Chandra
_ for the defendant-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

January 31, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C. J.

**

The plaintiff-appellant instituted this action by way of summary procedure
against his wife praying for a divorce a vinculo matrimonii on the sole ground
that they had been living in separation a mensa et thoro for a period of 7
years prior to the institution of the action in terms of section 608(2) of
the' Civil Procedure Code. The defendant-respondent filed answer denying that
they lived in separation. After trial the trial Judge rejected the evidence of
the defendant and entered judgment for the plaintiff as' prayed for in his
action. From the said judgment the defendant appealed to the Court of Appeal
and that court by its judgment dated 5.9.84 set aside the judgment of the
trial court and dismissed the application of the plaintiff with costs in both
courts. The Court of A peal granted leave to the plaintiff to appeal to this
court on the following questions of law.

(i) whether separation a mensa et thoro for a period of 7 years constitutes a
valid ground for divorce: under section .608(2) of the Civil Procedure Code,
and

(ii) if not, whether it is incumbent on the petitioner seeking a divorce under
that subsection on such ground to establish a matrimonial fault on the part of
the respondent to such separation.

**92**

Since the judgment appealed from is in conflict with the judgment of another
Bench of that court in Muthuranee v. Eliyatamby Thuraisingham (1) this appeal
was referred to a Bench of five judges for a final decision of the conflict in
the interpretation of section 608 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code.

Admittedly the marriage between the parties was one that was contracted under
the provisions of the Marriage Registration Ordinance (Cap. 112) which is
commonly referred to as Marriage (General) Ordinance. The preamble of this
Ordinance states:

"that it is an ordinance to consolidate and amend the law relating to
marriages other than the marriage of Muslims and to provide for the better
registration thereof."

Section 19 of the Ordinance provides as follows:

(1) No marriage shall be dissolved during the lifetime of the parties except
by judgment of divorce a vinculo matrimonii pronounced in some competent
court.

(ii) Such judgment shall be founded either on the ground of adultery
subsequent to marriage, or of malicious desertion, or of incurable impotency
at the time of such marriage.

(iii) Every court in Ceylon having matrimonial jurisdiction is hereby declared
competent to dissolve a marriage on any such ground.

Section 597 of the Civil Procedure Code provides that:

"Any husband or wife may present a plaint to a District Court within the local
limits of the jurisdiction of which he or she, as the case may be, resides
praying that his or her marriage may be any ground for which marriage . may,
by the law applicable in Ceylon to his or her case, be dissolved.'"

"Our common law of divorce is based on the "guilt' and not on the marriage
breakdown' principle ....... Adultery and malicious desertion are breaches of
the fundamental obligations flowing from the marriage contract, for it is of
the essence of the marriage relationship that the spouses should adhere to
each other, being physically and spiritually 'one flesh' ............. ."-The
South African Law of Husband and W fe-Hahlo-pp. 349-"350.

**93**

Section 596 of the Civil Procedure Code specifies the procedure in matrimonial
actions. It provides

"In all actions for divorce a vinculo matrimonii, or for separation a mensa et
thoro or, for declaration of nullity of marriage, the pleadings shall be by
way of plaint and answer, and such plaint and answer shall be subject to the
rules and practice by this Ordinance provided with respect to plaints and
answers in ordinary civil actions, so far as the same can be made applicable,
and the, procedure generally in such matrimonial cases shall (subject to the
provisions contained in this, Cap. XLII) follow ,the procedure herein before
set out with respect to ordinary civil actions."

The pleadings in matrimonial actions are by way of plaint and answer and the
procedure in such action is regular procedure and not summary procedure.

The grounds for a divorce are a matter of substantive law and are as specified
in the aforesaid section 19 of the Marriage (General) Ordinance.

The grounds for judicial separation are:

(a) that further cohabitation with the defendant has become dangerous or,
intolerable for the plaintiff;

(b) that the state of affairs was brought about by the unlawful conduct of the
defendant.

To be unlawful the conduct need not amount to a breach of the criminal law. It
is sufficient that the defendant has committed some matrimonial offence or
breach of the conditions underlying the status of marriage. "Adultery and
malicious desertion, being grounds for divorce are also grounds for the lesser
remedy of judicial separation." Keerthiratne v. Karunawathie (2).

A judicial separation may be prayed for by the plaintiff even where grounds
for a divorce a vinculo rnatrimonii exist. The court cannot, in such a case,
give more than a judicial separation. Judicial separation may therefore be
decreed even where there is evidence of adultery subsequent to marriage, or of
malicious desertion and also when for other reasons the continuance of the
cohabitation would become dangerous or unsupportable. So that judicial
separation may be decreed on account of cruelty or protracted differences or
for gross dangerous and unsupportable conduct on the part of the defendant.
Vide Keerthiratne v. Karunawathie (supra).

**94**

Judicial separation in the words of Professor Hahlo:

"Is a half-way house Between marriage and divorce. A decree of judicial
separation does not dissolve' the marriage tie, but puts, for the time being;
an end to the. personal marriage by suspending the reciprocal duty of the
spouses to live together:"

Section 608 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code' provides as follows

"Application for a separation a mensa et thoro on any ground on which by law
applicable to -Ceylon. such separation may be granted, may be made by either
husband or wife by plaint to the District Court, within the local limits of
the jurisdiction of which he or she, as the case may be, resides; and the
court, on being satisfied on due trial of the truth of the statement made in
such plaint; and that there is no legal ground why the application should not
be granted, may decree separation accordingly."

A court cannot enter a decree for separation a mensa et thoro based entirely
on the consent of parties - Joseph v. Joseph (3).

Act No. 20 of 1977 amended the section 608 as it originally stood in the Civil
Procedure Code by the renumbering of the above provision as section 608 (1)
and by inserting the following new subsection as section 608 (2)

"Either spouse may -

(a) after the expiry of .a period of two years from the entering of a decree
of separation: under subsection (1) by a District Court, whether entered
before or after the relevant date, or

(b) notwithstanding that no application has been made under subsection (1) but
where there has been a separation a mensa et thoro for a period. of seven
years,

apply to the District' Court by way of summary procedure for a decree of
dissolution of marriage, and the court may, upon being satisfied that the
spouses have not resumed cohabitation in any case referred to in paragraph (a)
or upon the proof of the matters stated in an application made under the
circumstances referred to in paragraph (b) enter judgment accordingly..:."

It is on the construction of section 608 (2) that rival submissions have been
made by counsel for the appellant and counsel for the respondent.

**95**

Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant submitted that the words "either spouse"
connoted either spouse irrespective of whether the spouse was the guilty
spouse or the innocent one and that section 608 (2) (b) stipulated that where
there has` been a separation a mensa et thoro for a period of 7 years either'
husband or wife will. be entitled to a decree for divorce, regardless of the
existence or not of grounds for a dissolution of marriage for which section 19
of the Marriage (General) Ordinance mandated a 'court competent to dissolve a
marriage. According to counsel, the fact of separation for 7 years will be
sufficient ground by itself, under section 608(2)(6) of the Civil Procedure
Code, to found a decree for dissolution-of marriage and it will be irrelevant
for the court to inquire into who is responsible for the separation. He urged
that the seven-year period of separation is a new statutory ground for
divorce. He admitted that a more fitting place for this new ground of
dissolution is section 19 of the Marriage (General) Ordinance, which contains
the substantive law relating to dissolution of marriage, but he submitted that
though this new ground of divorce is out of place in a code relating to
procedure of actions, nothing prevents the legislature from enacting
'substantive law in a code of procedure.

The preamble to the Civil Procedure Code states that it is an ordinance to
consolidate and amend the law relating to the procedure of the civil courts.
The code is primarily a procedural enactment, it prescribes the procedure that
has to be followed in a civil court in the adjudication and enforcement of
substantive rights between parties to a civil suit. Section 7 provides that
the procedure of an action may be either "regular" or "summary". Section 8
enjoins that every action shall commence and proceed by a course of regular
procedure save and except actions in which it is specially provided that
proceedings may be taken by way of summary procedure. It is to be noted that
as a general rule the procedure in matrimonial actions is regular procedure
(section 596). Section 608(1) re-affirms this rule with respect to
applications for a separation a mensa et thorn.

But the amended section 608(2) departs from the general rule and stipulates
summary procedure for obtaining a decree of divorce founded on separation a
mensa et thorn. The submission of counsel for the respondent is that the
amended section 608(2) seeks only to alter the procedure for obtaining a
dissolution of marriage founded on a decree of separation a mensa et thoro,
under section 608(l) or on the fact of separation a mensa et thoro for a
period of seven years. He

**96**

discounted the suggestion that section 608(2) enacts substantive law. He
contended that the mere' fact of separation a mensa et thoro for a . period,
of seven years has not been constituted a ground of divorce by, section 608
(2) (b). He argued that in the scheme -of sections 68(1) and, (2), the
applicant for divorce should prove (a) that he/she had obtained a decree for
judicial separation under section 608 (1) or (2).that there are grounds on
which by the law applicable to separation a mensa et thoro a decree for such
separation may be granted to him/her and that there had been such separation
for a period of seven years. He submitted that this new provision for divorce
under section 608(2) is in conformity with the common law and harmonises with
the 'guilt' principle which pervades our law of divorce. He, said that the
construction contended ,for by counsel for the appellant introduced a new
element in our law of divorce which is alien and opposed to the 'guilt'
doctrine, in that, it. enables- a guilty spouse to sue for divorce on the
ground of separation for seven years which separation he/she had brought about
by his/her unlawful conduct. He said that that new ground enables the guilty
spouse to take advantage of his/her own wrong.

Counsel for the respondent added that the breakdown principle, on which the.
English Matrimonial Causes Act 1973 is based does not make irrelevant the
conduct of the guilty spouse in granting a divorce. The English Act enables
the: court to grant a divorce on the ground that the marriage has broken down
irretrievably as evidenced by the fact that the parties have lived apart for a
continuous period of five years immediately preceding the presentation of a
petition for divorce. It however provides that-

"the respondent to a petition for divorce in which the petitioner alleges five
years separation may oppose the grant of a decree on the ground that the
dissolution of the marriage will result in grave financial or other hardship
to him and that it would: in all the circumstances be wrong to dissolve the
marriage", and it mandates the court "to consider all the circumstances,
including the conduct of the parties to the marriage, all the interests of
those parties and of any children or other persons concerned, and that if it
is of opinion that the dissolution of the marriage will result in grave
financial or other hardship to the respondent and that it would in all the
circumstances be wrong to dissolve the marriage it shall dismiss the petition.

**97**

Counsel for the respondent pointed out that section 608(2) does not direct he
court to take account of the considerations obligated by the English
provisions before dissolving the marriage.

In my view, though the submission. of counsel for the appellant is not without
force, on the whole I would prefer to accept the construction of counsel for
the respondent, even though it would involve writing into section 608(2) words
qualifying the spouse who could make the application under that section.

Section 608(1) specifically requires that the party applying for a judicial
separation must establish a ground on which by the law applicable thereto,
such a separation may be granted. The onus is on the plaintiff to show that
the cohabitation has become dangerous or intolerable owing to the unlawful
conduct of the defendant. A decree for judicial separation will not be granted
where the plaintiff refuses to cohabit for reasons other than the defendant's
alleged unlawful conduct.

Section 608(2) has to be read with section 608(1), and not in isolation as an
independent section. It derives its colour from the earlier section 608 (1).
Both sections seek to give relief to the spouse who is entitled to sue for a
decree of separation a mensa et thoro or who has sued and obtained such a
decree.

Taken out of context section 608(2) may appear to entitle either spouse,
whether guilty or innocent, to make the application under section 602 (a) or
(b) but the section has got to be read in the context of the concept of.
judicial separation and of section 608 (1 ). Taken in that context it is only
the innocent spouse who can be identified as the "either spouse" referred to
in section 608(2) for the purpose of the relief of divorce under section
608(2) (a) or section 608(2) (b).

It is to be noted that the grounds for the grant of a decree for judicial
separation are not the same as for the grant of a decree for divorce. The
ground for grant of judicial separation is that the cohabitation has become
dangerous or intolerable to the plaintiff as a result of the defendant's
unlawful conduct. On the other hand, the grounds for divorce are, as stated
earlier, adultery, malicious desertion and incurable impotency at the time of
the marriage. There is sense and justice in entitling the innocent spouse who
has obtained a decree for judicial separation to enlarge that decree into a
decree for dissolution

**98**

of marriage; after expiry of a period of two years from the entering of a
decree of separation; or in granting decree for divorce to an innocent spouse
who had lived in separation a mensa et thoro for seven years, but had not made
an application for a decree for judicial separation under section 608 (1) even
though entitled to do so.

In resolving the question' what is a proper. construction of section 608(2)
the following relevant principles of construction have to be borne in mind:

(a) There is a presumption that Parliament does not intend to make a radical
change in the existing law by a side wind.

As Lord Delvin said:

"It is a well established principle of construction that a statute is not to
be taken as effecting -a' fundamental alteration in the general law unless' it
uses words that point unmistakably to that conclusion"-National Assistance
Board v. Wilkinson(4).

The principle that the innocent spouse alone is entitled to a divorce or
judicial separation is deep-seated in our jurisprudence. I think if it is to
be superseded it should be overtaken by a clear definite and positive
enactment, not by an ambiguous one such as section 608(2) relied upon by the,
appellant.

(b) The golden rule of interpretation is that the words of a statute must
prima facie be: given their ordinary meaning. The court must not shrink from
interpretation, which ill reverse the previous law. Judges are not called upon
to apply their notions of good policy so as to modify the plain meaning of
statutory words; but, where, in construing general words the meaning of which
is not entirely plain there is good reason for doubting whether legislature
could have been intending so wide an interpretation as would disregard
fundamental principles, then a court may be justified in adopting a narrower
construction. It is to be taken as a fundamental principle, standing as it
were on the threshold of the whole subject' of interpretation, that the plain
intention of the' legislature as expressed by the language employed is
invariably to be accepted and implemented, whatever may be the opinion of the
Judge of its wisdom or justice. A sense of possible injustice of an
interpretation ought not to induce a judge to do violence to well settled
rules of construction but it may lead to the selection of one rather than the
other of two reasonable interpretations. A statute must be given effect to
whether the Judge likes it or not.

**99**

"Whenever the language of. a legislature admits of two constructions and, if
construed in one way, would lead to obvious injustice the courts act upon the
view that such a result could not have, been intended: unless the intention
had been manifested in express words. It is a cardinal, rule, governing the
interpretation of statutes that when the language of the legislature admits of
two constructions, the court should not adopt a construction which would lead
to an absurdity or obvious injustice." R. v. Sheen (5) (per Lord Campbell).

(c) On the general principle of avoiding injustice any construction will, if
possible be rejected (unless the policy of the Act required it) if it would
enable a person by his own act to impair an obligation which he had undertaken
or otherwise to profit by his own wrong - Maxwell on Interpretation of
Statutes, 12th Ed. at page 212 -

"A man may not take advantage of his own wrong. He may, not plead in his own
interest, a self-created necessity." Per Fletcher Moulton, L. J. Kish v.
Taylor' (6).

Bearing in mind the above principles of construction of a statute I cannot
persuade myself to accept the, construction contended for by counsel for the
appellant that the basic words "either spouse may" in section 608(2) includes
the, spouse whose unlawful conduct brought about the separation. This
construction will enable the guilty spouse to take advantage of his own wrong
(which brought about this separation) to achieve what he wanted, namely
dissolution of the marriage.

It is to be noted in this case the plaintiff-appellant bases his action for
dissolution of marriage only on the ground of seven years separation. In the
issues raised by the counsel for the plaintiff the conduct of the defendant is
not put in issue. The parties have four children by this marriage. For no
fault of the defendant, the plaintiff is `seeking to divorce her. In
Muthuranee v. Thuraisingham (supra) in which Tambiah, J, held that seven years
of separation simpliciter was sufficient to ground an action for divorce, the
defendant's wife resisted an earlier action of the plaintiff-husband for
divorce, on the ground that it was the plaintiff who maliciously deserted her
and her daughter and was living in open adultery with one. Cecilia, by whom he
was having two children. Then the' plaintiff withdrew-that action and filed
the present action praying for a decree of dissolution of marriage on the
ground that they have been separated for a period of 7 years.

**100**

Here was a case where the husband was unquestionably the guilty party who
deserted his wife and lived in adultery with another woman for 7 years and yet
he was held entitled to divorce his innocent wife. The injustice inflicted on
the innocent spouse is manifest. This consequence is he inevitable result of
the interpretation of section 608(2) contended for by counsel for the
appellant. To adopt the words of Brett, M. R., in Plumstead Board of Works v.
Spackman(7):

"If that is the true interpretation of the statute - if there are no means of
avoiding such an interpretation of the statute - a Judge must come to the
conclusion that the legislature by inadvertence has committed an act of
legislative injustice ; but to my mind a Judge ought to struggle with all the
intellect he has and with all vigour, of mind that he has, against such an
interpretation of an Act of Parliament and unless he is forced to come to a
contrary conclusion, he ought to assume that it is impossible that the
legislature could have so intended.

"Where the legislature has used words in, an Act which, if generally
construed, must lead to palpable injustice and consequences revolting to the
mind of any reasonable man, the court will always endeavour to place on' such
words a reasonable limitation on the ground that the legislature could not
have intended such consequence to ensue unless express language in the Act or
binding authority prevents such limitation being interpolated in the Act - Re
Brocklebank (8).

It is shocking to judicial conscience that a party who defies the moral laws
can obtain a divorce on the ground of his own matrimonial offence of malicious
desertion. It is inconceivable that a responsible legislature would have
intended, by enacting section 608(2), to lend its sanction to such proceeding.
Even English law which recognises the breakdown of marriage as a ground for
granting divorce mandates the taking into account, inter alia, the conduct of
parties to the marriage in, exercising its discretion to grant a decree for
divorce. On the interpretation of counsel for the plaintiff-appellant the
conduct of a delinquent petitioner is irrelevant in the matter of granting a
decree for divorce even though the separation for seven years has been brought
about by such conduct. The consequences of this interpretation is revolting to
the mind of any reasonable man. This interpretation destabilises the
institution of marriage, and undermines the moral and social foundation of our
society.

**101**

It is significant that section 608 (2) (b) opens with the words
"notwithstanding that no application had been made under subsection (1)". If
appellant's submission represents the correct construction, the clause
"notwithstanding that no, application had been made under subsection (1) would
be superfluous and serves , no purpose, for on that construction a separation
for seven" years simpliciter entities a spouse to a' divorce. In' my view the
presence of these words in this section tends to show that 608 (b) has' a link
with section 608(1). A statute ought to be so construed that no part of it
shall be treated as a surplusage. An interpretation which renders: any
provision of the Act redundant should be avoided. Effect must be given, if
possible to all the words used in the statutory provision for the legislature
is deemed not to waste its words or to say anything in vain- Quebec., Railway
V. Vandry (9)-per Lard Sumner.

In my view, the phrase "not with standing that no application is made under
subsection (1)" gives an insight into the mind of the legislature.
Applications under subsection 608 (1) for a judicial separation can be made
only by the innocent spouse. A spouse who is responsible for the separation
because of his unlawful conduct cannot apply for judicial separation Hence
section 608 (2) (b): will appear to ensure that even though the innocent
spouse had not chosen to apply for a judicial separation, that circumstance
will not bar that spouse, from claiming a divorce on the ground of separation
for 7 years. This construction fits into the scheme of the law. Where the
innocent spouse has applied for decree of separation and obtained it, then
he/she could move for a dissolution of the marriage after the expiry of a
period of two years from entering of the decree for separation. But, where the
innocent spouse has failed to apply under section 608(1) for decree of
separation though entitled to and had thus failed to obtain a decree of
separation to entitle him/her to avail of the provision of section 602(2) (a)
to have the marriage dissolved, even then, if there had been separation for a
period of seven years, then also, he/she will be able to apply for dissolution
of marriage.

I agree with the following reasoning of Atukorale, J. in the judgment appealed
from:

"This subsection 608(2) enabled, for the first time, either spouse to apply to
the appropriate District Court by way of summary procedure for a decree of
dissolution of the marriage without proceeding by way of plaint in the course
of regular procedure. It also prescribed in paragraphs (a) and (b) aforesaid
the

**102**

circumstances under which such an application by way of summary procedure may
be made by either spouse. The circumstances specified in paragraph (a) or (b)
must be shown to pre-exist before a spouse can have recourse to summary
procedure for the dissolution of his or her marriage. In the instant case the
circumstances set out in paragraph (b) have been established to exist prior to
the respondent's application for a decree for divorce. The crucial and
decisive words in so far as the instant case is concerned are therefore the
following :

the court may..... upon the proof of the matters stated in the application
made under the circumstances referred to in paragraph (h), enter judgment
accordingly.' What then are the matters that are required to be stated in such
an application and which have to be proved to entitle the petitioner to
judgment dissolving the marriage? Learned counsel for the respondent
maintained in effect that they refer to the fact of marriage and the fact that
the spouses had been living in separation: a mensa et thoro for a period of 7
years prior to the application. If these are proved, the court, learned
counsel urged, is obliged to enter judgment dissolving the marriage. I cannot
agree. As set out by me above proof of the matters specified in paragraph,
(b), above would only warrant recourse to summary procedure which. is. a
speedy and inexpensive form of procuring relief. The matters stated in the
application are in my view a reference to the matters that have to be set out
in terms of section 374(d) of the Code, namely, a plain and concise statement
of the facts constituting the ground of the application and its circumstances
upon proof of which the petitioner is entitled to relief or order prayed for."
.

The. view of Atukorale, J. in the present case is preferable to that of
Tambiah, J. in Muthuranee v. Thuraisingham (supra) and hence the latter should
be overruled on this point: The 'correct legal position is that only a spouse
who has lived in separation a mensa et thoro for seven years and who can
establish a separation a mensa et thoro on any ground on which by our law such
separation may be granted can

**103**

avail himself/ herself of the procedure set out in section 608 (2)(b) of the
Civil Procedure Code to obtain a decree of dissolution of marriage under that
section. -

I dismiss the appeal with costs.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- !,agree.

**

RANASINGHE, J.-** I agree.

**

DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J.

**

I have read the judgment of the Hon. the Chief Justice. I regret, I am unable
to agree.

The plaintiff-appellant (the husband) filed action byway of petition against
the defendant-respondent, his wife, and prayed for a divorce a vinculo
matrimonii on the sole ground that they had been living in separation a mensa
et thoro for a period of seven years prior to the institution- of the action,
in` terms of section 608(2) of the Civil Procedure Code:'

S. 608 reads:.,

"608(l) Application for a separation a mensa et thoro on any ground on which
by the law applicable to Ceylon such separation may be granted, may be made by
either husband or wife by plaint to the District Court, within the local
limits of the jurisdiction of which he or she, as the case maybe, resides, and
the court on being satisfied on due trial of the truth of the statements made
in such plaint, and that there is no legal ground why the application should
not be granted, may decree separation accordingly.

(2) Either spouse may-

(a) after the expiry of a period of two years from the entering of a decree of
separation under subsection (1) by a District Court, whether, entered before
or after the relevant date; or

(b) notwithstanding that no application has been made under subsection (1) but
where there has been a separation a mensa et thoro for a period of seven
years.

**104**

apply to the-District Court by way of summary procedure. for a decree-of
dissolution of marriage, and the court may, upon being satisfied that the
spouses have not resumed cohabitation in any case referred to in paragraph
(a), or upon the proof of the matters stated in an application made under the
circumstances referred to in paragraph (b), enter judgment accordingly.

Provided that no application under this subsection shall 'be entertained by
the court pending the determination of any appeal taken from such decree of
separation. The provisions of section 604 and 605 shall apply to such a
judgment.

In this subsection 'relevant date' means the date on which the Civil Courts
Procedure (Special Provisions) Law, 1977, comes into operation."

The wife filed answer denying that they lived in separation and maintained
that there has been no separation a mensa et thoro between the parties.

After trial, the learned trial Judge rejected the evidence of the wife and
arrived at the finding that the parties had been living in separation a monsa
et thoro for a period of seven years prior to the filing of the action. He
took the view that on proof of separation a mensa et thoro for such period,
the Court was obliged, to grant a divorce at the instance, of either spouse
under s. 608 (2), and that it was unnecessary for him to decide whether the
spouse suing for divorce was an innocent or guilty party. He entered judgment
for the plaintiff as prayed for in his petition.

The wife appealed to the Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal by its
judgment dated 05.09.84 set aside the judgment of the trial Judge and
dismissed the application of the plaintiff with costs in both the Courts. The
Court of Appeal was of the view that s. 608 (2) for the first time enabled
either spouse to apply for a `decree of dissolution of marriage by way of
summary procedure without proceeding by way of plaint in the course of regular
procedure; that the matters specified in paragraph (a) and (b) must be shown
to pre-exist before a spouse can have recourse to summary procedure for the
dissolution of his or her marriage; that proof of the, matters specified in
paragraph (b) would only warrant recourse, to summary procedure :which is a
speedy and inexpensive form of procuring relief. The judgment states-

**105**

''In my opinion a spouse seeking a divorce' by way of summary procedure must
not only justify the procedure invoked by him or her but must further plead
and prove to the satisfaction of court that he or she is entitled to a
dissolution of the marriage upon any ground which by the law applicable. to
his or her marriage such dissolution may be decreed. In the instant case
therefore the husband could not have succeeded in his claim for divorce by
mere proof of a seven-year separation a mensa et thoro but it was incumbent on
him to establish further one of the three grounds of divorce prescribed in s.
19 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance. It is my view that the primary
objective of s. 608 (2) of the Code is to make provision for a quicker and
cheaper procedure for obtaining relief in matrimonial cases and not to alter
the substantive law upon which marriages can be dissolved."

The Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal to the Supreme Court ex mere motu
on the following substantial questions of law:

(i) Whether separation a' mensa et thoro for a period of seven years
constitutes a valid ground for divorce under s.608(2) of the Civil Procedure
Code; and

(ii) If so, whether it is incumbent on the plaintiff seeking a divorce under
that sub-section on such ground to establish a matrimonial fault on the part
of the defendant to such application:

In the written submissions filed in this Court on behalf of the defendant-
respondent, it was sought to justify the view taken by the Court of Appeal
that the primary objective of s. 608 (2) of the Code is to make provision for
a cheaper and quicker procedure for obtaining relief in matrimonial cases and
not to alter, the substantive law of divorce; that the grounds for divorce are
still only those that are contained in s. 19 of the Marriage Registration
Ordinance and a petitioner seeking a divorce under s. 608 (2) (b) of the Code
must establish one of the three grounds specified in s: 19 of the Ordinance.
Reliance also was placed on a passage in Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes
that statutes dealing with procedure should, where possible, be limited in
their construction to procedure only.

Before this Court, however, learned President's Counsel appearing for the
defendant-respondent did not support the above view taken by the Court of
Appeal. Instead, he confined his arguments to the 2nd

**106**

ground of appeal, namely, that the petitioner seeking a divorce under s. 608
(2) (b) must establish a matrimonial fault on the part of the defendant. There
is no doubt, then, that s. 608 (2) (a) of the Code created a new valid ground
of divorce.

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant-respondent cited certain
passages from Benion on "Statutory Interpretation" (1984 Ed.), Crates on
"Statute Law'" (5th Ed.), and Maxwell on -Interpretation of Statutes" (12th
Ed.) which are to the following effect:

""it is a principle of legal policy that law should' be altered deliberately
rather than casually, and that Parliament should' not change either common law
or Statute law by a side wind, but only by measured and considered provisions.
The Court, when considering which of the opposing constructions of the
enactment would give effect to the legislative intention, should presume that
the legislator intended to observe this principle ........ as. Lord Devlin
said National Assistance. Board v. Wilkinson (supra), 'It is a. well
established principle of construction. that a Statute is not to betaken as
effecting a fundamental alteration in the general law unless it uses words
that point unmistakably to that conclusion'."-(Benion p.317)

"it is presumed that the legislature does of intend to make any change in the
existing law beyond that which is: expressly stated therein, or follows by
necessary implication from, the language of the statute in question.........
If the arguments on a question of interpretation, are 'fairly evenly balanced,
that interpretation should be chosen which involves the least alteration of
the existing law'

Statutes dealing with procedure should, where possible, be limited, in their,
construction to procedure only."- (Maxwell pp. 116. 11 8):

."It must be remembered that it is a sound rule to construe a Statute in
conformity with the common law rather than against it, except ;where ,or in so
far as the statute is plainly intended to alter the course of the common law.
The general rule in exposition is this, that in all doubtful matters, and
where the expression is in general terms, the words are to receive such a
construction as may be agreeable to the rules of common law in cases of. that
nature, for ?statutes are not presumed to make any alteration in the common
law further or otherwise, than the Act does expressly declare........ If

**107**

it is clear that it was the intention of the legislature in passing a new
Statute to abrogate the previous common law on the subject, the common law
must give way and the Statute must prevail."-(Craies pp 175. 310).

S. 608 (2) (b) was introduced into the Civil Procedure Code by the Civil
Procedure (Amendment) Law No. 20 of 1977. It would appear that the Bill that
was presented by the Minister of Justice, in its original form, contained only
sections 608 (1) and 608(2), which is now s. 608 (2) (a). Learned President's
Counsel for the defendant-respondent informs us that the Bill had passed its
second reading and at the Committee stage, some interested party sponsored the
amendment which resulted in the present s. 608 (2) (b) of the Code. It was his
submission that an important change in the Common Law as embodied in s. 19 of
the Marriage Registration Ordinance has been effected "by a side-wind''

S. 597 (1) of the Code states -

"Any husband or wife may present a plaint to the District Court braying that
his or her marriage may be dissolved on any ground for which, marriage may, by
the law applicable in Ceylon to his or her case, be dissolved."

S. 607 (1) states

"Any husband or wife may present a plaint to the District Court praying that
his or her marriage may be declared null and void."

"(2) Such decree maybe made on any ground which renders the marriage contract
between the parties void by the law applicable to Ceylon. "

S.608.(1) states

"Application for a separation a mensa et thoro on any ground on which by the
law applicable to Ceylon such separation may be granted may be made by either
husband or wife by plaint to the District Court and the Court, on being
satisfied on due trial of the truth of the statements made in such plaint, and
that there is no legal ground why the application should not_ be granted, may
decree separation accordingly."

**108**

Learned President's Counsel for the defendant-respondent also submitted that
the words "either spouse" in s. 608 (1), (2) should be given the same meaning
as the words "husband or wife" in ss. 597 (1), 607 (1) and 608 (1), that is, a
husband or wife who can establish a "ground" in order to obtain a decree of
divorce or of nullity or of separation; that s.608(2) must be read with s.,608
(1) and not in isolation. In other words, it is only an innocent spouse free
from matrimonial fault who has obtained a decree for separation unders.608(1),
who can apply under s. 608 (2) (a) to convert it into a decree for divorce. So
too, he argued, in regard to s. 608 (2) (b). The words "notwithstanding that
no application has been made under subsection (1)" in s. 608(2) (b) mean, he
said, that although no application has been made under sub-section (1), the
applicant must be a person who would be able to satisfy a ground of separation
in terms of s.608(1), but who has nevertheless not made such an application.
In other words, the applicant must prove the conditions sufficient to obtain a
decree of separation, although he has not obtained a decree of separation plus
a seven-year separation a mensa et thoro. Here too, only an innocent spouse
free of matrimonial fault can obtain a decree of divorce under s. 608 (2) (b).
The words "application made under the circumstances referred to in paragraph
(b)" in s. 608(2) indicate the circumstances in which the application is made
as stated in s. 608(2)(b) read with s.608(1).

Learned President's Counsel further submitted that in s.608 (2) (b) the
meaning to be attributed to the words "a separation a mensa et thorn" (for 7
years) must be the meaning given to the same words in s. 608 (1 ), that is, a
separation of the type recognised by law, and not merely a physical
separation. The same words cannot have two different meanings in the same
section.

Learned President's Counsel finally submitted that the meaning of s. 608 (2)
(b) is ambiguous and by no means clear. If so, the presumption is against an
intention to change the common law or the statutes embodying the common law.

Learned President's Counsel for the appellant, on the other hand, argued that
the whole exercise of interpretation only arises in cases of ambiguity. The
words of s. 608 (2) are clear and there is no place for interpretation. The
Court. has to give effect to the plain meaning of the words used in s.608 (2)
(b). Firstly, either spouse could make the

**109**

application, irrespective of who is responsible for the seven-year separation.
There must secondly be a factual separation a mensa et thoro for a period of
seven years. The expression separation a mensa et thoro" contemplates a
physical situation of a separation from bed, board, cohabitation and goods and
carries no connotation of a matrimonial fault. Thirdly, upon proof of the said
two matters, the Court must enter judgment accordingly.

Article 80(3) of our Constitution precludes the canvassing of the validity of
any statute law. It states that

" Where a Bill becomes law upon the Certificate of the President or the
Speaker, as the case may be, being endorsed thereon, no Court or tribunal
shall inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, the
validity of such Act on any ground whatsoever."

It matters not, then, whether s.608(2) of the Code was introduced by a "side
wind"` or a change in the substantive law of divorce was effected in a Statute
dealing with procedure. Have not the basic principles of the law of res
judicata been written into our Civil Procedure Code? Did not the old Civil
Procedure, in sections 600, 601 and 602, contain important provisions
regarding the dismissal of a suit upon connivance, condonation or collusion,
and give the Court a discretion to refuse a dissolution of marriage upon the
proof of adultery, delay, cruelty, desertion, neglect or misconduct on the
part of the plaintiff? If an Act of Parliament has been obtained improperly,
it is. for the legislature to correct it by repealing it. So long as it
remains on the Statute Book it is good and valid law, and the task of the
Court is to interpret the Act.

"Strictly speaking, there is no place for interpretation or construction
except where the words of a Statute admit of two meanings. As Scott, L. J.
said:

where the words of an Act of Parliament are clear, there is no room for
applying any of the principles of interpretation which are merely presumption
in cases of ambiguity in the Statute."

Rules of construction have been laid down because of the obligation imposed on
the Courts of attaching an intelligible meaning to confused and unintelligible
sentences.

The cardinal rule for the construction of the Acts of Parliament is that they
should be construed according to the intention of Parliament which passed
them. The tribunal that has to construe an Act of a Legislature, or indeed any
other document, has to

**110**

determine the intention as expressed by the words used. If the words of the
Statute are themselves precise and unambiguous, then no more can be necessary
then to expound those words in their ordinary and natural sense. The words
themselves alone do in such a case best declare the intention of the law
giver.

Where the language is explicit, its consequences are for Parliament, and not
for the Courts, to consider. In such a case the suffering citizen must appeal
for relief to the law giver and not to the lawyer." - (Crates 5th Ed. pp. 63,
64, 85).

"Where the language is plain and admits of but one meaning, the task of
interpretation can hardly be said to arise. Where, by the use of clear and
unequivocal language capable of only one meaning, anything is enacted by the
legislature, it must be enforced however harsh or absurd or contrary to common
sense the result may be. The interpretation of a Statute is not to be
collected from any notions which may be entertained by the Court as to what is
just and expedient. The duty of the Court is to expound the law as it stands;
and to leave the remedy to others.

But where the words of a Statute are plain and unambiguous, an intention to
alter the common law is evident from the words of the Act, there is no place
for the application of the presumption." (the presumption against changes in
the common law) - (Maxwell pp. 29,` 122).

I cannot accept the contention of Learned President's Counsel for the
defendant-respondent that it is only an innocent spouse, devoid of matrimonial
fault; who can seek a divorce under s. 608(2). In sections 597(l) and 607(l),
the words used are "any husband or wife may present. a plaint to the District
Court". The word "ground" is also used. Obviously, then, it is the spouse who
has a cause of action who can sue for divorce or a nullity of marriage.
Similarly, the words in s. 608 (1) are "application for a separation a mensa
et thoro may be made by either husband or wife by plaint to the District
Court." The word "ground" is also found. Here too, only the spouse who has a
cause of action can sue for judicial separation. In all three sections, the
draftsman employed language which made his meaning manifest that it is only
the innocent spouse who could file action seeking a divorce or nullity of
marriage or a decree of separation. It is significant that these words are not
reproduced in s.608(2) and the bare words "either spouse' are: used,
qualifying both paragraphs (a) and (b) of s. 608 (2).

**111**

If the contention of learned President's Counsel is correct, then, I must read
into' s. 608 (2) the following words or some such words :

(2) Either spouse -

(a) who has obtained a decree of separation may after the expiry of two years
etc..- or

(b) notwithstanding that no application has been made under sub-section (1)
but where such an application could have been made and there has been a
separation a mensa et thoro etc.

It is a well settled rule of construction that if the language of the
enactment is clear and unambiguous, it would not be legitimate for the Courts
to add words thereto and evolve therefrom some sense which may be said to
carry out the supposed intentions of the legislature (Bindra on Interpretation
of Statutes, 6th Ed. p. 412).

Further, if the submission that a spouse, in addition to a seven year
separation a mensa et, thoro, must also prove the conditions sufficient to
obtain a decree of separation is correct, the legislature need not have
enacted s. 608,(2) (b). Sections 608 (1) and 608 (2) (a) would suffice. A
spouse could obtain a decree of separation under s. 608 (1), and two years
later, convert same into a decree of divorce under s. 608 (2) (a):

I have no difficulty in construing the words "notwithstanding that no
application has been made under sub-section (1)". They mean in spite. of the
absence of a decree of separation. The words "application made `under the
circumstances referred to in paragraph (b), clearly refer to the
circumstances"" in paragraph (b), that is no decree of separation and a
separation for seven years.

What is the meaning of the expression "a separation a mensa et thoro" ?

S. 608 (1) states that a decree of separation may be granted on any ground on
which by the law applicable to Ceylon such separation may be granted. The case
law shows that our Courts have introduced the Roman Dutch Law grounds for
separation into our system.

''Maarsdorp's Institutes, Vol. 1, p. 75, sums up the Roman Dutch Law and
states that, among other grounds, continuous quarrels and dissensions or other
equally valid reasons, which render the living together of the spouses
insupportable, will justify a judicial

**112**

separation, and that although a wife or husband may reasonably be expected to
bear with occasional outbursts of ill temper, yet occasional assaults, however
light, accompanied by habitual intemperance, will make cohabitation
insupportable ......... It is well known that a judicial separation may be
obtained on the same grounds as divorce. ""  - (Orr v. Orr (10)).

"Separation may be by the Court, or by consent, in certain cases. The former
of these is called divorce a mensa et thoro, i.e., a judicial separation from
bed, board, cohabitation, and goods; and this separation may be prayed for by
the party, even where a divorce a vinculo might have been asked .........
Besides, the law loves to leave a door ajar for reconciliation, and will
prefer to decree judicial separation rather than a divorce a vinculo. Judicial
separation may, therefore be decreed for adultery subsequent to marriage, and
malicious desertion, and also when for other reasons the continuance of the
cohabitation would become dangerous or insupportable. So that judicial
separation may be decreed on account of cruelty, or protracted differences or
for gross, dangerous and unsupportable conduct in either spouse." -
(Keerthiratne v. Karunawathie (supra))

The expression "separation a mensa et thoro" means separation from bed and
board. Judicial separation is a separation of husband and wife from bed and
board by a judicial order. The Court by decree authorizes the parties to live
apart from each other. There can be an extra-judicial separation. Parties may
voluntarily agree to separate from bed and board and may even enter into a
notarially executed deed of separation setting out the terms on which they
agree to live apart which will be binding on the parties. (See Fruitiest v.
Frugtneit (11). What is contemplated in s. 608 (2) (b) is a private de facto
separation from bed and board for seven years.

Plain words must be given their plain meaning. There is no ambiguity by
learned President s Counsel for the defendant-respondent, nor will a Court be
justified in reading into s. 608 (2) words which are not the presumption
against changes in the common law as contended for in the words of s. 608 (2)
and there is no room for the application of there so as to arrive at an
interpretation that s.608(2) is only available to an innocent spouse devoid of
matrimonial fault.

**113**

S.608(2) plainly enacts that on an application of either spouse, whether
innocent or guilty of a matrimonial offence, a decree of separation may be
converted to one of divorce after the lapse of two years. In addition, it
declares that despite the absence of a decree of separation, a de facto
separation a mensa et thoro (from bed or board) for seven years is sufficient
to obtain a dissolution of marriage, on the application of either the innocent
or the guilty spouse. In the latter case, the Court in effect is only
conferring de jure recognition on a de facto state of affairs.

The Civil Courts Procedure (Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1977, retained
s.597 of the old Code. The husband or wife could have their marriage dissolved
on any ground for which it may, by the law applicable in Ceylon, be dissolved.
The substantive grounds on which a marriage may be dissolved are contained in
s. 19 of the Marriage Registration Ordinance: adultery subsequent to marriage,
malicious desertion or incurable impotency at the time of marriage. The common
law grounds of divorce are founded on the doctrine of matrimonial offence. To
obtain a divorce, one spouse must establish that the other is at fault and has
committed a matrimonial offence known to the law.

Law No. 19 of 1977 retained s.608 of the old Code and re-numbered it as
s.608(1). It repeated s.627(1) of the Administration of Justice (Amendment)
Law, No. 25 of 1975 which enacted that a judicial separation could only be
obtained on any ground on which a divorce may be sought. Law No. 19 of 1977
restored the old position.

Law No. 19 of 1977 also retained s.627(2) of Law No. 25 of 1975 which enabled
either spouse to convert a decree of separation into a decree of divorce after
the lapse of two years from the entering of decree of separation.

Why was this new ground of divorce in s. 608 (2) (a) enacted by the
legislature? Parties seek a judicial separation rather than a dissolution of
marriage for several reasons on account of their religious beliefs that a
marriage is sacred and indissoluble, or in the interests of the children but,
the main reason is the hope that time will be a great healer of the wounds of
the original parting and that the erring spouse would return soon. Where
reconciliation had failed and there was no hope of resumption of cohabitation,
the legislature thought that rather than compel parties to continue to be
married, provision should be

**114**

made for the conversion of a decree of separation into a decree of divorce,
after the lapse of two years. The legislature thought that the provision of a
two-year period after judicial separation was sufficient to enable parties to
resolve their differences and resume cohabitation. If after the. expiry of two
years, spouses are still living apart, the indication is that the marriage has
irretrievably broken down.

Law No. 19 of. 1977 went further and enacted an additional ground of divorce
in s. 608 (2) (b) that a de facto separation from bed and board for seven
years should be a ground for divorce. The underlying principle is clear. The
fact of a long separation was sufficient proof that the marriage had
irretrievably broken down and that it was futile to continue the form of
marriage without its substance. In such a situation, the parties should be
given an opportunity of rehabilitating and refashioning his or her life.

Thus we find that the general law of divorce contains features of the doctrine
of matrimonial offence and of the doctrine of the breakdown of marriage. This
was not something unknown to the other systems of divorce law in our
country.The Kandyan Law and the Muslim Law. S.32 of the Kandyan Marriage and
Divorce Act, (Cap. 113) sets out the grounds for the dissolution of a Kandyan
Marriage as adultery by the wife after marriage, adultery by the husband,
coupled with incest or gross cruelty, complete and continued desertion by the
wife or husband for two years, inability to live happily together, of which
actual separation from bed and board for a period of one year shall be the
test, and mutual consent. The Kandyan Law therefore contains features of the
doctrine of the matrimonial offence when it enables a spouse to seek a divorce
for the matrimonial offences of adultery and desertion committed by the other
spouse, and also allows divorce on the last two grounds (inability to live
together and mutual consent) which are based on the doctrine of the breakdown
of marriage.

The Muslim Law, too, contains features of both doctrines. A husband may
divorce his wife without assigning reasons by the pronouncement of Talaq. It
provides for divorce by mutual consent (Mubarat) and also for divorce at the
instance of the wife on the ground of ill-treatment or an account of an act or
omission on the husband's part amounting to a fault (Fasah Divorce).

How often in our trial Courts, have parties, having realised that their
marriage had broken down and having mutually agreed as regards custody of
children and alimony to the wife, engaged in collusive litigation? Cases have
proceeded undefended and ex parte and

**115**

decrees of divorce obtained at the instance of one spouse. In other instances,
cases, hotly contested on the pleadings, have been compromised at the trial
stage because parties have realised there was no hope of reconciliation.
Having agreed on custody of children and alimony to the wife, one side has
allowed the other side to lead evidence and obtain -a divorce without
contesting the evidence, and sometimes, on evidence which only supported a
case for judicial separation. Decrees of divorce were thus obtained, though
s.602 required the Court to be satisfied on evidence that the plaintiff's case
has been proved before entering a decree of divorce and even though in the old
Code (s-602(1)), a collusive proceeding was an absolute bar to the dissolution
of marriage. By enacting s.608(2), the legislature was only giving statutory
recognition to an established practice in our trial Courts.

There is another matter According to s. 19 of the Marriage Registration
Ordinance, the grounds for divorce are adultery, malicious desertion and
incurable impotency at the time of marriage. These grounds, except incurable
impotency, are based on the theory of matrimonial fault. The old Civil
Procedure Code, in s.602(1), enacted that the Court shall dismiss the plaint
if it finds that the plaintiff has been an accessory to or conniving at the
act or conduct which constitutes the ground upon which the dissolution of
'marriage is prayed for, or has condoned the same or that the plaint is
presented or prosecuted in collusion with the defendant. Thus, a finding of
connivance, collusion or condonation was an absolute bar to the dissolution of
marriage. This provision in the old Code was consistent with the theory of
matrimonial fault which is the basis on which a marriage is dissolved.

The old Code in the proviso to s.602(1) also provided that the Court shall not
be bound to pronounce a decree for divorce if it finds that the plaintiff has,
during the marriage, been guilty of adultery or been guilty of unreasonable
delay in presenting or prosecuting his plaint or of cruelty to the other party
to the marriage or of having deserted or wilfully separated himself or herself
from the other party before the adultery complained of and without reasonable
excuse, or of such wilful neglect of or misconduct towards the other party, or
has conduced to the adultery. Thus, plaintiff's adultery, his delay in filing
action, cruelty, desertion or wilful neglect or misconduct conducive to
adultery, are discretionary bars to the dissolution of marriage. This proviso
contains the principle that he or she who comes to Court for

**116**

relief must himself or herself come with clean hands. This is also consistent
with the theory of matrimonial fault which is the basis on which a marriage is
dissolved.

The Administration of Justice (Amendment) Law, No. 25 of 1975, did not re-
enact s. 602 of the old Code, but it enacted a new ground of divorce in
s.627(2). S.602 of the old Code was also not reintroduced by Law No. 20 of
1977, which went further and enacted an additional ground of divorce in s.608
(2) (b). Which means, today, a divorce could be obtained notwithstanding that
the plaintiff has been guilty of connivance, condonation or collusion. What
was the reason for the omission of the absolute and discretionary bars both in
Law No. 25 of 1975 and Law No. 20 of 1977?

To my mind the reason is clear. The retention of the provisions dealing with
absolute and discretionary bars would operate against the principle of
irretrievably broken down marriage contained in s.608(2). They were,
therefore, omitted by the legislature to enable parties whose marriages have
irretrievably broken down to seek a dissolution of their marriage.

I see no reason to change the view I have taken of s. 608 (2) (b) in my
judgment in Kuthuranee v. Thuraisingham (supra) even after hearing fresh
arguments, except in regard to one matter. I have stated in my judgment
(p.392). "S.608 (2) (b) enables spouses to permanently end their marital
relationship on the mere proof of a de facto separation for a period of seven
years.' This statement of mine might suggest that spouses who have parted from
each other for seven years for reasons of employment abroad, medical
treatment, jail sentence etc., are entitled to a dissolution of marriage by
mere proof of separation for seven years.

n England, the sole ground on which a petition for divorce may be presented to
the Court by either party to a marriage is that the marriage has broken down
irretrievably (Matrimonial Causes Act, 1973, S. 1 (1)). The Court hearing a
petition for divorce must not hold the marriage to have broken down
irretrievably unless the petitioner satisfies the Court of one or more of the
following facts, that is to say: (1) that the respondent has committed
adultery and the petitioner finds it intolerable to live with the respondent;
(2) that the respondent has behaved in such a way that the petitioner cannot
reasonably be expected to live v the respondent; (3) that the respondent has
deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of at least two years
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition; (4) that the

**117**

parties to the marriage have lived apart for a continuous period of at least
two years immediately preceding the presentation of the petition and the
respondent consents to a decree being granted; (5) that the parties to the
marriage have lived apart for a continuous period-of at least five years
immediatley preceding the presentation of the petition (s. 1 (2)). On a
petition for divorce it is the duty of the Court to inquire, so far as it
reasonably can, into the facts alleged by the petitioner and in to any facts
alleged by the respondent. If the Court is satisfied on the evidence of any
such fact as is mentioned in subsection (2), then, unless it is satisfied on-
all the evidence that the marriage has not broken down irretrievably, it
shall, subject to section 3 (3) and 5, grant a decree of divorce (s. 1 (3),
(4)). S. 5 relates to refusal of a decree of divorce where there would be
grave financial or other hardship to the respondent and it would in all the
circumstances be wrong to dissolve the marriage.

The English Law requires proof of an irretrievable broken down marriage as a
pre-requisite for the award of a decree of divorce.

In Chapman v. Chapman (12), the defendant presented a petition for divorce on
the ground that the marriage had irretrievably broken down. She prayed for
costs and in the petition suggested that the husband was responsible for the
separation. Lord Denning, M.R. observed:

"I think it altogether wrong for a petitioner (who Seeks a divorce on the
ground of five years living apart) to charge the respondent with a matrimonial
offence. If the petitioner Seeks to make such a charge, she should proceed on
one of the other grounds, such as adultery, intolerable behaviour or
desertion. She should only proceed on the five-year ground alone when that is
the only fact on which she is entitled to rely......... The result is, in my
opinion, that in these five-year cases, the Court should not enquire into
whose fault it was that the marriage has broken down. If the petitioner starts
making allegations of fault, in order to recover costs, then the respondent
will be entitled to cross-examine her and to call evidence himself in answer
and we shall be back to the bad old days of mutual recrimination in open
Court........ So I am firmly of opinion that the petition, in a five-year
case, should not contain any allegation of fault against the respondent. In
most five-year cases the fault is on the part of the petitioner, or is the
fault of both, or as I would prefer to say, the misfortune of both."

**118**

In South Africa, the four grounds of divorce were adultery, malicious
desertion; incurable insanity which has existed for not less than seven years,
and imprisonment for five years after the defendant spouse has been declared a
habitual criminal. The first two grounds are based on common law, the other
two on statute (See Hahlo on the South African Law of Husband and Wife, p.
296). Commenting on this Hahlo says:

"The statutory grounds of divorce are based on the idea that it is the
function of divorce' to dissolve the marriage tie when the consortium has been
destroyed. The common law grounds of divorce are based on the guilt
principle."

It would seem that in South Africa at present, there is the Divorce Act, No.
70 of 1979 (not available). In Kruger v. Kruger (13) the plaintiff, a medical
practitioner and 76 years of age, was married in 1940, and whilst working in
the Orange Free State started an intimate relationship with Mrs. H. In 1951,
he took a job in Johannesburg and Mrs. H. joined him there. The defendant wife
stayed on in the Orange Free State to look after the plaintiff's mother who
was terminally ill with cancer. After the mother died, the defendant and her
son joined the plaintiff in Johannesburg. In 1953, the plaintiff left the
defendant and ever since, he has been living with Mrs. H The plaintiff has
asked the defendant many, times to divorce him but she refused. In 1964, she
obtained a decree of judicial separation against her husband. In 1977 the
plaintiff suffered a serious brain haemorrhage and the defendant visited him
at the Nursing Home on a number of occasions and offered to look after him at
her home. He refused the offer. The defendant in her evidence stated that she
still loved him. She had hopes of her husband's return, that she believed in
the sanctity of marriage and she does not wish to break the vows she had made
before God. The husband stated in evidence that he still thinks highly of the
defendant and that she is an unselfish person who tries to express her life in
the best Christian traditions. He did not want to return to her, he loves Mrs.
H. and wishes to marry her if divorce is granted. Brink, J. said:

"There are indications in some of the letters, written by the plaintiff; and
also in the evidence, that there still is a particular bond between the
parties. When the fact that the plaintiff has chosen to live apart from the
defendant for almost 27 years and has said that he wishes to marry Mrs. H. if
an order for divorce is granted is, however, taken into account it is quite
clear that this bond does

**119**

not, as far as the plaintiff is concerned, have its origin in the love and
affection which persons, happily married; normally have for each other and
cannot be regarded as something which binds the parties to each other in such
a manner that it has prevented their marriage from reaching a state of
complete disintegration despite the many years of separation. The defendant's
attitude towards marriage is praiseworthy. The manner in which she behaved
towards the plaintiff shows that she does not refuse to divorce him out of
spite but because of a genuine desire to have the marriage relationship
between them restored. The marriage relationship can however only be restored
with the co-operation of the plaintiff. And the plaintiff's adamant
determination not to resume life with the defendant and the fact that he has
lived with Mrs. H. for almost 27 years constrain me to come to the conclusion
that the marriage has broken down irretrievably and that: even if I have a
discretion in the matter, I am obliged in the particular circumstances of this
case to grant an order for divorce ........... There is, apart from the fact
that the parties have not lived together as husband and wife........ ample
proof that the marriage has reached a state of absolute disintegration."

This case was decided under the Divorce Act, No. 70 of 1979. It is clear from
the judgment that an irretrievable breakdown of marriage is a ground of
divorce in South Africa now. Divorce was granted in this case at the instance
of the guilty spouse though it was opposed by the innocent spouse.

S. 608(2) states that the "Court may upon the proof of the matters stated in
an application made under the circumstances referred to in paragraph (6),
enter judgment accordingly."" This means, that even if a spouse has proved a
de facto separation from bed and board for seven years, the Court has a
discretion, whether or not to enter a decree for divorce. As s. 608 (2) (b)
embodies the theory of breakdown of marriage, the trial Court will, therefore,
only grant a dissolution of marriage if it is satisfied on the evidence that
the marital union is dead for all intents and purposes.

One other matter. The trial Judge has not considered the payment of permanent
alimony to the defendant-respondent. According to s.615 of the old Civil
Procedure Code, a court has no power, in a decree absolute for the dissolution
of marriage entered at the suit of the husband, to award permanent alimony to
the wife (See, Ebert v. Ebert (14)). Thus, only an innocent wife was entitled
to permanent

**120**

alimony both on divorce and on separation. This was consistent with the theory
of matrimonial fault which is the basis on which a marriage was dissolved. Law
No. 20 of 1977 repealed s. 615 and has replaced it with the new s. 615, in
terms of which, "the Court may, if it thinks fit, upon pronouncing a decree of
divorce or of separation, make order for the benefit of either spouse or of
the children or of both." Is it not to meet the new situation created by the
enactment of s. 608 (2), whereby even a guilty spouse who has wrecked the
marriage could obtain a divorce, that the new section 615 was enacted, for, if
the old s. 615 stood, the innocent spouse would have been deprived of support.

The learned trial Judge has correctly taken the view that in an application
for divorce under s. 608 (2) (b), the question whether the applicant is an
innocent or guilty party does not arise for consideration

I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 5.9.84, and restore the
judgment of the learned trial Judge. The case is sent back for the limited
purpose of enabling the trial Court to make an appropriate order for payment
of alimony in terms of s.615 of the Code, after due inquiry. There will be no
costs of appeal. _  
  
Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/17.html_  

