##  Nallanayagam v. Gunatilake and Others - SLR - 293, Vol 1 of 1987 [1985]
LKSC 17; (1987) 1 Sri LR 293 (22 November 1985)

**

293

NALLANAYAGAM  
v.  
GUNATILAKE AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No, 59/85.  
JULY 24 AND 25, 1985.

_

Fundamental Rights-Articles 13(1), 13(2) and 13(4) of the Constitution-
Spreading false rumours and statements-Regulations 19(1) and 19(2) of the
Emergency Regulations-Warrant of detention.

_

The complaint was that the petitioner was taken into Police custody on 22 5.85
and was produced before the Magistrate, Colombo Fort on 25.6 1985-three days
later than the 30 days after his arrest allowed by the proviso to Regulation
19 (1). On 23.5.1985 the I.G.P. acting under Regulation 19(2) authorised the
officer-in-charge, Police Station, Slave Island to detain, the petitioner who
had committed offences in contravention of Regulation 26.

**

Held :

**

The fundamental right referred to in Article 13(2) of the Constitution has to
be read with the proviso to regulation 19 (1) of the Emergency Regulations As
the petitioner was produced three days after the specified period, the belated
production of the petitioner was a violation of Article 13(2) of the
Constitution

Per Colin-Thome, J.  
  
"Article 13(2) embodies a salutary principle safeguarding the life and liberty
of the subject and must be exactly complied with by the executive."

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1) _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam-_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 100, 118 .  

(2) _Yasapalitha Nanayakkara v Henry Perera and Others-_ S C Application No.
19/85-S C minutes of 9.8 85

**

APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C._ with _Kithsiri Gunaratne, Desmond Fernando, A. B.
Dissanayake, Sanath Jayatilleke_ and _A. D. Telespha_ for petitioner. __  

_

Sunil de Silva, Addl. S. G._ with _Rohan Jayatilleke, S. S. C., K.
Dharmawardene, S. C_. and _Nihara Rodrigo, S.C._ for respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**294**

November 22, 1985.  
**COLIN-THOME J.

**

The petitioner filed this application on the 11th June 1985, under Article 126
of the Constitution, praying for

(a) leave to proceed in the first instance,

(b) an order on the Officer-in-charge of the Slave Island Police Station into
whose custody the petitioner was delivered for adequate opportunity to prepare
legal documents and affidavits;

(c) an order of immediate release or custody in premises affording the
petitioner proper bedding and surroundings conducive to health and comfort;
(d) a declaration that the petitioner's fundamental rights had been violated;

(e) compensation in a sum of Rs. 250,000 for costs and other relief.

At the outset the application under paragraphs (a) and (b) was granted, and an
order made that the detenu be kept in custody in more congenial surroundings
at the Slave Island Police Station. An indictment has now been served on the
petitioner charging him with committing offences under the Emergency
Regulations and he has been enlarged on bail by the High Court Judge of
Colombo with the consent of the Attorney-General pending his trial.

The petitioner does not state in his petition with sufficient particularity
which of the petitioner's fundamental rights have been violated. Learned
President's Counsel appearing for the petitioner has submitted that the
petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 13 (1), 13 (2) and 13 (4) of
the Constitution have been violated.

The material before this Court consists only of affidavits, counter,
affidavits and certified documents.

The petitioner avers in his petition and affidavit that on the 22nd May 1985
he was arrested at his home in Kalmunai by de Crusz, Assistant Superintendent
of Police, Kalmunai, the 3rd respondent. The petitioner states that de Crusz
did not inform him of the reason why he was being taken into custody. He was
only told by de Crusz that H. L. Piysena, Co-ordinating Officer, the 2nd
respondent, wanted the petitioner brought to the Batticaloa Police Station. He
was kept at the Batticaloa Police Station that night and taken to Colombo the
next day. On the 24th May his statement was recorded at the Criminal

**295**

Investigation Department Office in Colombo and he was informed that an
investigation was being made into an allegation that he was spreading false
information and bringing the Government into disrepute. Thereafter the
petitioner was kept in custody at the Slave Island Police Station.

The petitioner's wife has stated in her affidavit that she was present when de
Crusz took her husband away on the 22nd May. De Crusz told her husband that
Piyasena wanted her husband brought to the Batticaloa Police Station. De Crusz
did not state any reason why her husband was being taken into custody.

De Crusz in his counter affidavit states that on the 22nd May he took the
petitioner into custody. He informed the petitioner in the vehicle in which he
was taking him that he was being arrested for communicating or spreading
rumours or false statements.

Kumarasamy Krishnadasan, Headquarters Inspector of the . Batticaloa Police
Station, the 4th respondent, has stated in his affidavit that on the 22nd May
de Crusz brought the petitioner in custody and handed him over to Krishnadasan
to have him detained. The petitioner did not complain about the manner of his
arrest.

The petitioner in his second affidavit, dated the 2nd July 1985, has averred
that he has been on cordial terms with the police officers of the Kalmunai and
Batticaloa Police Stations and with the co-ordinating officer Mr. Piyasena
after he assumed duties in April 1985.

Under Article 13 (1) of the Constitution "Any person arrested shall be
informed of the reason for his arrest". On the material placed before this
Court by way of affidavit and counter affidavit it is not possible to come to
a positive finding that the petitioner was not informed of the reason for his
arrest.

Learned President's Counsel complained that the petitioner had been produced
by the police before the Magistrate, Colombo Fort, on the 25th June, 1985
three days later than thirty days after his arrest contravening the proviso to
Regulation 19 (1 ).

Regulation 19(1) and 19 (2) of the Emergency Regulations in force states:

"19. (1) The provisions of section 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, shall not apply in relation to persons arrested
under Regulation 18.

**296**

Provided that where any person has been arrested and detained under the
provisions of regulation 18 of these regulations, such person shall be
produced before any Magistrate within a reasonable time, having regard to the
circumstances of each case, and in any event, not later than thirty days after
such arrest.

The production of any person in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations shall not affect the detention of such person under paragraph (2).

(2) Any person detained in pursuance of the provisions of regulation 18 in a
place authorized by the inspector-General of Police may be so detained for a
period not exceeding ninety days reckoned from the date of his arrest under
that regulation, and shall at the end of that. period be released by the
Officer-in-charge of that place unless such person has been. produced by such
officer before the expiry of that period before a court of competent
jurisdiction."

While the effect of Regulation 18 in combination with Regulation 19 does not
require a judicial. order in regard to the duration. of the detention and the
place of detention, yet the requirement for production of an arrested person
before a Magistrate remains under the proviso, to Regulation 19 (1) "to ensure
the safety and protection of an arrested person," per Wanasundera, J. in
Edirisurya. v. Navaratnam (1). However the arrested person "shall be produced
before any Magistrate within a reasonable time having regard to the
circumstances of each case, and in any event, not later than thirty days after
such arrest".

Article 13(2) of the Constitution states that

"Every person held in custody detained or otherwise deprived of personal
liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court
according to procedure established by law, and shall not be further held in
custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms of
the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by law.

Procedure "established by law," for the present purpose is contained in the
proviso to Regulation 19(1) of the Emergency Regulations. In our view Article
13 subsection (2) of the Constitution incorporates by reference the substance
of what is contained in this

**297**

proviso. Accordingly the fundamental right referred to in Article 13(2) has to
be read with Regulation 19(1) proviso, of the Emergency Regulations. In the
instant case the petitioner was produced before the Magistrate, Colombo Fort,
three days after the specified period. The belated production of the
petitioner would therefore amount to violation of Article 13(2) of the
Constitution.

Another submission of learned President's Counsel for the petitioner is that
the continued detention of the petitioner from the date of his arrest to the
time of filing his petition on the 11th June 1985 was illegal as none of the
affidavits of the respondents aver that the petitioner was being detained
pending further investigation into any offences under, the Emergency
Regulations alleged to have been committed by him.' '

The relevant portion of Article 13(4) of the Constitution states that" The
arrest, holding in custody, detention or other deprivation of personal liberty
of a person, pending investigation or trial shall not constitute punishment.",

Under Article 15(7) of the Constitution "The exercise and operation of all the
fundamental rights declared and recognised by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14
shall be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the
interests of national security " For the purposes of this paragraph "law""
includes regulations made under the law for the time being relating to public
security. Article 13(4) is not subject to any restrictions prescribed by law
in the interests of national security.

Learned President's Counsel has drawn attention to a passage in my judgment in
Yasapalitha Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera and Others (2) decided on the 9th
August 1985, at page 11 which states

"It is manifest, therefore, that the detention of a person arrested without
warrant under Regulation 18 can be justified in law only if the detention is
for further investigation. It would be unlawful to detain such a person for an
unspecified and unknown purpose as this would be an infringement of Article
13(4). It necessarily flows from this that no sooner the further investigation
is concluded the suspect is entitled to his release from detention without
waiting for the duration of ninety days to be over."

**298**

On the 23rd May 1985 the Inspector-General of Police by virtue of the powers
vested in him under Regulation 19(2) authorised the Officer-in-charge, Police
Station, Slave Island, to detain the petitioner "who had committed offences in
contravention of Regulation 26" of Gazette Extraordinary No. 349/21 of
18.5.1985. The reason for the detention was stated in this order.

The petitioner has not complied with Regulation 65(1) (a) of the Supreme Court
Rules as he has failed to particularize in his petition the fundamental rights
which he alleges have been violated. This may have resulted in the omission in
the affidavits of the respondents to state that the petitioner was detained
for further investigation.

However, when the petitioner was produced before the Magistrate, Colombo Fort,
on the 25th June, 1985, the Magistrate was informed by Assistant
Superintendent of Police, Seneviratne, who produced the petitioner in Court,
that the Criminal Investigation Department was making inquiries regarding the
suspect and that relevant extracts were forwarded to the Attorney-General This
statement was recorded by the Magistrate (vide certified extract of record in
M.C. Case No. B.R. 3053, marked 1 R2). A report dated 25th June 1985 by
inspector G.R.D. Livera, C.I.D. was also filed in Court the same day stating
that the C.I.D. were conducting investigations regarding the suspect and, that
the relevant extracts have been submitted to the Hon. Attorney-General for
instructions. The submission of Learned President's Counsel that the detention
of the petitioner was not for further investigation therefore fails.

We have already held that the non-production of the petitioner, even though
the delay is only a period of three days, would still constitute a violation
of his fundamental right contained in Article 13(2) of the . Constitution.
Article 13(2) embodies a salutary principle safeguarding the life and the
liberty of the subject and must be exactly complied with by the executive. In
our view this provision cannot be overlooked or dismissed as of little
consequence or as a minor matter. To . vindicate this principle which is of
such significance, we would direct that the petitioner be paid a sum of Rs.
5,000 for the violation of his constitutional right. We direct that this sum
be paid by the State. The petitioner would also be entitled to the costs of
this application.

**

WANASUNDERA, J. -** I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_State ordered to pay compensation._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/17.html_  

