##  Jayanetti v. The Land Reform Commission and Others - SLR - 172, Vol 2 of
1984 [1984] LKSC 17; (1984) 2 Sri LR 172 (13 July 1984)

##  172



  **JAYANETTI**

**v.**

**THE LAND REFORM COMMISSION AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT. .

SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA. J., WIMALARATNE, J., COLIN‑THOME, J. AND ABDUL
CADER, J.

S.C. APPLICATION No. 15/84.

JUNE 12. 14, 15, 21 AND 22, 1984.



Fundamental right of equality under Article 12 of the Constitution‑Application
under Articles 17 and 126‑Rule 65 (1) (b) of the Supreme Court Rules,
1978‑Sections 22, 23, 24, 26 and 47 of the Land Reform Law‑Articles 4, 12(1)
and 126 of the Constitution‑Sole and exclusive jurisdiction of Supreme Court
in respect of  violation of fundamental rights‑Addition of parties after time
limit for institution of proceedings‑ Time limit for determination of Court
whether directory or mandatory‑Requisites for alienation of land by Land
Reform Commission-Is Land ­Reform Commission an agency or an instrumentality
of the State ? Meaning of executive action‑ Violation of the fundamental right
of equality by executive and administrative action



The petitioner had made an application to the Land Reform Commission(1st
respondent) to purchase 50 acres out of Mount Pearl Estate an agricultural
land and annexed to it a letter of recommendation from the then Member of
Parliament the 6th added respondent as this was an administrative requirement
for such an application. By letter dated 4th March 1982 the Regional Director
of the Commission informed the petitioner that the request could not be
granted because the Member of Parliament had withdrawn his recommendation
owing to strong objection raised by the local residents.



In view of a general direction given by the Minister (2nd respondent) under
section 47 of the Land Reform Law that an alienation exceeding 10 acres should
have his approval, the application was sent up to the Minister for his
approval with the recommendation of the commission. The Minister approved the
alienation to Mrs. Dassanayake. This was conveyed to the partied concerned by
letter dated 14.3.1983.



The petitioner interviewed the Chairman of the commission Mr. Ranjan Wijeratne
who considering that there was some basis for the petitioner's complaint of
unfair treatment suggested a compromise whereby 25 acres could be given to the
petitioner and 25 acres to Mrs. Dassanayake and submitted the proposal to the
Minister for his approval.

##  173



Mrs. Dassanayake, the petitioner and the M.P. interviewed the Minister and
made representations. In the meantime Mrs. Dassanayake had already deposited
three lakhs of rupees towards this purchase and also incurred other expenses.
Another application to alienate this land to the children of one Mr
Seneviratne had been turned down by the Minister because of his earlier
decision to alienate the land to Mrs. Dassanayake and as Only 34 acres were
left. The petitioner too had by his letter of 13th October 1983 given. the
impression that he was no longer interested in the suggested compromise. Faced
with these facts the Minister chose to abide by his earlier decision. On 2nd
February 1984 the Land Reform Commission executed the conveyance in favour of
Mrs. Dessanayake and on 10th February 1984 the petitioner filed this
application. Mr. Rajan wijeratne filed his affidavit on 13th March 1984 and
brought to the notice of Court that both Mrs. Dassanayake and Mr. Weerasinghe
who were not parties would be vitally interested in the proceedings and
adversely affected by the prayer to the petition.



As the proceedings went on the petitioner further brought to the notice of
Court the fact that Mrs. Dassanayake was employed in the Sri Lanka Insurance
Corporation and disqualified under section 23 of the Land Reform Law from
obtaining the land in ,question. The petitioner now insisted on the presence
of Mrs. Dassanayake, Mr. Weerasinghe and Mr. Wijegooneratne before Court but
the respondents relying on the Rule 65 (l) _(b)_ of the Supreme Court Rules
1978 objected to this. The respondents also objected that the Court had no
jurisdiction to hear and determine this matter after the expiry of two months.
The 4th  respondent objected that he was added after the time limit for
instituting action.



## Held-



(1)        The Supreme Court Rules 1978 (Rules 63 to 65) deal with the bare
skeleton of procedure relating to a proceeding under Article 126. It is
inconceivable that these four rules are comprehensive and all embracing and
can provide for every situation that could arise in the exercise of the
jurisdiction under Article 126. The procedural rules must  be considered as
secondary to the provisions of Articles 17 and 126 which are central. The
Court is empowered to grant such relief or make such direction in the case as
it may deem just and equitable and within this jurisdiction of the Court is
included the power to make interim orders and to add parties without whose
presence questions in issue cannot be completely and effectually decided. The
presence of Mrs. Dassanayake and Messrs. Wijegooneratne and Weerasinghe was
necessary as the Court could not make a fair order without consideration of
the allegations against them in so far as they had a bearing on the conduct of
the Land Reform Commission. These would be prejudiced if they were not given a
full and complete hearing. The Court acting in the interests of justice of
necessity had to join them as parties.



 (2)       The provision requiring the court to make its determination within
two months is directory only but this does not mean that the provision is
erased from the statute book. The time limit must be complied with except when
delay is necessitated in the in the interests of justice or where the delay is
caused by circumstances beyond the control of the Court.



(3)        The 4th respondent being impleaded in an action filed within the
prescribed time limit, is not entitled to object that the petitioner is barred
from proceeding against him as he was added after the expiry of the time limit
for instituting action.

##  174



(4)        Mrs. Dassanayake (4th respondent) being an employee of a State
Corporation was disqualified under section 23 of the Land Reform Law from
obtaining an alienation of land from the Commission. Further she had no
connection with the  administrative  district where the land wag situate and
no notice under section 26 of the Land Reform Law of the alienation was
published in the Gazette. The mandatory requirement for giving notice of any
proposed alienation by publication in the Gazette is designed ensure fair
dealing and equality.



(5)        The word "the law' in Article 12 (1) refers not only to legislation
but also to executive or administrative action. To confine it to legislation
alone would be to emasculate the equality clause.



(6)        The expression "executive action" in Article 126 is not to be
understood in the meaning given to the expression "executive" in Article 4.



(7)        Article 126 provides not only the sole and exclusive remedy in the
case of a violation of fundamental rights by executive or administrative
action but also the most expeditious remedy.



(8)        The Land Reform Commission constitutes an agency or instrumentality
of the State and its acts amount to executive or administrative action. All
activity of the Commission is subsumed under overriding policy considerations,
and this is reflected in the provisions enabling ministerial control with
financial assistance being provided and financial control being exercised by
the Government.



(9)        To make the recommendation of the Member of Parliament a condition
precedent or to give him virtually a right of veto would be to frustrate the
intention of the Legislature and to abdicate the powers vested in the
Commission.



(10)      The application of Mrs. Dassanayake has been entertained and
processed and dealt with in a most cursory and perfunctory manner.



(11) There has‑been unequal treatment of the petitioner by executive or
administrative action violative of Article 12.



Cases referred to :



(1)        _K. K. Kochunni v. State of Madras_ AIR 1955 SC 725  


(2)        _Maharaj v. A G of Trinidad and Tobago_ [1979] AC 385.  


(3)        _Vivienne Goonewardene v. Hector Perera, S. C._ No. 6/83‑S. C.
minutes of 7.2.84  


(4)        _Raja Suryapalasingh v. U.P. Govt._ AIR 1951 Allahabad 674.  


(5) _         State of U. P. v. Deoman _AIR 1960 SC 1125.  


(6)        _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation_ [1982] SLR 1.  


(7)        _Wijeratne v. People's Bank_ [1984] 1 SLR 1.  


(8)        Ramana v. I.A. Authority of India AIR 1979 SC. 1628.  


(9)        _Jackson v. Metropolitan Edition Co_. (1974) 419 U S. 363.  


(10)      _Ghanatilleke v. Attorney ‑General _[1978‑79] 1SLR 37.  


(11)      _Dhanraj Mills Ltd. v. Kocker_ AIR 195 1 Bombay 133. _  
 _

(12)      _Karthigesu Visuvalingam and Others v. Don John Francis Liyanage and
others._ S. C. No. 47/83‑S. C. Minutes of 19.10.1983.

**  175**



**APPLICATION** under Article 126 for violation of the fundamental right of
equality.



_H. L. de Silva, P. C_. with _Arthur Samarasekare, Kithsiri P. Gunaratne,
Upali Almeida_ and _A. L. M. de Silva_ for the petitioner.



_Mark Fernando_ for the 1st respondent.



_S. W B. Wadugodapitiya, Addl Solicitor ‑General_, with _R. Selvaskandan_ ,
_S. C_. for the 2nd and 3rd respondents.



_A. J. I. Tilakawardena_ with _Mohan M. Burhan,_ instructed  by _(Miss)_ _I.
Siriwardena_ for the 4th  added respondent.



_P. K. S. Sureshchandra_ for the 5th and 6th added respondents.

### Cur .adv. vult.



July 13, 1984.

WANASUNDERA, J.



This is an application by the petitioner under Article 126 of the Constitution
complaining of the violation of the equal protection clause by the Land Reform
Commission the 1st respondent, and the Minister of Agricultural Development,
Research and Co‑operatives the 2nd  respondent, in regard to certain
alienations of land under the Land Reform Law of 1972. The Attorney‑General
has been made the 3rd  respondent in accordance with the provisions of Article
134 of the Constitution.



In his petition and affidavit, the petitioner, a resident of Colombo, has
stated that he also has a residence in Welipenna in the Matugama electorate of
the Kalutara District, where he is engaged in a business of manufacturing
crepe rubber. This crepe rubber factory, which is situated at Lewwanduwa,
employs about 60 persons and has the capacity of processing 2,000 kilograms of
rubber per diem.



The petitioner has stated that in January 1982 he became aware that the land
constituting Mount Pearl Estate, an agricultural land, situated in the
Matugama electorate, containing old rubber, vested in Land Reform Commission
and in extent about 83 acres was alienation under the Land Reform Law. The
petitioner states that he made an application for the purchase of an extent of
50 acres and annexed to it a letter of recommendation from the then the 6th
added respondent, as this was an administrative requirement for such an
application. Though the 1st  respondent  denied that the petitioner made a
formal application in the official form, it is clear that a written
application had been made and was entertained and considered by the
Commission.

##  176



By letter dated 4th March 1982, the Regional Director of the Commission
informed the petitioner that his request for the 50 acres of land cannot be
granted as the Member of Parliament , the 6th respondent, had in the meantime
informed the Commission that he is withdrawing his recommendation due to
strong objections raised by the local residents.  The 6th  respondent himself
confirmed this position when the petitioner met him. He informed the
petitioner that the land should not be alienated to one or two distributed
among the local villagers.



But, A few month later the Member of Parliament was singing a different tune.
In August or September 1982, by his letter annexed to Mrs. Dassanayake's
application he is found recommending the alienation of 50 acres of this estate
to Mrs. Dassanayake, the 4th added respondent. About this time, his brother-in
law the 5th added respondent, residing with him, was also making an
application for the balance 33 acres and this application too was recommended
by the 6th respondent though he was a resident of Galle. The petitioner has
placed before us some material to show that all the Gramodaya Mandalayas in
that area had protested against the proposed alienation to Mrs. Dassanayake.



Mrs. Dassanayake's application had been entertained and, in our view,
processed and dealt with in a most cursory and perfunctory manner. In view of
a general direction given by the Minister under section 47 of the Law that an
alienation exceeding 10 acres should have his approval, the application was
sent up to the Minister for his approval with the recommendation of the
Commission. The 2nd respondent Minister then approved this alienation to Mrs.
Dassanayake. This was conveyed to the parties concerned by letter dated
14.3.1983.



In the meantime the petitioner had got wind of these developments. He
discovered that Mrs. Dassanayake was a resident of Colombo having no
connection whatsoever with the Matugama electorate. He also found that Mrs.
Dassanayake's husband was employed as public Relations Officer of the Ministry
of Trade and Shipping. The petitioner therefore concluded that she may have
brought to bear some official or political influence on the commission to
obtain her alienation. The petitioner believed that he had been discriminated
against and sought an interview with Mr. Ranjan Wijeratne, the Chairman of the
1st  

##  177



respondent, with a view to obtaining relief. Mr. Wijeratne granted the
interview and appears to have been sympathetic to the petitioner and thought
that there was some basis for the petitioner's complaint that he ha not been
fairly treated. He suggested a compromise. Of the 50 acres proposed to be
alienated 25 acres should be given to the petitioner and the balance 25 acres
to Mrs. Dassanayake. He  submitted this suggestion for the Minister's
consideration since the Minister had already approved the alienation of 50
acres to Mrs. Dassanayake.



Mrs. Dassanayake, the petitioner and the M.P. had thereafter interviewed the
Minister and made representations to him on this matter. By this time Mrs.
Dassayanake had taken a number of steps to conclude the transaction and had
deposited over 3 lakhs of rupees towards this purchase and also incurred other
expenses. Another application to alienate this same extent of land to the
children of one Mr. Seneviratne had been turned down by the Minister in view
of his earlier decision to alienate this land to Mrs. Dassanayake and as only
34 acres were left. Faced with these facts the Minister chose to abide by his
earlier decision. It appears to us that whatever decision the Minister took at
this stage would have resulted in litigation, because it would have adversely
affected the rights of one or other of the parties. He appears to have advised
himself properly when he played safe and decided not to vary the decision he
had already made. Besides, the petitioner's own letter of 13th October 1983
gives the impression that he was no longer interested in a compromise
settlement. We have no doubts about the bona fides of both the Minister and
Mr. Wijeratne in this matter and the allegations made against them are, in our
view unfair and without foundation.



The petitioner had filed this application on 10th February 1984. On 13th March
1984 the Chairman, Land Reform Commission, Mr. Ranjan Wijeratne, filed his
affidavit before this court. While explaining the position of the Commission
and his own role in the developments, he also brought to the notice of court
that both Mrs. Dassanayake and Mr. Weerasinghe, who were not parties to the
application would be vitally interested in these proceedings and would be
adversely affected if an order is made by us in terms of the prayer to the
petition in their absence.

##  178



On 19th March 1984 the petitioner himself filed a list of persons whose
evidence would be required by him, naming Mrs. Dassanayake, Mr. J. D.
Weerasinghe, Mr. Reginald Wijegooneratne the ex‑M. P., and some officers of
the Land Reform Commission, and prayed for notice on them.



On the 21st of March 1984 the 2nd and 3rd respondents filed a motion praying
for the issue of notice on Mrs. Dassanayake "as she is a necessary party to be
added to these Proceedings, as her interests may be adversely affected by the
decision in these proceedings. "



As the proceedings developed further, the petitioner brought to our notice his
discovery that Mrs. Dassanayake has concealed from the Commission the fact
that she was employed in the Sri Lanka Insurance Corporation and was therefore
disqualified under section 23 of the Land Reform Law from obtaining the
alienation in question. The petitioner now insisted on the presence of all
these parties in Court.



The respondents, notwithstanding their earlier assertions that Mrs.
Dassanayake would be adversely affected and should be made a party, now
objected to a widening of the scope of these proceedings by the inclusion of
persons not parties to the original application and to any inquiry into
matters pertaining to them. They specifically relied on the provisions of Rule
65 (1) _(b)_ of the Supreme Court Rules 1978, which they said debarred the
addition of new parties.



Due to the importance of this question and the application of the petitioner
to examine witnesses in these proceedings, the original bench of three judges
thought that it was desirable that this case be heard by a larger bench. It is
in deference to this request that the Chief Justice has nominated the present
bench to hear this appeal.



After hearing submissions of counsel, we directed that Mrs. Dassanayake, Mr.
Wijegooneratne and Mr. Weerasinghe be added as parties and time was given to
these added parties to file whatever papers they wished. These parties have
filed statements of objection. The submissions of their counsel have also been
heard by us. Since we did not at that stage give our reasons for our ruling
regarding the addition of these parties, they may be mentioned at this stage.

##  179



Rule 65 (1) _(b)_ of the Supreme Court Rules requires the petitioner to name
in his petition the Attorney‑General and any person or persons who he alleges
have infringed or are about to infringe his fundamental Or language rights. In
this context it should be noted that the remedy provided by Article 126 for a
violation of a fundamental right it limited to such violation by executive or
administrative action. A private person who is in some way connected with such
an action such as, for example, a person who stands to benefit by the
transaction does not appear to fall within the kind of persons contemplated by
Rule 5 (1) _(b)._ This problem becomes more complex if such a name were to
transpire in the course of the proceedings, for it has been submitted by
counsel for the Petitioner that Rule 65 (1) _(b)_ is limited to the point of
time as at the institution of proceedings and does not provide for matters
arising thereafter.



As far as the rules go, it would appear that they deal with the bare skeleton
of procedure relating to a proceeding under Article 126\. Part VI of the Rules
which deals with these procedural matters consists of only four Rules, i.e
Rules 63‑66\. It is inconceivable that these four Rules are comprehensive and
all embracing and can provide for every situation that could arise in the
exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 126. Incidentally, even the Civil
Procedure Code with more than 800 sections is said not to be exhaustive.

  
The remedy for a violation of a fundamental right is enshrined in Articles 17
and 126 of the Constitution and not in any rules. Article 17 is given the
importance of being dignified into a fundamental right Itself. This provision
is of the utmost importance not only for securing the safety and welfare of
the people of this country but stands as an  impregnable redoubt protecting
the operation of the democratic system of Government in the country.
Therefore, if we take our stand on these two provisions as central, we find
that any procedural  rules  must be considered secondary to these
constitutional guarantees. We are empowered, and indeed it is our duty, to
give full operation to the provisions of Articles 17 and 126. These provisions
vest this Court with sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any
question relating to an infringement of fundamental rights by executive or
administrative action. We are empowered after such inquiries, as we consider
necessary, to grant such relief or make such direction in the case as we may
deem just and equitable. This is an extensive jurisdiction and it carries with
it all implied powers that are necessary give effect and expression to our
jurisdiction. We would include

##  180



within our jurisdiction, _inter alia_ , the power to make interim orders and
to add persons without whose presence questions in issue cannot be completely
and effectually decided. In fact, our present decision in no way widens the
ambit of Article 126 but seeks to articulate its real scope and to make the
remedy more effective.



In _K. K. Kochunai v. State of Madras_ , (1)  the Supreme Court of  India,
dealing with Art. 32 the corresponding Article in the Indian  Constitution,
said ‑  


"...........But on a consideration of the authorities it appears to be well
established that this Court's powers under Art. 32 are wide enough to make
even a declaratory order where that is the proper relief to be given to the
aggrieved party. The present case appears to us precisely to be an appropriate
case, if the impugned Act has taken away or abridged the petitioners' right
under Art. 19 (1) _(f)_ by its own terms and without anything more being done
and such infraction cannot be justified. If, therefore, the contentions of the
petitioners be well founded, as to which we say nothing at 11 a declaration as
to the invalidity of the impugned Act together with the consequential relief
by way of injunction restraining the respondents and in particular respondents
2 to 17 from asserting any rights under the enactment so declared void will be
the only appropriate reliefs which the petitioner will be entitled to get.
Under Art. 32 we must, in appropriate cases, exercise our discretion and
frame our writ or order to suit the exigencies of this case declared void,
respondents 2 to 17 will certainly be necessary  parties, as persons
interested to deny the petitioners' tit1e. We see no reason why, in an
application under Art. 32 where declaration and injunction are proper reliefs,
respondents 2 to 17 cannot be made parties."



In regard to an argument that was advanced that the Court had no power under
Art. 32 to go into disputed questions of fact, the Court observed -



".............Clause (2) of Art 32 confers power on this Court to issue
directions or orders or writs of various kinds referred to therein. This Court
may say that any particular writ asked for is or is not appropriate or it may
say that the petitioner has not established any



**  181**



fundamental right or any breach thereof and accordingly dismiss ‑the petition.
In both cases this Court decides the petition on merits. But we do not
countenance the proposition that, on an application under Art. 32, this Court
may decline to entertain the same on the simple ground that it involves the
determination of disputed questions of fact or on any other ground. If we were
to accede to the aforesaid contention of learned counsel, we would be failing
in our duty as the custodian and protector of the fundamental rights. We are
not unmindful of the fact that the view that this Court is bound to entertain
a petition under Art. 32 and to decide the same on merits may encourage
litigants to file many petitions under Art. 32 instead of proceedings by way
of a suit. But that consideration cannot, by itself, be a cogent reason for
denying the fundamental right of a person to approach this Court for the
enforcement of his fundamental right which may, prima facie, appear to have
been infringed. Further, questions of fact can and very often are dealt with
on affidavits........................ As we have already said, it is possible
very often to decide questions of fact on affidavits. If the petition and the
affidavits in support thereof are not convincing and   the court is not
satisfied that the petitioner has established his fundamental right or any
breach thereof, the Court may dismiss the petition on the ground that the
petitioner has not discharged the onus that lay on him. The court may, in some
appropriate cases, be inclined to give an opportunity to the parties to
establish their respective cases by filing further affidavits or by issuing a
commission or even by setting the application down for trial on evidence, as
has often been done on the original sides of the High Courts of Bombay and
Calcutta, or by adopting some other appropriate procedure. Such occasions will
be rare indeed and such rare cases should not, in our opinion, be regarded as
a cogent reason for refusing to entertain the petition under Art. 32 on the
ground that it involves disputed questions of fact. "



In the Indian provisions, no doubt, the writ jurisdiction is also intertwined
with this jurisdiction, but in substance both Constitutions seek to achieve
the same end and, in my view, our jurisdiction is in no way less extensive
than that under the Indian Constitution-vide _Maharaj v. A. G. of Trinided and
Tobago_ , (2)

**  182**



The 1st respondent has himself stated that these added parties are vitally
interested in the result of the application. The preliminary submissions
showed that serious allegations were being made against them and in
particular, as Mr. Mark Fernando himself said, in the public interest the
validity of Mrs. Dassanayake's alienation may have to be reconsidered by the
Land Reform Commission in the light of these allegations. Far from there being
any legal bar to their addition as parties, it seems to me that it was the
only course any court could have followed in this matter.



It would be interesting to contrast this case with the facts of the case of
_Vivienne Goonewardene v. Hector Perera_ , (3)  where the contrary proposition
was advanced. In that case an affidavit of a person admitting certain facts in
issue was presented to court by one of the respondents in support of his own
case. This respondent treated this person in effect as a willing witness. In
that case it was urged on behalf of the witness that he should have been made
a party and given a hearing, because the order of the Court could have an
adverse effect on him. But that submission failed to draw the distinction
between a mere witness and the case of a Parson who stands independent of the
parties but whose presence is required as a proper party to the proceedings.



In this case Mrs. Dassanayake, Mr. Weerasinghe and Mr. Wijegooneratne have
been brought into the case against their own will and do not represent anybody
but stand in virtue of their own right Since this Court cannot make a fair
order in this case without considering the allegations against them, in so far
as they have a bearing on the conduct of the Commission, and since they would
be prejudiced if they are not given a full and complete hearing this Court
acting in the interests of justice of necessity had to join them as parties.



          Mrs. Dassanayake, Messrs Wijegooneratne and Weerasinghe then filed statements of objection. Mrs. Dassanayake has been evasive regard to the specific and grave allegation made against her by the petitioner, in that she had misled the Commission by a false statement in her application. She had concealed the fact that she was disqualified from getting an alienation of land from the Land Reform Commission since she is an employee of a corporation. Mrs. Dassanayake has not denied this allegation ‑ which should have been done by affidavit.

##  183



I shall now examine the Provisions of the Land Reform Law that have a bearing
on this matter. The Land Reform Law, No. 1 of 1972, was enacted to fix a
ceiling on the extent of agricultural land that may be owned by any individual
in this country. Any land exceeding this ceiling is to be vested in the Land
Reform Commission established by this Law. This amounts to the nationalization
of all such excess land. The Commission is a statutory Corporation. It
consists of a Chairman appointed by the Minister and eight other members.
Three of such members are ex‑officio members, heads of government departments,
namely the Land Commissioner, the Commissioner of Agrarian Services, and the
Director of Agriculture. Of the remaining five members, again three have to be
state officers nominated by the Minister of Finance, the Minister of
Plantation Industry, and the Minister of Planning and Employment. Therefore we
find that at least six of the eight members of the Commission must be state
officers and they constitute the board of management of the Commission. The
Commission has its own Fund, but the initial capital was paid from the
Consolidated Fund. Additional amounts could also be voted by Parliament.
Section 47 provides for Ministerial control enabling the Minister to give
special or general directions to the Corporation. Mr. H.L. de Silva also drew
our attention to sections 48, 57 and 62 showing State interest or other ways
of State control of the Commission.



Section 22 of the Law empowers the Commission to alienate land vested in it
for specified purposes. It provides, _inter alia,_ for alienation of land
vested in the Commission by way of sale, exchange, rent purchase or lease for
agricultural development or animal husbandry. Section 23 prohibits the
alienation of land to certain categories of persons. This includes "any
employee of the Government or of any State Corporation or of a local
authority, save and except for the purpose of construction of residential
houses". Section 22 (3) has provided that in determining the persons to whom
land should be alienated, "the Commission shall, as far as practicable, comply
with ‑Provisions that consideration shall be given to persons from the
administrative district where such land is situated." Section 26 prescribes
that notice of the proposed alienations should be published In the Gazette.



Mr. H. L. de Silva submitted that the material before us shows that any of
these statutory provisions have been disregarded by the commission in the
present case. I have already referred to the fact that Mrs. Dassanayake, being
the employee of a State Corporation,

##  184



was disqualified from obtaining an alienation from the Commission, of which
the Commission was apparently unaware. Further, she is a person without any
connection with the administrative district where such land is situated.



Equally important is the fact that notice of the proposed alienation  has hot
been published in the Gazette. Mr. Mark Fernando sought to argue that the
publication in the Gazette is discretionary. He relied on the use of the word
"may" in section 26 and also drew our attention to the various kinds of
alienation set out in section 22, and submitted that in some cases a
publication in the Gazette did not appear to be called for. These submissions
do not bear examination. Section 26 contemplates two separate acts, namely,
the decision to alienate and thereafter, if alienation is decided, the
publication in the Gazette of notice of such alienation. The discretion vested
in the Board relate to the first act. This provision does not show a second
discretion, nor is the word "may" used twice to indicate this second
discretion in respect of the second act. The very facts of this case militate
against leaving such discretion to the Commission. There is also nothing in
the provisions of  section 22 to indicate why a publication in the Gazette
should not be made in respect of all those items. In any event it must
certainly apply in the case like the present case where an alienation is made
to persons under section 22 (1) _(a)_ , _(b)_ or _(c)_. This mandatory
requirement for giving notice of any proposed alienation by publication in the
Gazette is designed to ensure fair dealing and equality.



Mr. Fernando then contended that even those transgressions would not enable
the petitioner to succeed in an application under Article 126, unless he can
show a violation of his fundamental right of equality under Article 12. He
first contended that the word "the law" in Article 12 (1) refers to
legislation and not to, executive or administrative action. Such a reading of
Article 12(1) would result in emasculating the equality clause. There are
clear indications in the Constitution itself that the fundamental rights are
to be secured, respected and advanced by all organs of government. Besides,
any proposed legislation contrary to fundamental rights are to be secured,
respected and advanced by all organs of government. Besides, any proposed
legislation contrary to fundamental rights would be struck down at the Bill
stage itself and the question of discrimination by "legislation" as such does
not really arise.



Article 12 of our Constitution is similar in content to Article 14 of the
Indian Constitution. The Indian Supreme Court has held that Article 14
"combines the English doctrine of the rule of law with the equal

##  185



protection clause of the 14th amendment to (the U.S.) Constitution". We all
know that the rule of law was a fundamental principle of English
Constitutional Law and it was a right of the subject to challenge any act of
the State from whichever organ it emanated and compel it to justify its
legality. It was not confined only to legislation, but extended to every class
and category of acts done by or at the instance of the State. That concept is
included and embodied in Article 12.



In India the words used in the equal protection clause are "equality before
the law" and "the equal protection before the law". Our Constitution uses the
expression "equal before the law" and "equal protection of the law". They mean
substantially the same thing. It has been said that "equality before law" may
be defined as equal subjection of all persons to the ordinary law of the land
and "equal protection of laws" as the protection of equal laws. _Raja
Suryapalasingh v. U.P. Govt_. (4).



_In State of U.P. v. Deoman_ (5) the Indian Supreme Court defined those
expressions as follows :



"Equality before the law is a negative concept ; equal protection of law is a
Positive one. The former declare that every one is equal before the law, that
no one can claim special privileges and that all classes are equally subjected
to the ordinary law of the land ; the latter postulates an equal protection of
all alike in the same situation and under like circumstances. No
discrimination can be made either in the privileges conferred or in the
liabilities imposed. "



Seervai sums up the position as follows :



"And law in Article 14 is not confined to the law enacted by a legislature but
includes any order or, notification. Thus Article 14 protects a person not
only against legislation but also against executive orders or notifications.
This is not surprising, for the protection given by the Article would be worth
little if a law enacted by the legislature could not violate it but executive
action could. As Lord Atkin said in another context : 'The Constitution is not
to be mocked by substituting executive for legislative interference with
freedom'."



The next ground urged by Mr. Fernando is that the alleged acts do not
constitute executive or administrative action bringing them within the ambit
of Article 126. This has been presented  in two ways first, on the broad basis
Article 126 is limited to violation of fundamental

##  186



rights by executive action, meaning that the expression "executive" must be
read in accordance with and given the same meaning as indicated in Article 4.
This is not the first time such an argument has been raised before us to
narrow the application of Article 126 and been rejected. I think it is time
that we finally nail this to the counter. It would be a sufficient answer if
we merely indicate that the expression used in Article 126 and the expression
used in Article 4 are not identical. In Article 126 the expression is
"executive and administrative, action", while Article 4 uses the words
"executive power ". We are therefore of the view that as a matter of ordinary
interpretation the wording in  Article 4 cannot have a controlling effect on
the interpretation of Article 126.



In aid of this argument, Mr. Fernando submitted that Article 126 does not
exhaust the reliefs available to a person complaining of a violation of a
fundamental right, so that any category of persons left out by a narrow
interpretation of Article 126 could obtain relief elsewhere. He Probably
thought that the Court had opted for a broad interpretation of Article 126
because of this wrong view. While this Court has been aware that in suitable
cases resort to the Court of Appeal and even to the lower Courts is available
and relief by way of writ, declaration, injunction, etc., can be obtained, it
must however be pointed out that Article 126 provides not only the sole and
exclusive remedy in the case of violation of fundamental rights by executive
or administrative action, but also the most expeditious remedy. The intention
embodied in Article 126 for a summary disposal of causes involving
transgression of fundamental rights is a satisfactory and effective provision
for protecting fundamental rights. At the same time this Provision has been
designed to aid the administration for past experience has shown that
administrative action can be delayed or even brought to a halt by protracted
litigation and by interim orders, injunctions, etc. In this context it
somewhat surprises me to find a state corporation endeavouring to get out of
the operation of Article 126 when one would expect them to act otherwise and
take advantage of this provision.



The other objection was narrower. Mr. Fernando submitted that the land Reform
Commission does not constitute an agency or instrumentality of the state, nor
does its acts amount to executive or administrative action. Earlier decisions
of this court have considered

##  187



this matter in great detail and I would refer with, approval to the judgments
of my brother Sharvananda, J., in _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation_ (6) and
_Wijeratne v. Peoples Bank_ (7) in this regard.



 In the _Insurance Corporation_ case, my brother Sharvanada, J. has set out
the several criteria which judges have accepted in determining whether or not
a public corporation is an agent or instrumentality of the State. In the
_People's Bank_ case, my brother Sharvananda, J. summed up the law as follows
:



"It will thus be seen that there are several factors which may have to be
considered in determining whether a corporation is an agency or
instrumentality of the government. Bhagawathi, J. in hl is very lucid judgment
in _Ramana v. I. A. Authority of India_ (8) summarised some  of those factors
'whether there is any financial assistance given by the State, and if so what
is the magnitude of such assistance, whether there is any other form of
assistance given by the State,  and if so, whether it is of the usual kind or
it is extraordinary, whether there is any control of the management and
Policies of the    corporation by the State and what is the nature and extent
of such control, whether the corporation enjoys State conferred or State
protected monopoly status and whether the functions carried out by the
corporation are public functions closely related to governmental functions".

    

"He further observed that this particularisation of relevant factors is
however not exhaustive and by its very nature it cannot be, because with
increasing assumption of new tasks, growing complexities of management and
administration and the necessity of continuing adjustment in relation between
the corporation and government calling for flexibility, adaptability and
innovative skills it is not is not possible to make an exhaustive enumeration
of the tests which would invariably and in all cases provide an unfailing
answer to the question whether a corporation is a governmental instrumentality
or agency. Consideration of any single factor may not suffice, a Court will
have to consider the cumulative effect of these various factors to arrive at
its decision  It is not enough to examine seriatim each of the factors upon
which a claimant relies and to dismiss each as being individually insufficient
to support a finding of State action. It is the aggregate that is
controlling'- Per Douglas, J. in _Jackson v. Metropolitan Edition Co_. (9). It
is the cumulative effect of all the relevant factors that determines the
measure of state responsibility."

**  188**



Earlier in his judgment, my brother had explained another type of situation
where a public corporation not strictly an agency or instrumentality of the
State can in the exercise of a particular power or powers be endowed with a
function that is executive or administrative.



He said :



"A public corporation can for certain purposes serve as an agent or surrogate
of the State. It all depends on the nature of its functions, whether it is
performing a governmental function or not. It may happen that certain of its
functions may be governmental, whilst the others may not. When a public
corporation is performing its non‑governmental function its action does not
have the attributes of State action or executive or administrative action.
When the Bank performs its functions of redemption or acquisition of land,
under Section 71 of the Finance Act No. 11/63, it may be urged with certain
cogency that such action of the Bank constitutes executive or administrative
action'. But in this case, the petitioner were not employed in the service of
the Bank for the performance of  duties connected with the exercise by the
Bank of its powers under  the said section 71."



The Land Reform Commission was an instrumentality established by the law to
manage and administer the vast acres of agricultural  land appropriated or
"nationalized" by the State. These lands have to be  managed in terms of State
policy which is writ large in the numerous provisions of the law. In this case
we are concerned with its powers of alienation. One cannot imagine that the
Commission has been given a free hand to deal with those properties in any
manner it wishes as in the case of an individual. Mr. Tilakawardena, whose
argument was supported by Mr. Fernando, sought to argue that while alienations
under section 22 are fettered to the extent set out therein, in other matter
the Commission has an absolute power over its lands with the discretion to
alienate them in any way it chooses. He saw such a power in section 26 and
drew a distinction between section 22 and section 26.

           

Mr. H.L. de Silva demonstrated that section 22-26 must be read in sequence and
when one does so, it is quite apparent that the empowering power as regards
alienation is contained in section 24 alone. These provisions hang together as
a part of a coherent scheme with section 22 dealing with the purposes of
alienation, section 23 with qualifications, and section 26 setting out the
machine or the procedure for effecting such alienations. This view is
reinforced  when

##  189



we examine the preamble to the law which emphasis that alienations should be
strictly confined to purposes which would ensure productivity or utilization
of man power, and not for other reasons. All activity of the Commission is
subsumed under overriding policy considerations and this is reflected in the
provisions enabling ministerial control with financial assistance being
provided and financial control being exercised by the Government.



The affidavit filed by the Chairman of the Commission states that alienations
are subject to Ministerial direction. Section 47 empowers the Minister to give
special or general directions to the Commission and the Commission is obliged
to comply with such directions. Directions have been laid down in respect of
alienations and, since the extents involved in this case are over 10 acres,
any such alienation must have the approval of the Minister.



Mr. H. L. de Silva sought to attack the acts of both the Commission .and the
Minister in this regard. He said that the Commission had wrongly required a
recommendation from the M.P. which is in the nature of a condition precedent
to the exercise of its jurisdiction. It had also surrendered its decision
making power to the Minister and the Minister had dictated to the Commission.
All  these acts, he submitted, were impermissible. I do not think that this
criticism of the manner the justified. As I read these provisions together
with the manner the powers have been exercised, I find that it was the
Commission alone that went into the merits of each application and made the
decision.  The recommendation to the Minister for his approval was a
requirement validly imposed in terms of the law. The minister was entitled in
terms of section 47 to vest in himself a right of approval not in the
generality of cases which is left to the Commission but in those exceptional
cases recommended by the Board Even here, the decision is made by the
Commission, the Minister can only approve or not approve it. I can find
nothing illegal in this arrangement.



The need for the Minister's approval and his sanctioning the alienation in the
present case brings this particular alienation in close relationship to the
Ministerial powers, thereby giving it an executive or administrative character
where or not the Commission itself is an agent or instrumentality of the
Government. It is superfluous therefore to decide in this context the larger
question as to the character of the Commission itself.

##  190



Mr. Fernando next contended that a mere mistake or error on the part of the
officers administering that law will not entitle a person to come into court
on the basis of a violation of fundamental rights by the State. He submitted
that to found an application under Article 126, there should be an intentional
or purposeful act by or at the instance of the State. In this case, he
submitted, what is alleged is an error or mistake on the part of an officer
who dealt with the relevant applications for alienation. In support of this
proposition he referred us to the case of _Gnanatilleke v. Attorney ‑General_,
(10)



In _Dhanraj Mills Ltd. v. Kocker_ , (11) the court stated the law in the
following terms :

           

''..............a clear distinction must be borne in mind between the law and
the administration of the law. If the law itself permits discrimination, even
though the law may appear to be fair and undiscriminatory, the Court may
interfere and say _(sic)_ 'We are more concerned with how the law actually
works rather than how it appears in black and while' ......... One may even
have a case where in exercising the discretion unfairly and
unequally..............  even in such a  case the Court may interfere and
say......... the administrative order suggest behind them a policy of the
State of discrimination But ........  the position is different when a subject
comes to the Court  and challenges a specific act of an individual officer as
being in contravention of Art. 14. The officer in acting contrary to Art. 14
is really acting contrary to the law and not in conformity with or in
contravention of Art. 14. The officer in acting contrary to Art. 14 is really
acting contrary to the law and not in conformity with or in consonance with
the law ...... In such a case the subject comes to Court not for protection
under Art. 14, but for protection against the dishonest, arbitrary or
capricious act of the officer. The Court is not powerless to give the subject
protection against a dishonest officer, but that protection cannot be sought
under Art. 14 or under Art. 226.''



But this view is not without its critics. Text writers have strongly advocated
that the State should be made liable even in respect of errors and mistakes on
the part of public officers if the end result is a violation of fundamental
rights.



Mr. H. L. de Silva however placed his case on a somewhat broader footing than
that of a mere error or mistake on the part of an officer of the Commission.
He referred to a number of acts and omissions on

##  191



the part of the Commission which he said induced or facilitated the
discrimination complained of by the petitioner. He submitted that the whole
operation of the alienations was conducted by hole and corner methods ; there
was no public notice of it given by gazetting as prescribed by the Law. There
was the unwarranted requirement of ,having a recommendation from the local
Member of Parliament annexed to each application, although it would have been'
legitimate for the Commission to have obtained the views of the local Member
of Parliament as regards the needs of land for his electorate.  To make the
recommendation of the Member of Parliament a sort of condition precedent or to
give him virtually a right of veto would be to frustrate the intention of the
Legislature and to abdicate the powers vested in the Commission



He added that the Procedures for processing applications were unsatisfactory,
leading to abuses and discrimination. In this regard, he said that vital
matters in Mrs. Dassanayake's application were taken merely at their face
value and not subjected to checking and confirmation as expected of a prudent
and efficient institution. This was a absolutely necessary since the project
Put forward by her involved an outlay of a large sum of money. On examination,
it now appears that  she was not even in a position to provide any worthwhile
security for her undertaking. Similarly, Mr. Weerasinghe's application did not
even contain the basic, information called for in the application. Mr. H.L de
Silva also complained that the _volte face_ of the Member of Parliament and
his recommendation of Mrs. Dassanayake and Mr. Weerasinghe soon after should
have alerted the Commission to the fact that something was amiss, but the
Commission turned a blind eye to this turn of events. Mr. de Silva also stated
that when Mr. Ranjan Wijeratne thought that the petitioner had been unfairly
treated, it was virtually an admission on the part of the Commission that it
had not acted correctly towards the petitioner.



These submission show something more than an error or mistake on the part of
an individual or isolated officer administering the Law. This is more akin to
the existence of an administrative Policy in the administrative procedures
inducing or resulting in the discrimination  complained of in this case. If
so, it could amount to a violation by the executive or administrative
authorities themselves.

##  192



There is also another aspect to this matter. Section 23 provides for a
disqualification. Although it is couched in that form, this provision
basically sets out a classification, It has not been suggested that this
classification is unreasonable. In the present case, when the Commission made
an alienation to Mrs. Dassanayake, it has disregarded a classification made by
the Legislature itself. In the result, the case of the petitioner, who is
legally entitled to make an application, has suffered in preference to the
case of a person who is disqualified by Law. The disregarding of a valid
classification is the clearest example of discrimination. In the above
circumstances I am of the view that there has been a violation by the
Commission of the fundamental right of the petitioner guaranteed by Article
12.



Counsel for the respondent also contended that due to the imperative
provisions of Article 126, this Court would have no jurisdiction to hear and
determine this matter after the lapse of a period two month. On this issue, we
are bound by the decision in _Karthigesu Visuvaliagam and Others v. Don John
Francis Liyanage and   others_ (12)    Which held that this provision is
directory. Our ruling that this provision is directory. Our ruling that this
provision is directory does not signify that it is being erased from the
statute book. It only means that the time limit imposed by the provision will
not be strictly applied to defeat the interests of justice,  where such delay
is caused by circumstances beyond the control of court or when such delay is
necessitated in the interests of justice.



Mr. Tilakawardena's further submission that we cannot proceed against the
4threspondent outside the initial time limit set out in Article 126 is equally
untenable. The correct position is that the  4threspondent has been impleaded
to an action filed within the prescribed time limit. That action is against
the State and the 4th respondent has been added as a proper party to this
action.



In the result I would hold that there has been unequal treatment of the
petitioner violative of Article 12 by executive or administrative action in
this case. In the exercise of‑our powers under Article 126 (4) we would
declare that due to the violation of the provision of the Land Reform Law, the
deed of transfer to Mrs. Dassanayake No. 1125 dated 2nd February 1,984 and all
proceedings in connection  with  the alienation of the 84 acres of this land
are null and void. We refrain however from giving any other specific
directions in the matter. We leave it open to the Commission to take whatever
action in

**  193**



accordance with the Law, which it considers meet in respect of dealings with
this land which is vested in it. The parties will bear their own costs.

** **

**SHARVANANDA, J.** ‑ I agree.  


**WIMALARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.  


**COLIN ‑THOME, J. ‑ **I agree.  


**ABDUL CADER, J. ‑** I agree

  
_Application allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/17.html_  

