##  Hewamanne v. De Silva and Another - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 17;
(1983) 1 Sri LR 1 (28 July 1983)

# 1



**HEWAMANNE**

**v.**

**DE SILVA AND ANOTHER**

** **

SUPREME COURT

WANASUNDERA, J., PERERA, J.,

RANASINGHE, J., CADER, J.

AND RODRIGO, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 2/83

9TH, 10TH, 11TH, 12TH, 13TH,

16TH, 17TH, 18TH, 19TH, 20TH,

30TH, 31ST MAY, 1ST, 6TH AND

7TH JUNE 1983.



Contempt of Court ‑ Publication of a news item prominently displayed under
eye‑catching headlines ‑ News item impeaching the integrity of two Judges of
the Supreme Court and also casting most serious aspersions on their conduct as
Judges ‑ What constitutes Contempt ‑ Can a reproduction of a notice of a
motion contained in an Order Paper of Parliament be a contempt.  


The respondents the Editor and the owner, Printer and Publisher respectively
of the Publication 'Daily News' were charged with contempt Of court in respect
of a news item prominently displayed under the headlines, "Select Committee
probe of Mr. K.C.E. de Alwis' representations" and "F.D.B's pleadings prepared
in Judge's chambers?" published, in the Daily News of 7th March,1983. This
news item was a reproduction of a notice of a Motion in the Order Paper of
Parliament for 8th March,1983.

#  2



 The 1st respondent in an affidavit stated that Justice K.C.E. de Alwis was a
member of the Special Presidential Commission which recommended imposition of
civic disabilities on Mr Felix Dias Bandaranaike and others. Thereafter Mr
Bandaranaike instituted proceedings against Justice de Alwis and the court
prohibited Justice de Alwis from func­tioning as a member of the Commission.
Subsequently Justice de Alwis made representations to His Excellency the
President and the Cabinet decided to move a resolution in Parliament for the
appointment of a Select Committee.



The 1st respondent also stated that in view of the public interest and concern
on the said sub­ject matter and also its constitutional impor­tance the said
Order Paper was published as a news item on 7th March, 1983 in the Daily News.



The respondents in this action raised the following arguments‑



(1)The freedom of speech and expression which is a Fundamental Right of the
public, guaranteed by Article 14 of Constitution, must be given prece­dence
over the law of contempt of court.



(2)At present the legal and political sovereignty of the State vests in the
people. Hence the public must be afforded a greater right to criticise the
judiciary and accordingly the law of contempt of court has to be reviewed and
modified.



(3)In English Law a fair and accurate publication of a document forming part
of the proceedings of the House is immune from proceedings for contempt or
libel. The said principle is also applicable in Sri Lanka.



(4) In case law, Particularly the present English case law, the impugned
publication would not ,constitute a contempt of court since now the courts



**  3**



allow a greater latitude to the public to criticise judges and the
administration of justice.



Held , Perera, J. and Ranasinghe, J. dissenting



1\. The law of contempt of court which had hitherto existed will, in view of
the provisions of Article 16 of the Constitution, continue to operate
untrammeled by the Fundamental Right of speech and expression.



2(i) Although the legal sovereignty of the State is in the People, the right
of the public to get in­volved in discussions on the working of the judiciary
is limited, so as to safeguard the integrity and impartiality of the judiciary
which is basic to the administration of justice.



(ii) Apart from Article 107 (2) of the Constitution., which provides for the
Legislature to inquire into the conduct of judicial officers, the law at all
times allows fair and temperate comments on decisions and the administration
of justice. But the judges and the judiciary should not be exposed to wide
open discussion by the mass media and the general public.



3(i) our Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act has deliberately omitted a
provision recognised in English Law, which granted parliamentary pri­vilege to
the publication of proceedings of Par­liament. Thus, there is no privilege in
our law to protect the impugned publication.



(ii) There is no unfettered right to publish judicial and particularly
Parliamentary proceed­ings. Even on the analogy of slander and defama­tion
cases, such immunity cannot be conceded and a libel action between private
parties, is irre­levant to the question of the impugned, Publication.

# 4

  
(iii) The English statutory law and the case law, have laid down the provision
that when a publi­cation is of any matter which the law has prohi­bited or
which would be incompatible or which would frustrate the very proceedings,
such a publication will not be entitled to any qualified privilege.



4\. (i) In Dominion countries the offence of contempt by scandalising the
court is very much alive and far from obsolete.



(ii) In England, the offence of contempt by scandalising the court is not yet
obsolete. In the recent past, even in spite of a change of attitude towards a
more liberal view, the law of contempt is still operative and an attack on the
honesty and impartiality of the judiciary has always been held to be contempt.



(iii) In Sri Lanka too, the offence of contempt by scandalising the court is
still very much in force, especially to preserve the dignity and respect of
the court.



(iv) The statute law of Sri Lanka also recognises the offence of contempt
against or in disrespect of the court.



The impugned publication therefore constitutes a contempt of court. The
respondents, by this publication have committed a contempt of court.



Held further ‑



_Per_ Wanasundera J.,



5\. "Although the Constitution does not specifically refer to the press, the
provisions guaranteeing the ­Fundamental Right of speech and expression to
every citizen are adequate to ensure the freedom of the press in this
country".

# 5

  
6\. The power vested in the Judges to safeguard the welfare and the security
of the people is also a delegated part of the sovereignty of the People,
referred to in Article 3 and 4 of the Con­stitution. Contempt against the
judges is therefore an insult offered to the authority of the People and their
Constitution.



7\. In this instance as the offence has not been committed calculatedly and
with deliberate inten­tion of interfering with the administration of justice,
the court did not impose any punishment.



_Per_ Cader, J.,



8\. "Parliament is a responsible body and can well be expected to preserve and
foster the dig­nity of the Courts in the interest of the public. But an equal
duty rests on the Courts to safe­guard that same dignity".



# Cases referred to



(1) _Wason v. Walrer_ (1868 - 69) L.R. 4 Q.B. 73  
  
(2) _Namboodrepad v. Nambier_ A.I.R. (57) 1970 S.C.2015  
  
(3) _Leo Roy v. R. Prasad_ 1958 A.I.R. (Punjab) 377  
  
(4) _The State v. Ram Chander Sharma_ \- A.I.R. (46) 1959,41  
  
(5) _Liyanage v. The Queen_ ( _Liyanage's Case_ ) (1965)68 N.L.R. 265  
  
(6) _Bribery Commissioner v. Ranasinghe_ [1965] A.C 172, 1964) 66 N.L.R.73  
  
(7) _Har;ison v. Bush,_ 0855) 5 E & B 344; 119 EE.R. 509  
  
(8) _R...v. Rule_ [1937] 2 K.B.375  
  
(9)  _Morris v. The Crown Office_ [1070] l All E.R.1079  
  
(10) _Skipworth's Case_ (1873) L.R. 9 Q.B. 230, 28 LT 227  
  
(11) _R. v. Davis_ [1906] 1 K.B. 32

# 6



(12) _A.G. v. Times Newspaper_ [1974] A.C. 273,[19731 3 All. E.R 54, [1973] 1
All E.R.,815,[19731 3 W.L.R. 298  
  
(13) _Bridges v. California_ (1941) 314 U.S. 252  
  
(14) _Stockdale v. Hansard_ (1839) 9 Ad. & El (1837) 2 M & Rob 9, 3 St.Tr.
(n.s.) 861, 112 E.R. 1,112  
  
(15) _Mangena v. Edward Lloyd Ltd.,_ (1908) 98 L.T. 640  
  
(16) _H.S.M. Sharma v. Sri Krishna Sinha A.I.R._ (46) 1959 S.C.395  
  
(17) _R. v. Wright._ 1799 8 T.R. 293, 101 ER 1396  
  
(18) _R. v. Lord Abingdon_ 1794, 1 Esp. 226  
  
(19) _Rex v.Creevey_ (1813) 1 M & S 273  
  
(20) _Bromage v. Prosser_ 4 B & C 247, 107 E.R. 1051  
  
(21) _Taylor v. Hawkins_ 16 Q.B. 321, 20 L.J. Q.B.314  
  
(22) _Davidson v. Duncan_ 7 E & B 231, 26 L.J. (Q.B.)106  
  
(23) _Cook v. Alexander_ [1.973] 3 All E.R. .1037  
  
(24) _Sri Surendra Mohanty v. Sri Nabakrishna Choudhoury_ A.I.R (46) 1958
Orissa 168  
  
(25) _R. v. Border Television Ltd., ex p. A.G_. (1978) 68 Cr. App. Rep. 375,
(1978) Crim.L.R. 221  
  
(26) _Attorney General v. Leveller Magazine_ (1979) 68 Cr. App. R. 43, [1979]1
All E.R. 745,[1979] 2 W.L.R. 247 (H.L.), [1979] A.C. 440  
  
(27) _Johnson v. Grant_ 1923 S.C. 789  
  
(28) _Bluenjenfield_ (1912) 28 T.L.R. 308  
  
(29) _Woodgate v. Ridout_ 4 F & F 202, 176 E.R. 531  
  
(30) _Bognuda v. Bawkes Bay Newspapers_ (1963) N.Z.L.R. 45, 501  
  
(31) _Lucas & Son (Nelson Mail) Ltd., v. O'Brien _1978 (2) N.Z.L.R 289  
  
(32) _R. v. Clement_ (1821) 4 B & Ald 218, 106 E.R.918  
  
(33) _Re Evening Star_ (1884) N.Z.L.R. 3 S.C. 8  
  
(34) _De Buse v. McCarthy_ [1942] 1 K.B. 156  
  
(35) _Rex v. Rich_ [1937] 2 K.B. 375  
  
(36) _Webb v. Timias Publishing Co.,_ [1960] 2 Q.B.535, [1960] 2 All E.R. 789  
  
(37) _King v. Almon_ (1765) Wilm 24-3), 97 E.R. 94  
  
(38) _Wede v. Robinson_ 109 C.L.R. 593

# 7

_  
(39) Re The Evening News (1880) 1 N.S.W. L.R. 211  
  
(40) R. v. Gray [1900] 2 Q.B. 36, [1900] 3 AII  E.R.59.  
 _

_(41)  MC Leod v. St. Aubyn [1899] A.C. 549.  
 _

_(42) Re Vidal , The Times 14th October 1922.  
 _

_(43)   R. v. Freeman (1925) Times, 13 November  
  
(44) R. v. New Statesman (Editor)_ _Ex p DPP (1928) 44 T.L.R. 301  
 _

_(45)   R. v. Wilkinson (1930) Times, 16th July  
 _

_(46) R. v. United Fisherman and AIIied Workers'   Union (1968) 2 C. C.C. 257,
65 D.L.R. (2d) 579  
  
(47) R. V. Murphy (1969 ) 4 D.L.R. (3d) 289(48)   Re Borowski (1971)19 D.L.R.
(3d) 537, 3 C.C.C.(2d) 402  
 _

_(49) A.G. v. Blundell (1942) N._ Z. L _.R 287  
 _

_(50) R. v. Western Printing and Publishing Ltd.,(1954) 111 C.C.C 122  
 _

_(51) Rex v. Wiseman [1969] N.Z.L.R. 55  
 _

_(52) A. G. v. Re Goodwin (1969) 70 S.R. (N.S.W.) 413  
 _

_(53) R v Metropolitan Police Commissioner ex p Blackburn No. 2 [1968] 2 all.
E.R. 319,[1968]2 Q.B. 150  
 _

_(54) Thalidomide Cases Re (11) and Taylor's Application [1972] 2 Q.B. 369  
 _

_(55)_ _Attorney General v. B.B.C. [1981] A.C.303, [1979] 3 W.L.R. 312,[1980]
3 ALL E.R. 161  
 _

_(56)_ _The King v. Nicholls (1911) 12 C.L.R.230  
 _

_(57)_ _Ambard v. The Attorney General of Trinidad and Tobago [1936] 1
All.E.R. 704, [1936] A.C.322  
 _

_(58)_ _Debi Prasad Sharma v.Emperor A.I.R.(36) 1943 P.C.202  
 _

_(59)_ _Rule on P.A.Capper (1896) 1 Br.317  
 _

_(60)_ _Rule on Armand de Souza (1914) 18 N.L.R. 41.  
 _

_(61)_ _Rule on Armand de Souza (1914) 18 N.L.R. 33  
 _

_(62)_ _Rule on Hulugalle (1936) 39 N.L.R.294  
 _

_(63)_ _Veerasamy v. Stewart (1941) 42 N.L.R.481  
 _

_(64)_ _Perera v. The King (1951) 52 N.L.R. 293  
 _

_(65)_ _In Re Wickramasinghe (1954) 55 N.L.R.511  
 _

_(66)_ _Vidyasagara v. The Queen (1963) 65 N.L.R 25  
 _

_(67)_ _M. G. Perera v. A. V. Peiris (1948) 50 N.L.R 145, [1949] A.C. 1_

# 8



_(68) Cooper v. Union of India A.I.R. (57) 1970 S.C.1318.  
 _

_(69) Macintosh v. Dun [1908] A.C. 390.  
 _

_(70) Stuart v. Bell [1891] 2 Q.B. 341.  
 _

_(71) Kandoluwe Sumangala v. Mapitigama Dharmarakitta (1908) 11 N.L.R. 105.  
 _

_(72) Re Jayatilaka (1961) 63N.L.R. 282.  
 _

_(73) James v. Robinson (1963) 109 C.L.R. 593.  
 _

_(74) Read and Huggonson Re (St. ‑James' Evening Post case) (1742) 26 E.R.
683,2 Atk 469.  
 _

_(75) R. v. New Statesman ex p D.P.P. (1928) 44 T.L.R.301.  
 _

_(76) Badry v. D.P.P. of Mauritius [1982] 3 All E.R.973.  
 _

_(77) The King v. Fletcher Ex p Kisch (1935) 52 C.L.R.248  
 _

_(78) R. v. Mulgaokar A.I.R. 1978 (S.C.) 727.  
 _

_(79) In Re Subrahmanian A. I. R., (30). 1943 Lahore329.  
 _

_(80) Sambhu Nath Jah v. Kedar Prasad Sinha A.I.R.(59) 1972 S.C. 1515.  
 _

_(81) Re Bahama Islands [18931 A.C. 138  
 _

_(82) R. v. Colsey (1931) Times, May 9  
 _

_(83) Steele v. Brannan (1872) L.R. 7 C.P. 261.  
 _

_(84) R. v. Mary Carlile (1819) 3 B & Ald 167, 106 E.R. 624.  
 _

_(85) Kielly v. Carson 4 Moore's (P.C.) Reports 1841 45 p. 69.  
 _

_(86) Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs, Bihar v.Murali Manohar
Prasad (1941)   42 Cr. L. Jnl 225, A.I.R. (28) 1941 Patna 185.  
 _

_(87) Metropolitan Music Hall Co. v Lake (1889) 58 L.J. Ch. 513, (1889) 60 LT
749, 5 T.L.R. 329.  
 _

_(88) ln re Cornish, Staff v. Gill (1893) 9 TLR 196.  
 _

_(89) Sarat Chandra Biswal v. Surendra Mohanty A.I.R. (56) 1969 Orissa 117.  
 _

_(90) Allbutt v. General Council of Medical Education and Registration
(1889),23 Q.B.D. 400._



_Rule for an act of contempt of the Honourable Supreme Court._





**9**



_S. Nadesan Q.C._ with _Miss_ _Suriya Wickramasinghe, S.H.M. Reeza_ and
_Kumar_ ****_Nadesan_ for the petitioner. _K.N.Choksy S.A.A.L.,_ with _D.H.N.
Jayamaha, Harsha Soza, Ronald Perera,_ Miss _I.R. Rajepakse_ and _Nihal
Fernando_ for the 1st respondent.  


_Mark Fernando_ with _M.A. Bastiansz_ for the 2nd Respondent.  


_Shiva Pasupathi S.A.A.L. Attorney ‑ General _with _Suri Ratnapala S.S.C.._
and _Kalinga Wijewardena S.C._ appeatred as _Amicus Curiae.  
 _

_Cur. adv. vult._

  
July 28, 1983.



**WANASUNDERA, J.**



  This is a Rule for an act of contempt of court issued on the 1st respondent,
the Editor of the newspaper "Daily News", and the 2nd respondent, the owner,
printer and publisher of the newspaper, for jointly and severally printing and
publishing in the issue of the Daily News of 7th March 1983, a news item
carried on the front     page,    prominently displayed under the headings
"Select Committee probe of Mr. K.C.E de Alwis' representations" and " F.D.B.'s
pleadings prepared in Judge's  Chambers.?". Prima facie, this news item
impeaches the integrity of two judges of this Court and casts the most serious
aspersions on their conduct as Judges. No reasonable person can come to any
other view. This news item was a verbatim reproduction of a notice of  a
Motion contained in the Order Paper of Parliament for March 8, 1983, except
for two eye­ catching head‑lines  and the introductory paragraphs. The whole
of the news item, however, contained no new material other than what was
contained in the proposed Resolution.



The alleged contempt was brought to our notice by a petition filed by S.R.K.
Hewamanne, an attorney‑at‑law. On 16th March 1983, in due course, the petition
was taken up for hearing in open

**  **

**10**



court. Mr. Nadesan, Q.C., supported the petition and after hearing his
submissions, the Court was satisfied that a prima facie case was established
.against the respondents and it thereupon directed the Registrar to issue a
Rule on the two respondents. The Court also requested the Attorney‑General to
appear as amicus and assist the, Court at the trial.



  On 29th March 1983, when the Rule matter was taken up for trial, the
respondents appeared before Court and pleaded not guilty to the charges. Their
counsel, submitted that they had' cause to show against the Rule. On this
occasion all counsel present agreed that, having regard to the fact that some
of the legal issues that arose for consideration were of great public
importance, it was desirable that this matter be heard and disposed of by a
larger bench, so that an authoritative decision could be obtained on those
issues. In deference to this request the three Judges before whom the matter
came up ( two of whom are members of the present Divisional Bench) requested
the Chief Justice to constitute a larger beach to hear this matter. The
present Divisional Bench has assembled consequent to such a direction given by
the Chief  justice.



The 1st respondent filed an affidavit, along with a number of annexes, in
defence of the charges against him. The case has been tried upon this
material, as all counsel indicated that they did, not wish to adduce any
further evidence. We called upon the respondents to begin.



The submissions of Mr. Choksy, Mr. Mark Fernando, and the Attorney‑ General,
which were to the effect that the offence of contempt cannot be established
either ** __** on the law or the facts, to a great extent traverse common
ground. When these submissions are examined closely, it seems to me

# 11





that the Attorney General and Mr. Fernando elaborated and dealt more fully
with certain aspects of the matters already outlined or foreshadowed by Mr.
Choksy. All these arguments could be summarised broadly as follows:‑



(1)   By reason of the fundamental right of the freedom of speech and
expression guaranteed by the Constitution and its corollary, the corresponding
right of the public to know and be informed, the newspapers had a right to
bring to the attention of the general public any matter of public interest.
Consequently, this right of the public must be given precedence over the law
of contempt of court.



(2)   In any event, having regard to the provisions of Articles 3 and 4 of the
Constitution, which vests in the People both the legal and political
sovereignty of the State, the People have a right now to partici­pate actively
in the administration of the country, including discussions on the working of
the judiciary. Accordingly the law on contempt of court has to be reviewed and
modi­fied in the light of this shift of sovereignty to the People, and the
public should now be afforded a greater right to critise the judiciary.



(3)   The Attorney‑General submitted more specifically that, having regard to
the practice and principles applicable in the U.K.., (which he said would also
apply here), a fair and accurate publication of a document forming part of the
proceedings of the House is immune from proceedings for contempt of libel. For
this he relied primarily on the decision of _Wason v. Walter_ (1) referred to
later.



# 12



(4)   Under the principles of the ordinary law of contempt of court as
enunciated in the case, law, particularly in more recent U.K. cases the
impugned publication would not constitute a contempt of court, since today the
courts allow a greater latitude to the public to criticise judges and the
administration of justice.

The first submission admits of a short and simple answer. The Supreme Court is
the "highest and final superior court of record in the Republic" and has been
established by the Constitution. It is vested with a power to punish for
contempt and this power is found in Article 105 (3). The law of contempt,
which is a concept known to English law was well known in this country from
early British times. This English law of contempt, modified to some extent in
its application here, was in operation immediately prior to the coming into
operation of this 1978 Democratic Socialist Republican Constitution. It had
been continued in operation by the earlier Republican Constitution of 1972,
which also kept alive the then existing law of contempt of court. Our
Constitution has a chapter on fundamental rights, including freedom of speech
and expression. Those provisions, if applicable, may have modified probably to
some degree the existing law of contempt of court, but in view of the
provisions of Article 16, it is not necessary to go into that question in any
detail. Article 16, which is one of the Articles contained in the Chapter on
Fundamental Rights, states that:  

 "All existing written law and unwritten law shall be valid and operative
notwithstanding any inconsistency with the preceding provisions of this
Chapter."

#  
13  


 The short answer, therefore, to Mr. Choksy's first submission is that the law
of contempt of court which had hitherto existed would operate untrammeled by
the fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression contained in Article
14.



Even if Article 14 were applicable, Article 14 would be subject to any law
made by Parliament relating to contempt of court. I do not think that in any
event Article 14 would have been of much avail to Mr. Choksy. Mr. Choksy
presented his case with great restraint and even he did not advocate the
licence to criticise courts obtaining under the American law based on the
fundamental rights should apply here. The Indian courts have rightly refused
to follow the American decisions in this regard. But, if Mr. Choksy was
contending for the principle that precedence should be given to the freedom of
expression as against the due administration of justice, the views expressed
in the Indian case law may come as a surprise to him.



Article 19 (1) (a) of  the Indian Constitution guarantees to every citizen
freedom of speech and expression. This includes the freedom of the Press.
Article 19(2) saves existing laws which include the law of contempt, provided
such laws are considered reasonable. It would be observed that in India the
fundamental right of freedom of expression is directly called into play when
one has to deal with the law of contempt.



The Indian courts in  a number of decisions have held that the liberty of the
freedom of expression and the liberty of the press should be subordinated to
the independence of the judiciary and the proper administration of justice.
_Namboodrepad v._ _Nambiar_ (2) _Leo Roy Frey v. R. Prasad_ (3) ,In _State v.
Ram Chander_ (4) , the court said:

  

**14**

**  **

 " Freedom of press, liberty of speech and action so far as they do not
contravene the law of contempt are to prevail without let or hindrance. But at
the same time the maintenance of the dignity of the courts is one of the
cardinal principles of the rule of law in a free democratic country and when
the criticism which may otherwise be couched in language that appears to be
mere criticism results in undermining the dignity of courts and the course of
justice in the land, it must be held repugnant and punished. No Court can look
on with equanimity on a publi­cation which may have the tendency to inter­fere
with the administration of justice."



These views expressed by the Indian     courts are relevant not only in the
context of this submission, but also spill over to the   other submissions
made by the respondent. This brings me then to the second submission on which
Mr .Mark   Fernando laid great emphasis.



The respondents have argued that, with the shift of sovereignty from the Queen
to the People as found in the present Constitution , the People would now have
a supervisory interest over the acts of the Government and of its components;
this would include the right of discussion and criticism an would enable the
people to participate in the process of Government in a more meaningful way
than under any previous Constitution. In particular, Mr Fernando submitted
that, since both Parliament an the Supreme Court derived their ultimate
authority from the People by virtue of Articles 3 and 4 o the Constitution,
they were answerable to the People and that today both the People an
Parliament as the People's representatives had right to be interested in the
administration of justice, in a manner and to a measure that did not exist
prior to 1972.

**15**

  
The first respondent in the affidavit filed before us has mentioned the
appointment of the Special Presidential Commission comprising Justice
J.G.T.Weeraratne, Justice S. Sharvananda and Justice K.C.E. de Alwis; the
recommendation the Commission had made for imposing civic disabilities on Mrs
Sirima Bandaranaike, former Prime Minister and at that time a member of
Parliament, and on Felix R. Dias Bandaranaike; the consequent Reso­lutions in
Parliament in imposing such civic disabilities and the expelling of Mrs Sirima
Bandaranaike from the House. Those acts the affidavit stated aroused great
public interest and were given wide publicity. As a sequel to these events,
proceedings against members of the Commission had been instituted in Court by
the former Prime Minister and the former Minister of Justice to have these
findings invalidated.



  . Thereafter, on or about 9th July 1982, Mr. Felix R. Dias Bandaranaike
instituted proceedings for the for the issue of a writ of Quo Warranto against
Mr Justice K.C.E. de Alwis,  a member of the Commission, on the ground that
the latter  had become disqualified from acting as a member of the Commission
by reason of a financial transaction with one A.H.M. Fowzie, a former Mayor of
Colombo,whose conduct was a subject of investigation by the Commission. This
application was heard by a bench consisting of the Chief Justice, Justice
D.Wimalaratne and Justice Percy Colin  Thome. The majority‑ Justices
Wimalaratne and Colin Thome ‑ directed the issue **** of a writ of  Quo
Warranto against Justice K.C.E. de Alwis, prohibiting him from functioning
any further as a member of the Commission.



Subsequently, Justice K.C.E.de Alwis made representations to His Excellency
the President alleging bias against himself on the part of Justices
Wimalaratne and Percy Colin Thome, and

# 16

  
asked for an inquiry. These events which counsel described as unprecedented
aroused further public discussion. The Bar Association had discussed the
proposal to appoint a Special Presidential Commission, but expressed objection
to the proposal. A Cabinet decision to the effect that the Minister of Justice
would move a Resolution in Parliament on 8th March 1983 for the appointment
**** of a Select Committee of Parliament to investigate and report on the
allegations made by Mr K.C.E. de Alwis was announced to the press at the
weekly Press briefing given by the Minister of State. The proposed motion was
included in the Order Paper of Parliament for Tuesday, March 8th, 1983.



In accordance with the prevailing practice of sending copies of Order Papers
to Members of Parliament, newspapers, certain officials and institutions (
according to a distribution list compiled by the Secretary General), the first
print of the Order Paper was delivered to the 2nd respondent on 5th March
1983. It is not claimed that this publication was done under the authority of
Parliament.



The 1st respondent states that in view of the public interest and concern in
the subject matter its constitutional importance and the people's right to
know that such a Resolution was before Parliament, he decided to publish this
news item on the front page of the Daily News of 7th March 1983.



The 1st respondent also states that certain of the questions referred to the
Select Committee for inquiry and report were already well known to the public.
Two new questions had emerged. And accordingly the news item prepared in his
office under his direction and supervision gave prominence and emphasis to
these two new questions. The 1st respondent states that, since the news

**17**

item concerns a pending inquiry, he ensured that the news item was purely
factual and did not contain any comments.



Both counsel for the respondents stressed the public interest in the events
stated above and elaborated on the right of the public to be informed so that
any member of the public, if he so wished, could go to his Member of
Parliament and make representations in this matter, which was undoubtedly one
of great public importance.



Mr. Nadesan challenged some of the fac­tual statements and submissions. He
denied that the news item was published bona fide without an intention to
commit contempt of court. All the events which were subsequent to the
publication on 7th March 1983 like the debate in Parliament, Mr Nadesan said,
were irrelevant to the issue under consideration, except perhaps as a factor
to be considered in imposing punishment. Mr. Nadesan also drew our attention
to the wording of the 1st respondent's affidavit and said that though there
was an averment that the public were interested in these events, he did not
find any express statement to the effect that this publication was for the
public benefit or in the interest of the public.



Mr. Nadesan also stated that the mass of material produced by the respondents
to show public discussion of these events in the media reveal that Mr. K.C.E.
de Alwis had made a general Complaint of prejudice and none of the serious and
specific allegations now contained in the motion had earlier appeared in the
media. The prominent headlines picking out two sensational items had been done
by the 1st respondent with full knowledge of its implications so as to give
the news item the maximum publicity. He said that counsel for the 1st
respondent admitted that one of the allegations

# 18

  
was of a shocking nature and the 1st respondent thought that for that reason
it would be a matter in which the public would be greatly interested. Mr.
Nadesan also submitted that the argument that this was done in the public
interest to enable the public to participate and indicate their views on this
matter was a specious argument, because the news item appeared on the day
immediately preceding the Parliamentary proceedings and gave hardly any time
to the public to make any useful representations. The motion which was
reproduced also did not sufficiently indicate the particulars or the evidence
supporting the allegations so that it would have been difficult for the
general public to be of real assistance in this matter. Further, what was
placed before the House was a mere resolution regarding a formal inquiry to be
held by a Select Committee on a later date. If representation were permissible
at all, the proper authority should be to the Select Committee and the proper
time when its sittings began. The affidavit also states that a Select
Committee has now commenced sittings on the matter, and we understand that
those sittings are being held in camera without publicity.



  It seems to me that the people's right to know, upon which the respondents
claim the right to publish ,has ultimately to be decided as a legal issue upon
the interpretation of the Constitution and other applicable legal provisions.
How valid then is the respondents' submission that under the present
Constitution the public enjoys a greater right than before to discuss,
criticise and participate in the administration of justice?



The submission that since 1972 there has been a radical shift of the legal
sovereignty of the State from the Queen to the people is undoubtedly well
founded. The people in the exercise of their franchise now select the

# 19

  
President (who is the head of the Executive) and also Parliament by direct
elections. These two elected representatives of the people therefore exercise
the powers of Government by virtue of a mandate periodically given by the
people. It therefore follows that the acts and conduct of such representatives
must be accountable to the People and this means that they would be subject to
criticism and discussion by the People. In fact, modern social and political
conditions demand a continuous dialogue between the People and their elected
representatives who hold a mandate from them.



How does the Judicature stand in the matter? Even a cursory glance at the
Constitution is sufficient to indicate that there are features in the
Judicature and in the Administration of Justice which distinguish the courts
and judges from other organs of government and other public officers. Mr.
Nadesan invited our attention in this connection to the Preamble to the
Constitution which is a concise statement of its genesis . This Preamble
recites the Mandate given by the People to the founding fathers of the
Constitution. It assures to all peoples, FREEDOM, EQUALITY, JUSTICE,
FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS and the INDEPENDENCE OF THE ‑ JUDICIARY as the
intangible heritage that guarantees the dignity and well being of succeeding
generations of the People of Sri Lanka. These principles constitute the basic
fundamental rights of the People and were thought by the People to be so
valuable and sacrosanct that they were enshrined in the mandate and repeated
in bold type in the Preamble. It is significant that both "Justice" and " the
Independence of the Judiciary" are given particular emphasis and Mr. Nadesan
said that, as far as he is aware, in no other Constitution is the independence
of the judiciary emphasised to this degree or given that importance.

# 20

  
 When we next examine the body of the Constitution, we see that aspirations of
the People for an independent Judiciary are given precise legal form and
effect. Article 4(c) states that ‑



"(c) the judicial power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament through
courts, tribunals and institutions create and established, or recognised, by
the Constitution, or created and established by law, except in regard to
matters relating to the privileges, immunities and powers of __ Parliament and
of its Members, wherein the judicial power of the People may be exercise
directly by Parliament according to law."



On a plain reading of this provision, it is clear that the judicial power of
the People can only be exercised by "judicial officers" as defined in Article
170, except in regard to matters relating to the privileges, immunities and
powers of Parliament. I think no counsel before us disputed that these
provisions indicate an unmistakable vesting of the judicial power of the clear
that the judicial power of the People in the judiciary established by or under
the Constitution and that Parliament acts as a conduit through which the
judicial power of the People passes to the judiciary. Whatever the wording of
Article 4 (c) may suggest, there could be little doubt that at the lowest this
provision, read  with the other provisions, has brought about a functional
separation of the judicial power from the other powers in our Constitution an
accordingly the domain of judicial power (except the special area carved out
for Parliament), has been entrusted solely and exclusively to the judiciary.

**21**



One of the cases relied on by both Mr. Nadesan and Mr. Mark Fernando was the
judgment of the Privy Council _in Liyanage's case_ (5) _,_ relating to the
separation of powers under the Soulbury Constitution of 1946. In that case the
Privy Council observed :-



"...........But the importance of securing the independence of judges and
maintaining     the dividing line between the judiciary and the executive (
and also, one should add,   the legislature) was appreciated by those who
framed the Constitution" (see _Bribery Commissioner v. Ranasinghe)_ (6) .The
Constitution is significantly divided into parts: 'Part 2 The
Governor‑General', 'Part 3 The Legislature ', 'Part 4 Delimitation of
Electoral Districts',' Part 5 The Executive',' Part 6 The Judicature', 'Part 7
The Public Service', 'Part 8 Finance'. And although no express mention is made
of vesting in the Judicature the judicial power which it already had and was
wielding in its daily process under the Courts Ordinance, there is provision
under Part 6 for the appointment of judges by a Judicial Service Commission
which shall not contain a member of either House but shall be composed of the
Chief     Justice and a Judge and another person who is **** or **** shall
have been a judge. Any attempt to influence any decision of the Commission is
made a criminal offence. There is also provision that ' judges shall not be
removable except by the Governor‑ General **** on an address of both Houses.



These provisions manifest an intention to secure in the judiciary a freedom
from Political, legislative and executive control. They are wholly appropriate
in a Constitution which intends that judicial power shall be

# 22

#  

vested only in the Judicature. They would inappropriate in a Constitution by
which it was intended that judicial power should be shared by the executive or
the legislature The Constitution's silence as to the vesting of judicial power
is consistent with its remaining, where it had lain for more than a century,
in the hands of the judicature. It is not consistent with any intention that
henceforth it should pass to, or be shared by, the executive or the
legislature."



If we examine the present Constitution the identical features making for a
separation of the judiciary from the other organs of the government indicated
by the Privy Council are found to be present. We find Chapters VII, VIII and
IX are headed, 'The Executive'. Chapter VII relates to the President, Chapter
VIII to 'The Cabinet of Ministers' and Chapter IX to 'The Public Service!
Chapter X, XI and XII all deal with the Legislature. Chapter X relates to
Parliament, Chapter XI to the Procedure and Powers of the Legislature and
Chapter XII to the Amendment of the Constitution. Chapter XV and XVI deal with
the Judiciary. Chapter XV is headed ' The Judiciary'

and contains a separate section entitled 'Independence of the Judiciary'.
Chapter XVI is headed The Superior Courts' and contains two parts -one
relating to the Supreme Court and the other relating to the Court of Appeal.
As under the 1946 Order in Council, we find the provisions for the
appointment, transfer and disciplinary control  over the minor judiciary
vested in an independent Judicial Service Commission consisting of the Chief
Justice and two Judges of the Supreme Court. In the Soulbury Constitution, one
member could be a retired judge, but today the position is even better.
Article 116 states that any interference with the exercise of judicial powers
is an offence. Article 107 provides that a judge of the Supreme

# 23

  
Court and the Court of Appeal shall hold office during good behaviour and
shall not be removed except by an order of the President, made after an
address of Parliament supported by a majority of the total number of members
of Parliament (including those not present).



These constitutional provisions have established and constituted the Judiciary
as one of the three principal organs of the State and have also proceeded to
ensure the independence of the judiciary as its essential feature. The
peculiar standing and position of judges in our Constitution are very much
similar to the position of judges in the U.K. Sir Winston Churchill, in a
speech made in the House of Commons when the increase of the salaries of
judges was being discussed in the House, described with his characteristic
eloquence the unique position the judges occupy in the framework of
government. The quotation is taken from a lecture entitled "Independence and
Impartiality of Judges" given by Lord Denning at the Faculty of Law
Witswatersrand University, S. Africa, and contained in S.A.L.J., page 349;



"There is nothing like them at all in our island. They are appointed for life.
They cannot be dismissed by the executive Government. They cannot be dismissed
by the Crown either by the Prerogative or on the advice of Ministers. They
have to interpret the law according to their learning and conscience. They are
distinguishable from the great officers of State and other servants of the
Executive, high or low, and from the leaders of commerce and industry. They
are also clearly distinguishable from the holders of less exalted judicial
office. Nothing but an address from both Houses of Parliament, assented to by
the Crown, can remove them."

#  
24

Sir Winston continued:  


"The principle of the complete independence of the Judiciary from the
Executive is the foundation of many thin in our island life. It has been
widely imitated in varying degrees throughout the free world.1t is perhaps one
of the deepest  gulfs between us and all forms totalitarian rule. The only
subordination which a judge knows in his judicial capacity is that which he
owes to the I existing body of legal doctrine enunciated in years past by his
brethren on the bench, past a present, and upon the laws passed Parliament
which have received the Royal assent. The judge has not only to do justice
between man and man. He also ‑ and this one of his most important functions
considered incomprehensible in some large  parts of the world ‑ has to do
justice between the citizens and the State . . . The British Judiciary, with
its traditions and record, is one of the greatest living assets of our race
and people and the independence of the Judiciary is a part of our message the
ever‑growing world which is rising swiftly around us." (M.C. Debates, 23rd Mar
1954, column 1061)



The proper administration of justice requires judges who are skilled and
learned. It is even more important that their decisions are honest impartial
and are arrived at without pressures or interference however slight or from
whatever quarter. For, truly, justice must not only be done but it must also
appear to be done. Thirdly, public must have an abiding confidence in purity
of the administration of justice. Apart f the law, it is, I believe, for these
reasons that the public generally refrain from indulging in

# 25



Public discussion of the acts and conduct of judges or do not discuss them to
the same degree as other public officers. The Constitution and the State
however afford other channels to the public to register their complaints
against judges. The Justice Report (1959) under the Chairmanship of Lord
Shawcross recommended that the appropriate means of making a bona fide
complaint against judges was a letter to the Lord Chancellor or to his member
of Parliament.



  In _Harrison v. Bush_ (7), followed in _R. v. Rule_ (8), the defendant, an
elector and an inhabitant of a borough, bona fide signed (with other persons)
and sent to the Home Secretary, a memorial complaining of the conduct of the
plaintiff _,_ a Magistrate for the county in which the borough was situated.
It was held that the memorial was privileged. "If" said Lord Campbell, C.J.,
"Dr. Harrison, has so misconducted himself as a Magistrate, he had committed
an offence; and it was the duty __ of those __ who witnessed it to try by all
reasonable means in their power that it should be inquired into and
punished........  In __ this land of law and liberty all those who are elected
with public authority may be brought to the notice of those who have the power
and the duty to inquire into it and to take steps which may prevent the
repetition of it."  



I would like to digress at this stage to clear a misconception based on a
general statement that at one stage appealed to one of my brothers, namely,
that proceeding for the removal of a judge should be held in public. This
could be misunderstood as an alternate and much narrower way Of stating the
public interest in this matter, but is really based on an isolated remark made
in a case. This general statement is clearly referable to the historical
development ‑which led to safeguards being provided in regard to the removal  


# 26

of judges and does not have the wider connotation now suggested. At one time
the Sovereign claimed the right to dismiss judges, who incurred his
displeasure, at his will and pleasure. The pleasure principle was contested
and replaced by the principle that a judge could only be removed for
misconduct.



  If the matter remained there it would still have been open to the Executive
to remove a judge unjustly on the pretext that the Executive is subjectively
satisfied that misconduct has been established in a given case or by holding
some unfair administrative inquiry behind closed doors. As a further safeguard
against abuses of this nature, the Constitutions of' democratic states now
provide for a fair and formal inquiry to be held by an impartial tribunal of
the highest level. Generally it is the Legislature itself which will hold this
inquiry. Our Constitution framed on   these lines provides that a judge could
be removed on the ground of proved misbehavior or incapacity. Vide Article
107(2) of the Constitution:



"107.(2) Every such judge shall hold office during good behaviour, and shall
not removed except by an order of the President made after an address of
Parliament, supported by a majority of the total number of Members of
Parliament (including those present) has been presented to the President for
such removal on the ground of pr misbehavior or incapacity;



Provided that no resolution for presentation of such an address shall
entertained by the Speaker or placed on Order Paper of Parliament, unless
notice such resolution is signed by not less t one third of the total number
of Members of

# 27

Parliament and sets out full particulars of the alleged misbehavior or
incapacity."



See also Indian Contempt of Court Act, No. 70 of 1971.



This is the public inquiry the Constitution has in mind, namely, one held by
the representatives of the People at the highest level and not by the
Executive, and the removal to be decided only as for a debate in the House to
which the public are generally admitted. In this context it would be
far‑fetched to argue that each and every member of the public should be
afforded an opportunity of directly and actively participating at such an
inquiry or that it should be carried out in the open before the public from
the beginning to the end. Even if some publicity is permissible from the point
charges are framed and even this is debatable ‑there is no warrant at all for
publicity to be given to the preliminary proceedings that lead to the formal
inquiry unless there is a prima ,facie case and the public airing of every
Complaint, many frivolous and vexatious, can do untold harm to the image of
the judiciary.



To resume the discussion on the main issue, namely the freedom of speech in
relation to the administration of justice, the following passage from
judgments in the U.K. throw considerable light on the problem:  


In _Morris v. The Crown Office_ (9) Salmon J., said:



"Everyone has the right publicly to protest against anything which displeases
him and publicly to proclaim his views, whatever they may be. It does not
matter whether there is any reasonable basis for his protest or whether his
views are sensible or silly. He can say or write or indeed sing what he likes
when he likes and where he likes, provided that in doing so he does not

**28**

  
infringe the rights of others. Every member of the public has an inalienable
right that our courts shall be left free to administer justice without
obstruction or interference from whatever quarter  it may come. Take away that
right and freedom of speech together with all the other freedoms Would wither
and die, for in the long run it is the courts of justice which are the last
bastion of individual liberty. The appellants, rightly   or wrongly, think
that they have a grievance. They are undoubtedly entitled to    protest about
it, but    certainly not in the fashion they have chosen. In an attempt, and a
fairly successful attempt to gain publicity for their cause , they have chosen
to disrupt the business of  the courts and   have scornfully trampled on the
rights which everyone has in the due administration of justice; and for this
they have been very properly punished, so that it may be made plain to all
that such conduct will not be toleratso ‑ even by students. The archaic
description of these proceedings as 'contempt of court' is in my view
unfortunate and misleading. It  suggests that they are designed to buttress
the dignity of the __ judges and to protect them from     Insult. Nothing
could be further from the truth. No such protection is needed.The sole
purpose of proceedings for contempt    is to give our courts the power
effectively to protect the rights of the     public by ensuring that the
administration of justice shall not be   obstructed or  prevented
_(Skipworth's Case_ (10) __ and _      R. v Davies _,(11) _._ This __ power to
commit for what is inappropriately called' contempt of court' is sui generis
and has from time immemorial reposed in     the judge for the protection of
the public .............."



The following __ passage from Lord Simon's opinion     _A.G. v. Times
Newspaper_ (12), where the matter is approached in terms of fundamental norms
is even more persuasive:

**  
29  
 **



The first public interest involved is that of freedom of discussion in
democratic society. People cannot adequately influence the decisions which
affect their lives unless they can be adequately informed of facts and
arguments relevant to the decisions. Much of such fact finding and
argumentation necessarily has to be conducted vicariously, the public press
being the principal instrument. This is the justification for investigative
and campaign journalism. Of course it can be abused - but so may anything of
value. The law provides some safeguards against abuse; though important ones
(such as professional propriety and responsibility) lie outside the law.



" The law as to contempt of court is not one of the legal safeguards against
abuse of the public's right (arising from the very necessity of democratic
government) to be informed and to hear argument before arriving at a decision.
The law of contempt of court is a body of rules which exists to safeguard
another, quite different, institution of civilised society. It is the, means
by which the law vindicates the public interest in due administration of
justice -that is, in the resolution of disputes, not by force or    by private
or public influence, but by indepen­dent adjudication in courts of law
according to an objective code. The alternative is anarchy (including that
feudalistic anarchy which results from arrogation, to determine disputes by
other than those charged by so­ciety to do so in impartial arbitrament
accor­ding to an objective code).



The objective code may well be defective, either generally or in particular
circumstances indeed, since it is a human product, it is inherently likely to
be

# 30



defective in at least some circumstances. Its method of application, also
being subject to human fallibility, is likely to be less than perfect.
Nevertheless it is the essence of the due administration of justice that this
objective code should be allowed to be applied by those charged by society
with applying it, until. it, or its method of application, is duly changed.



The foregoing seems to me to arise from the very nature of the judicial if
process and its function in society .........."



The _Times case_ (supra) no doubt, dealt with the narrow point of the
pre‑judgment of a case by reason of public discussion of the issues of the
case. This was found to be wholly objectionable and amounting to a contempt of
court. The reasoning is that the public has delegated its decision making to
the courts, namely to the trained personnel who man them, and the public has
no right to interfere with the acts of the delegate as long as the delegation
continues.



Even the Court of Appeal condemned "trial by newspaper" and the difference
between the views of the two courts lay not so much in principle but as to
where the line should be drawn when a court should say that public discussion
beyond that stage will be regarded as damaging. The necessity to look at the
matter somewhat narrowly even in the House of Lords is no doubt due to the
prevailing attitudes there, where the tendency is to give the widest latitude
for public discussion. The same need not apply here.



The House of Lords did however refer to the far‑reaching side effects of
prejudgment, namely its long term effects of creating a general atmosphere of
disrespect for the law and the

# 31

  
courts. If public pressure on pending litigation is considered to be
pernicious, how much more desirable is it to avoid any disparagement of the
judge himself, who is the controlling element of the whole mechanism.
Allegations of dishonesty and ,impartiality cannot but undermine the very
basis of his functions as a judge. The dicta of the House of Lords, though
given in relation to the narrow issue of prejudgment , has wider implications
and can certainly be called in aid in the present matter.



Let me now look **** at certain other passages from the judgment of the House
of Lords, bearing the above observations in mind. At page 81 Lord Simon added:



"The public interest in freedom of discussion (of __ which the freedom of the
press is one aspect) stems from the requirement that members of a democratic
society should be sufficiently informed that they may influence intelligently
the decisions which may affect themselves. The public thus has a permanent
interest in the general administration of justice and the general course of
the law. This is recognised by justice being openly administered and its
proceedings freely reported, by public debate on the law and on its incidence.
But, as regards particular litigation, society, through its political and
legal institutions, has established the relevant law as a continuing code, and
has further established special institutions (courts of law ) to make the
relevant decisions on the basis of such law. The public at large has delegated
its decision making in this sphere to its microcosm, the jury or judge. Since
it would be contrary to the system for the remit to be recalled pendente lite,
the paramount public interest pendente lite is that the legal proceedings
should progress without interference."  


# 32

The dangers of permitting public discussion of issues before court are
elaborated by Lord Reid in the following words:‑



"I think that anything in the nature prejudgment of a case or of specific
issues it is objectionable not only because of its possible effect on that
particular case but also because of its side effects which may far reaching.
Responsible 'mass media' will do their best to be fair, but there will also be
ill‑informed, slapdash or prejudiced attempts to influence the public. If
people are led think that it is easy to find the truth, disrespect for the
process of the law could follow and, if mass media are allowed to judge,
unpopular people and unpopular causes will fare very badly. Most cases of
prejudging of issues fall within the existing authorities on contempt. I do
not think that the freedom of the press would suffer ........... "



On the same lines we find Justice Frankfurter's powerful dissent in _Bridges
v. California_ (13) which is also worthy of reproduction:



" ........................ A trial is not a free trade ideas' nor is the best
test of truth courtroom  the power of the thought to itself accepted in the
competition of t market' ... A court is a forum with strictly defined limits
for discussion. It circumscribed in the range of its inquiry in its methods by
the Constitution, by Iaw as and by age old traditions. Its judges are
restrained in their freedom of expression by historic compulsions resting on
no other officials of government. They are so circumscribed precisely because
judges have in their keeping the enforcement of rights and

**33**



the protection of liberties which according to the wisdom of the ages can only
be enforced and protected by observing such methods and traditions........ The
Fourteenth Amendment does not forbid a State to continue the historic process
of prohibiting expressions calculated to subvert a specific exercise of
judicial power. So to assure the impartial accomplishment of Justice is not an
abridgment of freedom of    speech or freedom of the press as these phases of
liberty have heretofore been conceived even by the stoutest libertarians. In
fact, these liberties themselves depend upon an untrammelled judiciary whose
passions are not even unconsciously aroused and whose minds are not distorted
by extra‑judicial considerations.



Of course freedom of speech and of the press are essential to the
enlightenment of a free people and in restraining those who wield power.
Particularly should this freedom be employed in comment upon the work of
courts, who are without many influences ordinarily making for humor and
humility, twin antidotes to the corrosion of power. But the Bill of Rights is
not self destructive. Freedom of expression can hardly carry implications that
nullify the guarantees of impartial trials. And since courts are the ultimate
resorts for vindicating the Bill of Rights, a State may surely authorize
appropriate historic means to assure that the process for such vindication be
not wrenched from its natural tracks into the more primitive melees of passion
and pressure. The need is great that courts be criticised but just as great
that they be allowed to do their duty."

# 34

  
The pernicious impact that public discussion may have on the judicial process
in its subjective aspect cannot be discounted, Such public discussion would
also engulf the judges and they would find themselves in a position where they
would be directly exposed to the passing winds of popular excitement and
sentiment. The words of another great American Supreme Court Judge and a
Jurist in his own right, Justice Cardozo, exposing this danger, would be
pertinent here:



"Historic liberties and privileges are not to bend from day to day because of
some accident of some immediate overwhelming interest which appeals to the
feelings and distorts judgement. A country whose Judges would be willing to
give it whatever law might gratify the impulse of the moment would find that
it had paid too high a price for relieving itself of the bother awaiting a
session of the Legislature and the enactment of statute in accordance with
established forms."



  The import of these passages is clear. They show that there is a consensus
that in the hierarchy of values and principles that sustain a democratic
society, preponderance must be given to the proper functioning of the
administration of justice, as this is central to the very conception of the
administration of justice, Therefore the reasoning in the passages cited is no
less valid in the present situation as in the circumstances referred to in
those cases. This cannot in any way imply that judges are above the law. Apart
from the authorised channels available for making complaints, the law at all
times allow fair and temperate comments on decisions and the administration of
justice. I am

# 35

  
Therefore unable to assent to the proposition that judges and the judiciary
should be exposed for wide open discussion by the mass media and the general
public. The latter view, I believe, would in the long term be actually counter
productive and destructive of the public welfare.



  I shall now turn to the third ground set out earlier. Counsel for the
respondents and the Attorney-General developed their arguments on the basis
that what was published as " a proceeding of parliament ". I take it that in
formulating their argument s in terms of this expression , well known in
constitutional law, they sought to take advantage of Parliamentary privilege
and rely on it as automatically covering this publication. Conceding that the
motion is "a proceeding in parliament    ", because it concerns the internal
business of Parliament with which no outsider can interfere, the question is:
does the privilege of Parliament as expressed in Article 9 of the Bill of
Rights 1688 apply to this publication, which has been done outside Parliament
and by a person not connected with the house?



  The expression "a proceeding of Parliament" is taken from Article 9 of the
historic Bill of rights, which was declaratory of certain important privileges
asserted by parliament and which parliament managed to rest from the monarch,
not without fierce struggle. The Bill of rights provided that-



" ..................... freedom of speech and debates or proceedings in
parliament  ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or place out
of parliament."



As the wording indicates, this confirmed the long - standing claims of
parliament to exclude any outside interference within its walls (Erskine May,
16th Edn, p.59) and to allow parliament - meaning

#  
36

the members individually and the House generally absolute freedom in the
conduct of its business.



But there are acts which may be performed by members or the House falling
outside the above category. There could also be acts having some connection
with Parliament, performed by outsiders outside the four walls of Parliament,
either with the authority of the House or without such authority such as the
publication of Parliamentary proceedings. Parliament claimed such a privilege
in respect of the publication of parliamentary paper when published by the
authority of the House, but, this was denied by the courts. In this second
phase of its struggle for the recognition of its rights,,` Parliament came in
to collision with courts. It commenced with the encounter in the first
_Stockdal_ v. _Hansard case ****_ (14), but fortunately was resolved to a
great extent by the enactment of the Parliamentary 1‑7apets Act 1840 (3 & 4
Vict. c.9). It should be noted that the privilege claimed was in respect of
publications authorised by the House. At no time has the House claimed
privilege for publications not authorised by it as in the present case.



A publication of a proceeding in Parliament, using the expression in the
widest sense,, (technically "speech, debate and proceeding i Parliament" in
the Bill of Rights carry different concepts), has to be considered in three
aspect for the purpose of any worthwhile discussion. Th following break‑down
would be a convenient method of treatment:



(a) In relation to the privileges of Parliament which should again be dealt
under two heads;



  i.e. (1) Parliament's sole right to publish or authorise the publication of
its

**37**

  
proceedings and to punish as a breach of privilege any transgression of this
right.



(ii) The duty of the courts to recognise such a privilege or extended
privilege granted by statute.



(b) In relation to ordinary civil proceedings in the courts such as in a libel
action between private parties where no privilege as in (a) (ii) exists.



(c) In relation to the offence of contempt of court.



Such discussion would help to place the issue before us in its proper
perspective.



 In this connection it should be emphasised that a privilege designed for one
type of act would not cover a different type of act, e.g., the privilege of
freedom of speech and the privilege of publication are two separate
privileges. A privilege is restricted strictly to the particular **** subject
matter it is meant to apply to, and any act **** outside **** it would not
enjoy that protection. Just to give one illustration of this, may I refer to
_Mangena_ _v. Edward Lloyd_ (15),where    Darling, J., after referring to the
Parliamentary Papers Act which protected the printing and distribution of
copies of parliamentary papers said: "it gives no protection to people who
publish what is in a Blue **** Book **** by other means than by printing that
is by reading it out at a meeting for example...."



As regards (a) (i) above, the existence of such a right must now be accepted.
The Resolution of 1971 **** of the Commons clearly establishes this. Vide also
the careful survey of precedents tracing this Privilege in the judgment of
Chief Justice S.R. Das

# 38

  
of the Indian Supreme Court in _M. S. M. Sharma v. Sri Krishna Sinha_ (16).
The present practice, in the U.K. as regards this privilege is modified by the
said Resolution passed in 1971, it which, while, reciting that right, states
that "notwithstanding the resolution of the House on 3rd March 1762 and other
Resolutions, this House will not entertain any   complaint of contempt of __
the House or breach of privilege in respect of the publication of  the debates
or proceedings of the House or of __ its Committees except when any such
debates or proceedings shall have been conducted with     closed doors or in
private or when such publication shall have been expressly prohibited by the
House," An earlier Resolution to this same effect in May 1875 by Lord
Hartington had been rejected by the House. In this connection see  our
legislation:‑ Parliamentary Privileges & Powers Amendment Act, No. 17 of 1980.



Although this resolution does not amount to an abandonment of __ this
privilege ‑ the resolution can be rescinded by the House at any time ‑ such
publications of debates or proceedings by outsider today would not run the
risk of action by the House. This is in so far as Parliamentary privilege is
concerned. They may also stand on steadier ground than before in ordinary
litigation before the courts and would justify to some extent the calculated
risk the courts took when the viewed such publication as having the
toleration, if not the implied authority of the House. This is what Cockburn.,
C.J. said in _Wason's case_ (1).



"Practically ,such publication is sanctioned by Parliament. It is essential to
the working of our Parliamentary system and to the welfare of the nation. Any
argument founded on it alleged illegality appears to us, therefore, entirely
to fail. Should either House of Parliament ever be so ill‑advised as to

**39**



prevent its proceedings from being made known to the country ‑ which certainly
never will be the case‑any publication of its debates made in contravention of
its orders would be a matter between the House and the publisher. For the
present purpose, we must treat such publication as in every respect lawful and
hold that while honestly and faithfully carried on, those who publish them
will be free from legal responsibility'"



It would be seen that this judgment was therefore based on not too firm a
foundation, though it is now accepted as good law. Even the learned Chief
Justice was constrained to admit the existence of such a right in Parliament,
but hoped that Parliament would be restrained in the exercise of that power or
that circumstances would militate against Parliament exercising such a
privilege. This flaw in the Chief Justice's reasoning is brought out by Frank
Thayer in his book Legal Control of the Press, page 31, apparently written
prior to the Resolution of 1971:



"Parliamentary privileges as part of the unwritten English Constitution is the
exclusive right of either House to decide what constitutes interference with
its duties, its dignity, and its independence. Its power to exclude strangers
so as to secure privacy of debate closely follows the right of Parliament to
prevent the publication of debates. Attendance at Parliamentary debates and
the publication of debates are by sufferance only, although it is now
recognized that dissemination of information on debates and Parliamentary
proceedings is advantageous to English democracy and, in fact necessary to
public safety. By judicial dictum it has been stated that there is a right to
publish fair

# 40



and accurate reports of Parliamentary debates, but actually the traditional
privilege of Parliament continues in conflict with judicial opinion. There is
still a standing order forbidding the publication of Parliamentary debates, an
order that by custom and the of sufferance has become practically obsolete;
the threat Of such an order and the  possibility of a contempt citation for
its abuse, should Parliament deem it advantageous to withhold some particular
discussion, serve as check upon careless reporting and distorted comment. "



I have already mentioned the enactment of the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840,
which came close upon the heels of _Stockdale v. Hansard ****_ (14) in which
the courts disputed the privilege of such publication. Halsbury in Laws of
England, Vol. 28 (4th Edn), para. 104, sets out the present legal position as
follows:



"104\. Authorised reports and copies of parliament­ary proceedings‑



"Without prejudice to any of the privileges of Parliament persons who publish
under the direct authority of either House of Parliament have the statutory
protection of a summary stay of proceedings, civil or criminal, in respect of
reports, papers, votes or proceedings of either House while those who,
although not acting under the direct authority of either House publish a
correct copy of such reports, papers, votes or proceedings have a somewhat
similar statutory protection.."



Erskine May deals with this matter in greater detail as follows:



" Privilege does not protect a publisher

**41**

  
publishing a paper presented to Parliament and printed by order of the House
(except under the statutory certificate or proofs).‑ It is no defence, at
common law, that defamatory statements have been published by order of the
House.



_Stockdale v. Hansard_ (supra). An action against the publisher of a report
made to Parliament by a statutory body, and ordered by the House to be
printed, succeeded on   the ground that defamatory statements in there sport
were not privileged by virtue of the House's order for printing. In Lord
Denman's judgment, a distinction was drawn between what ­the House may order
to be printed for the use __ of its members,' and what may be published and
sold 'indiscriminately.'



  The controversy between the House and the Court of Queen's Bench, of which
this decision forms a part, led to high words on both sides and raised a wider
question, as to the relation of courts of law to questions of privilege (See
p.187). But the decision in this case prescribes the limits of the right of
the House to publish its proceedings or matters connected therewith, and lays
down that, apart from statutory protection, such publication, if defamatory,
is actionable unless it is confined to members of the House.



Statutory protection for parliamentary publication:



  By the parliamentary Papers Act 1840, passed in consequence of the decision
of the court of Queens Bench in the case of _Stockdale v. Hansard_ (supra), it
was enacted that proceedings, criminal or civil, against persons for the
publication of papers printed by order of either House of Parliament,  


**42**



shall be immediately stayed, on the production of a certificate, verified by
affidavits to the effect such publication is by order of either House of
Parliament. Proceedings are also to be stayed, if commenced on account of the
publication of a copy of a parliamentary paper, upon the verification of the
correctness of such copy; and in proceedings commenced for printing any
extract from, or abstract of, a parliamentary report or paper, the defendant
may give the report in evidence under the general issue, and prove that his
own extract or abstract was published bone fide and without malice; and if
such shall be the opinion of the jury, a verdict of not guilty will be
entered."'



The above is a paraphrase of sections 1, 2 an of the Parliamentary Papers Act
1840. The first sections appear in substance as section 19 of own
Parliamentary Powers and Privileges Act 383), but these sections do not arise
consideration in this case. Section 3 of the Act is worded as follows:‑



"And ... it shall be lawful in any civil criminal proceeding to be commenced
prosecuted for printing any extract from or abstract of such report, paper,
votes, or proceedings, to give in evidence under the general issue such
report, paper, votes, or proceedings, and to show that such extract or
abstract was published bona fide and without malice; and if such shall be the
opinion of the jury, a verdict of not if guilty shall be entered for the
defendants."



Having regard to the intention behind this Act, there is no doubt that
sections 1 and 2 are in effect statutory extensions of the absolute privilege
of Parliament to the publications concerned. They ordain that all court
proceedings should be brought to a halt upon the production of

**  
43**

  
The required certificate from the relevant Parliamentary officer or upon the
required verification being produced. Section 3 is different in kind from the
two earlier section and appears to belong to an altogether different category.
It gives a lesser defence of qualified privilege. This section operates on the
conduct of the trial, on its procedures and evidence showing that the court
will continue to be seized of the case. In short it is not cast in terms of
parliamentary privilege at all. The question whether or not this Act applies
to ordinary civil and criminal proceedings  only, and is not capable of taking
in contempt proceedings as argued by Mr. Nadesan, is one that need not be gone
into here, as our inquiry is restricted to section 3. Section 3 contain
expressions like " evidence under the general issue", and "opinion of the
jury". It is evident that such language is singularly inappropriate in the
case of summary contempt proceedings. In any event our Parliamentary Powers
and privileges Act (Cap. 383). Has deliberately omitted a provision such as
section 3 of the U.K. Act. Therefore, whatever be the immunity contained in
section 3 of the U.K Act, no such immunity can be recognised here. The
resulting position, as far as the present case is concerned, is that there is
no privilege recognised by our law that would protect the impugned
publication.



The Attorney‑General however relied on the passage from Erskine May at page 80
for the propositions he advanced before us. If he meant to say that the
present case dealt with the publication of a proceeding of Parliament and
therefore was automatically entitled to parliamentary privilege, I am afraid
this passage does not support him. It is reproduced in toto to prevent any
misconstruction:  


# 44



"........... Consideration must now **** be given to the principles upon which
the publication of reports of Parliamentary debates and proceedings is
privileged against actions in courts. Although the privilege of freedom of
speech protects what is said in debate in either House, this privilege does
not Protect the publication of debate outside Parliament. Nor does an order of
the House for their printing and publication confer parliamentary privilege on
proceedings published outside Parliament. A Member who publishes his speech
made in either House separately from the rest of the debate is  responsible
for any libellous matter it may contain under the common law rules as to
defamation of character. But the publication, whether by order of the House or
not, of  a fair and accurate account of a debate in either House of Parliament
is protected by the same principles as that which protects fair reports of
proceedings in courts of justice, namely, that the advantage to the public
outweighs any disadvantage to individuals unless malice is proved. Statutory
protection has been given by the Parliamentary Papers Act 1840, to papers
published by order of either House of Parliament from proceedings in any court
of law."



It would be convenient to pause here to refer to a submission made by Mr. Mark
Fernando, which appears to be mistaken and a perpetuation of error made at one
time by the English courts. My recollection is that the Attorney‑General
himself took the same stand. At one time there was a misconception that the
parliamentary Privilege which safeguarded freedom of speech and debate gave
protection to the publication of such speeches and debates. The argument was
simple, namely, that proceeding of Parliament enjoyed a privilege

**45**



whether it took place inside the House or was reported outside the House in
the form of a report. In fact, the leading case setting out this view was Lord
Kenyon's judgment in _R. V.Wright_ (17). This case was strongly relied on by
Mr. Fernando in the course of his submissions. But this view was recognised as
being clearly erroneous. This becomes apparent from this same quotation from
Erskine May, which we continue:



"The close relation between a proceeding in Parliament, such as a debate, and
the publication of that proceeding seems to have misled members of both Houses
and the courts into thinking that the same privilege protected both the
proceeding and its publication.



In his judgment in _R. v. Wright ,_ (supra) _,_ Lord Kenyon thought it
impossible to admit that the proceeding of either of the Houses of Parliament
could be a libel' upon which it was afterwards observed that the most learned
judge 'here confounds the nature of the composition with the occasion of
publishing it' (By Lord Denman in _Stockdale_ v. _Hansard,_ (supra). The
notion seems to have been either that the privilege attaching to the
proceedings themselves was transferred to their publication or that anything
which formed part of the proceedings of Parliament became permanently divested
of all libellous character. But Lord Kenyon himself decided that a speech
which had been made in the House of Lords was not privileged, if published
separately from the rest of the debate _(R. v. Lord Abingdon_ (18) __ ).In
_Stockdale v. Hansard_ (supra) in 1837 it had been decided that publication by
order of the House did not confer privilege on a paper which had been ordered
to lie upon the Table



**46   **



of the House, and so might be regarded as a proceeding of the House. It was
not until 1868 that it occurred to any litigant to bring an action for libel
against the publisher of a debate in one of the Houses of Parliament,  and, in
this case, although the publication was decided to be protected, the principle
on which it was protected was held not to be that of parliamentary privilege
but the same principle as that on which accurate reports of proceedings in
courts of justice are privileged, (see Wason _v. Walter,_ (1)) _._



Once again I would like to interrupt this citation, for it would be pertinent
at this Stage to emphasise one or two basic matters. it is essential that we
bear these distinctions in mind if we are to understand the issues before us.
The expression "proceedings of Parliament" bears the widest connotation.
Whatever business of Parliament that takes place within the Chamber would
undoubtedly enjoy an absolute privilege. Such privilege may be of different
kinds. But when we come to matters done or having effect outside the Chamber,
a number of different factors come into 'play, e.g., in regard to the
publication of the spoken debates there could be privilege, or extended
privilege, qualified privilege or no privilege, as the case may be. In fact,
it has been said that if a member publishes his speech made in the House, his
printed statement is a separate publication unconnected with any proceeding in
Parliament. Then there is the Parliamentary Papers Act which deal with a
separate matter altogether, namely the publication of documents or papers on
orders of the House and the publication of Parliamentary papers as in the case
before us.



Now to proceed with the quotation:  


"Privilege does not protect a Member publishing his own speech apart from the
rest of a

**47**

  
debate: ‑ If a Member publishes his speech, his printed statement becomes a
separate publication unconnected with any proceedings in Parliament.



_Abingdon's case **,**_ (supra). ‑ An information was filed against Lord
Abingdon for a libel. He had accused his attorney of improper professional
**** conduct, **** in a speech delivered in the House of **** lords, which
**** he afterwards published in several newspapers at his own expense. Lord
Abingdon, pleaded his own case in the Court of King's Bench, and contended
that he had a right to print what he had, by the law of Parliament, a right to
speak; but Lord Kenyon said, that a member of Parliament had certainly a right
to publish his speech, but that speech should not be made a vehicle of slander
against any individual; if it was, it was a libel. The court gave judgment
that his lordship should be imprisoned for three months, pay a fine of £100
and find **** security for his good behaviour (see _Rex v. Creevey,_ (19);
_Stockdale v. Hansard , (supra): Wason Y. Walter_ (1)

**_ _**

_Creevey's case, ****_ (supra)‑Mr Creevey, a member of the House of Commons,
had made a charge against an individual in the House, and incorrect reports of
his speech having appeared in several newspapers, Mr Creevey sent a correct
report to the editor of a newspaper, with a request that he would publish it.
Upon an information filed against him, the jury found the defendant guilty of
libel, and the King's Bench refused an application for a new trial (See Lord
Ellenborough's judgment). Mr Creevey, who had been fined £ 100, complained to
the House of the proceedings of the King's Bench, but the House refused to
admit that there was a breach of privilege (C.J. (1812‑13), 604; Parl. Deb.
(1812‑13) 26 c.898)."



Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol. 28, (4th Edn) Para. 103 states the Law in
almost the identical Manner:

# 48

  
"103. Proceedings in Parliament: Words spoken by a member of Parliament in
Parliament are absolutely privileged, and the court has no jurisdiction to
entertain an action in respect of them, When Parliament sitting and statements
are made in either house, the member making them is not amenable to the civil
or criminal law, even if the statements are false to his knowledge, and a
conspiracy to make such statements would not make the members guilty of it
amenable to the criminal law. However, this privilege does not extend to a
statement published by a member outside the house, even where it is a
reproduction of what was said in the house, and made in consequence of the
appearance of an incorrect publication in the newspapers; and a letter from a
member to a minister, even on a matter of public concern, is probably not
entitled to absolute privilege."



With this background in mind I shall now turn to _Wason v. Walter ,_ (1), on
which the Attorney‑General placed almost the entire weight of his case. In
this case the plaintiff presented a petition to the House of Lords charging a
high judicial officer, with having 30 years before made a false statement in
order to deceive a Committee of the House of Commons and praying for an
inquiry and removal of this officer. There was a debate o this matter and in
the course of the debate it w found that the allegations made by the plaintiff
were utterly unfounded.



The Times newspaper published a faithful report of this debate. As a sequel,
the plaintiff brought an action for libel against the owner of  the newspaper.
it would be observed that this was common law action for libel and was not a
case of contempt of court. In any event the facts allege could not have
constituted a contempt of court for

**49**

  
a libel on a judge in his personal capacity constitutes a libel and not a
contempt. The court in holding the publisher not liable for libel held that
the publication should be regarded as privileged on the same principle as an
accurate report of proceedings in a court of justice is privileged, namely
that the advantage of the publicity to the community at large outweighs any
private injury resulting from the publication.



The following two quotations from the judgment (the first cited in all
standard texts relating to libel and slander as a correct statement of the
law) demonstrate the reasoning behind the decision:‑



"To us it seems clear that the principles on which the publication of reports
of the proceedings of courts of justice have been held to be privileged, apply
to the reports of parliamentary proceedings. The analogy between the two cases
is in every respect complete. If the rule has never been applied to the
reports of parliamentary proceedings till now, we must assume that it is only
because the occasion has never before arisen. If the principles which are the
foundation of the privilege in the one case are applicable to the other, we
must not hesitate to apply them, more especially when by so doing we avoid the
glaring anomaly and injustice to which we have before adverted."



The court also set out the basis on which publication of judicial proceedings
are accorded immunity, namely predominance being given to the public interest
as against a limited private interest:



  "it is now well established that faithful and fair reports of the
proceedings of courts of justice, though the character of individuals  


# 50

  
may incidentally suffer, are privileged, and that for the publication of such
reports the publishers are neither criminally nor civilly responsible."



The immunity thus afforded in respect of the publication of the proceedings of
courts of justice rests upon a twofold ground. In the English law of libel,
malice is said to be the gist of an action for defamation. And though it is
true that by malice, as necessary to give a cause of action in respect of a
defamatory statement, legal and not actual malice, is meant, while by __ legal
malice, as explained by Bayley, J., in _Bromage v. Prosser_ (20) is meant no
more than wrongful intention which the law always presumes as accompanying a
wrongful act without any proof of malice in fact, yet the presumption of law
may be rebutted by the circumstances under which the defamatory matter has
been uttered or published, and, if this Should be the case, though the
character of the Party concerned may have suffered, no right of action will __
arise. The rule,' said Lord Campbell, C.J., in the case of _Taylor ‑ v.
Hawkins_ (21),'is that if the occasion be such as repels that presumption of
malice, the communication is privileged, and the plaintiff must then, if he
can, give evidence of malice.'



It is thus that in the case of reports of proceedings of courts of justice,
though individuals may occasionally suffer from them, yet as they are
published without any reference ** __** to the individuals concerned but
solely to afford information to the public and for the benefit of society, the
presumption of malice __ is rebutted, and such publications are held __ to be
privileged,



The other and the broader principle on which this exception to the general law
of libel is

**51**

  
founded is, that the advantage to the Community from publicity being given to
the proceedings of courts of justice is so great, that the __ occasional
inconvenience to individuals arising from it must yield to the general good,
It is true that with a view to distinguish the __ publication of proceedings
in parliament from that of proceedings of courts of justice it has been said
that the immunity accorded to __ the reports of the proceedings of courts of
justice is grounded on the fact of the courts being open to the public, while
the houses of __ parliament are not; as also that by the publication of the
proceedings of the courts the people ** __** obtain a knowledge of the law by
__ which their dealings and conduct are to be ­regulated. But in our opinion
the true ground  is that given by Lawrence, J, in _Rex v. Wright_ __ (supra)
namely, that though the publication of __ such proceedings way be to the
disadvantage of the particular individual concerned, yet it is of vast
importance to the public that the ­proceedings of courts of Justice should be
universally known. The general advantage to __ the __ country in having these
proceedings made public, more than counterbalances the inconvenience to the
private persons whose conduct may be the subject of such __ proceedings. ' In
_Davidson v. Duncan_ (22), Lord Campbell says, 'A fair account of What __
takes place in a court of justice is privileged. The reason is, that the
balance of public benefit from publicity is great. it is of great consequence
that the public should know what takes place in court; and the proceedings are
under the control of the judges. The inconvenience therefore, arising from the
chance of injury to private character is infinitesimally small as compared to
the convenience of publicity.' And Wighteman, J, says:‑ 'The only foundation
for the exception

# 52



is the superior benefit of the publicity of judicial proceedings which
counterbalances the injury to the individuals, though that at times may be
great.'



Both the principles on which the exception from legal consequences is thus
extended to the publication of the proceedings of courts of justice, appear to
us to be applicable in the case before us. The presumption of malice is
negatived in the one case as in the other by the fact that the publication has
in view the instruction and advantage of the public, and has no particular
reference to the party concerned. There is also in the one case as in the
other a preponderance of general good over partial and occasional evil. We
entirely concur with Lawrence, J. , in _Rex v. Wright_ (supra), that the same
reasons which apply to the reports of the proceedings in courts of justice
apply also to proceedings in parliament,"



And again at page 94:



"It is to be observed that the analogy between the case of reports of
proceedings of courts of justice and those of proceedings in parliament being
complete, all the limitations placed on the one to prevent injustice to
individuals will necessarily attach on the other : a garbled or partial report
, or of detached parts of proceedings, published with intent  to injure
individuals, will equally be disentitled  to protection. Our judgment will in
no way interfere with the decisions that the publications of a single speech
for the purpose or with the effect of injuring an individuals will be
unlawful, as was held in the cases of _Rex v. Lord Abingdon_ (supra), and _rex
v. Creevey_ (supra), as to such a speech being privileged if bona fide
published by a member for the  


**53**

  
information of his constituents. But whatever would deprive a report of the
proceedings in a court of justice of immunity will equally apply to a report
of proceedings in parliament."



These passages speak for themselves. They merely set out the principles
guiding a court in deciding a libel action between private parties involving
the reporting or the publication of a parliamentary debate. At no point has
the court thought it necessary to embark on an inquiry as to the existence or
the extent or the applicability of the privileges of Parliament or of the
powers of the courts in respect of contempt. My understanding of this matter
is borne out fully by the judgment of Chief Justice S R. Das of the Indian
Supreme Court in _M. S._ _M. Sharma v. Sri Krishna Sinha_ (supra), where he
himself came to the same conclusion. The facts of this case are somewhat
complex. It was a case dealing with the privileges of the Bihar Legislative
Assembly. At the annual budget debate a member of the assembly made " one of
the bitterest attacks against the way the Chief Minister was conducting the
administration of the State". The petitioner who was the editor of a paper
published this speech. A member of the Assembly raised the question of a
breach of privilege of the House and the matter was referred to the Committee
of Privileges. After some delay, the petitioner was served with a notice from
the House asking him to show cause why he should not be punished for a breach
of privilege. As submitted to us by the Attorney‑General, the learned advocate
for the Petitioner relied on _Wason v. Walter_ (1) and contended:



" ........... that this decision establishes that the Press had the absolute
privilege of publishing a report of the proceedings that take place in
Parliament, just as it is entitled to publish a

# 54



faithful and correct report of the proceedings of the Courts of justice,
though the character of individuals may incidentally suffer and that the
publication of such accurate reports is privileged and entails neither
criminal nor civil responsibility. This argument overlooks that the question
raised and actually decided in that case, as formulated by Cockburn C.J
himself at p.82, was simply this:‑



'The main question for our decision is, whether a faithful report in a public
newspaper of debate in either House of Parliament containing matter
disparaging to the character of an individual., as having been spoken in the
course of the debate, is actionable at the sult of the party whose character
has thus been called in question.'



The issue was between the publisher and the person whose character had been
attacked. The question of the privilege, as between the House **** and the
newspaper, was not in issue at all. In the next place, the __ observations
relied upon as hearing on the question of privilege of Parliament were not at
all necessary for deciding that case, and as Frank Thayer points out at p.32
of his Legal Control of the press, this part of the opinion is purely
dictum'.



So much for the decision in _Wason v. Walter_ (1) _. Cook v. Alexander,_ (23),
was another authority relied on by the respondent. It is a case similar in
principle to _Wason v. Walter_ (1). It relates to the reporting of words
spoken in the debate of Parliament. it too does not deal with a publication of
parliamentary papers. In fact, Lord Denning begins his judgment as follows:‑



"This case raises a point of considerable **** importance. It is about the
reporting of

**  
55**

  
proceedings in Parliament. It has not come up for full discussion in the
courts for over 100 years; that is since _Wason v. Walter_ (1) ."



The facts of this case are as follows: The plaintiff was a teacher at an
approved school and had publicly criticised the school for its excessive
severity in the punishment of the students. Consequent to this criticism the
Government held an inquiry and the Home Secretary made an order closing the
school. This matter came __ up for discussion in the House of Lords in which
the closure order was criticised by the opposition and defended by the
Government. Eleven speakers spoke in the debate, lasting over three hours, and
the record filled 94 columns of Hansard. One of the main contributions. was a
speech made by a bishop who condemned the plaintiff in strong terms. A
Government spokesman rebutted that criticism calling it "a monument of
unfairness".



On the next day the "Daily Telegraph" reported the debate fully in three
columns in an inside page of the newspaper. The report gave extracts of all
the speeches and was a fair and accurate summary of the debate. There was also
on the back page an item in the form of "Parliamentary sketch", i.e. an
impression of the debate as the reporter saw and heard it. It was a selective
report highlighting certain portions of the debate which the reporter thought
would be of special public interest. The sketch gave prominence to the
bishop's speech and had an arresting headline and stated that the bishop had
made a scathing attack on the plaintiff. There was a passing reference to the
rebuttal. This sketch also gave two page references to the inside page which
contained the full debate.



The Court of Appeal, following _Wason v. Walter_ (1) held that the qualified
privilege



# 56



Enjoyed by a report of proceedings in Parliament in the form of a precis of
the words spoken could be extended to a sketch of Parliamentary proceedings if
the sketch was made fairly and honestly with the intention of giving an
impression of the impact of the proceedings made on the hearer. The important
of this judgement lies on the fact that this was the first time a
Parliamentary "sketch" came up for consideration. Lord Denning said:



"The Parliamentary sketch is thus a different thing from a report of
proceeding s in Parliament. A report of proceedings in Parliament, as usually
understood, is a report of the words spoken in the debate, summerised so as to
fit into the space available. In a short a precis. Such a report was
considered in 1868 in _Wason v. Walter,_ (1)"



**Lawton, L.J.** , said:



"The reporter represents the public in Parliament; he is their eyes and ears:
and he has to his best, using his professional skill to give them a fair and
accurate picture of what went on in either the house of lords or the House of
commons. He cannot report everything that happened; he must from the very
nature of things be selective and what he may well find himself alone in
answering is the question: Well, if I were a fair minded, reasonable member of
the public, what would I have remembered about his debate? He is in my
judgement entitled to set out what he remembers."



It would be thus seen that these authorities can be distinguished from the
instant case in two important particulars. First, these are cases of libel and
not relating to contempt of court and,  


**57**



second, they deal with the publication of the spoken words in a debate and not
with a publication of what is contained in a parliamentary paper or document
as in this case. In the context of this matter, I deem it of utmost importance
that these distinctions should be borne in mind.



If _Wason v. Walter_ (1) and this case have any bearing on the issue before
us, it is to show that the protection that was recognised by them to
publication of parliamentary proceedings was granted not by virtue of the law
of parliamentary privilege or the statutory extension of the privilege, but by
principle of the common law, where the judges by analogy extended to the
report of __ parliamentary proceedings, a like protection as obtaining in
respect of the publication of judicial proceedings. Apart from that, I have
got little assistance from them since they have no real bearing on the actual
issue before us.



The foregoing discussion would show that neither the absolute privilege of
Parliament nor the extended statutory privilege can have application to this
case; nor does _Wason v. Walter_ (1) relied on by the Attorney‑General carry
his case any further. Fortunately for us, there is an Indian decision very
much in point ‑ which the respondents tried to brush aside ‑ and other dicta
and the opinion of text writers which provide the clearest guidelines for
resolving this matter without resorting to the libel cases which were
extensively relied on by the respondents.



The libel cases are therefore, in my view, irrelevant and this case could very
well be decided without reference to them. However, in deference to the
arguments of counsel and having regard to the time taken on the analysis of
those cases, I think I owe __ it to counsel to say something about those

#  
58

arguments and cases for whatever they are worth.



First, let me deal with the cases that are in point. There is this Indian case
_Mohanty v_. _Nabakrishna Choudhoury,_ (24). This case lays down without any
hesitation that a fair and accurate publication by a newspaper of a
parliamentary debate enjoys no protection if it constitutes a contempt of
court. In this case the Chief Minister of Orissa made a statement during
proceedings in the Legislature, where he referred to the "immaturity of the
High Court" and added that in many instances the Supreme Court had corrected
the High Court and also held that the High Court had abused its powers. This
debate was published by the 2nd respondent, the editor of the newspaper
"Matrubhumi". Both respondents were noticed by the High Court on a charge of
contempt.



  The main argument was as to whether the Chief Minister was answerable for
the speech made in the Legislature. The High Court proceeded on the basis that
the contents of the speech amounted, prima facie, to contempt and the issue
was whether it was protected by Article 194(2) of the Constitution which
provided for privilege of the freedom of speech in the House. It was argued
that Articles 194(1) and (2) were subject to the other provisions of the
Constitution, in which case an absolute freedom of speech in the Legislature
could not have been claimed. The court however held that there was a
difference in the wording of Articles 194 (1) and (2) and the Chief Minister
was entitled to claim immunity under Article 194(2). The 2nd respondents
however was held to have committed contempt of court by publishing that
debate. He tendered an unconditional apology.



This case which covers the present situation squarely shows that the
publication of a speech made in Parliament ‑ even though immunity attaches  


**59**



to the speech ‑ can amount to contempt of court, if it contains objectionable
material. In answer, the respondents could only say that, since the accused
had pleaded guilty, the case had been decided without a discussion of the
issue before us. This appears to be a feeble rejoinder. The main part of the
case dealing with the privilege of the Legislature had been hotly contested
and it seems to me that neither the judge nor the respondent had any doubts or
misgivings about the 2nd respondent's culpability.



Next I turn to an English authority R. _v. Border Television Ltd._ (25) _._ In
__ this case the respondents, a television company and a provincial newspaper,
were separately charged with contempt of court for publishing information
about a criminal trial, during its progress, which information was capable of
revealing to the jury that the accused had committed other offences. Out of 20
counts the accused had pleaded to four charges on the first day of trial and
the trial was continuing on the other charges. The report of the proceedings
contained this fact. The Attorney‑General moved in the matter and brought this
publication to the notice of court as an instance of contempt.



It was argued that a fair, accurate and contemporaneous report of judicial
proceedings is privileged and that in the conflict between the public interest
in free reporting of judicial proceedings with the private right of the
accused, the public interest outweighs the private interest. The Lord Chief
Justice said:



"If it were true that the conflict arising in this case is a conflict between
public Interest and private interest, then there is ample authority to justify
what Mr. Gray had said. Those authorities are very numerous and exceedingly
well known. But what is said  


# 60

  
against Mr. Gray's contention is that this is not a conflict between two
interest, one of which is public and the other of which is private. In truth
this is a conflict in so far as it is a conflict at all, between two public
interests and therefore has to be approached as Lord Reid approached a similar
problem in what is generally nowadays called the _Thalidomide case_ (54)
_........_



The Lord Chief justice concluded:



"lt seems to me they are both public interests and they can both perfectly
well be allowed to live together by simply recognising that any action which
would be contempt of court is not protected by the fair, accurate and
contemporaneous exemption. By that approach the two public interests can be
fully served."



The question of contempt of court in relation to the publication of judicial
proceedings and also in relation to the privileges of Parliament arose in the
famous Colonel "B" episode . The facts are these: Several journalists were
charged under the Official secrets Acts 1911 and 1920. During the committal
proceedings, an officer of the security services was allowed by the magistrate
to give his evidence anonymously as Colonel "B". Despite this court ruling,
three newspapers disclosed the colonel's name gathered from material produced
in court. Proceedings for contempt of court were initiated by  the Attorney-
General against those newspapers. Before hearings took place, the matter
however was the subject of discussion in Parliament. Four members of
Parliament referred to colonel "B" by this correct name in the course of
question in the business of the House. Neither the speaker nor any member was
then aware that the matter was sub judice and therefore no action was taken at
that time. The



# 61



Speaker, however, later in a statement to the House admitted that the actions
of the members were contrary to the sub judice rule. This was also the opinion
of the Committee of Privileges which later inquired into this matter.



Some journalists then realised the importance of the members' actions in
naming Colonel "B". They wrote to the Director of Public Prosecutions and
asked for guidance with regard to the reporting of the day's parliamentary
proceedings. They wanted to know whether this would constitute a contempt of
court. The Director of Public Prosecutions issued the following statement:



"The legality of revealing the identity of Colonel "B" is the subject matter
of pending proceedings for contempt of court. It is not accepted, despite the
naming of the Colonel on the floor of the House of Commons, that the
publication of his name would not be acontempt of court even if it was a part
of a report of proceedings in the House" (Vide H. C. Debates, Vol. 948 col.
812).



Since this statement dealt with a publication of Parliamentary proceedings
some members of the House thought that the Director of Public Prosecutions has
sought to interfere with a matter concerning Parliament. Accordingly. a member
raised a question of Privilege in Parliament. After various motions were
tabled on this matter, the Leader of the House on May 2, 1978, moved "that the
matter of publication of the Proceedings of the House, other than by order of
the House, in so far as the Privileges of the House are concerned, and the
matter of the application of the sub judice  rule.....should be referred to a
Committee of Privileges," This was agreed upon and the Committee of Privileges
made an initial report. It held that  


# 62

  
the statement of the Director of public Prosecutions did not violate the
privileges of Parliament.



  The contempt proceedings initiated by the Attorney‑General in the Colonel
"B" matter against the newspapers and journals ended in a conviction. An
appeal was however taken to the House of __ Lords. Vide _Attorney ‑General v.
Leveller Magazine_ (26). The House of Lords allowed the appeal because the
circumstances showed that whatever ruling the court had given to conceal the
identity of Colonel "B" had later been impliedly abandoned and therefore the
publication of his identity would not amount to an interference with the
administration of justice.



Lord Diplock in an illuminating judgement set out the basic principles that
should apply to a case such as that. His judgement includes all types of
contempt and the words "comment or information that has a tendency to pervert
the course of justice........by deterring other people from having recourse to
courts of justice in the future for the vindication of their lawful rights",
are meant to include the contempt of scandalising the court by imputing
dishonesty or partiality to a court. What this decision clearly holds is that
a fair and impartial report of a proceeding of court does no necessarily give
complete immunity but is subject to __ the principles of contempt of court.
That is the principle contended for by Mr. Nadesan and denied by the
respondents. The following excerpts from the judgment bear out, this
position:‑



Lord Edmund‑Davies stated the law as follows at page 362:



**   **" .............. The phrase contempt of court' does not in the least
describe the true nature of the class of offence with which we are here  


**63**



**   **Concerned......The offence consists in interfering with the
administration of the law; in impeding and perverting the course of
justice.......It is not the dignity of the court which is offended ‑ a petty
and misleading view of the issues involved ‑ it is the fundamental supremacy
of the law which is challenged ( _Johnson v. Grant,_ (27), per Lord President
Clyde,at p.790).When contempt is alleged the Courts have for generations found
themselves called upon to tread a judicial tightrope, for, as Phillimore J.
put it in _Blumenfeld_ (28) at p. 311: 'The court had to reconcile two things
namely, the right of free speech and the public advantage that a knave should
be exposed, and the right of an individual suitor to have his case fairly
tried. The only way in which the court could save both was to refuse an
unlimited extension of either right. It became, then, a question of degree.'
This dilemma most frequently arises in relation to Press and other reports of
court proceedings, for the public interest inherent in their being fairly and
accurately reported is of great constitutional importance and should never
lead to punitive action unless, despite their factual accuracy, they
nevertheless threaten or prejudice the due administration of justice."



Lord Scarman said in his succinct manner at page 370:



"My Lords, when an application is made to commit for contempt of court a
journalist or editor for the publication of information' relating to the
proceedings of a court, freedom of speech and the public nature of justice are
at once put at risk. The general rule of our law is clear. No one shall be
Punished for publishing such information

# 64



unless it can be established to the satisfaction of the Court to whom the
application is made that the publication constitutes an interference with the
administration of justice either in the particular case to which the
publication relates or generally........"



I now come to consider the views of text writers. Gatley, on Libel and Slander
at page 317, states:



"735\. The administration of justice:‑ 'The due administration of justice is
undoubtedly a matter of public interest, and therefore fair matter for public
comment. Not only the proceedings at the trial, but also the conduct and
decision of the judge, and the verdict of the jury, are matters of public
interest and may be lawfully commented on as soon as the trial is
over........."



As a footnote to the above (footnote 78) he observes:



"It is of the utmost importance to distinguish three separate questions. The
first is: what comments on the administration of justice are fair comments on
a matter of public interest, so as to fall within the defence of fair comment
in a defamation ac­tion? The second is: what reports or comments, may be made
on the administration of justice without committing a contempt of court? The
third, which is dealt with in secs. 592 et seq is: what proceedings are such
that fair and accurate reports of them are privileged ?



While the questions are separate, it may

**65**

  
be of importance to consider whether **** a publication is a contempt in
deciding whether, **** it is privileged or a fair comment. There appears to be
no direct authority as to whether a publication which is a contempt of court
can be a fair comment on a matter of public interest. In a case in which the
publication complained of is a contempt, because of the possible prejudice to
the person defamed it is difficult to see how the comment can be fair in
relation to him though it might be in relation to another. However _Woodgate
v. Ridout_ ,(29),where Cockburn, C.J., seems to have suggested that a
publication might be a fair comment even if the writer was taking on himself
to dictate what the judgement of the court should be, which is at least close
to contempt. Where a comment is on proceedings, which it would be a contempt
of court or contrary to a statutory prohibition to report it, it is submitted
that such proceedings are not a matter of public interest for this purpose,
though the decision of a court to restrict publication must be a matter on
which it is legitimate to comment. See Sec.596 n.28 for contempt and
privilege."



These observations had been made before the decision in _R. v. Border
Television Ltd._ (supra) This decision now substantiates those observations.



The law of libel itself contains certain limitations in the exercise of this
privilege. These are most significant and are set out in Gatley at page 253:



"596\. Limits of privilege:‑ It is obvious that, as the (common law) privilege
is founded upon grounds of public policy, and of benefit and advantage to the
community, it does not extend to protecting any report, however fair

# 66

  
and accurate, which is blasphemous, seditious or immoral, or prohibited by
statute or by any rule or order having statutory force, or by order of the
court or a judge prohibiting a report of the proceedings in any case where the
publication of such report would interfere with the course of justice."



Footnote 28 to this passage contains the following:-



_   _".......See also _Bognuda v. Bawkes Bay Newspapers,_ (30) _,_ where the
defendants proved that an order restricting publication of the matter
complained of was made without jurisdiction, so that the publication was
privileged. It is submitted that there can be no privilege for a report, the
publication of which is a contempt of court: see sec. 735 _,_ n. 78. This was
conceded in _Lucas & Son v. 0' Brien, _(31) _,_ though an exception was said
to be possible."



Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol.28, (4th Edn) Para.119, page 61, virtually
echoes the statements contained in Gatley referred to above. Halsbur states:



"119 Reports of judicial, parliamentary and' other proceedings. The
publication of a fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings ­taking
place before a properly constituted judicial tribunal sitting in open court
is"... privileged, and no action lies at common law in respect of the
publication in the report unless malice is established. This common law
privilege is not confined to judicial reports but extends to reports of
proceedings in. Parliament and of other public proceedings, where the
publication is for the common

**67**

  
convenience and welfare of society, that is in the public interest. The
privilege is not confined to reports published in a newspaper or to reports
published contemporaneously; every person has the protection of the privilege
if he publishes the report merely to inform the public.



Being directed to the public interest, the common law privilege will not
protect any report that is blasphemous, seditious or obscene, or which is
prohibited by statute or by the order of a court or of a judge. Since the
ground of the common law privilege is that the public is entitled to be
present at the proceedings and therefore to be informed of what took place,
the privilege does not extend to reports of proceedings at which the public is
not entitled to be present, such as proceedings at common law in certain
domestic tribunals or arbitrations. The publication of reports of pleadings or
evidence while proceedings are pending may constitute a contempt of court, as
also will the publication of a report of proceedings before any court sitting
in private concerned with the exercise of its jurisdiction over infants, or
mentally disordered persons, or where the information reported relates to a
secret process, discovery or invitation in issue in the proceedings.



Note 9:‑Publication when prohibited by court order constitutes a contempt of
court: R _. v. Clement_ (32).Where such an order is made by a court in
relation to proceedings held in private, breach of, the order will be a
contempt of court: see the Administration of Justice Act 1960, s.12(l) (c).
See also _A.C. v. Leveller Magazine (supra)_.



There are two other references which are

# 68



valuable. **** The first is an article by Patricia M. Leopold, entitled
"Freedom of Speech in Parliament on 1981 Public Law". At page 45, after
referring to _Wason v. Walter , (Supra)_ she says:



"This means garbled or partial reports will not be entitled to claim qualified
privilege nor will those which are blasphemous seditious, amounting to a
contempt of court or are otherwise prohibited be law."



In footnote 69 appearing on the t same page relating to the item of contempt
of court she says:



"See _R. v. Border Television ex p Att ‑Gen. _(supra), where the Divisional
Court held that a fair and accurate report of a court proceeding could still
amount to a contempt of court."



The other reference is to the famous Colonel "B" affair.



If we are to have regard to those limitations, then it seems to me that not
only has the unfettered right claimed by the respondents to publish judicial
proceedings and particularly Parliamentary proceedings not been substantiated,
but even on the analogy of slander and defamation ­cases such an immunity
cannot be conceded. But on __ the other hand, both principle and authority see
to indicate that the offence of contempt of court can be committed in respect
of the publication o judicial or parliamentary proceedings.



These citations, it would be seen, are supported by case law set out in the
footnote. Mr.Mark Fernando sought to distinguish some of the cases. No doubt
some of them are based on statutory provisions, yet others clearly lay down
that qualified privilege would not be granted in cases

**69**



where the publication is of any matter which the law has prohibited; or if the
publication of the proceedings would be incompatible with or would ****
frustrate those very proceedings. This must surely include the case of
contempt of court. In the light of what I have been saying, I do not think Mr.
Fernando has succeeded in showing that those decisions and the views of text
writers are in any way unsound or invalid.



Mr. Nadesan has been able to secure for us a copy of the judgment in the New
Zealand case, _Lucas & Son (Nelson Mail) Ltd. v. O'Brien, _(supra) , mentioned
in the footnote No.28 at Gately, pages 253‑254, after the argument's were
concluded. This case appears to support the observation made by the learned
author, that a publication amounting to contempt is not entitled to immunity.



In this case, O'Brien, a member of the Social Credit Political League,
resigned and became the leader of the New Democrat Party. The League commenced
an action against O'Brien for misuse of its assets. The Nelson Mail published
an article which was in substance the repetition of the statement of claim
filed in the Supreme Court Registry. O'Brien sued the Nelson Mail for
defamation. The League was also joined as a defendant on the ground that it
was the League which had furnished the copy of the statement of claim to the
newspaper for publication. The defendants pleaded qualified privilege on four
grounds, which included the following :‑



(a) There was a social and moral duty to communicate or publish the
subject‑matter to the general public by reason of the corresponding interest
in the public to receive it.

# 70



(b) That the publication was a fair accurate report of the proceedings and of
the record of court.



Under the procedures obtaining New Zealand, the court had an inherent
jurisdiction to strike out pleadings which were frivo- lous or vexatious. On
the application of O' Brien the Supreme Court struck out all four pleas of
qualified privilege that the defendants has raised. The defendants appealed to
the Court Appeal. The Court of Appeal allowed the appeal only one ground,
namely, that the defendants should not be deprived of having issue (a) above
decided at the trial. The court dismissed the other grounds of appeal. The
Supreme Court had erroneously thought the considerations of public interest
could not justify the grant of qualified privilege unless the publication of
the contents of the statements also attracted privilege as a fair and accurate
report of a judicial proceeding. The Court of Appeal took the view that there
was no such relationship between the two and that the two defences we entitled
to stand independently of each other.



Although this was said, the Court gives an indication that if the statements
published amount to a contempt of court, then differ consideration would
apply. The relevant passage the judgement is as follows:‑



"Another matter referred to by Ongley, J., was the possibility that the
publication of the contents of the statement of claim amounted to a contempt
of court. The judge referred to the case of _Re Evening Star_ (33). In that
case Williams, J., held that the publication of the contents of a statement of
claim amounted to a contempt of court in the particular

**71**

  
circumstances there disclosed. After citing a passage from the judgement in
that case, Ongley, J. , observe ‑



It would be surprising if statements that might amount to contempt for the
reasons outlined by William, J, could at the same time be privileged for
reasons of public policy in an action of defamation.'



  however the judge did not go so far as to hold that the publication of the
statement of claim in the present case actually amounted to a contempt of
court. In argument before us Mr. Eichelbaum conceded that if it did then its
publication could not be the subject of qualified privilege on the basis of a
moral or social duty as claimed. It is possible that a situation could arise
in which  it would be necessary for the court to balance the ordinary
interests of a litigant to a fair trial against some other consideration of
general public interest and to decide where the overall public interest lay.
However in view of the concession made by Mr. Eichelbaum there is no need to
discuss that question any further. I do not understand Williams, J. to have
decided in the _Evening Star case_ that the publication of a statement of
claim must necessarily amount to a contempt of court."



  Although the facts of this case deal more with procedural matters, the brief
discussion of a plea of qualified privilege in relation to contempt of court,
though inconclusive because of the concession, helps to throw some light on
the problem, There is much to be said for the reasoning Of the New Zealand
Supreme Court on this issue. To take an example, if a court expressly
prohibits the publication of certain proceedings of court, a publication in
violation of this order would amount to a contempt of court. If the
publication also contains defamatory matter concerning **** some individual,
that would prima facie give rise to a  


# 72



claim **** for damages. In a libel action brought by the defamed person, would
it be reasonable to permit a defence of public interest to the publisher who
has broken the law? Would it be in the public interest to shield a person who
has defied a court order? Surely the answers must be "No". Would it not be in
the wider interest of the community to ensure the proper functioning of the
courts rather than condone an illegality? How could the publication of matter
reflecting adversely on the administration of justice and amounting to a
contempt of court be said to be in the public interest and be entitled to the
benefit of the defence of privilege ? Both the courts and text writers have
approached the matter on these lines.



Gatley has stated that a person would be disentitled to such protection when
the report is garbled one or is partial or of detached parts o proceedings.
This is another aspect of the matter. It has been submitted that in the
present case what was given publicity was a mere motion which was to be moved
in Parliament for the setting up of Select Committee which would at some
future date inquire into some allegations.



In _De Buse v McCarthy,,_ (34), the defendant, a clerk, set out a notice
convening a meeting of the defendant borough council to consider inter alia,
the report of a committee of the council regarding a loss of petrol from a
council's depot. A long agenda of business was attached to the notice and copy
of the report the committee. The notice was not only affixed the door of the
town hall but as directed by the council and in accordance with established
practice, copies were also sent to each of public libraries in the borough.
Four employees who claimed that the report was defamatory brought action. The
defendant pleaded that the notices were sent to the libraries under the
implied power given by a statute and in discharge of the duty imposed  


**73**  


on them. Alternatively they pleaded that they and the rate payers had a common
interest in the subject‑matter and it was the duty of the council and it was
reasonably necessary and proper for it in the course of its business to
publish the words to the rate payers. Lord Greene, M.R., said:



"I cannot see that it can possibly be said that the council was under any duty
to make that communication to the rate payers. At that stage the matter was,
in a sense, subjudice, because the committee's report by itself could have no
practical value unless and until it has been considered by the council and the
council had come to some decision on it. That decision might have been that
the report be adopted, or that the report be not adopted or that the report be
referred back to the committee The appointment of committees of this kind is
part of the‑ internal management and administration of a body of this
description and, whatever the duty or the interest of the council might have
been after it had dealt with the report and come to some decision on it, I
cannot see that at that stage in the operation of the machinery of the
borough's administration that there was any duty whatsoever to tell the rate
payers how the wheels were going round. There may well have been a duty or if
not a duty at any rate an interest of the council to inform the rate payers of
the result of its own deliberations."



Du Parq, L.J., distinguished _Rex v   Rich _ (35) __ where the defendant,
honestly believing in his statement, made a complaint to his member of
Parliament with the object of acquainting the Home Secretary. Lord Du Parq
said:



"To find an analogy to the present case one

# 74

  
would have to assume, if such an assumption might be made without any
reflection on members of Parliament, that a member of Parliament who received
such information from a constituent were to say: 'It is to my interest to show
how vigilant I am in all that concerns my constituency' and to further that
interest were to read out to a meeting of electors the highly defamatory
statements, which had been handed to him for transmission to the Secretary of
State. I cannot imagine any court holding in such a case that a legitimate
interest was being furthered or protected by the member of Parliament."



These cases to some extent support Mr. Nadesan's submission in regard to the
averments in the respondents' affidavit.



Before I proceed to the last point, there are a few miscellaneous matters to
be disposed of, The first is a caution and the need to remember that the law
of libel in the U.K. is to some extent governed by Statute Law. These
statutory provisions are the Libel Amendment Act 1888 and the Defamation Act
1952. These provisions must undoubtedly affect the thinking of the courts even
in the case of a libel arising from a publication of a parliamentary ****
debate or report. The libel cases therefore have to be read with that
reservation.

** **

The next matter relates to the submission made by Mr. Nadesan to the effect
that the basic principle behind the libel case decisions is not applicable in
the case of contempt of court. In webb _v. Times Publishing Co._ (36), which
was a libel case, Pearson, J., had given five reasons. For recognising the
public interest involved in the publication. They are:



(1) The fact that court proceedings are open to the public.



**75**



(2) The administration of justice is a matter of public concern.  


(3) The necessity for the education of the public on such matters.  


(4) The desirability of having fair and accurate reports rather than go by
rumours.



(5) "Most important, there is called the balancing operation, balancing the
advantages to the public of the reporting of judicial proceedings against the
detriment to individuals of being incidentally defamed."



Mr. Nadesan contended that at least one of those items, namely (5) above,
would not hold good if we were to consider the publication of proceedings of a
court of justice amounting to contempt of court or to any prohibited matters
which deal not with private rights but with the larger public interest.



The texts are very clear that the privilege will not extend, however fair and
accurate, to the matters which are blasphemous, seditious, immoral, etc. These
are essentially public matters and the publication of such matters, far from
being for the public interest, would be against the public welfare. I think
the distinction made by Mr. Nadesan is a valid one and the reasoning in the
libel cases which deal with harm to an individual cannot hold good when we are
confronted with the case of a larger public interest as in a matter of
Contempt. The principles set out in the cases cited by the respondents
therefore do not in themselves solve or throw any real light on the present
problem.



There is also one other matter. We were given the benefit of Mr. Mark
Fernando's researches when he referred us to an interesting monograph in 24
L.Q.R.184 ‑ The History of Contempt of Court by Sir John Fox ‑ and sought to
argue that because of

# 76



a common origin, these two topics should be treated identically by the court.
It does not appear to me that this scholarly article proves that libel and
contempt of court are identical, although there may be some similarity between
criminal libel a contempt, since they are both of a criminal nature and
originated from the incipient criminal law What the article does show is how
the courts began to assume a power to proceed in a summary mode by way of
attachment for contempt committed out of court, which they did not originally
possess. The foundation of this jurisdiction is Wilmot, J's judgment in
_Almon's case_ (37), whatever be the historical origins.



Borrie and Lowe ‑ The Law of Contempt 9255 dealing with Fox's article. makes
the following comment:



"In reaching the conclusion that the summary process was applicable in cases
of constructive contempt, Wilmot, J. relied not upon specific authority but
upon specific authority but upon the general point that the jurisdiction to
proceed summarily stands upon the very same foundation and the basis as trial
by jury do immemorial usage and practice. 'Although this historical assessment
has never been challenged in subsequent English decisions, a fine piece of
scholarly research by sir john fox has seriously challenged the historical
validity of wilmot, J. was wrong in saying that constructive contempts had
always been tried summarily. However in view of the fact the practice, which
has been repeatedly followed over the last 200 years is now too firmly
established to be overruled judicially masterly though sir john Fox's research
may have been, it can now only be a  


**77**

matter of academic interest. As Mr. Justice Frankfurter commented in an
American decision‑



the fact that scholarly research has shown that historical assumptions
regarding the procedure for punishment of contempts were ill‑founded, hardly
wipes out a century and a half of the legislative and judicial history of
federal law based on such assumption.'



Such a comment seems to be particularly appropriate with regard to, the __
position in England." (Vide also _Wede v. Robinson_ (38)) _._



  The present basis on which the law of contempt is operated is undoubtedly
Almon's case ** __** (supra) and in disposing of Mr.Mark Fernando's argument
we have also to conclude that the law of contempt has now reached the stage
when it has to be regarded as a separate branch of law carrying with it its
own principles and procedures.



While there could be some ** __** analogy between cases of contempt of court
and breaches of privileges of Parliament, it would be difficult and incorrect
to equate cases of contempt of court to cases of defamation or slander.
Although some common features are noticeable, they are basically rooted in
different principles and constitute different branches of law While defamation
is a matter of private rights and private law, contempt is an offence of a
public nature. More particularly defamation belongs to the branch of law known
as torts and is governed by the Roman‑Dutch law. It involves a transgression
of a private right giving rise to a claim for damages. Criminal contempt was
originally a misdemeanour and contains a strong Public policy element. The
applicable law in this country in the case of contempt is the English law.
Libel actions also admit of well recognised

# 78



defences such as justification,    truth, fair comment, etc. But in the case
of contempt by scandalising the court, the authorities indicate that no such
defences are permitted. The offence of scandalising the court seems to be in
the nature of an absolute offence involving strict liability.



From the foregoing it must be accepted that there is a difference in kind and
forms of action between contempt of court and an ordinary libel action. It
would be sufficient for the present if we regard a libel action as one
relating to private rights as against the offence of contempt which relates to
a public matter, namely, the administration of justice.



I now turn to the last ground urged by the respondents. The particular branch
of the law of contempt we are now concerned with is called,, "scandalising the
court". Its object is to protect the administration of justice and to preserve
public confidence in the System of Justice. There are many different ways in
which this offence can be committed. Wilmot, J., in the celebrated _Almon's
case,_ (supra), observed of this type of contempt:



It excited in the minds of the people a general dissatisfaction with all
judicial determinations, and indisposes their minds to obey them and whenever
men's allegiance to the law is fundamentally shaken, it is the most fatal and
most dangerous obstruction of justice and in my opinion, calls for a more
rapid and immediate redress than any other obstruction whatsoever ; nor for
the sake of the judges, as private individuals, but because they are the
channels by which the king's justice is conveyed to the people. To be
impartial, and to be universally thought so, are both absolutely necessary."  


**79**

Lord Denning more recently has said in "The Road to Justice (1955)":



  "The judges must of course be impartial; but it is equally important that
they should be known by all people to be impartial, If they should be labelled
by traducers, so that people lost faith in them, the whole administration of
justice would suffer. It is for this reason that scandalising a judge is held
to be a great contempt and punishable by fine and imprisonment."



  Again, referring to the contempt lies in the idea that without well
regulated laws a civilized community cannot survive. It is therefore most
important to maintain the respect and dignity of the courts and its officers ,
whose task it is to uphold and enforce the law, because without such respect,
public faith in the administration of justice would be undermined, and the law
itself would fall into disrepute."



  These same ideas have been given expression to by sir James Martin, C.J., in
_Re the evening news Newspaper,_ (39) as follows:-



  "What are such courts but the embodied force of the community whose rights
they are appointed to protect? They are not associations of a few individuals
claiming on their own personal account special privileges and peculiar dignity
by reason of their position. A supreme court like this whatever may be thought
of the separate members comprising it is the accepted and recognised



**  80**



tribunal for the maintenance of the collective authority of the entire
community ........ it derives, its force from the knowledge that it has the
whole powers of the community at its back. This is a, power unseen but it is
efficacious and irresistible and on its maintenance depends the security of
the public."



But for an accurate legal definition of the offence, we could rely on the oft
quoted statement of _Lord Russel of Kilowen_ in _R v. Gray_ (40):



Any act done or writing published calculated to bring a court or a judge of
the court into contempt or to lower his authority is a contempt of court."



At one time it was thought that the prosecution for the contempt of
scandalising the court was obsolete. In _McLeod v. St. Aubyn_ (41), Lord
Morris said: ,



"It is a summary process and should be used only from a sense of duty and
under pressure of public necessity, for there can be no landmarks pointing out
the boundaries In all cases. Committals for contempt of court y scandalising
the court itself have become obsolete in this country. Courts are satisfied to
leave to public opinion attacks or comment derogatory or scandalous to them.
But it must, be considered that in small colonies, consisting principally of
coloured populations, the enforcement in proper cases of committal for
contempt of court for attacks on the court may be absolutely **** necessary
**** to preserve in such a community the dignity of respect for the court."



  Lord Morris' statement about the offence of scandalising the court being
obsolete in England  


**81**



was disproved in the following year in _R v. Gray_ (supra), when the editor of
the Birmingham Daily Argus was found guilty and punished for publishing an
article which was described in the court as "personal scurrilous abuse of a
judge as a judge."



It has been contended by the respondents that judges and their work are open
to fair criticism and since the new item concerned does not go "beyond those
bounds and relates to a matter of public interest and concern, no contempt had
been committed by its publication. I shall now proceed to examine the
authorities  cited by counsel, starting with the English cases, to ascertain
whether or not the impugned news item does not amount to a contempt according
to the principles laid down in these cases.



    In _Re Vidal_ (42),the respondent, dissatisfied with a judgement of the President of the Probates Division and Admiralty Division, paraded before the court house carrying a sandwich board bearing the words: __ "Is judge __ Sir Henry Duke afraid to prosecute me ? I accuse him to be a traitor to his duty and of defrauding the course of justice for the benefit of the Kissing Doctor" This was described as "scurrilous abuse of the worst description" and the offender was found guilty of contempt. In _R_. _v. Freeman_ (43),the respondent was found guilty of scandalising the court for sending an abusive letter to  the judge. __ In the New Statesman, _ex parte, D.P.P. (44),_ the famous Dr. Marie Stopes, an early advocate of birth Control, was sued for libel by the editor of the Morning Post and damages were awarded against her. The New Statesman thereafter published an article suggesting that Justice Avory who heard the case had allowed his religious convictions as a Roman Catholic to prejudice his summing‑tip. The article concluded with the statement: "The serious point in this case however is that an individual owning to

#  82



Such views as those of Dr. Stopes cannot apparently hope for a fair hearing in
a court presided over by Mr. Justice Avory ‑ and there are so many Avorys".
This was held to be a contempt. In _R. v. Wilkinson_ (45), the editor of the
magazine "Truth" was found **** guilty of contempt for publishing the
following:‑



"Lord Justice Slesser who can hardly be altogether unbiased about legislation
of this type maintained that really it was a very nice provisional order or as
good as  one can expected in this 'vale of tears'."



The imputation made was that Slesser, L.J., when h was Solicitor General, had
__ steered the relevant legislation through Parliament.



The following cases from the Dominions also show that the offence of contempt
by scandalising the court is very much alive and far from obsolete in those
countries. In _R. v. United Fisherman a Allied Workers, Union_ (46),the Court
of Appeal of Columbia upheld convictions for contempt on a trade union and its
officers for publicly initiating vote as to whether the union should comply
with court order. Again in In _R. v. Murphy_ , (47) , article in a newspaper
run by students at the University of New Brunswick contained an attack the
judge in a particular case and also contained a general accusation worded as
follows:‑.,



"The courts in New Brunswick are simply the instruments of the corporate
elite. Their duty is not so much to make just decisions as to make right
decisions (i.e. decisions that will further perpetuate the elite which __
controls and __  rewards them Court appointments are political appointments.
Only the naive would reject the notion that an individual becomes a justice or
judge after he proves his worth to the establishment."  _  
 _

**83**

This was held to amount to a contempt of court. In­ _Re Borowaki , ._ (48)
**,** the Canadian Minister **** of Transport of Manitoba a was found guilty
for imputing political bias to a Magistrate. He had also used language about
the Magistrate which the Court held to be "unbelievably outrageous " .



In _A.G._ _v. Blundell,_ (49), where the President of the New Zealand Labour
Party said that "he had never known the Supreme Court to give a decision in
favour of the workers where it could possibly avoid it ". Myres, C.J., held
that this was a contempt. In _R_. _v. Western Printing and Publishing Ltd.,_
(50), a newspaper contained the following passage:‑



"The stern warning intoned earlier in the week by the Chief Justice and his
colleagues taking the St.John's press and radio to task for publicising the
_Valdamanus_ ' case , has a faint tinge of the iron curtain to it. It is
intimidation of the most blatant variety (the shut up‑or‑else type, that is).
After reading the article to which the eminent jurists objected, the finding
them in my opinion quite innocent of anything that might tend to prejudice a
fair trial, I can only assume the admonition was another move in the "jump‑on
­the press" campaign. The next step will be the seizure and shut down of all
the island's papers (except one ) a la Juan Peron."



Walsh, C.J. held that this article amounted to contempt.



In _Rex v. Wiseman,_ (51), allegations were made in writing by a solicitor
that during a previous case certain judges had been guilty of forgery,
fabricating evidence and showing partiality. This was held to be contempt. In
_A.G. v. Re Goodwin,_ (52), in an action for malicious  


# 84



prosecution the respondent was criticised by the trial judge. Thereupon the
respondent wrote to the Attorney‑General and a number of Registrars of the
local district courts, questioning whether the judge was a suitable person to
be a judge, and imputing ulterior motives to him. This was held to be a
contempt.



It is now necessary to consider some of the recent developments in the U.K.
relating to contempt of court. The Phillimore Committee Report 1974 noted that
a change of attitude had quietly taken place in regard to the offence of
scandalising the court and once again a more liberal attitude to such
contempts was in evidence. The Committee said:



"Criticism has become more forthright in recent years especially since the
creation of the National Industrial Relations  Court. Things have been said
and published  about the Court and its President which could undoubtedly have
been made the subject of proceedings for contempt. For example, in one
publication it was stated as a fact that the judge had conferred in private
with one party to proceedings with a view to advising them about the next step
to take. Although this was untrue and a gross contempt, no proceedings were
instituted.



Most attacks of this kind are best ignore They usually come from disappointed
litigants or their friends. To take proceedings respect of them would merely
give them greater publicity and a platform from which the persons concerned
could air their views further. Moreover the climate of opinion nowadays is
more free. Authority including the courts is questioned and scrutinised more
than it used to be. The Lord Chief Justice

**  85**



said in his evidence to us :



'Judges' backs have got to be a good deal broader than they were thought to be
years ago.'



It is no doubt because of this and in pursuance of the spirit of Lord Atkin's
direction that practice has reverted to what it was before the turn of the
century when it was said that ‑



'Courts are satisfied to leave to public opinion, attacks or comments
derogatory or scandalous to them.'



We feel that the time has come to bring the law into line with this practice."



Here we see the oscillation of the law from one extreme to another. For a
period of over 75 years in the recent past, judges have shown a marked
sensitivity to public criticism; but today they are inclined to a more liberal
attitude.



Even the Phillimore Committee did not recommend the doing away of this class
of contempt which was thought at the turn of the century to be obsolete in the
U.K. The Committee recommended that this branch of the law of contempt should
be replaced by a new and strictly defined criminal offence triable on
indictment as in the case of ordinary offences.



In _Regina v. Commissioner of Police, ex parte Blackburn ****_ (53), Quintin
Hogg,, Q.C., M.P., published an article in "Punch" in which he vigorously
criticised the Court of Appeal and incorrectly attributed to the Court of
Appeal decisions which were in fact decisions of the Queen's Bench Division.
He had written inter alia

# 86



_  _

that the Gaming Act was "rendered  virtually unworkable by the unrealistic
contradictory and in the leading case, erroneous decisions of the courts
including the Court of Appeal. "He also ridiculed the court by suggesting that
the court should apologise for the expense and trouble to which the court had
put the police and criticised the strictures passed by the court on lawyers,
__ Parliament, and Police, when the mistakes were on the part of the court
itself. The Court of Appeal in a restrained and dignified Judgement held the,
this does not amount to contempt of court. In fairness to Mr Hogg, it may be
said that the article did not contain, any imputation of __ partiality or
corruption to the court. Probably in less permissive era, this article may
have __ run a grave risk of being on the wrong side of the law Lord Denning
said:



  "It is the right of every man, in Parliament, or out if in the Press or over
the broad-cast to make fair comment, even outspoken comment on matters of
public interest. Those who comment can deal faithfully with all that is done
in a court of justice. They can say that we are mistaken and our decisions
erroneous whether they are subject to appeal or not."



**Lord Salmon** said:



"It follows that no criticism of a judgement, however vigorous can amount to
contempt of _ _ court provided it keeps within the limits reasonable courtesy
and good faith."



Both Mr Choksy and the Attorney‑General relied on the _'Thalidomide cases'_
(54) _._ They arose from campaign conducted by the Times __ Newspaper against
Distillers, the manufacturers of a drug marketed them called Thalidomide,
which resulted in

**_ _**

**87**



producing serious deformities in babies. The campaign was designed to
pressurise Distillers into giving the children, on whose behalf actions had
been instituted, more generous compensation than the suggested terms of
settlement. Times Newspapers had published one such article on which no action
for contempt had been taken. They intended publishing another which was more
detailed and having a direct bearing on the issues involved in the case and
notice of this was given to the Attorney‑General. There had also been general
public discussion of the plight of these children on the radio, T.V., and in a
debate in the House of Commons. One further fact that was considered material
was that those cases had been dragging on for a number of years. The
Attorney‑General of England went into court and obtained an injunction
prohibiting the publication of the proposed article in the Times. On appeal,
the Court of Appeal removed the injunction.



Mr Choksy __ relied on Lord Denning's judgement, where he was of the view that
the law authorised fair comment by the newspapers in a matter of this nature.
It should be noted however that this was not a case of contempt by
scandalising the court; it was a case of contempt by prejudging pending
proceedings. Lord Denning said that in the unique circumstances of a profound
national tragedy, it was in the public interest that those issues should be
publicly discussed. It was also found that the Only extant legal proceedings
had been dormant for years and the injunctions were themselves a move towards
achieving a settlement. In those circumstances the court held that the law of
contempt which restrained comment on matters subjudice did not apply. Denning,
C.J., said:



".....in my opinion the public interest in having it discussed outweighs the
prejudice which might thereby be occasioned to a party



# 88



to a dispute. At any rate, the High Court of Parliament has allowed it to be
discussed. why should not we in these Courts also permit. There is no possible
reason why Parliament shall permit it and we refuse it."



In the case of contempt of court by prejudicing pending proceedings,
considerations other than those relevant in the case of contempt by
scandalising the court come into play .The stress in the Court of Appeal
judgments is on the possible harm that may be done to the private interests of
the parties as against the public interest in the freedom of the public to be
informed of these matters. This is also made clear in an earlier passage where
Denning, L. J., says‑..



"....it must always be remembered that besides the interest of the parties in
a fair trial or a fair settlement of the case their is another important
interest to considered. It is the interest of the public in matters of
national concern and the freedom of the press to make fair comment on such
matters. The one interest must be balanced against the other., There may be
cases where the subject matter is such that the public interest counter
balances private interest of the parties. In such ca the public interest
prevails. Fair comment to be allowed.



On the other hand, when we consider the cases contempt of court by
scandalising the court reason of a newspaper publication, both the co; ting
interests are of a public nature.



There had been a debate in Parliament, mainly on the moral liability of the
Distillers. Lord Justice Denning in this context refers to Parliament as the
High Court of Parliament. Mr Nadesan submitted that expression could not be
used with reference to

**89**



the Parliament of this country and to that extent, this case could have no
application to our case. Be that as it may, the Attorney‑General relied on the
following passage from Denning, L. J's judgement it, support of his
submissions :‑



"It is desirable that the convention of Parliament as to matters of subjudice
should so far as possible be the same as the law administered in the courts.
The object of such is the same‑to prevent prejudice to pending litigation and
the parties to it ‑ and the rules for achieving it should be the same, and for
this very good reason: as soon as matters are discussed in Parliament they can
be and are reported at  large in the newspapers. The publication in the
newspapers is protected by law. Whatever comments are made in Parliament they
can be reported in the newspapers without any fear of action for libel or
proceedings for contempt of court. If it is no contempt for a newspaper to
publish the comments made in Parliament, it should be no contempt to publish
the selfsame comments made outside Parliament."



The import of this passage is that a newspaper commits no libel or a contempt
of court by publishing the comments made in Parliament, meaning the spoken
debates. As I have shown earlier, there is a distinction between the
publication of the spoken debate and the publication of parliamentary papers.
The two are governed by different provisions of law. Strictly speaking, this
case would not accordingly apply to a case of the publication of a
parliamentary paper as in the present case.



Apart from that, Denning, L.J' s statement was clearly obiter and can also be
distinguished on more substantial grounds. Leaving aside contempt for the
Moment, let us see whether his statement that a

# 90



person does not commit a libel by the publication of a parliamentary debate is
a correct statement of law. This statement is undoubtedly too general and
unprecise and does not‑reflect the correct legal position with any accuracy. I
have already set out the passages in Erskine May and Gatley which show that a
newspaper publisher enjoys only a qualified privilege in this regard and a
publication which is not for the public benefit or which is accompanied by
malice would render the publisher liable for libel. There are also many other
limitations on this privilege to which reference has already been made.
Denning, L.J., makes no references to those; so his obiter has to be accepted
if at all with reservations.



On the other hand we find Scarman, L.J's expression of opinion reflecting more
accurately the real state of the Law:



"It is clear that the House was not inhibited from discussing the sort of
questions that 'The Sunday Times' would raise in the article if published. It
is also clear that the Commons took the view that their debate did not
transgress their own subjudice rule. The Courts, subject only to the
legislative power of Parliament, determine what constitutes contempt of court
and have a discretion as to remedy and punishment."



In fact, the above goes directly against the argument the Attorney‑General has
submitted to us.



The following observations of P.M. Leopold this matter in her "Freedom of
Speech in Parliament" are again relevant. She says at 45:

  
"Since court reports are privileged because of the superior benefit of
publicity, there

**91**



are certain restrictions on Such publications. Cockburn C.J. ( _Wason v.
Walter ****_ (supra)), expressly stated that the restrictions which applied to
the reportingof court proceedings should also apply to the reporting of
parliamentary proceedings. This means garbled or partial reports will not been
titled to claim qualified privilege, nor **** will **** those which are
blasphemous, seditious, amounting to a contempt of court or otherwise
prohibited by law. The only suggestion to the contrary is an obiter dictum by
Lord Denning, M.R., in _A.G. v. Times Newspapers Ltd.., ****_ (supra), where
he suggests that newspaper accounts of parliamentary proceedings have a
greater protection than that indicated above. The case concerned contempt of
court and Lord Denning suggested that whatever comments are made in
Parliament, they can be repeated in the newspapers without any fear of an
action for libel or proceedings for contempt of court. The other members of
the Court of Appeal did not comment on this matter nor did any member of the
House of Lords when it later considered, the case. It is submitted that Lord
Denning's remarks do not alter the legal position."



The author says in footnote 72 on page 46 with reference to Lord Denning's
dictum:



"The only mention of the matter was a passing reference by the
Attorney‑General in his address to the House of Lords where he stated(at p.
280) the fact that what was said in Parliament about Distillers was widely
reported does not mean that there is no check on what may be published of them
outside."

#  
92



The subsequent‑developments arising from this case are interesting and were
brought to our notice, by counsel. There was an appeal to the House of Lords
from this decision and the House allowed the appeal. The House held that it
was a contempt of court to publish an article expressing an opinion on the
merits of a specific issue which was for determination by the court in
circumstances such that the article gave rise to a real risk that it will
prejudice a fair trial. Regarding the citizens' right to a discussion of
public matter in relation to contempt of court, Lord Reid putting the matter
in a broader framework than the Court of Appeal said:



"The law on this subject must    be founded entirely on public policy. It is
not there to protect the private rights of parties to a litigation or
prosecution. It is there to prevent interference with the administration of
justice and it should in my judgement be limited to what is reasonably
necessary. For that purpose public policy generally requires a balancing of
interests which may conflict. Freedom of speech should not  be limited to any
greater extent than is   necessary but it cannot be allowed where there would
be real prejudice to the administration of justice."  
  
In the view of the Court of Appeal, the two interests involved were a public
interest as against a private interest. The House of Lords however decided the
case on the basis of two competing public interests though of two different
kinds . It would also be noted that once the broarder concept of public
interest entered into the picture in the house of Lords the decision of the
court of Appeal had necessarily to be reserved.

**93**

**_ _**

**_  _**In a later passage appearing at page 81, Lord­ Simon made it quite
clear that the paramount public interest is that the legal proceedings should
progress without interference. Then Lord Simon goes on to say:



  "But once the proceedings are concluded, the remit is withdrawn and the
balance of public interest shifts. It is true that the pan holding the
administration of justice is not entirely cleared. The Judge must go on to try
other cases, so the court must not be scandalised. Further, jurors must be
empanelled, so the departing jurors must not be threatened .Witnesses in
future cases must be able, to give honest and fearless testimony, so witnesses
in past cases must not be victimised. But these things conceded, the paramount
interest of the public view is that it should be fully apprised of what has
happened (even being informed if appropriate, of relevant evidence that could
lawfully not be adduced at the trial) and hear unhampered debate on whether
the law procedure and institutions which it had ordering have operated
satisfactorily or call for its modification."



  This passage also helps to dispose of another point raised by Mr. Choksy and
also referred to in the texts, namely that a case can be given over to Public
comment once the trial is over.   The In the view of the Court of Appeal, The
Principle is __ subject to the exception of Scandalising the court and in the
present case we have not a discussion of the case but the attribution of
impartiality and corruption to the judges who heard the case. It is also quit
clear that in a case of contempt by scandalising the court, on a balancing of
a two public interests involved, the public interest in the due administration
of justice must be conceded to be prior to the other public interest.



# 94

Then, as regards the references to the Debates in Parliament in the judgements
of the Court of Appeal, and sought to be made much of by counsel, I find that
they too add up to nothing. There is singularly little reference made to them
in the House of Lords that can be considered worth wile. In fact Lord Reid
said:



"Some reference was made to the debate in the House of Commons. It was not
extensively referred to in argument. But so far as I have noticed there was
little said in the House which could not have been said outside, if my view of
the law is right."



The only other reference I could find to this debate was in the opinion of
Lord Cross, who said:



"The discussion in Parliament in which much stress is laid on the judgements
in the Court of Appeal concentrated so far as I can see almost entirely on the
moral obligations of Distillers. There is therefore no need to consider
whether, if members of Parliament ­had taken it on themselves to discuss the
legal issues in the case, that fact ought to have affected the attitude of the
courts to similar discussion in the press."



As far as U.K. decisions are concerned, this pronouncement of the House of
Lords _is_ the highest authority and binding on English courts. Whichever way
the matter is looked at,. the _Thalidomide_ _case_ (supra) does not in the end
support either the contention of Mr Choksy or the Attorney-General.



Mr Choksy also brought to our notice two further developments regarding this
case. The Times Newspaper took the matter to the European Court of

**  
95**

  
Human Rights claiming __ that __ the House of Lords' __ judgement __ amounted
to a violation of certain provisions of the European Convention on Human
Rights, which were binding on the __ U.K. Government. In the meantime the
Phillimore Committee Report to which particular reference has been made by the
European Court was published. The report discussed the various judgements in
the House of Lords and was critical of the prejudging test laid down by the
House of Lords. The Committee recommended a different testbasedon the formula
adopted by the Court of Appeal( Phillimore, L.J.., was himself one of the
judges who gave the Court of Appeal judgement), namely whether the words
complained of created a serious risk that the course of justice may be
interfered with.



The European Court, split 11 ‑ 9, held that the restriction imposed on the
Sunday Times by the House of Lords was not necessary, in a democratic society
for maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary. The decision
turns on an interpretation of Article 10 (1) and (2) of the European
Convention on Human Rights. Though Article 10 bears superficial resemblance to
Articles 14 and 15 of our Constitution, they differ __ a great deal when
closely examined in their appropriate contexts, The majority and minority
differed as to the extent to which it was proper for the European Court to
review a decision of the national courts. Hitherto the law and practice of the
European Court had been to refrain ‑ from interference with the decision of a
national court an a question affecting the fundamental freedoms, leaving to
such local court "a margin of appreciation". In this case however, the
majority distinguished between a restriction of a domestic court decision,
protecting morals where a wide margin of appreciation was allowed and a
re­striction designed to maintain the interest of and impartiality of the
judiciary where the "margin of appreciation" should be narrower. They admitted

#  
96

  
That their approach could not be same as that of the House of Lords which
sought to maintain a freedom of speech and the due balance between freedom of
speech and the due administration of justice, but had to be of a tribunal
interpreting an international convention which laid down a general right of
freedom of speech, subject to a    number of exceptions which must be narrowly
interpreted. In this process of interpretation the European Court placed the
greatest emphasis on the words "as are prescribed by law and are necessary in
a democratic society," in Article 10 (2). The Court held that the word
"necessary" in this Article implied the existence of a "pressing social need"
and accordingly held that the injunction imposed on the Sunday Times was not
such a "pressing social need" and not proportionate to the legitimate aim
pursued. This approach of the European Court is radically different from the
way the English Courts have looked at the matter.



There was a further sequel to this judgement of the European Court. In the
U.K., statutory provision was made by the Contempt of Court Act 1981, both to
give effect to the Phillimore Committee recommendations and to try and make
the law in England conform to these developments. The courts too in a
subsequent decision, _Attorney General v. B.B.C.,_ (55) _,_ have taken note of
the, international obligations undertaken by the U. K Government and the need
to give effect to them as far as possible. Thus, Lord Scarman said:



  "I do not doubt that, in considering how far we should extend the
application of contempt of court, we must bear in mind the impact of whatever
decision we may be minded to make on the international obligations assumed by
the united kingdom under the European convention. If the issue should
ultimately be....a question of legal policy, we must have regard to the
country's obligations to observe the

**  
97**

European Convention as interpreted by the European court of Human Rights
.......... ".



  The Court however pointed out that the European Court would necessarily have
to approach such matters, differently from an English Court, having regard to
the provisions of the Convention. The European Court would not be concerned
with deciding an issue between two conflicting, interests, but would be
applying a single principle, freedom of speech, subject to a number of
exceptions which must be variously interpreted. It is therefore inevitable
that the decisions of the U.K. courts and the European courts would differ and
will not be the same. It this later case has any bearing on the present case,
it is to show that as a decision of the highest domestic court in the U.K.,
the House of Lords' decision in the _Times case_ must remain as the final
pronouncement on the subject.



We have seen the different views expressed by the English courts at different
times. The present liberal views prevailing there no doubt reflect the state
of the permissive and open society that is now prevalent in the West. We on
the other hand fortunately or unfortunately depending on how one looks at it
are still wedded to conservative and traditional values. To that extent there
would be different approaches to this problem between us and the U.K. But
except for a few isolated instances, even in the U.K., an attack on the core
of the judicial process, namely the honesty and impartiality of the judiciary,
has always been held to be a contempt. We have seen that the Phillimore
Committee, in spite of the prevailing liberal attitudes in the U.K.,
recommended the retention of Contempt in respect of scandalising the court,
and only suggested that it be made an indictable offence.

# 98



However, in an Australian case, _Nicholls_ (56) _,   _Griffiths, C.J., said:



"I am not prepared to accede to the proposition that an imputation of
partiality is necessarily a contempt of. On the contrary, I think that if any
judge of this court or of any other court were to make  a public utterance of
such a character, as to be likely to impair the confidence of the public or of
suitors or any class of suitors in the impartiality of the court, in any,
matter likely to be before it, any public comment on such utterance, if it
were fair-comment, would, so far from being a contempt of court, be for the
public benefit and would be entitled to similar protection to that which
comment upon matters of public interest is entitled under the law of libel."

  

This is undoubtedly in the nature of an exception and could be justified in
cases where the judge by his own conduct ‑ of which there should be no
dispute, it being apparent ‑ impairs public confidence in the administration
of justice, In this case it was the judge himself who made a public statement
compromising the judiciary. In such rare cases it is understandable that the
court should allow fair comment on such self evident and proven misconduct.



Turning, to the legal position in this country, we find that our courts have
been enabled, to adopt a more conservative attitude than that prevailing in
the U.K. It will be recalled that in _Mc Leod's case_ (Supra), Lord Morris
expressed the view that, while the offence of contempt by scandalising the
court had become obsolete in the U.K., in the colonies the enforcement of
committal

**99**



for contempt for attacks on the court was absolutely necessary to preserve in
such community the dignity of and respect for the court.



The distinction Lord Morris drew between the U.K. and "small colonies
consisting principally of coloured populations" is couched in the language of
a bygone age, but the distinction he drew could be supported on more
reasonable grounds. It would appear that Lord Morris' statement was not a
stray statement made in passing, but one that had been made after due
deliberation. In _Anbard **** v. **** The_ _Attorney General of Trinidad and
Tobago_ ,(57), **** Lord Atkin in his classic judgement quoted those words of
Lord Morris and added:



"And that in applying the law the Board will not lose sight of local
conditions is made clear in the judgement in _Mc Leod v. St_. Aubyn."(41)



As late as 1943 in _Debi Prasad v. King Emperor_ Lord Atkin had occasion to
revert to this matter once again. He said



"In 1899 the Board pronounced proceedings, for this species of contempt to be
obsolete in this country though surviving in other parts of the Empire."



The British colonial empire was a far flung one stretching East and West,
North and South. It embraced a variety of peoples and races and religions,
each with its own social and cultural traditions. The application of a uniform
law to suit the widely different local conditions was not practicable. We must
particularly guard ourselves against the temptation of the indiscriminate use
of decisions of Western countries which have their own

#  
100

  
social milieu and reflect the permissive values of their societies as a
substitute for our own thinking. In fact, even the case law from some of the
dominions show that they have been as eager as we have been to preserve this
branch of the law of contempt in its vigor, notwithstanding the doubts
entertained on the matter in the U.K. One of the earliest cases found in our
law reports dealing with this type of contempt is the Rule is the Rule on
_P.A. Capper_ (59). In this case the Supreme Court held that an article by a
newspaper editor making derogatory references to the members of the jury in a
criminal trial was calculated to insult the jury and scandalise the court..
The article in    question written in sarcastic vein set out the views of the
"Sapient Jury" and suggested that their _"_ names should be struck off the
English speaking list - were such a course feasible ‑ as being incompetent to
try a person who may claim them at his 'peers.'"



In the matter of a Rule on _Armand de souza,_ (60), the Supreme Court held
that the deliberate and wilful publication in a newspaper of false and
fabricated material concerning a trial calculated to hold the court or the
judge to odium or ridicule amounts to a contempt of court. In another case
concerning the same respondent, _Armand de Souza_ (61) the respondent as the
Editor of the Ceylon Morning Leader, had written that the police Magistrate,
Nuwara Eliya, was partial to the police view and is often open to assistance
or suggestion from the police and that they would not receive "this tremendous
advantage" but for the fact that he improperly conducts part of his business
in chambers. The respondent also alleged that the magistrate defers far too
much to planters and that his mind is very difficult of access to conviction
hostile to the interests of a European planter. The court held that evidence
to prove the truth of the allegations of fact and truth of his own
interpretation of his language was irrelevant.

**101**



The court held that the law of contempt by scandalising the court was still in
force in Ceylon. Wood, Renton, C.J., after referring to the English cases
said:



"There is, as I have said, no kind of doubt as to the right of any member of
the public to criticise, and to criticise strongly, judicial decisions or
judicial work, and to bring to  the notice of the proper authorities any
charge whatever of alleged misconduct on the  part of the Judge. But it is a
very different matter to claim that irresponsible persons,  upon ex parte
statements, are to be at liberty to invite themselves into __ the judgement
seat, and to scatter broadcast imputations such as those with which we have
here to do. The law of contempt, as has often been pointed out both in England
and in this   Colony, exists in the interests, not of the Judges, but of the
community. The Supreme  Court would be false to its duty if it permitted
attacks of this kind to go unpunished."



In another case, the _Rule, on Hulugalle_ (62) _,_ the respondent who was the
Editor of the Ceylon Daily News was charged with contempt in respect of
certain passages appearing in a leading article headed "Justice on Holiday".
The court held that the article imputed a serious breach of duty to the judges
of the Supreme Court in taking an unauthorised holiday during August for the
purpose of attending a race meeting ‑ whereas in fact the August vacation was
authorised by statute and contained a further imputation of dishonesty to the
judges in attributing the arrears of work to lack of staff when it was really
due to their addiction to sport instead of conscientious devotion to duty. The
court held that this was a serious contempt, but added:

# 102  


"It would be thoroughly undesirable that the press should be inhibited from
criticising  honestly and in good faith the administration of justice as
freely as any other institution. But it is equally undesirable that such
criticism should be unbounded......"



  In _Veerasamy v. Stewart,_ (63)   the editor of a newspaper published
editorials, letters and report of a speech pending a non‑summary inquiry of
such a character as to create an atmosphere of prejudice against the accused.
It was held that this amounted to contempt of court, and that it was not
essential to establish that the respondents intended to pre­-judice the fair
trial of the petitioner.



In _Perera **** v. the_ _King,_ (64) _,_ the appellant who was a member of
Parliament, as was customary, paid a visit to the Remand Prisons, Colombo. A
complaint made to him, that some prisoners had not been present in court when
their appeals had been heard, was recorded by him in the prison visitor's
book. The material portion of the entry was:

  

"...The present practice of appeals of remand prisoners being heard in their
absence is not healthy. When represented by Counsel or. otherwise the prisoner
should be present at proceedings ........"



  The practice referred to was a practice that had originated in an order of a
previous Chief justice relating to unstamped petitions which were dealt in
chambers by a single judge of the Supreme Court. it did not involve a
differentiation between prisoners who were and who were not defended, nor did
it involve a hearing. The complaint made to the  


**103  
 **

appellant was made on a misapprehension **** of the correct position, which
was not known **** to the appellant. A rule was issued on him and he was
con­victed by the Supreme Court. **** In appeal to the Privy Council, Their
Lordships held that the con­viction cannot be sustained. They said:

  

"They have given the matter the anxious **** scrutiny that is due to any
suggestion that something has been done which might impede the due
administration of justice in Ceylon. And it is proper that the Courts there
should be vigilant to correct any ‑misapprehension in the public that would
lead to the belief that accused persons or prisoners are denied a right that
ought to be theirs. But Mr. Perera too has rights that must be respected, and
Their Lordships are unable to find anything in. his conduct that comes within
the definition of Contempt of Court. That phrase has not lacked authoritative
interpretations. There must be involved some act done or writing published
calculated to bring a Court or a judge of the Court into contempt or to lower
his authority or something 'calculated to obstruct or interfere with the due
course of justice or the lawful process of the Courts': see _Reg. **** v.
Gray_, (supra).



What has been done here is not at all that kind of thing. Mr. Perera was
acting in good  faith and in discharge of what he believed to be his duty as a
member of the Legislature. His information was inaccurate, but he made no
public use of it, contenting himself with entering his comment in the
appropriate instrument, the Visitors' Book, and writing to the responsible
Minister. The words that he used made no direct reference to the Court, or to
any judge of the Court, or indeed to the course of justice, or to the process
of the  


# 104

  
Courts. What he thought that he was protesting against was a prison
regulation, and it was not until some time later that he learnt that, in so
far as a petitioner had his petition dealt with in his absence, it was the
procedure of the Court, not the rules of the prison authorities, that brought
this about. Finally, his criticism was honest criticism on a matter of public
importance. When these an no other are the circumstances that attended the
action complained of, there cannot be Contempt of Court.."



In the case of in _re Wickramasinghe_ , (65),  the respondent who in the
course of a speech at a public meeting criticised the judiciary in such a
manner that no person who may have been persuaded by his speech could continue
to have confidence in the jury was held to have committed a contempt of court.



In _Vidyasagara v._ _The Queen., ****_ (66), the respondent, an advocate
appearing for a union before the Industrial Court, read out the following
statement from a typewritten document:‑



  " ............ In the circumstances, the Union having felt that this court
by its order had indicated that an impartial inquiry could not be had before
it, has appealed to the Minister to intervene in the matter. The Union is
therefore compelled to withdraw from these proceedings and will not consider
itself bound by any Order made ex parte which  the Union submits would be
contrary to the letter and spirit   of the Industrial Disputes Act
..........."



Section 40A(l) of the Industrial Disputes Act states that a person who without
reason publishes



**105**

  
any statement or does any‑ act that brings the Industrial Court into disrepute
during the progress or after the conclusion of an inquiry, commits an offence
of contempt against or in disrespect of such Court.



The Privy Council held that the allegation of partiality was an imputation of
prejudice to the court, which was contempt. It was also argued that it would
not be contempt for a counsel to allege partiality of a court as this would
restrict unduly, counsel's arguments on a hearing in certiorari proceedings.
The Privy Council said that "different considerations apply when an attack is
made in a court of review on the impartiality of a lower court. It may be
necessary in certain cases for counsel in compliance with his duty to his
client to allege partiality of the lower court."



Another case strongly **** relied on by the respondents was the Privy Council
decision in _Perera vs. Pieris,_ (67). This was an action for defamation and
did not deal with contempt of court. The defendant who was the printer and
owner of the newspaper had published an extract from the published report of a
Commissioner appointed under statutory powers to inquire into allegations of
bribery against members of the Legislature. The plaintiff alleged that this
was defamatory of him. The Commissioner had sent the Report to the Governor
who had it printed as a Seasonal Paper. It was released to the public
simultaneously with a Gazette Extraordinary which published the text of a Bill
enabling the State Council to expel a member for accepting a bribe. In
accordance with the prevailing practice the Press was sent a copy free of
charge. Practically the whole of the Report was published in the newspapers.



Their Lordships did not enter into an inquiry as to whether the proceedings
before the Commissioner was

#  
106



a judicial or quasi‑judicial proceeding or parliamentary proceeding as
contended for by the defendant. It therefore deals with a situation which is
sui generis. The Privy Council sought t abstract from the defence of privilege
which was defence to an action for defamation, its wide underlying principle.
This Their Lordships found was the "Common convenience  and welfare of
society", or it the general interest of society" or the "balance of public
benefit from publicity".



In the Roman‑Dutch law which was applicable, _anmimus   injurandi ****_ was **
__** an essential. element of the delict of defamation. If a publication can
be shown to be made in the public interest, it would be privileged and this
would be sufficient to rebut _animus Injurandi **.**_ In __ the case of the
publication o judicial and parliamentary proceedings, the court will, having
regard to the nature of the activities of those two institutions, treat the
publication "as conclusively establishing that the public interest is
forwarded". But this statement should be understood in that context, namely of
publication amounting to a libel. As shown earlier this case along with _Wason
v. Walter_ **** (1) and other cases relating to libel stand in __ a class
apart from cases of contempt of court.



It is clear that the Privy Council was dealing here with the defence of public
interest available in an action for defamation to rebut _animus injurandi_. It
was not even dealing as such with the problem of balancing a private interest,
against a public interest much lesss with the balancing of two public
interests which arise cases of contempt. It is also not clear from the
language whether their Lordships were thinking the reporting of Parliamentary
debates, meaning the spoken debate as against the publication of Parliamentary
papers which, as I have shown, would be governed by a different set of
principles.

**107**



Coming back to the case before us, it would be seen not only from the local
cases but also those from other jurisdictions that the allegations contained
in the publication constitute a contempt of court. Even judges with the most
liberal views have not countenanced allegations of partiality and dishonesty
against judges. I have no difficulty whatsoever in coming to the conclusion **
__** that the respondents by their publication had committed a contempt of
court.



I should not conclude without referring to certain additional factual matters
which Mr. Choksy brought to our notice in his reply. The first concerns an
earlier motion in Parliament reflecting indirectly on the conduct of a judge
which had been published by a newspaper, but no action had been taken on it.
The second referred to the report of a speech made by the Chief Justice to the
Bar Association where he advocated an increase in the salaries of the Judges
and said that under the present salary structure, corruption was beginning to
infiltrate into the judiciary. It was generally known that the services of one
or two minor court judges had been terminated on suspicion of __ corruption.



  Assuming that the publication of that motion or report of the speech to the
Bar Association could be regarded as constituting a contempt of court ‑ and
this is debatable ‑ no conclusion could be drawn from the fact that there had
been inaction On the part of authorities or the courts on those two occasions.
Both in the U.K. and even here, there have been occasions when, for some
reason or Other, matters in which action could or should have been taken have
not been pursued. For example, the Phillimore Committee mentioned that things
have been said and published about the National Industrial Relations Court
which clearly amounted to contempt, but no action was instituted in those

# 108



cases. Shetreet in his work "Judges on Trial" gives numerous instances where
judges __ and the judiciary have found themselves helpless in the face of
adverse circumstances. The state of public opinion widely prevalent is
undoubtedly a relevant factor in deciding as to whether or __ not a court take
action for behaviour suggesting a contempt of court, for Miller in his work
"Contempt of Court" has apply observed :



"Comment may well be named as relatively innocuous in one jurisdiction and as
scandalising the court in another. Equally within the same jurisdiction, it
may be seen as likely to destroy confidence in the courts at one period of
history and as unworthy of attention at another, By the same token a different
response may well be warranted according to whether the comment relates to a
contemporary case or to a case beginning to recede into history."



Although the Constitution does not specifically refer to the Press, the
provisions fundamental right of speech and expression to every Citizen are
adequate to ensure the freedom of the Press in this country. The Press of
course does not have any special privilege and it enjoys no greater rights
than any member of the public. This does not mean that we wish to devalue and
minimise the importance of the Press and the great service it performs in our
society. The fourth estate is now considered essential for the proper
functioning of democracy which is founded on the premise that an informed
public will have the right of unfettered discussion of the affairs of
government to enable them to come to correct **** decisions. Hence two
elements are involved, the freedom to express one's view and its corollary,
the right to receive information, for public debate

**109**



cannot take place without one being properly informed. No private citizen
today can for this purpose garner all‑ the news and information by himself.
The Press fills this need and comes to the assistance of the public and
constitutes one of the principal vehicles for this purpose. The public no
doubt owes a great debt to the media for this service.



While we greatly appreciate and value the role of the Press for its
contribution to the existence of an open society and are prepared to allow as
much latitude as is reasonably necessary for the performance of that service,
the courts however are compelled to sit up and take note when the acts of the
Press go beyond accepted bounds. Fortunately such instances are infrequent,
more rare are cases where the offence is committed calculatedly and with
deliberation. Such is not the case here.



Our courts derive their authority from the Constitution which our People have
adopted and given unto themselves. That authority is a sacred one and held in
trust for the welfare and security of the People. The power we judges are
called upon to exercise is nothing less than that part of the Sovereignty of
the People which had been delegated to the courts as their chosen instrument
for this purpose. Contempt against the judiciary is therefore an insult
offered to the authority of the  People and their Constitution. The law of
contempt does not exist for the personal benefit of the Judges. As Lord
Denning said, let me say at once that we will never use this jurisdictions as
a means to uphold our own dignity. It is therefore the duty of the courts to
come to the defence of the constitution and uphold the dignity of the courts
whenever an affront has been offered to them.



Chief Justice Hidayatullah in his judgement in

# 110

_  
Cooper v. Union of India.,_(68) has expressed in memorable words what is
broadly the attitude of the courts in these matters:



"There is no doubt that the Court like any other institution does not enjoy
immunity from their criticism. This Court does not claim to be always right
although it does not spare any effort to be right according to the best of __
the ability, __ knowledge and judgement of the judges. They do not think
themselves in possession of all truth or hold that wherever others differ from
them, it is so far error. No one is, more conscious of his limitations and
fallibility than a judge but because of his training and the assistance he
**** gets **** from learned counsel **** he is apt to avoid mistakes more than
**** others ......... We are constrained __ to say also that while fair and
temperate criticism of this Court or any other Court even if strong, may not
be actionable, attributing improper motives, or tending to bring judges or
courts in to hatred and contempt or obstructing directly or __ indirectly with
the functioning of Courts is serious contempt of which notice must and will be
taken. Respect is expected not only from those to whom the judgement of the
court is acceptable but also from those to whom it is repugnant. Those who err
in their criticism by indulging in vilification of the institution of courts,
administration of justice and the instruments through which the administration
acts, should take heed for they will act at their own peril. We think this
will be enough caution to persons embarking on the path of criticism."

  

While I hold that the respondents are guilty of a contempt of court, I am
Prepared to accept their statement that they did not have a deliberate

**111**



intention of interfering with the administration of justice , though their
publication has that effect. In meting punishment we have to consider the
totality of the circumstances relating to this matter. The fact that a
parliamentary motion impliedly reflecting on the conduct of a Judge had
previously been published without attracting thereto the laws of contempt of
court and the uncertainty of the 'Legal position in view of the recent
constitutional changes, which may have misled even the legal advisers, are
mitigating factors which will take into consideration. It is therefore
possible for a merciful view to be taken of the conduct of the respondents.
But, having regard to the proposed order of the majority, it is unnecessary to
pursue the question of punishment any further.



This court, by its majority decision, therefore, confirms the Rule issued on
the respondents but, in view of the mitigatory circumstances, imposes no
punishment. They are accordingly discharged.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.**



In this case, a Rule was issued by this Court after a perusal of the petition
and affidavit filed by the petitioner and after hearing Mr. S. Nadesan Q.C.,
who appeared for him. The petitioner alleged that the 1st respondent was the
Editor of the " Daily News" of which the 2nd respondent was the owner, printer
and publisher. The petitioner averred that in the issue of "Daily News" of the
7th of March 1983 there appeared a news item prominently displayed the heading
"Select Committee Probe of  Mr. K.C.E. de Alwis representa­tions". He alleged
that the news item taken as a whole and in its parts seek to cast a doubts on
the impartiality and integrity of the Judges of the supreme court and thus to
weaken

**112**

  
public confidence in the administration of justice and that this publication
scandalised the Judges of the Supreme Court and was calculated to lower the
prestige of the Court.



This petition was filed on. the 14th March, 1983 but no reference was made to
the fact that this news item actually reproduced a motion which had been
printed on 5th March, 1983 by Parliament to be on the Order Paper of the 8th
of March, 1983. This fact was not disclosed to the court and there was subtle
attempt by the petitioner to impute a motive, for the publication by the 1st
respondent pleading that the 1st respondent was a nephew Mr. K.C.E. de Alwis,
a former Judge of the ** __** Court Appeal and a member of the Special
Presidential Commission.



On the material placed before this Court a on the submissions made by Counsel
for U petitioner there appeared to be a prima facie contempt and this Court
issued a Rule.



The respondents appeared in Court a pleaded not guilty to the charge, The 1st
respondent filed a comprehensive affidavit setting out the facts antecedent to
the publication of the news item and setting out his defence. He specifically
denied that by the publication intended the result alleged by the petitioner.
The 2nd respondent filed several documents to prove that several other
newspapers had published the same news item on the 7th March,1983 as a matter
of public interest and relied on the defence pleaded by the 1st respondent.



At the hearing of this matter after the Rule was served, Mr. Nadesan, Q.C.,
specifically stated that he was not relying on the allegation made the
petitioner about the alleged relationship of the 1st respondent to Mr. K.C.E.
de Alwis

**113**



apologised for this irrelevant averment finding a place in the petition and
affidavit of his client, the petitioner. He categorically stated that no
malice was alleged or relied on by the petitioner.



The contention of the respondents was that the news item published was a
factual and correct reproduction of the contents of the Order Paper of
Parliament which was to be set down for consideration under the heading
"Public Business" for the 8th March, 1983.



The contention on behalf of the petitioner at the hearing was that the
contents of the motion as appearing in the copy of the Order Paper to be
included in the business for the 8th March, 1983 constituted a contempt of the
Supreme Court and its Judges solely because the matters to be probed as stated
in the Order Paper related to the Supreme Court and referred to the conduct of
two of its Judges.



I propose to deal first with the affidavit of the 1st respondent and the
documents annexed to the affidavit. In the affidavit the 1st respondent refers
to the fact that by warrant dated 29th July, 1978 His Excellency the President
had established a Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry comprising
Justice J.G.T. Weeraratne, Justice S. Sharvananda and Justice K.C.E.de Alwis
and that the Commission had been functioning since that date and that
Parliament had acted on the reports made by the Commission from time to time.
In July 1982, Felix Dias Bandaranaike, a person against whom the Commission
had made an adverse finding petitioned the Supreme Court for a Writ of Quo
Warranto and prohibition against Mr. de Alwis. The appointment and ** __** the
proceedings of the Special Presidential Commission had been given due
publicity in the press and other media. The allegations made by Felix Dias
Bandaranaike were given much publicity in the Press. The document

# 114



RI(l) was produced as this news item dated 10th July, 1982. Every single step
taken in the Supreme Court in connection with "his application was given full
coverage by the news media as is evidenced by July 1982 up to the documents
R1(2) to R1(51) from july 1982 up to the 29th October, 1982\. The contents of
each separate judgement of the three Judges too were published and the
majority of the two judges directed that the Writ of Quo Warranto do issue.
However, Mr. de Alwis still continued as a member of the Special Presidential
Commission as His Excellency had not removed him. Mr. de Alwis as a member of
the Commission, thereafter appears to have made certain representations to His
Excellency President under whose warrant he was still a member.



This fact and also the fact that various steps were being contemplated to
investigate these., representations were also given considerable publicity in
the Press. The documents R1(52) to R1(58), being news items from. 29th
December, 1982 to the 6th March, 1983 show that the Press had informed the
public of all these developments and that the Sri Lanka Bar Association too
had got itself interested. There could be no doubt that the People were
interested in all these matters and were entitled to know the out come of them
all.



It was in the background of this publicity that the news items in the "Sun"
paper and the "Daily News" paper of the 3rd March, 1983 announced details of
Cabinet Decisions and intimated to the public that the Cabinet had decided on
2nd March, 1983 to appoint a Select Committee of Parliament to inquire into
the representations made by Mr. de Alwis. Parliament thereafter proceeded to
prepare the questions to be probed by the Select Committee to be appointed.
The draft motions and the specific questions that were to be raised were
formulated a the Office of the Leader of the House of Parliament

**115**

  
and communicated to the Secretary General of Parliament before the impugned
news item appeared. In support of their contention the respondents produced a
letter dated 4th March, 1983, R1(2) signed by the Secretary of the Leader of
the House of Parliament addressed to the Secretary General of Parliament to
which was attached the draft of the motion under the name of the Minister of
Justice. This motion had then been forwarded to the Government Printer to be
included in the printed Order Paper for the 8th March 1983\. The Order Paper
so printed had been sent in due course to the Delivery Section of the Central
Mail Exchange (IR5) by the Secretary General of Parliament and according to
(IR6) the printed copies of the Order Paper for the 8th March 1983 had been
delivered to Members of Parliament and the news media including the "Daily
News" on the 5th March, 1983. There can be no doubt that the publication of
this Order Paper was not specifically prohibited or specifically authorised by
Parliament but rather Parliament had in  the Ordinary course of business
provided special facilities to the news media to see that they received Order
Papers of Parliament well in advance of the date on, which matters in the
Order Paper were actually taken up for the purpose of giving information to
the reading public. The Order Paper forms part of the parliamentary
proceedings referable to Parliament and not attributable to any one outside
Parliament.



The preamble to the motion reads as follows:‑



"Whereas Mr. K.C.E. de Alwis former Judge of the Court of Appeal and a member
of the Special Presidential Commission has made representa­tions to His
Excellency the President of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
regarding the conduct of the proceedings relating to application No. 1 of 1982
and other matters relating thereto, this Parlia­ment is of opinion that a
Select Committee be

# 116



appointed to inquire and report to Parliament etc. on the various matters
enumerated under items (a) to (f).



Thus it is clear that the respondents were not made aware of the specific
representations, made by Mr. Alwis and that the respondents did not purport to
publish such representations. It had been established in these proceedings
that the Cabinet of Ministers had on 2nd March, 1983 decided committee of
Parliament (R1(54)) to inquire into the said representations and Parliament
thereafter proceeded to formulate the questions to be probed. The motion and
the specific questions to be probed were formulated At the office of the
Leader of the House of Parliament and communicated to the secretary  General
of Parliament. This was the starting Point of the parliamentary process by
which the matter ultimately reached Parliament for consideration and debate.
The standing orders of Parliament were produced by the respondents in Court.
According to Standing Order 9 (4) the preparation of the Order Book showing
the business of a particular day is one of the duties of the Secretary
General, Standing order 78 provided as follows:‑



"78\. The conduct of the President or acting President members of Parliament,
Judges or other persons engaged in the  administration of justice shall not be
raised except upon a substantive motion and in any amendment, question to a
Minister or remark in a debate on a motion dealing with any other subject,
reference to the conduct of such persons aforesaid shall be out of order."



Therefore, this Parliamentary Process was initiated in terms of the  Standing
Orders. Under the heading ** **

**117**



Independence of the Judiciary' in the Constitution, Article 107(l) and (2)
provides not only for the appointment of Judges but also for removal of Judges
on the ground of 'proved misbehavior or incapacity I after an address
presented in Parliament. No doubt this motion was not an address in terms of
Article 107(2) but was a motion dealing with the conduct of some Judges of the
Supreme Court. Article 107(3) provides as follows:‑



" 3. Parliament shall by law or by Standing orders provide for all matters
relating to the, presentation of such an address, including procedure for the
passing of such address _the investigation and proof of alleged misbehavior
and incapacity etc_."



  While Article 107(2) provided for an address on the ground of proved
misconduct or incapacity, the Constitution in Art. 107 (3) gives Parliament
the right to make provision by law or by Standing Orders for the investigation
and proof of alleged misbehavior or incapacity which of necessity must precede
any action under Article 107(2).



Taking into consideration all these facts Could it be said, that the contents
of the motion on the Order Paper, the printed copy of which was sent to the
respondents on the 5th March 1983 before it was actually taken up for
consideration on the 8th March 1983, was a publication by the respondents
calculated to bring the Supreme Court or any of its Judges into contempt? In
my view the Publication of this news item must be considered in its proper
context, but not as something apart as Mr. Nadesan, Q.C., invited us to do,
merely because there is a reference to the Supreme Court and to Some Judges.



There is no criticism of or comment made on

# 118



the Supreme Court or any of its Judges even by the person who was to introduce
the motion. The 1st respondent himself had not personally mad any comment,
allegation or criticism of what happened at the hearing of the application
made against Mr.K.C.E.de Alwis or made any criticism of judgements or orders
of the Judges. He has not even reproduced the contents of the representations
made by Mr.de Alwis to His Excellency the President. The 1st respondent had
reproduced the entirety of text of the motion of the Order Paper which been
prepared for consideration by Parliament, on the 8th March 1983 under the
heading 'Public Business'. No doubt there was an editorial giving prominence
to some questions to be probed but without comment.



I have endeavoured to enumerate the facts as set out by the respondents as in
my view without a proper appreciation thereof a discussion of the law
applicable would be an academic exercise. Mr.K.C.E.de Alwis rightly or wrongly
appeared to think that he had a legitimate grievance and he was undoubtedly
entitled to Protest about it. It was not done publicly but by a representation
communicated to the Head of the State who appointed him as a member of the
Commission and under whose warrant he had still the authority to function as
such member of the Commission. This was the authorised channel available to
him to make, representations. Thereafter the steps taken by Executive through
Parliament which exercises powers granted to it under the Constitution not his
actions nor the acts of the respondents.



Learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that on the basis of all these
facts the respondents had merely published a fai and accurate report of
parliamentary proceedings resulted from such representations and therefore
there was no contempt of Court. Learned

**119**

  
Attorney General who appeared before us as _amicus curiae_ too submitted that
under the circumstances in this case there was no contempt. The law of
contempt applicable to criticism of or comments on Courts or Judges had no
application in this case and all the authorities dealing with scandalising of
a Court or a Judge were of no relevance.



There is a principle that a fair and accurate report of proceedings in courts
of justice is protected. It is the same principle in regard to a fair and
accurate report of a proceeding in Parliament. In both cases the advantage to
the public outweighs any disadvantage to individuals unless malice is proved.
This principle was clearly enumerated in the case of _Wason v. Walter_ (1). It
is of great consequence that the public should know what takes place in a
court as the proceedings are public and are under the control of the Judges.
The same reasons apply to reports of proceedings in Parliament which are under
the control of Parliament.



In the Privy Council case of _Perera v. Peiris_ (67)(at page 159) this
question was considered fully and stated as follows:‑



"The wide general principle was stated by their Lordships in _Macintosh v.
Dun_ (69) to be the "common convenience and welfare of society" or "the
general interest of society" and other statements to much the same effect are
to be found in _Stuart v. Bell_ (70) and in earlier cases, most of which will
be found collected in Mr. Spencer Bower's valuable work on Actionable
Defamation. In the case of reports of judicial and parliamentary pro­ceedings
the basis of the privilege is not the circumstance that the proceedings
reported are judicial or parliamentary ‑ viewed as isolated facts ‑ but that
in the public interest that

# 120

  
all such proceedings should be fairly reported. As regards reports of judicial
proceedings reference may be made to _Rex v. wright_ (supra)(17) where the
basis of the privilege is expressed to be "the general advantage to the
country in having these proceedings made public", and to _Davison v Duncan_
(22) where the phrase used is "the balance of public benefit from
publicity';‑", while in _Wason v. Walter_ (1) the privilege, accorded to fair
reports of Parliamentary proceedings was put on the same basis as the
privilege accorded to fair reports of judicial proceedings ‑ the requirements
of the public, interest".



The Supreme Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka is the highest Superior Court.
Article 105(2) of the Constitution has given it the power to punish for
contempt of itself whether committed in Court or elsewhere. Article 14(l)(a)
declares that ever person is entitled to the freedom of speech a expression
including publication and there could be no doubt that the freedom of the
Press has been secured. Article 15 (2) however, provides that the exercise and
operation of this fundamental right shall be subject to such restrictions as
may prescribed by law in relation to parliamentary privileges, contempt etc.
It was conceded by all parties that no restrictions had been prescribed by law
in relation to contempt of court and that in terms of Article 15 the existing
written law a unwritten law continued to be in force. On that basis the law of
contempt in England and the law contempt as were in force in Sri Lanka at the
date of the Constitution are applicable. Considering al the authorities cited
there is not a single case which justifies the conclusion that the fair an
accurate report of a parliamentary proceeding such  


**121**

**  **

as the one we are considering can be regarded as a contempt of Court. At
common law, a fair and accurate report of judicial proceedings taking place
before a properly constituted tribunal sitting in open court is privileged.
This privilege extends to proceedings in parliament. It also extends to other
public proceedings where publication is for the common convenience and welfare
of society, that is, in the public interest. According to Halsbury's Laws of
England 4th Edn. Vol.28, page 61, this privilege is not confined to reports
published in a newspaper or to ,reports published contemporaneously; every
person .has the protection of this privilege if he ,publishes the report
merely to inform the public. The grounds of this common law privilege is that
the public is entitled to be present at the proceedings unless prohibited by
the Court, by Parliament or by the body holding the proceedings and therefore
the public is entitled to be informed of what was taking place. There is thus
an immunity to the report or publication.



But the publication of comments or criticism of a Court or a Judge stand on a
different footing. The law of contempt imposes a significant limitation on the
freedom of speech and expression ,by prohibiting such publications as would
prejudice a fair trial in a pending case thereby interfering With the
administration of justice and also by further restricting comment on or
criticism of .Courts or Judges where such publication scandalises the Courts
or Judges.



According to our Constitution, sovereignty is in the People and the
legislative power of the People is exercised by Parliament, the judicial Power
of the People is exercised by Parliament through Courts and tribunals created,
established or recognised by the Constitution and the Executive Power of the
People is exercised by a President



# 122



elected by the People. The concept of these republican principles of
Representative Democracy is enshrined in the Constitution and referred to in
the preamble to the Constitution. In that context it is of paramount and
public interest that the people are allowed to know and are correctly informed
of what transpires in Parliament. As stated in the case of _Cook v. Alexander_
(23) there is a conclusive presumption that what is said or done in Parliament
even in England, is of public interest. The Press of this country has a public
duty to bring relevant facts to light and the fact that Parliament is probing
matters connected with the judiciary with responsibility is a matter of
interest to the people and cannot be regarded as a contempt of court or of the
judiciary. Parliament was within its rights if it had in fact prohibited the
publication of this fact, but the Courts cannot be called upon to do what
Parliament had not  done directly or indirectly. Our Supreme Court has from
earliest times even where it had punished writers and publishers for contempt
of Court, in instances where there were actual criticism of the Judges or
Courts calculated to bring a Court or a Judge s into contempt and lower its
authority, observed a consistent principle. Wood Renton J. in 1908 in case of
_Kandoluwe Sumangala v. Mapitigama Dharmarakitta_ (71), referred to the law of
contempt in these terms:‑



"It is extremely difficult to bring home to minds of some people and yet it is
of vital moment that every one should know, that the law of contempt of Court
does not exist for the glorification of the Bench. It exists and exists solely
‑ for the protection of the public". In regard to the freedom of the Press,
Soertsz J. in _Veerasamy v. Stewart_ (63) said this:-



**123**

**  **

"No one desires to fetter unduly the freedom of the Press, least of all Courts
of Law, for the Press can be, and has often been a powerful ally in the
administration of justice".



The importance of the freedom of the Press cannot be ignored when under a
Constitution such as ours, the People are supreme and have a right to change
the persons who exercise the sovereignty of the people in terms of Article 4.



I have had the advantage of reading the judgement of Wanasundera, J. He has
considered all the submissions made by the Counsel for the petitioner and by
Counsel for the respondents and by the Attorney General. He has exhaustively
analysed the decided cases cited before us in great detail and also referred
to the views of textbook writers. Practically all the cases, particularly the
Indian authorities, dealt with criticism resulting in undermining the dignity
of Courts and the course of justice. I have taken the view that in this case
there is complete absence of criticism of or comment on Courts or Judges by
the respondents and with respect and with regret I have to disagree with the
conclusion he has arrived at on the basis of the authorities cited.



I have come to the conclusion that the, Publication in this case of a news
item reproducing the text of a motion set down in the Order Paper of
Parliament does not constitute a contempt of Court as the public interest in
this country demands that the proceedings in Parliament be known to the Public
and that the public must be made aware that allegations, however serious made
against even the highest Court, are being inquired into with a due sense of
responsibility.



# 124



I accordingly order that the Rule on respondents be discharged.



**RANASINGHE, J.**



I have had the opportunity of reading, in draft, the judgement of Wanasundera,
J., and, the view I take in regard to a principal defence urged on behalf of
the Respondents, is different, have set down my reasons in this judgement.



On Monday March 7th, 1983 the "Ceylon Daily News", which is an English daily
newspaper which is said to have the largest circulation the Island, owned and
published by the Respondent and edited by the lst Respondent published
prominently in its front page, a continued on page 11, a news item relating to
a resolution to be moved on the following day by Justice Minister in
Parliament, for the appointments of a parliamentary select committee to probe
certain representations made by Mr.K.C.E. de Alwis former Judge of the Court
of Appeal and also member of the Special Presidential Commission whose
continuance on the said Commission had be successfully challenged before the
Supreme Court Mr. Felix Dias Bandaranaike, who had himself be a Minister of
Justice in a previous Government' against, inter alia, two of the three
Supreme Court judges who had heard the said application made the said
Mr.Bandaranaike against the said Mr. Alwis.



The said article contained the following headlines ‑:

> >     " Select committee probe of
>>

>> Mr. K.C.E.de Alwis' representations

>>

>>     FDB's pleadings

>>

>> prepared in judge is chambers it"

**125**



The letters of the second headline were larger and thicker than those of the
first. A copy of the said news item, as it appeared on the front page and on
page 11 of the said newspaper on 7.3.83, is annexed, marked 'A', to the
Petitioner's affidavit filed in these proceedings.



The news item, in‑its first five paragraphs, makes reference : to the
resolution to be moved by the Minister of Justice for the appointment of a
select committee to probe Mr. de . Alwis' representations: to three of the
questions which such select committee will have to probe. Thereafter it
proceeds to reproduce the entirety of the text of the said resolution.
Paragraph (b) of the said resolution is said to be: whether there were any
circumstances which rendered it improper for the two judges (who are named) to
have agreed to hear and determine the application (S.C. Ref. No.1 of 1982)
filed by Mr. Felix Dias Bandaranaike and whether the decision of either of
them was influenced by any improper considerations ; and paragraph (c) to be :
whether any pleading filed by or on behalf of the petitioner the said Felix
Bandaranaike in the' said proceedings were prepared in the chambers of the
judge (who is named) who heard the said application, and, if so, the
circumstances in which it came to be so prepared.



The Petitioner, who is an attorney ‑at‑law, practising in this Island, has
complained to this Court: that the said news item, taken as a whole and in its
parts, seeks to cast doubt on the impartiality and integrity of the judges of
this court, who heard the aforesaid application, and thus weaken public
confidence in the administration of justice: that the said publication
scandalises Judges of this Court and is calculated to lower the prestige of
this Court : that the said publication has also the necessary tendency to
interfere with the due administration of justice : that the 1st

# 126

  
and 2nd Respondents have thus committed a grave contempt of this Court, and
should be punished for the said offence of contempt.



After hearing learned Queen's Counsel in support of the Petitioner, this
Court, issued a, Rule on both the 1st and 2nd Respondents. Annexed to the said
Rule, and marked 'X' was a copy of the news item.



It will be convenient at this stage to refer to the provisions of several
Articles in the Constitution promulgated in 1978. Article 105(3) vests this
Court with the power to punish for contempt of itself, whether committed in
the Court, itself or elsewhere. Article 168(l) provides for the continuance in
force of all laws, written laws and unwritten laws, which were in force
immediately  before the commencement of the Constitution, except where
provision to the contrary is expressly made in the Constitution itself.
Article 14 (2) provides that the exercise and operation of the fundamental,
right declared and recognized by Article 14 (1) (a) ‑ viz : the freedom of
speech and expression including publication shall be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law, inter alia, in relation to contempt
of court. No such.. restrictions have, however, been yet prescribed by law.
Article 16 (1) states that all existing written law and unwritten law shall be
valid and operative notwithstanding any inconsistency with the preceding
provision of the said Chapter, viz Chapter 111 which deals with Fundamental
Rights. The resulting position then is that the law relating to contempt of
court , which was in force and in operation in this Island at the time the
Constitution came into operation on the 7th September, 1978, would continue to
be operative even thereafter.



The substantive law of contempt applicable in



**127**



this Island is the English law. That it is so was accepted by all learned
Counsel who appeared before this Court at this inquiry ; and it is also made
quite clear by the judgements cited to us at the hearing ‑ vide : In _re
Cappers_ (59), and also In the matter of _Armand de Souza,_ (61) , In the
matter of a Rule on _H.A.J. Hulugalle_ , (62); _Weerasamy v. Stewart_ (63); In
_re Jayatilaka_ (72).



The right of a court of law to punish persons for the commission of acts in
contempt of its authority has been firmly recognized and accepted in many
jurisdictions. Originating as an offence against the King, who was considered
the ultimate source of all judicial authority and the fountain‑head of
justice, this power has been exercised by the Courts in England for several
centuries and has been said to be as old as the law itself. The power which so
existed in the courts of law to punish summarily for the offence of contempt
found categorical and authoritative expression as far back as 1765 in an
"undelivered judgement" of Mr.Justice Wilmot in the case of The _King v.
Almon_ ,(37) which was however published only in the year 1802, in the
following terms :



"The power which the Courts in Westminster Hall have of vindicating their own
authority is coeval with their first foundation and institution ; it is a
necessary incident to every Court of Justice whether of record or not to fine
and imprison for a contempt to the Court, acted in the face of it. And the
issuing of attachments by the Supreme Courts of Justice in Westminster Hall,
for contempts out of Court, stands upon the same immemorial usage as supports
the whole fabric of the Common Law ; it is as much the lex terrae, and within
the exception of Magna Carta as the issuing of any other legal process

# 128



  whatsoever. I have examined very carefully to see if I could find out any
vestiges or traces of its introduction but can find none, It is as ancient as
any part of the Common Law; there is no priority or posteriority to be
discovered about it and, therefore. i cannot be said to invade the Common Law,
but to act in an alliance and friendly conjunction with every other provision
which the wisdom of our ancestors has established for the general good of
society. And though do not mean to compare and contrast attachments with
trials by juries, yet truth compels me to say that the mode of proceedings by
attachment stands on the very same foundation and basis as trial by juries do
immemorial usage and practice  ........ "



Blackstone, who was a contemporary of Wilmot, J. has also given expression to
a similar view when his Commentaries iv 286 he stated :



"The process of attachment for these and the like contempts must necessarily
be as ancient as the laws themselves. For laws, without a competent authority
to secure their administration from disobedience and contempt would be vain
and nugatory. A power therefo­re in the Supreme Courts of justice to suppress
such contempts by an immediate attachment of the offender results from the
first principles of judicial establishments and must be an inseparable
attendant upon every superior tribunal."



It was contended by learned Counsel for the 2nd respondent that the opinion of
Wilmot,J. has be subjected to criticism by several judges a jurists, amongst
which the article by Sir John Fox in the 24th and 25th Volumes (1905 and 1909



**129**

**  **

respectively) of the Law Quarterly Review stands out pre‑eminent, and that,
therefore, it should no longer be treated as laying down the law on this
subject. Mr. Justice Wilmot's opinion has since been received with approval in
so many subsequent cases (vide: The Law of contempt of Court and Legislature
by Tex Chand and H.L. Sarin, 1949, 2nd edition at page 12 for a list of such
cases) that "it must now be taken to have been practically determined that the
summary process for committal for contempt whether in or out of Court, existed
from the earliest times" ‑ Oswald on Contempt Committal and Attachment (3 edt)
p, 3. . Whatever be its historical basis and however sound be its reasoning,
it is now too late for the call made by Sir John Fox in his aforementioned
article for the correction of, what he submits is, the error in the opinion of
Wilmot,J. to be responded to. In the year 1963, the High Court of Australia
has, in the case of _James vs. Robinson_ (73), after observing that Sir John
Fox had himself not only stated in the course of the said article that " _R.
vs. Almon_ has been referred to with approval in a line of  decided cases
extending to the present day" (i.e. up to the time of the said article in 1908
‑ 1909) but had also concluded his article by stating that "the law as it
stands is so firmly established that Parliament alone can effect an
alteration, if alteration be necessary", and that Sir William Holdsworth, in
his book A History of English Law, Vol‑3 P.393 , has also expressed the view
that _R. vs. Almon_ (supra) "was accepted as correct and it forms the basis of
the modern law on this subject", concluded that it would "be the sheerest
futility to seek to ascertain whether the present law rests Upon a sound
historical basis or not...." , and that "in the half century which has
followed the' Publication of these article's the principle (laid down by
Wilmot,J.) has, if possible, become more firmly established.

# 130



The jurisdiction which the courts have to deal with the contempt of its
authority was referred to by Lord Russell C.J. in the case of _R. vs. Gray_
(40) at p  40 in this way ‑



"This is not a new‑fangled jurisdiction; is a jurisdiction as old as the
common itself, of which it forms part. It is jurisdiction the history the
purpose extent of which are admirably treated in t‑, opinion of Wilmot C.J.,
then Wilmot J., in his Opinions and Judgments. It is Jurisdiction, however, to
be exercised wit scrupulous care, to be exercised only when the case is clear
and beyond reasonable doubt ........."



In the year 1970 in the case of _Morris vs. The Crown Office_ (9), Lord
Denning M.R. page 1081 observed



"The course of justice must not be deflect or interfered with. Those who
strike at strike at the very foundations society";



and at page 1087 Salmon L.J. said :



"The sole purpose of proceedings for contempt is to give our courts the power
effectively to protect the rights of to protect the rights of the public by
ensuring that the administration of justice shall not be obstructed or
prevented."



In the more recent case of A.G. vs. Times Newspapers (12), which evoked
considerable, public interest in England and ultimately reached the European
Court of Human Rights, in the  House  


**131**

  
of Lords, Lord Reid stated at page 303 that:



" The law on this subject (i,e. contempt of Court) is and must be founded
entirely on public policy. It is not there to protect the private rights of
parties to a litigation or prosecution. It is there to prevent interference
with the administration of justice and it should, in my judgment, be limited
to what is reasonably necessary for that purpose. Public policy generally
requires a balancing of interests which may conflict. Freedom, of speech
should not be limited to any greater extent than is necessary but it cannot be
allowed when there would be real prejudice to the administration of justice";



and at page 310 Lord Morris stated :



"....... the phrase contempt of court is one which is compendious to include
not only disobedience to orders of court but also certain types of behaviour
or varieties of publications in reference to proceedings before courts of law
which overstep the bounds which liberty permits. In an ordered community
courts are established for the pacific settlement of disputes and for the
maintenance of law and order. In the general interest of the community it is
imperative that the authority of the courts should not be imperilled and that
recourse to them should not be subject to unjustifiable interference. When
such unjustifiable, interference is suppressed it is not because those charged
with the responsibility of administering justice are, concerned for their own
dignity : it is because the very structure of ordered life is at risk if the
recognized courts of the land are so flouted



# 132



that their authority wanes and  are supplanted. But as the purpose and
existences of courts of law is to preserve freedom within the law for all well
disposed  members of the community, it is manifest that the courts must never
impose any limitations upon free speech or free discussion or free, criticism
beyond those which are absolutely necessary. When therefore a court has to
consider the propriety of some conduct or speech or writing the decision, will
often depend whether one aspect of the public interest definitely outweighs
another aspect of the public interest. Certain aspects of the public interest
will be relevant in deciding and assessing whether there has been contempt of
court  if........"



and at page 316, Lord Diplock observed :



"Contempt of Court is a generic term descriptive of conduct in relation to
particular proceedings in a court of law, which tends to undermine that system
or inhibit citizens from availing themselves of it for the settlement of
disputes. Contempt of Court may thus take many forms";



and further at page 318 :



"Contempt of Court is punishable because it undermines the confidence of not,
only the, parties to a particular litigation but also of the public as
potential suitors in the due administration of justice by the established
courts of law";



and at page 323, Lord Simon stated :



"The law of Contempt of Court is a body of, rules which exists to safeguard
another ,



# 133

  
quite different institution of civilised society. it is the means by which the
law vindicates the public interest in due administration of justice that is in
the ion of disputes, not by force or by resolution or but by private public
influence, but by independent adjudication in courts of law according to an
objective code;



and at page 329, Lord Cross stated:  


"Contempt of Court' means an interference with administration of justice and
it is unfortunate that the offence should continue to be known by a name which
suggests to the modern mind that its essence is a supposed affront to the
dignity of the court ..... Yet the due administration of justice is something
which all citizens whether on the left or the right or in the centre, should
be anxious to safeguard. When the alleged contempt consists in giving
utterance either publicly privately to opinions with regard to or connected
with legal problems, whether civil or criminal, law of contempt constitutes an
interference with freedom of speech, and I agree with my noble and learned
friend that we should be careful to see that the rules as to 'Contempt' do not
inhibit freedom of speech more than is reasonably necessary to ensure that the
administration of justice is not interfered with."



Contempt of Court could be constituted by conduct of varying kinds. One of the
earliest classifications of contempt has been by Lord Hardwicke in the year
1742, who in the case of _Read and Huggonson_ (74), stated:



### "There are three different sorts of contempt One kind of contempt is,
scandalising the

# 134



court itself. There may be likewise a con­tempt of this court, in abusing
parties, who are concerned in cases here. There may be also a contempt of this
court in prejudicing mankind against persons before the case is heard."



Tek Chand and H.L.Sarin in the book entitled "The Law of Contempt of Court and
of Legislature" (2nd edt) (Supra) at page 249 enunciate the principles
underlying the law of contempt qua press, publications under the following
heads :



1\. "It is a Contempt of Court to scandalise the Court or offend against the
dignity of a, Judge by attributing to him dishonesty or impropriety or
incompetence, regardless o the fact whether the case with reference to which
the offending remarks were made is pending in the Court or has been decided.  


2 .......................  


3 .....................  


4\. General criticism of the conduct of a Judge not calculated to obstruct or
interfere with the administration of justice, or_ the admi­nistration of the
law in any particular case, even though libellous, does not con­stitute a
contempt of court ........



That the contempt alleged to have been committed by the respondents in this
case falls into the category known as "Scandalizing the Court or Judge" is
clear ; and there is no dispute in regard to such classification.  


Although Lord Morris did, in the case of _McLeod vs. St. Aubyn_ (41), decided
at the end of the nineteenth century, express the view that this class of
contempt scandalizing the Court or Judge had become obsolete in England, yet
his view



# 135

**  **

was shown to be incorrect by the case of _R. vs. Gray_ (40), decided by Lord
Russell, C.J. in the very next year and by several subsequent cases : _R. vs.
New Statesman ex p. D.P.P._ (75), _Ambard vs. A.G. for Trinidad and Tobago_
(57), _R. vs. Metropolitan Police ex p Blackburn_ (53), _Badry vs. D.P.P. of
Mauritius_ (76). That this branch of the law of contempt is in force in this
Island does not admit of any doubt in view of the local decisions in the cases
of : _In re Armand de Souza_. (supra). _In re H.A.J.Hulugalle_ (62), _In re
Jayatilaka_ (72).



A lucid authoritative description of the class of contempt known as
"scandalizing a Court or a Judge" is to be found in the judgment of Lord
Russell C.J. in _R. vs. Gray_ (40)at page 62 when he said:



"Any act done or writing published calculated to bring a court or a Judge of
the court into contempt, or to lower his authority, is a Contempt of Court.
That is one class of Contempt. Further, any act done or writing published
calculated to obstruct or interfere with the due course of justice or the
lawful process of the courts is a Contempt of Court. The former class belongs
to the category which Lord Hardwike L.C. characterised as "scandalising a
court or judge ( _In re Read and Huggonson_ ( 74)).That description of that
class of contempt is to be taken subject to one and an important
qualification. Judges and courts are alike open to criticism and if reasonable
argument or expostulation is offered against any judicial act as contrary to
law or public good, no court could or would treat that as contempt of court.
The law ought not to be astute is such cases as to criticise adversely what
under such  


# 136

  
circumstances and with such an object is published ; but it is to be
remembered that in this matter the liberty of the press is no greater and no
less than the liberty of every subject of the Queen."



The qualification stressed by Lord Russell was re‑echoed and emphasised three
decades later by, Lord Atkin in a famous passage in the advice, given by the
Board in the case of _Ambard vs. A.G for Trinidad and Tobagoi_ (57) at p 709:



"But whether the authority and position of an individual or the due
administration of justice is concerned, no wrong is committed by any member of
the public who exercises the ordinary right of criticising in good faith in
private or public, the public act done in the seat of justice. The path of
criticism is a public way : the wrong headed are permitted to err therein :
provided that the members of the public abstain from imputing improper motives
to those taking part in the administration of justice, and are genuinely
exercising a right of criticism and not acting in malice or attempting to
impair the administration of justice, they are immune. Justice is not
cloistered virtue : she must be allowed to suffer the scrutiny an respectful
even though outspoken comments o ordinary men."



That any member of the public is entitled to criticise, even strongly,
judicial decisions or judicial work done in a Court of Justice once a case is
over has been readily conceded by It Courts, and is a principle which is now
firmly established. Laid down almost eighty years ago by Lord Morris in
McLeod's case (supra), reiterated, by Lord Atkin in Ambard's case (supra) and
most  


# 137

**  **

eloquently upheld by Lord Denning in the case of _R. vs. Commissioner of the
Metropolis ex P ‑Blackburn _(supra)) at p.320. This principle has been placed
in its proper setting, by the House of Lords recently in the much published
_Times case_ (supra), where Lord Simon stated at page 327 and 328 that, once
the proceedings are concluded, the remit is withdrawn and the balance of
public interest shifts: chat the litigation having been concluded the public
interest in freedom of discussion becomes paramount subject to the
restrictions that the Court must not be scandalised, and any pending
litigation should not be interfered with. This right has also been recognised
in this Island in the cases of : _In re Armand de Souza_ (supra),and _In re.
H.A.J. Hulugalle_ (supra).The High Court of Australia too has accepted this
principle : The _King vs. Fletcher , ex p. Kisch_ (77).That fair criticism is
not contempt and that the judiciary is not immune from such fair criticism,
has been recognised in India too. vide _In re Mulgaokar_ (78). The Indian
decision, in the case of _In re Subramanian_ (79), also laid down that where
a publication amounts to contempt of court it is no defence that it is only a
quotation from another source. That, before a decision whether any act does
amount to contempt of court or not is arrived at, it is necessary to consider
all the surrounding circumstances is a principle elucidated in the case of
_Sambu Nath Jha vs. Kadar Prasad Sinha_ (80).



The principle underlying punishment for contempt of court is that it is
inflicted for attacks on Judges not with a view to protecting the individual
judge or the court as a whole from a repetition of such attacks, but in order
to maintain the authority of the judge or court and prevent a loss of public
confidence and a risk of any interference with the administration of justice.
Any libel on a judge, which has no reference to his judicial functions, or any

# 138



personal abuse or slanderous criticism of a judge as an individual and not in
his judicial capacity does not amount to contempt of court ‑In _re Bah
Islands_ (81).



In considering the said article "A" (or "X") the court has to consider how it
will be understood by those who read it. In doing so, the court has put itself
in the place of the average reader the newspaper, which carries the said
article, a, decide, as best as it could, what impression would have created in
the minds‑of such reader. dealing with this matter, Wood Renton,C.J. obsery,
at page 38, in the case of _In re Armand de Sou_ (supra), which said approach
was approved of Abrahams,C.J. at page 303 in the case of _In H.A.J. Hulugaile_
(62), that such reader



" would read the article as such articles a read every day by ordinary people,
who have no time, even where they have the capacity carry out such a process
of balancing, a, who would be guided in the long run by t general impression
which the article left their minds."



A consideration of the impunged article marked "A" by the Petitioner and 'X'
by the Respondents shows that the first paragraph sets out, in the form of a
question, the contents clause (c) of the resolution which the Minister Justice
would move and the full text of which said resolution is set out later at
paragraph seven thereof ; the second paragraph states that what is so set out
earlier in the first paragraph is one'' the questions which a parliamentary
select committee will be called upon to probe under terms of a resolution to
be moved on the follow day by the Justice Minister ; the third paragraph

# 139

**  **

states that the Justice Minister will move for the appointment of a select
committee to probe the representations ‑ without setting out express y what
the representations are ‑ made by Mr. K.C.E. de Alwis; the fourth, fifth and
sixth paragraphs highlight clauses (a) and (b) of the resolution which is set
out in full later at paragraph seven ; the seventh paragraph then sets out in
full ­consisting of the preamble and five clauses numbered (a) to (e) ‑ the
text of the said resolution which the Justice Minister, it is reported, would
move on the following day. The said clause (b) of paragraph seven is :
"whether there was any circumstance which rendered it improper for (the two
judges are named) to have agreed to hear and determine the application (S.C.
Ref. No.1 of 1982) filed by Mr. Felix R.D. Bandaranaike and whether the
decision of either of them was influenced by any improper consideration it and
the said clause (c) of the said seventh paragraph is: "whether any pleading
filed by or behalf of the petitioner the said Felix R.D. Bandaranaike in the
said proceedings were prepared in the chambers of ........ (the judge is
named) ........... one of the judges who heard the said application and if so
the circumstances in which it came to be so prepared."



In regard to the two headlines which the said article carries, learned Queen's
Counsel for the Petitioner stated that, if the body of the said article "A"
(or "X") does not constitute a contempt of court, then the headlines by
themselves would not make it so, and that, if the text of the article itself
amounts to contempt of court, then the form and contents of the headlines
would f operate to aggravate such contempt.



In almost every one of the cases cited to us at the hearing, what was alleged
to constitute the contempt was a direct attack ‑ either oral or written by the
very person who was himself brought



# 140



before court to answer to the charge of contempt of court, In this case,
however, neither of the Respondents is the person who is himself, responsible
for originating ‑ either orally or in, writing ‑ that which is charged as
amounting to contempt. As set out earlier, the Indian case of _In re
Subramanian_ (supra) denies a person, who merely repeats or reproduces
anything uttered or written by another which amounts to contempt of court, the
defence that he himself has merely repeated of, reproduced that which another
uttered or wrote Although impugning the impartiality of a judge and, the
imputation of improper motives to a judge in the discharge of his judicial
function had be ­held to amount to contempt ‑ as _in Ambard's case',_ (57) at
p 335, in _R. v . New Statesman_ (Editor ex, parte D.P.P.. (44) and _in R. vs.
Colsey_ (82), yet, the view has been expressed that such an allegation: may
not necessarily be a contempt of court. Griffith AC.J., delivering the
judgment of the High Court of Australia in the case of _The King vs. Nicholls_
(56) observed



" ... and I am not prepared to accede to the., proposition that an imputation
of want of, impartiality to a judge is necessarily a contempt of court. On the
contrary I think that, if any judge of this court or of any other court were
to make a public utterance of such a character as to be likely to impair the
confidence of the public, or of the suitors o any class of suitors in the
impartiality of the court in any matter to be brought before it, any public
comment on such an utterance if it be a fair comment would, so far from being
a contempt of court, be for the public benefit, and would be entitled to
similar, protection to that which comment upon matters of public interest is
entitled under the law of libel."



# 141



_Borrie and Lowe : on The Law of Contempt at p 162,_ having stated that the
decision in _R. vs. Colsey_ (82) has been much criticised and may be open to
question, refers to a criticism of it by Professor Goodhart.



I have considered the principles relating to the offence of scandalizing of a
judge or court' at length because they would also be very helpful in the
consideration of the other defences urged on behalf of the Respondents.
Although, on a consideration of the principles relevant to this head of
contempt of court, as set out above, it would seem difficult for a publisher
to escape liability in respect of the contents of clauses (b) and (c) of
paragraph seven of the said article, yet, several arguments to the contrary,
worthy of serious consideration, have been advanced . It is, however,
unnecessary for me to express a definite finding upon this question in view of
the opinion I have formed, as will be set out later in this judgment, in
regard to the defence put forward by the Respondents based upon the plea of
privilege. That being so it would also be necessary for me to consider the
further contention put forward on behalf of the Respondents that mens rea is
also a necessary element in the offence of contempt of court. Even so, in view
of the fact that there has been considerable discussion of this matter, I
would merely give an indication of what seems to be the position, in law, in
regard to this matter. Having regard to the various decisions ‑ from the
English, Indian, Australian and also our own courts ‑ and also the discussions
of the several learned authors of text books, it seems to me : that the mental
element required to be established is merely an intention to publish the
impugned, objectionable matter ; that an intention, to bring the judge or the
court into hatred,‑ ridicule, contempt  and interfere with the due
administration of justice on the part of the offender is not a required
ingredient of the offence of contempt of court,.



# 142



The principle defence put forward on behalf of the Respondents ‑ apart from
the contention that the contents of the impugned article 'X' (or "A") cannot
be considered as constituting an offence of contempt ‑ is that the said
article, which is only a publication of the contents of an Order Paper of
Parliament (a certified copy of which has been marked R 3), is a fair and true
report of proceedings in Parliament, and is, therefore privileged.



It was submitted, on behalf of the Respondents, at the hearing before this
court that the question which arises for consideration in these proceedings ‑
viz : whether a fair and accurate report of Parliamentary proceedings
published in a newspaper without any malice and with the sole object of
furnishing information to the public is protected by a plea of a qualified
privilege, even though such report contains material which amounts to contempt
of court ‑ is res integra and comes up for consideration by this court for the
first time. It is one that is said to be not covered by any previous judicial
authority ‑either in England or any other country where the parliamentary
system of government prevails.



The first matter, which has to be decided in this connection, is whether an
Order Paper of Parliament comes within the term "parliamentary proceedings". A
consideration of ‑Standing Orders nos. 20, 23, 46, 47, of the Standing Orders
of the Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka prepared
and adopted in terms of Article 74 of the 1978 Constitution makes it clear
that the Order Paper constitutes, as it were, the agenda for a meeting of
Parliament. It contains the Orders for the Day and the motions and questions,
notices of which have been duly given and which have not been ruled out by the
Speaker and which are to come for consideration at such meeting. Its contents



# 143



constitute "Public Business". Ordinarily no motion, resolution or bill could
be moved, without it having been first placed on the Order Paper for that
particular day. Nor could a question be asked if it had not been previously
placed in the Order Paper for the day. The moving of motions and resolutions
and the asking of questions on the floor of the House when the House is in
session, is initiated by a Member by having notices of such acts included
previously in the Order Paper for that particular ' day. Inclusion in the
Order Paper is but the beginning of the process which would entitle the member
to ask such questions or move such resolutions or motions at a later stage on
a specified date on the floor of the House when the House is in session. It is
but the first step in a transaction which would be concluded subsequently.



_Erskine May's Parliamentary Practice_ (17 edt) discusses, at page 62, the
meaning of the term "proceedings in Parliament." The primary meaning given to
this term, as a technical parliamentary term, is "some formal action, usually
a decision, taken by the House in its collective capacity." It has been
extended "to the forms of business in which the House takes action and the
whole process, the principal part of which is debate, by which it reaches a
decision". It is further stated that "an individual Member takes part in a
proceeding usually by speech, but also by various recognised kinds of formal
action, such as voting, giving notice of a motion, etc., or presenting a
petition or a report from a Committee, most of such actions being time‑saving
substitutes for speaking. At page 62 is also a reference to the Report of the
Select Committee on the Official Secrets Act in session 1938‑39 which states
that the said term (proceedings in Parliament) covers "both the asking Of a
question and the giving of written notice of Ouch question, and included
everything said or done by a Member in the exercise of his functions as a



# 144



member in a committee of either House as well as everything said or done in
either House in the transaction of Parliamentary business . The judgment of
the American court referred to by Erskine May, also at page 62, shows that
"speech"' was not confined to the mere " uttering of a speech." or haranguing
in debate" but was extended to "every" other act resulting from the nature and
in the execution of the office."



_Halsbury : Laws of England_ (4 edt ) at paragraph 1486 states : "An exact and
complete definition of proceedings in Parliament' has never been given by the
courts of law or by either House. In its narrow sense the expression is used
in both Houses to denote the formal transaction of business in the House or in
Committees. It covers both the asking of a question, and includes everything
said or done by a member in the exercise of his functions as a member in a
committee of either House, as well as everything said or done in either House
in the transaction of parliamentary business. " Sec. 3 of the Parliament
(Powers and Privilages) Act No.21 of 1953 referred to the freedom "of speech,
debate and proceedings". The term "proceeding" there would seem to cover
spheres of activity not covered by "speech" and "debate".



The term "proceedings in Parliament" should not be confined to utterances made
on the floor of the House but should be extended to include all that is said
and done within the House by a Member in the exercise of his essential
functions as Member of the House. Viewed from this standpoint it is clear that
R3, which is the Order Paper for the sittings of Parliament on 8.3.83, is
covered by the term proceedings in Parliament".



That a fair and accurate report of an proceedings in Parliament published
without malice



# 145

**  **

in a newspaper, is, under the common law, privileged is a principle of law
which is now clearly and firmly established ‑ vide _Gately_ : Libel and
Slander (8 edt) para. 635. The question whether a faithful report in a
newspaper of a debate in either House of Parliament which contains matter
defamatory of an individual, as having been spoken in the course of a debate
on the floor of the house, is actionable at the instance of such an individual
came up for consideration in England for the first time in the year 1868 in
the case of _wason vs. Walter_ (1) and Cockburn, C.J., delivering the judgment
of the Court of Queen's Bench, held that it is not so actionable.



As the aforementioned case _Wason vs. Walter_ (1) is the case in which this
principle was laid down for the first time it would be helpful to consider it
in some depth in order to understand the basis for the formulation of that
principle. A petition was presented to the House of Lords charging a high
judicial officer, who had, after a very successful career at the Bar, been
recently appointed, with having, several years prior to such appointment made
a false statement in order to deceive a committee of the House of Commons, and
praying for an inquiry and the removal of the officer. At a debate which
ensued in the House of Lords the charges were refuted. The newspaper, Times,
thereupon published a faithful report of the proceedings which contained
certain matters disparaging of the person, who had presented the petition
spoken in the course of the debate. The petitioner then instituted an action
of libel founded upon the said newspaper report. Having considered several
earlier cases which had been cited, Cockburn. C.J. took the view that, as
those decided cases did not provide the authority upon which to proceed,
recourse would have to be had to principle in order to arrive at a decision of
the question so before the court. In the quest for



# 146



principle the Chief Justice accepted 'as well established that faithful and
fair reports of the proceedings of courts of justice, though the character of
individuals may incidentally suffer, are privileged, and that for the
publication of such reports the publishers are neither criminally nor civilly
responsible'. The principle upon which such publications are privileged was
said to be that "the advantage of publicity to the community at large
outweighs any private injury resulting from the publication." Thereafter,
having considered the principles upon which privilege so attaches to
publications of court proceedings, it was decided that those principles should
be extended to apply also to reports of proceedings in parliament, and that,
as the analogy between the cases of reports of proceedings of these two
institutions being complete, all the limitations placed on the one to prevent
injustice to individuals must necessarily attach to the other. The argument,
that publication of parliamentary proceedings is illegal as being in
contravention of the standing orders of both Houses of Parliament, was
disposed of in this way : that practically speaking it is idle to say that the
publication of parliamentary proceedings is prohibited by parliament : that
the standing orders which prohibit such publications are obviously maintained
only to give each House the control over the publication of its proceedings,
and the power of preventing or correcting any abuse of the facility afforded ;
that, independently of the orders of the Houses, there is nothing unlawful in
publishing reports of parliamentary proceedings that, practically, such
publication is sanctioned by parliament ; that it is essential to the working
of the parliamentary system and to the welfare of the nation ; that any
argument founded on its alleged illegality must therefore entirely The
judgment ends by concluding that such publications must be treated as being in
every respect lawful, and that, where it is done honestly



# 147

**  **

and faithfully, the publisher is free from legal responsibility, even though
the character of individuals may incidentally be injuriously affected.



This decision had thereafter been accepted, as settling the legal principle
upon this subject, for well over a century. It has been cited With approval in
the Queen's Bench Division in the case of , _Webb vs. Times Publishing Co.
Ltd_. (36) and in the Court of Appeal recently, in the year 1973, by Lord
Denning in the case of _Cook vs. Alexander_ ,(23); and by the Privy Council in
1948 in the case of _M. G. Perera vs. A. V. 'Peiris_ (67) which was an appeal
from the Supreme Court of this Island.



It was contended on behalf of the Petitioner : that, although such plea of
privilege covers claims for libel by individuals who may have been defamed by
such publications yet, such plea is not available where such publications
contain blasphemous or seditious matter ; that just as blasphemous and
seditious matter is not protected, matter that amounts to contempt of court is
also not protected. This contention is founded upon what appears in paragraph
596 of Gatley: Libel and Slander(supra), under the heading "Limits of
'Privilege", wherein the author states : "It is obvious that as the (common
law) privilege is founded upon grounds of public policy, and of benefit and
advantage to the community, it does not extend to protecting any report;
however fair and accurate, which is blasphemous, seditious or immoral, or
prohibited by statute or by any rule or order having statutory force, or by
order of the court or a judge prohibiting a report of the proceedings in any
case where the publication of such report would interfere with the course of
justice". ‑In this statement no express reference has been made to contempt of
court. That which would amount to contempt of court is not spe‑

#  
148



cifically mentioned as also a matter which would preclude the claim of
privilege. Nor is contempt of court a matter that would be brought under any
one of the heads expressly mentioned in this paragraph. Based upon this
statement, it was strongly conten­ded that if blasphemous, seditious and
immoral matter could exclude privilege, why not contempt of court?



The authority relied on for the proposition so put forward  in so far as
blasphemous, seditious, and immoral matters are concerned ‑ is the case
_Steele vs. Brannan_ (83) which followed an earlier decision in the case of
_R. vs. Mary Carlile_ (84). On a careful perusal of the judgment in Steele's
case which founds itself upon the earlier decision in _Carlile's case_ (supra)
and a passage from' Starkie on Slander and Libel, 3rd edt at page 215, it
seems to me that neither the judgment of Bovil C.J. or for that matter neither
of the judgments pronounced by the two judges, Keating, J. and Garvi J., could
be said to justify the formulation of such a general principle as is sought to
be relied upon on behalf of the Petitioner. The facts and circumstances upon
which the decision in Steel', case (supra) was based are the appellant
Steele,, kept in his shop for sale pamphlets which were considered obscene;
this pamphlet was a substantially correct report of the trial of one G.M. on a
indictment for a misdemeanour in selling a certain obscene work called the
"Confessional Unmasked"; the contents of that book were set out in full in
this pamphlet, although, at the trial, it was taken as read and only passages
in it were referred to; on an order made by a Magistrate the pamphlets which
were for sale in Steele's shop were seized, and Steele was asked to show cause
why they should not be destroyed ; upon the Magistrate making an order for the
destruction of the said pamphlet on the ground that it was obscene, Steele
appealed against the said Order to the Court of Common Pleas. One of the
defences raised was that the said



# 149

**  **

publication was privileged as a fair report of pro­ceedings (the trial of G.
M. referred to earlier) in a court of competent jurisdiction. Bovill, C.J.,
having referred to the passage from Starkie On Slander and Libel, referred to
earlier, and also to the judgment of Bayley, J., in ‑ _Carlile's case_ ,
(supra), concluded that ;



"It is clear that in general the publication of fair reports of proceedings in
courts of justice, like free discuss‑ion of matters of public importance,
being considered for the public benefit, is privileged; but it is equally
clear that discussion offensive to public decency and of a depraving tendency
are not privileged."  
  
Keating, J. in the course of his judgment observed:



"The freedom of the press with relation to proceedings of courts of justice
is, doubt­less of the highest importance, and the law does its utmost to
protect such freedom, but the law would be self‑contradictory if it made the
publication of an indecent work an indictable offence and yet sanctioned the
republication of such a work under cover of its being part of the proceedings
in a court of justice."



Grove, J. expressed himself thus :



"If it were permissible to publish the report of a trial, in which the
question was whether certain matter was obscene and the publication of it a
misdemeanour, and to produce the whole of such disgusting matter under the
cover of such report, the rule would be that the person publishing an ob‑  


# 150



scene work would only have to be brought before a court of justice for such
publication, in order to entitle him to republish same matter with perfect
impunity. His trial would frustrate the very purpose  which it had in view,
viz: the putting of a stop to the publication of such matter. This
consideration appears to me to reduce the appellant's contention to an
absurdity."



A careful consideration of the facts and circumstances in _Steel's case_
(supra), and the judgment delivered in that case, it is clear that the claim
of privilege just could not have been accepted in such a situation as arose in
that case. Had such a claim been upheld, not only would the law have been
rendered self contradictory, but the court would also have been stultifying
itself for, whilst it, on the one hand, took steps to prevent the publication
of an article, it would, on the other, have given its blessings to the
publication of the very matter so impugned. The decision in _Steele's case_
(supra) may a applicable if a newspaper published what learn Counsel in the
case of _Vidyasagars vs. The Queen,_ (66) stated to court, even though such
report was fair and accurate and the publication bona fide. The decision in
_Steele's case_ (supra) do not lend itself to support a proposition that there
are proceedings in Parliament, which though they constitute acts and deeds of
Members themselves cannot, nevertheless, be reported by a newspaper however
fair and accurate such report be, and even though such publication has not
been expressly prohibited by the House.  


The case of _Surendra Mohanty vs. Nabakrishna Choudhury and others_ (24) was
also cited on behalf of the Petitioners. In that case a newspaper published a
speech, made in the State Legislature



# 151



by Member of that Legislature, which amounted to contempt of the High Court.
Upon the Member concerned, and the editor, the printer and the pub­lisher of
the newspaper being asked to show cause why they should not be committed for
contempt, the editor, the printer and the publisher tendered an unqualified
apology. The Rule issued against the Member was discharged on the ground that
the High Court had no jurisdiction to take action against a Member of the
Legislature for his speech in the Legislature, even if it amounts to contempt.
The decision in that case, in so far as it affected the publishers, is of
little or no assistance in this case where the Respondents have denied
liability and a consideration of the relevant principles of law has become
necessary.



Great reliance was also placed on behalf of the Petitioner, in support on this
contention, upon a statement made by Gatley (Supra) in the course of footnote
no. 28 appearing at page 596, wherein the author submits that "there can be no
privilege for a report the publication of which is contempt of court", and
then proceeds to state that" this was conceded in _Lucas and Son vs. O'Brien_
(31), though an exception was said to be possible." Although the law report,
in which the said judgment is reported, itself is not available, photostat
copies of it have, since judgment was reserved in this case, been submitted to
us by learned Queen's Counsel appearing for the Petitioner. A perusal of the
said copy shows that : O'Brien who had been a member of a political League in
New Zealand had in 1969 resigned from that League and founded another
Political party ; on 21st November 1972 the League instituted legal
proceedings against O'Brien and several others alleging that assets belonging
to the League had been transferred to the new party in order to assist O'Brien
in the 1972 New Zealand general election ; On 22.11.72 Lucas and Sqns (Nelson
Mail) Ltd., published an article in its



# 152



newspaper which was in effect a repetition of the statement of claim filed in
Court against O'Brien; O'Brien then commenced an action against the newspaper
and the League for damages on the basis that the said article was defamatory
both defendants raised, inter alia, the defence of qualified privilege, at
common law, on the basis that they had a moral or social duty to communicate
the contents of the claim made against O'Brien to the general public, and that
the article was a fair and accurate report of proceedings of Court ; these two
defences were, on the application of the plaintiff, O'Brien, struck out by the
trial judge ; the defendants thereupon appealed to the Court of Appeal. In
appeal the Court allowed the defendants to put forward the defence of
qualified privilege based on a social or moral duty to communicate. It was in
discussing this plea, that the appellate court considered the trial judge's
reference to the possibility that the publication of the contents of the
statement of claim filed by the League against O'Brien amounted to a contempt
of court ; and having observed that "It would be surprising if statements that
might amount to contempt ........ could at the same time be privileged for
reasons of public policy in an action for defamation"? the appellate court
proceeded to observe that : the trial judge, however, did not in fact go so
far as to hold that the publication of the said statement of claim actually
amounted to a contempt of court: that, before it (the appellate court),
learned Counsel did concede that, if such publication had in fact amounted to
contempt, then such publication could not be the subject of qualified
privilege on the basis of a moral and social duty. It is he important to note
that the statement, that anything which amounts to contempt of court would not
be covered by privilege, was not a conclusion arrived at by court and which
formed the basis of the court's decision, but that it represents only an
admission made by Counsel on a question of law.



# 153

**  **

What is even more important to note is that the plea of qualified privilege
which was accepted as being not available is a plea of qualified pri­vilege
put forward on the basis of "a moral or social duty", and that it makes no
reference to a plea put forward on the basis of a publication being a fair and
accurate report of parliamentary proceedings made without malice. In any event
the court further observed that "it is possible that a situation could arise
in which it would be ne­cessary for the court to balance the ordinary interest
of a litigant in a fair trial against some other consideration of general
public interest and to decide where the public interest lay". This evidently
is the observation which made Gatley state, as set out earlier, that "an
exception was said to be possible".



There is, however, an expression of opinion by a judge of the Court of Appeal
in England that the protection granted to a fair and accurate report of
parliamentary proceedings covers not only that which would otherwise have been
actionable on the basis of libel, but also that which would amount to contempt
of court. Lord Denning did, in the Court of Appeal in the case of _A.G. vs.
Times Newspapers Ltd_.(12) state:



"as soon as matters are discussed in Parliament they can be, and are, reported
at large in the newspaper. The publication in the newspapers is protected by
the law. Whatever comments are made in Parliament, they can be repeated in the
newspapers without any fear of an action for libel or proceedings for contempt
of court. If it is no contempt for a newspaper to publish the comments made in
Parliament, it should be no contempt to publish the selfsame comments made
outside Parliament."



# 154



No earlier authority has been referred to by Lord Denning in support of the
principle that Such proceedings can be published without running the risk of
being brought up for contempt Of  court. Yet, if previous authority is
necessary, then the expression of opinion by Chief Justice Cockburn, in
_Wason's case_ (1), in setting out the illustration so set out is a good
example of scandalising a judge', and if the public could be informed of what
pass a clear instance of the aforesaid principle so set out by Lord Denning in
the Court of Appeal. An expression of opinion on a question of law by so
eminent a judge is by itself high authority. It was submitted that, in any
event, as the House of Lords has  subsequently reversed the decision of the
Court of Appeal Lord, Denning's judgment would be of no avail. The House of
Lords did undoubtedly set aside the decision of the Court of Appeal to
discharge the injunction, but not on the basis that the principle so set out
by Lord Denning in the Court of Appeal is wrong in law. The mere fact that the
appeal to the House of Lords was allowed would not in any way detract from the
force and authority of any principle of law formulated and set down in the
judgment of the Court of Appeal. It would have lost its authority only if the
House of Lords did deal with it pointedly, and did expressly state that such
principle is not good law. In passing, it may be noted that the European Court
of Human Rights _1979 Vol. 2 European Court of Human Rights Report p.245_ did
not agree with the view of the House of Lords.



It was further contended that the view expressed by Lord Denning should be
confined to England because Parliament in England was earlier the High Court
of Parliament vested with judicial powers, and also because of the lex et
consuetudo



# 155



Parliament which was peculiar to that Parliament; and certain statements,
appearing in _Kielly vs. Carson,_ (85) to the effect that the power possessed
by the House of Commons to deal with for contempt was as a Court of Judicature
and as part of the High Court of Parliament. It transpired that the statements
appearing at pages 66 ‑ 75 were only submissions of Counsel, and that the
judgment in the case commenced at page 83. In the judgment itself it is
stated, at page 89, that the power to deal with for contempt possessed by the
House of Commons is so possessed not because it is a representative body with
legislative functions, but "by virtue of ancient usage and prescription", that
the lex et consuetudo parliament forms part of the Common Law of the land,
that, according to that law and custom, High Court of Parliament before its
division, and the House of Lords and Commons since, are invested with many
peculiar privileges, that of punishing for contempt being one. These
principles relating to the powers of the House of Commons to deal with for
contempt of its own authority do not, in any way, render the aforementioned
principle of law set out in the judgment of Lord Denning inapplicable to the
facts and circumstances of a case such as the one now before this court where
the question is whether a court of law is in any way precluded from dealing
with a person who has published an article which contains matter that amounts
to a contempt of such court. In any event, it must also be noted that, under
Article 4(c) of the Constitution, whilst the judicial power of the People is
now exercisable by Parliament through the courts and the other institutions
specified therein, Parliament can exercise directly the judicial power of the
People in respect of the matters spelt out in the said sub‑Article.



### That the same reasoning which applies in cases where a party seeks to
restrain the



# 156



publication of a libel, be made applicable also to contempt of court is a view
that has been again expressed by Lord Denning ‑ although on that occasion it
was in respect of a civil action and the publication was only a programme
proposed to be broadcast by the British Broadcasting Corporation‑ in 1979, in
the case of _A.G. vs. B.B.C._ (55) at 318.



In administering the law of contempt of court, the courts have been called
upon to consider two important principles relating to two aspects of public
interest, each of which is of paramount importance in any parliamentary system
of government, and which are also now enshrined in the Constitution : the
public interest in the administration of justice. The approach which the
European Court of Human Rights adopted in the _'Times case_ (supra), viz :
that the Court is faced not with a choice between two conflicting principles,
but with a principle of freedom of expression that is subject to a number of
exceptions which must be narrowly interpreted, cannot, however, be considered
in this Island as no restrictions have yet been prescribed by law in relation
to contempt of court under the provisions of sub‑article (2) of Article 15 of
the Constitution. We have, therefor to continue to walk the tight‑rope,
performing the balancing act prescribed by the House of Lords in the Times
case (supra) and referred to earlier. Contempt of Court is punished, as has
been set out earlier, not because those who are charged with the
responsibility of administering justice are concerned about their own dignity
but because it undermines the confidence of the public ‑ not only of the
parties to a particular suit but also all potential litigants in the due
administration of justice by the courts of law established by law. The
administration of justice, as has already been stated, is a matter of
tremendous importance and utmost concern to the public. The freedom of speech
has always been of paramount importance to the



# 157

**  **

public; for, it is one of the fundamental features of parliamentary system of
government without which parliamentary democracy would be a mockery. The law
of contempt of court constitutes a direct interference with the freedom ' of
speech; and, in the delicate exercise of assessing the claim of these two
competing interests both of which are equally indispensable, they have both to
be carefully weighed and finely balanced. Whilst, on the one hand, the freedom
of speech, should not be limited more than is really and truly necessary, on
the other it cannot be permitted in a situation where there is a real
likelihood of causing prejudice to or interfering with the administration of
justice.  


Article 14 (1) (a) of the Constitution guarantees to every citizen the freedom
of speech and expression including publication. The law relating to contempt
of court is a restriction on the said freedom of speech; but, as set out
earlier the combined force of the provisions of Articles 168 (1) and of 16 (1)
render such restriction valid and operative. At an early stage of the
proceedings before this court it was contended, on behalf of the Respondents,
that the Constitution promulgated in 1978 'advanced the rights of the Press'
and that the law relating to contempt of court dealing with publications in
the Press, which was in force in this Island at the time the Constitution came
into operation, requires to be reviewed. The Consti­tution has not granted any
specific rights to the Press of this Island. No special or exclusive right,
which has not been granted to a citizen of the Republic, has been granted to
the Press. No right, over and above the rights granted to a Citizen of the
Republic, has been granted to the Press of the Republic. The rights, which the
Press enjoys, constitute only an amalgamation, if at all, Of the rights of the
individual citizens of the Republic. The Constitution has not vested in the



# 158



Press any right which it did not enjoy earlier under the common law; nor any
right which a Citizen of the Republic is not granted under the Constitution.
The fundamental rights enjoyed by the Press under the Constitution are nothing
more and nothing less than the rights which even the humblest citizen of the
Republic is entitled to.



Article 3 of the Constitution provides : that sovereignty is in the People and
is inalienable; that sovereignty includes the powers of the government,
fundamental rights and the franchise. Article 4 of the Constitution which sets
out the manner in which the sovereignty so vested in the People should be
enjoyed and exercised, provides, inter alia: in sub‑article (a) that the
legislative power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament, consisting
of elected representatives of the People and by the People at a Referendum ;
in sub‑article (b) how the executive power of the People should be exercised ;
in sub ‑ article (c) how the judicial power of the people should be exercised.
Under the Constitution the three main powers of government viz: the
legislative, the executive and the judicial, are, even though they are to be
exercised by Parliament, the President of the Republic and the courts
respectively, all nevertheless vested in the People. The People of this Island
have therefore an inalienable and unquestionable right to know and take an
interest in all that takes place inter alia, both in Parliament and in the
administration of justice. The administration of justice has always been in a
parliamentary system of government, a matter of both great and profound public
interest, and public concern. It has now become even more so under the
Constitution now in operation  Parliament not only exercises the legislative
power vested in the People, but also consists of the elected representatives
of the People. That being so, what such elected representatives say and do in
Parliament,

# 159



and what takes place in Parliament is of tremendous importance to the People
and the People must know and have access to information of all such matters,
subject only to any restrictions imposed by the law of the land. The necessity
for and the importance of informing the people of all proceedings in
parliament have been very aptly and forcefully set out by Chief Justice
Cockburn well over hundred years ago, in the case of _Wason vs. Walter_ , (1)
referred to earlier; and in view of its great relevancy I take leave to quote
at length, commencing from page 89 ‑:



"it seems to us impossible to doubt that it is of paramount public and
national  importance that the proceedings of the houses of Parliament shall be
communicated to the public, who have the deepest interest in knowing what
passes within their walls, seeing that on what is there said and done, the
welfare of the community depends. Where would be our confidence in the
government of the country or in the legislature by which our laws are framed,
and to whose charge the great interests of the country are comm­itted, where
would be our attachment to the Constitution if the great council of the realm
were shrouded in secrecy and concealed ;from the knowledge of the nation? How
could the communication between the representatives of the people and their
Constitutions, which are so essential to the working of the repre­sentative
system, be usefully carried on, if the constituencies were kept in ignorance
of what their representatives are doing? What would become of the right of
petitioning on ,all measures pending in parliament, the undoubted right of the
subject, if the people are kept in ignorance of what is passing in either
house? Can any man bring himself to doubt that the publicity given in  modern

# 160



times to what passes in parliament is essential to the maintenance of the
relation subsisting between the government, the legislature and the country at
large?"



Dealing with the argument that, even so, debates in which the character of
individuals is brought in question should not receive publicity, the Chief
Justice proceeded to state at page 90:



"...............  there is perhaps no subject in which the public have a
deeper interest than in all that relates to the conduct of public servants of
the state, no subject of parliamentary discussion which requires to be made
known than any inquiry relating to it. Of this no better illustration could
possibly be given than is afforded by the case before us. A distinguished
counsel whose qualification for the judicial bench had been abundantly tested
by a long career of forensic medicine, is promoted to a high judicial office,
and the profession and the public are satisfied that in a most important post
the services of a most competent and valuable public services of have been
secured. An individual comes forward and calls upon the House of Lords to take
measures for removing the judge, in all other respects so well qualified for
his officer, by reason that on an important occasion he had exhibited so total
a disregard of truth as to render him unfit to fill an office for which a.
sense of the solemn obligations of truth and honour is an essential
qualification. Can it be said that such a subject is not one in which the
public has a deep interest, and as to which it ought not to be informed of
what passes in  debate?"



The Chief Justice then proceeds to discuss, at page 94, why it is so very
desirable that all Public



# 161



functionaries, including judges, should be open to criticism :



"Comments on government, on ministers and officers of state, on members of
both houses of parliament, on judges, and other public functionaries are now
made every day which half a century ago would have been the sub­ject of
actions or ex office information, and would have brought down fine and
im­prisonment on publishers and authors. Yet who can doubt that the public are
gainers by the change, and that though injustice may often be done, and though
public men often have to smart under the keen sense of wrong inflicted by
hostile criticism the nation profits by public opinion being thus freely
brought to bear on the discharge of public duties."



These statements were made well over a century ago; but how true they sound
even today, how apposite they are even now. It has been submitted that, though
such observations may apply to other func­tionaries, yet, limitations should
be placed upon them in so far as they relate to judges lest the independence
of the judiciary be undermined. The only limitation would be that the limits
of fair criticism be not exceeded and the field of contempt Of court not be
entered into. Subject to this salutary restriction ‑ and the reminder which
will be referred to later on in this judgment ‑ a judge too stands, at the
conclusion of a case, open to criticism, however rumbustious it be.



That proceedings in Parliament are presumed conclusively to be of public
interest, and that the nature of the activities of Parliament (and of the
courts) are such that they are treated as conclusively establishing that the
public interest is forwarded by publication of reports of their proceedings is
also a principle which has



# 162



been accepted ‑ in the 19th century in _wason's case_ (1), and in the 20th
century in _Webb's case_ (36) in 1973, and in 1948 by the Privy Council in
_M.G. Perera's case_ (67). The Privy Council was also of view that reports of
judicial and parliamentary proceedings stand in a class apart from reports of
proceedings of other bodies, in regard to which their status alone was not to
be conclusive, but the subject matter dealt with in the particular report had
also to be considered. So that, as far as Parliamentary proceedings are
concerned, no distinction is to be made on the basis of the subject‑matter
dealt with, or the nature and the character of such subject‑matter. A
newspaper, which, therefore, publishes, without malice and with the sole
subject of conveying information to the public, a fair and accurate report of
"a proceeding in Parliament", publishes something which the law presumes
"conclusively to be of public interest it , and which the law also treats as­
"conclusively establishing that the public interest"", is forwarded by (its)
publication."



During the last three or four decades there seems to have been considerable
interest evinced in England in regard to an examination of the state of the
law of contempt of court ; and several committees, chaired by experienced and
distinguished judges of the superior courts have, from time to time, examined
the legal position relating to contempt of court and have recommended several
changes and reforms to be brought about in this particular branch of the law :
a committee chaired by Lord Shawcross in 1959 ; a committee chaired by Lord
Salmon in 1969 ; a committee chaired by Lord, Justice Phillimore in 1974. The
opinions expressed and the recommendations made by these severs, committees ‑
even though they have not all been given legal effect to ‑ serve to indicate
the modern approach to a branch of the law which is very ancient in origin and
which is of the utmost



# 163



importance in the field of administration of justice.



The Report of the Committee on Contempt of Court chaired by Rt. Hon. Lord
Justice Phillimore, which was presented to Parliament in England, states, at
page 69, in regard to the offence of scandalising that : "most attacks of this
kind are best ignored. They usually come from disappointed litigants or their
friends. To take proceedings in respect of them would merely give them greater
publicity and a platform from which the person concerned could air his view
further. Moreover the climate of opinion nowadays is more free. Authority
including the Courts, is questioned and scrutinised more than it used to be.
The Lord Chief Justice said in his evidence to us :"Judges" backs have got to
be a good deal broader than they were thought to be thirty years ago". It is
no doubt because of this, and in pursuance of the spirit of Lord Atkin's
dictum that practice has reverted to what it was before the turn of the
century when it was said that:



'Courts are satisfied to leave to public opinion attacks or comments
derogatory or scandalous to them.'



The Phillimore committee was of opinion that the time has come to bring the
law into line with such practice, and recommended that the branch of the law,
known as 'scandalising a judge or court' be done away with and be replaced by
a new strictly defined criminal offence to be triable on in­dictment and in
respect of which the defence that the allegations were true and that the
publication was for the public benefit be available to the defence. This
recommendation has, however, not yet been implemented, although the Law of
Contempt of Court Act was enacted in 1981.



# 164



In their report The Inter‑departmental Committee on the Law of Contempt as it
affects Tribunals of Inquiry chaired by Lord Justice Salmon, in the year 1969,
had this to say in regard to the making of allegations of impropriety against
judges, (and which appears at page 190 of the book entitled _Judges on Trial
by Shimon Shetreet ‑ and edited by Gordon J. Borrie‑_1976) :



"In the most unlikely event, however, there being just cause for challenging
the inte­grity of a judge, it could not be contempt of court to do so. Indeed
it would be a public duty to bring the relevant facts to light."



A committee chaired by Lord Shawcross ‑ as set out at p.191 in Judges on Trial
(supra) ‑ which had also considered the question of contempt of court had
recommended that there should be the opportunity of making bona fide charges
of partiality or corruption against a judge and that the appropriate means for
this purpose was not the Press but a letter to the Lord Chancellor or the
complainant's Member of Parliament. In this case now before us, the document
"A" does not represent a complaint made by Mr. de Alwis to the Respon­dents'
newspaper. It is only a publication of a fair and accurate ‑ no question has
been raised about its fairness or accuracy ‑ report of something done in
Parliament.



The last successful prosecution for scandalising a judge' in England has been
over­ half a century ago ‑ 1931 in the case of _R vs. Colsey_ (supra) when an
allegation of partiality was alleged against Lord Justice Slesser, who had,
earlier, as Solicitor ‑ General, steered the rele­vant legislation which came
up for consideration before him in this case, by the editor of the  magazine
Truth, and the editor was fined. This



# 165



decision has, as earlier stated, come in for much criticism, and, according to
Borrie and Lowe (supra) ‑ p 162) 'may be open to question'. The only
subsequent attempt, according to the reported decisions, to have a person
dealt with under this head of contempt was in 1968 when Quintin Hogg, Q.C. was
brought up before the Court of Appeal which was incidentally the very first
occasion, according to Lord Denning that the Court of Appeal in England was
called upon to deal with a case of contempt against itself ‑ in respect of an
article written by him in the magazine called, "Punch". It was in the course
of the judgment in this case that Lord Denning used with reference to the
court's power to deal with for contempt, the now well known words :



"It is a jurisdiction which undoubtedly belongs to us, but which we will use
most sparingly : more particularly as we ourselves have an interest in the
matter. Let me say at once that we will never use this jurisdiction as a means
to uphold our own dignity. That must vest on surer foundations. Nor will we
use it to supress those who speak against us. We do not fear criticism, nor do
we resent it. For there is something far more important at stake. It is no
less than freedom of speech itself. It is the right of every man in Parliament
or out of it in the Press or over the broadcast to make fair comment even
outspoken comment on matters of public interest. Those who comment can deal
faithfully with all that is done in a court of justice. They can say we are
mistaken and our decisions erroneous, whether they are subject to appeal or
not. All we would ask is that those who criticise us will remember that, from
the nature of our office we cannot reply to their criticism. We cannot enter
into public controversy. Still less into  


#  166



political controversy‑ We must rely . on conduct itself to be its own
vindication."



It may, however, be very difficult to draw line between strongly expressed
criticism scurrilous abuse.



If such conduct as was considered in case of _The King vs. Nicholls_ (56)
could be the subject of public comment, then public knowledge of the
consideration of an allegation conduct, which is not so apparent to the
public, by the highest Legislature of the country cannot be said to cause more
damage to the person or institution concerned.



Although, amongst the authorities cited to at the hearing of this matter,
several of them instances in which the offenders have been with, yet, in quite
a few, the defences have upheld. After a review of the judicial decisions
relating to this particular head of contempt Arlidge and Eady in their book on
the Law Contempt of Court (1982) state at page 16 "Overall it is difficult to
escape the feeling even in the few cases where matter has been he be
scandalous, no great harm would have been to the administration of justice if
the particular publication had been passed over unnoticed. If, suggested, the
correct test is whether there is a risk of serious interference with the
administration of justice, it may be that there will be few cases where this
contempt will be established."



The modern approach in regard to this category of contempt of court seems to
be heavily in favour of the courts being content "to leave to public opinion
attacks or comments derogatory or scandalous to them", and "to rely on (their)
conduct it self to be (their) own vindication."



# 167



_Wason is case_ (1) set out the grounds upon which publicity to Court
proceedings are given though inconvenience may be caused to individuals by
much publications, and proceeded to accord to reports of the proceedings of
Parliament a similar pro­tection in law. Pearson, J. did in _Webb's case­_
(supra) set out five reasons, which had been collected from the earlier
authorities, why pri­vilege has been accorded to judicial proceedings : that
court proceedings are open to the public, and therefore reports of such
proceedings should be freely permitted; that the administration of justice
concerns everyone, and that it is well that the conduct of Judges should if
necessary be brought. before the bar of public opinion like all other matters
of public concern; that the education of the public as to the details of the
administration of justice ; that the parties affected may be well be better
off with a fair and accurate report than with rumours circulating ; in
balancing the advantages to the public by the reporting of judicial
proceedings against the detriment to individuals of being incidentally
defamed; the general advantages to the country in having proceedings published
more than counter­ balances the inconvenience to private persons, whose
conduct may be the subject of such proceedings.



_Shetreet : Judges on Trial 1976, edited by Gordon J._ Borrie refers, at page
98, to a letter, dated 9.2.1921, written by the then Lord Chancellor, Lord
Birkenchead, to the then Prime Minister of England, Mr.Lloyd George  strongly
opposing a proposed appointments to a high judicial office. In that letter the
lord Chancellor had, quoting the terms of the Act of settlement of 1701,
stated that the judges "be removable only for the most serious judicial
misbehavior and then in the most public and open manner". Shetreet at page
150, also refers to an



# 168



incident which had taken place in England in the year 1973 in which two highly
placed Judges of the land had figured prominently in public with reference to
a matter arising from the criticism, by trade unionists and members of
Parliament, of the conduct of a judge in his judicial capacity the President
of the Industrial Relations Court (Sir John Donaldson) made an order of
sequestration against the 'political fund' of a large trade union ; the trade
union concerned refused to obey the said Order ; a campaign of criticism was
then undertaken by the trade unionists and the Labour backbenchers against Sir
John Donaldson ; a motion, signed by 187 Labour Members of Parliament was also
put down in Parliament, calling for the removal of Sir John Donaldson on the
ground of "political prejudice and partiality" Sir John Donaldson then
defended the decision of his Court in public in order to set the record
straight; Lord Hailsham the then Lord Chancellor, did himself, in a public
speech made as the head of the judiciary, call upon the public to note the
identity and the party of the signatories to the said motion, and to strike a
blow for the integrity and independence of the judges of England. Learned
Counsel appearing for the Respondents, did also draw the attention of this
Court to several instances even in this Island in which publicity had been
given in the local to matters pertaining to the judiciary and the
administration of justice, which could have come well within the ambit of
'scandalising a judge or Court'. Such publicity has not been shown to brought
about any loss of public confidence in the judiciary of this Island or to have
resulted in any risk of serious interference with the administration of
justice in this Island. The submission was made that any complaint against a
judge qua judge should be directed to the authority, which under the law has
the power to



# 169

**  **

take steps against such judge, and that no publicity should be given to such
complaint or to the steps taken upon it until a final decision is made and
that the public should be made aware of such complaint and the proceedings
only after the final decision is made in regard to such com­plaint. The
advantages, if any, of such a closed' procedure, are, in my opinion,
outweighed by the beneficial advantages of a procedure which is "Most public
and open". It is in the best interests of the very person against whom such an
allegation has been made that it be not fully concealed from the public and
that no occasion be provided for the circulation of rumours which in practice
has often been found to cause immense suffering to the helpless individual.
The innocent need not fear such openness. A person whose conscience is clear
need not and will not fight shy of an 'open' procedure. The damage that would
and could be caused both to the individual and to the institution where access
to information is completely barred heed hardly be stressed. Any pain of mind
that would be caused, and any stigma that would be attached to one, who is
innocent, as a result of the public being informed of any such complaint, and
of the steps being taken in that behalf by those in authority, would be only
temporary; for, once the innocence of the party Complained against is
vindicated, and he is exonerated, the same degree of publicity could and Would
be given to such decision. A responsible Press ‑ and other media with an equal
sense of responsibility ‑ could be relied on to do whatever is in their power
to see that the fair name of the officer concerned, which might have been
dimmed even in some small measure by, their own act, is restored to its
original lustre. Such information given to the public, regarding the complaint
and the steps that are to be taken by the country's highest legislature to
have such complaint inquired into by the appropriate authority, would,



# 170



far from shaking the confidence the public has in the institution or in the
individual, operate to assure to the public that the stream of justice
continues, and would continue to flow with all its traditional and pristine
purity. The administration of justice would stand to lose more than it would
gain if the judges and the Courts were to be shielded from public scrutiny.  


It is legitimate to proceed on the basis that all proceedings in Parliament
are conducted with a very high sense of responsibility, and always in the best
interests of the People, whose elected representatives the Members of
Parliament are and in whom also the Constitution of the Island has vested the
sovereignty. That the House is deeply conscious of the importance of, and the
special place that should be accorded to the administration of justice, and
also of the solemn and responsible manner in which it must proceed in all
matters connected with it is evident from the Standing Order No: 78, wherein
it is provided that the conduct of Judges or other persons engaged in the
administration of justice shall not be raised except upon a substantive
motion. As earlier stated, before such a motion could be moved on the floor of
the House, certain procedural steps, required by the Standing Orders of the
House, and which are also subject to the orders of the Speaker, have to be
complied with. Furthermore, all proceedings on the floor of the House are
­subject to the direction and control of the Speaker. The House has the power
to prohibit the publication of any of its proceedings. The House also observes
a well established procedure in regard to matters that are sub judice. It has
been stated that whatever salutory precautionary measures there be, they will
be open to abuse Then, as has been said, anything of value is liable to be
abused. That, however, does not justify an approach that the Members will act
in a





# 171

**  **

manner that is not compatible with the sense of responsibility that the People
who elected them have a right to expect, and do in fact expect of them.



  Lord Denning did, in the course of the judgment in the _Times case_ (supra)
refer to the desirability of the conventions of Parliament being the same as
the law administered in the Courts in matters affecting the Courts in order to
prevent any interference with the administration of justice. A similar
expression of opinion was made by Lord Phillimore in the course of his
judgment in the same case: and the third judge Lord Scarman, suggested that,
although the courts, subject only to the legislative power of Parlia­ment, can
determine what constitutes contempt of court, yet, in an area which enjoys the
attention of both Parliament and the courts and where discretion is a major
element in the process of decision it is the duty of the courts to note the
practice of the House of Parliament and to act in harmony with it, so far as
the law allows.



No allegation of malice has been made against either of the Respondents by the
Petitioner in his affidavit; and learned Queen's Counsel did also, in the
course of his sub­missions. state that no such allegation is being made. There
is no reason why the 1st Respondent's assertion that his was an act done bona
fide and solely for the purpose of supplying information to the public should
not be accepted.



  There is another aspect of this matter to be considered ‑ whether a
publication such as "A" could be said in any way to have an impact on another
well known principle of parliamentary democracy, viz: the independence of the
judiciary. This principle has been variously described as "a cornerstone of
democracy", "pillar of democracy",



# 172



"the last bastion of freedom," the "bulwark of individual freedom". Whatever
the description,  the characteristics of this particular feature, which is one
of the hallmarks of , parliamentary democracy, are well‑ known and need no
elaboration. Having been originated and developed England it has been readily
accepted and adopted as an inherent and indispensable characteristic of
parliamentary democracy. With us, in this Island, this principle is now
enshrined in the Constitution itself. It is referred to in the Preamble  as
one of the assurances granted to the people and is embodied in the chapter
relating to the Judiciary. The relevant provisions are Article 107 to Article
117. Article 107 (2) makes provision for the removal of judges: by an order of
the President, who, in terms of Article 4 (b), alone exercises the executive
power of the people, upon an address of Parliament, which, in terms of Article
4 exercises, apart from the People themselves at a Referendum the legislative
power of the People. The proviso to sub‑article (2) of Article 107 sets out
the circumstances in which a resolution for the presentation of such an
address shall be entertained by the Speaker. Sub-article (3) of Article 107
states that Parliament shall either by law or by Standing Order provide for
all matters relating to the presentation of such an address, and for certain
specified steps relevant to such a resolution. No Standing Orders made in
terms of Article 107 (3) have been brought to the notice of this Court. Nor is
there anything to show that such Standing Orders have in truth and in fact
been made. The resolution relevant to these proceedings set down in the Order
Paper, R3, is, it seems to be clear, only the beginning of the process which
would, if it is so warranted, culminate in the resolution referred to in the
proviso to sub‑article (3) of Article 107. The public interest in proceedings
specified in sub



# 173

**  **

article (2) (3) Of Article 107 is unquestionable. The publication "A" cannot
be said to violate any of the aforesaid provisions of the Constitution
relating to the independence of the judiciary.



A consideration of the question, which arises upon the plea put forward on
behalf of the Respondents, as set out above, leaves me to the view that the
protection granted by the common law to a fair and accurate report of
proceedings of Parliament published without malice and solely for the
information of the public though it contains defamatory matter also protects A
fair and accu­rate report of a proceeding of Parliament, such as "A",
published without malice and solely for the information of the public and the
publication of which has not been prohibited by Parliament, even though such
report contains matter which would otherwise have rendered the publisher
liable to be dealt with under that branch of the law of contempt known as
"scandalising a judge or Court".



There are just two other matters I would like to refer to before I conclude
this judgment.



The Press undoubtedly has a very important and responsible part to play in
regard to the administration of justice. As has been set out by _Shetreet_
(supra) at p 179, Lord Denning has had this to say in regard to the role of
the Press in this field : "In every court in England you will, .I believe,
find a newspaper reporter ....He notes all that goes on and makes a fair and
accurate report of it ........   He is, I verily believe, the watch‑dog of
justice. .,...The judge will be Careful to see that the trial is fairly and
properly conducted if he realises that any unfairness or impropriety on his
part will be noted by those in court and may be reported in the Press. He will
be more anxious to give a correct decision if he knows that his reasons must
justify



# 174



themselves at the bar of Public opinion": "Justice has no place in darkness
and secrecy. When a judge sits on a case, he  himself is on trial
............. If there is any misconduct on (his) part any bias or prejudice,
there is a reporter to keep an eye on him". Lord Shawcross, in the report of
the committee chaired by him in 1965 on the 'Law and the Press', referred to
by Shetreet (supra) at page 180 has observed :"a large measure, of
responsibility rests upon the Press to keep a constant watch on the
proceedings in the courts at all levels to make such criticism as appears
necessary in the interest of justice". The Salmon Committee in 1969 (supra)
has observed : "the right to criticise judges.......... may be one of the
safeguards which helps to ensure their high standards of performance and also
that the same meticulous care which has always been taken in appointing them
in the past will continue to be taken in the future". This "watch‑dog" \- an
equally familiar and equally alert figure in our own courts ‑ has an extremely
responsible and vital role to play in the sphere of administration of justice.
It behoves this "watch‑dog", therefore, not to "break loose and have to be
punished for misbehaviour", but to discharge the trust placed in it with a
deep sense of responsibility and with dignity and decorum always remembering
that, in the words of Lord Denning', all that the judges ask of all those who
criticise them is:



" .............. remember that from the nature of our office we cannot reply
to their criticisms. We cannot enter into public controversy. Still less into
political controversy. We must rely on our conduct itself to be its
vindication."



It need hardly be stressed  that the aforementioned decision operates to
Protect  


#  175



reports ‑ as are expressly referred to, and are published in the manner and
with the object specifically set out therein ‑ only of proceedings of
Parliament, and also, of course, of courts. It does not protect scurrilous
outbursts against judges, qua judges, and courts by, for instance,
"ill‑informed, slap‑dash news‑writers and pamphle­teers", who, if and when
found answerable, will be severely dealt with.



The Rule issued on the 1st and 2nd Respondents should, accordingly be
discharged.



**ABDUL CADER, J.**



The facts are set down in the Judgment of Wanasundera, J. The news item which
is the subject matter of the charge has the heading­; "Select Committee Probe
of Mr K.C.E. de Alwis; Representations".  


"F.D.B.'s pleadings prepared in the Judge's Chambers ?"



Thereafter, two items in t‑he motion are singled out for special mention
emspicuously am then the entire motion before Parliament is reproduced.
Mr.Nadesan agreed that neither the headline nor the spotlighting of certain
parts of the resolution will constitute contempt by itself, when there is a
reproduction of the entire text of the resolution in that news item, but that
they. would aggravate the contempt only if the news item amounts to contempt.
In fact, in the proceedings before us, there are no inaccuracies to complain
about, except that some parts of the resolution have been highlighted. (Vide
_Cook v. Alexander_ (23))



We are concerned in these proceedings only With the aspect of contempt dealing
with scanda‑



#  176



lising the Court and I shall now deal with some cases reported in Borrie and
Lowe on the Law of Contempt on this aspect of the law where convictions had
been entered in respect of newspaper publications.



In _Rex vs. Cray_ (40)



"The terrors of Mr. justice Darling will not trouble the......  reporters very
much. No newspaper can exist except upon its merits, a condition from which
the Bench, happily for Mr.Justice Darling, is exempt. There is not a
journalist in Birmingham who has anything to learn from the impudent little
man in horse hair, a microcosm of conceit and empty headedness, who admonished
the press yesterday."





In _Rex v. New Statesman_ (75)



"We cannot help regarding the verdict this week in the libel action brought by
the Editor of the Morning Post against Dr. Marie Stopes as a substantial
miscarriage of justice. We are not at all in sympathy with Dr. Stopes' work or
aims, but prejudice against those aims ought not to be allowed to influence a
Court of Justice in the manner in which they appeared to influence Mr. Justice
Avory in his summing up.....The serious point in this case, how ever, is that
an individual owning to such views as those of Dr. Stopes cannot apparently
hope ,or a fair hearing in a court presided over by Mr.Justice Avory and there
are so many Avory's."



In _Rex v. Colsey_ (82)



"Lord Justice Slesser who can hardly altogether unbiassed about legislation of
this



#####  177



type maintained that really it was a very nice provisional order or as good as
one can be expected in this vale of tears."



_In the Evening News_ (39):



"His Honour the Judge Windeyer has had another opportunity to show his utter
want of judicial impartiality and from the bench he has delivered once more a
bitter and one‑sided adovcate's speech."



I now proceed to consider the news item which is the subject matter of the
charge. The very headline which the editor thought important to highlight
suggests gross impropriety to a judge. What can be more partial than to permit
a party to prepare the pleadings in the chamber of the judge who heard the
case ? The question mark makes no difference. Nice distinctions that there was
no allegation that the judge had a hand in it are of no substance as the
information carries a sufficient innuendo. If not, why investigate it at all?



Yet another 'question' that brings the court into disrepute is that two Judges
were influenced by improper considerations.



Taking the entire article as a whole, one is left with no uncertainty as
regards the effect that this item would have had on the public and it is that
what matters, not the respondent's intention.



###### Borrie and Lowe in "The Law of Contempt"



"Allegations of partiality are probably the most common way in which the court
has been held to be "scandalised". The courts are particularly sensitive about
such allegations



#  178



And there seems to be a clear distinction between an allegation of partiality
and allegation of incompetence. This sensitivity is attributable to the fact
that the very basic function of a judge is to make an impartial judgment.
Indeed the law goes on to some lengths to ensure that a Judge has no personal
interest in the case, his decision being considered void and of no effect if
bias is proved; _nemo judex in sua causa_. Allegations of partiality are
treated very seriously indeed because they tend to undermine confidence in the
basic function of a judge."



In Veerasamy v. Stewart (63) Soertsz, J. states as follows:-



"As Harris, C.J. said in the case of Superintendent of Legal Affairs, _Bihar
v. Murali Manohar_ (86).



"It has been frequently laid down that no intent to interfere with the due
course of justice, or to prejudice the public need be established if the
effect of the article or articles complained of is to create prejudice, or is
to interfere with the due course of justice."



In regard to the precise meaning of the words if the effect is to create
prejudice or to interfere', numerous judgements have established the rule that
-



"the question in every case is not whether the publication in fact interferes,
but whether it tends to interfere with the due course of justice", (e.g., vide
_Metropolitan Music Hall v. Lake_ ; (87) _In re Carnish, Staff v. Gill_ )
(88).



#  179



Therefore, in view of my finding that the respondents did not intend to
interfere with the course of justice, it is sufficient for me to address
myself to the question whether these publications tend to prejudice the
petitioner and the other accused, by interfering with their right to a fair
and impartial trial."



In the English case of _Rex v. Davies,_ (11) at p. 40, which was quoted with
approval in _Attorney General v. Baker and Others_ we find words to the
following effect :



"The real offence is the wrong done to the public by weakening the authority
and influence of a tribunal which exists for their good alone......... such
conduct is pre‑eminently the proper subject of summary jurisdiction. Attacks
upon Judges,  .. excite in the minds of people a general dissatisfaction with
all judicial determination  and, whenever men's allegiance to the laws is so
fundamentally shaken, it is the most fatal and dangerous obstruction of
justice, and in my opinion calls out for a more rapid and immediate redress
than any other obstruction whatsoever; not for the sake of the Judges as
private individuals, but because they are the channels by which the King's
justice is conveyed to the people. To be impartial and to be universally
thought so are both absolutely necessary for giving justice that free, open
and unimpaired current which it has for many ages found all over this
kingdom".



Hidaytullah, C.J., observed in _Cooper v. Union of India_ (68) :



"There is no doubt that the Court like any other institution does not enjoy
immunity from



#  180



fair criticism. This Court does not claim to be always right although it does
not spare any effort to be right according to the best of the ability,
knowledge and judgment of the judges. They do not think themselves in
possession of all truth or hold that wherever others differ from them, it is
so far error. No one is more conscious of his limitations and fallibility than
a judge but because of  his training and the assistance he gets from learned
counsel he is apt to avoid mistakes more than others.........We are
constrained to say also that while fair and temperate criticism of this Court
or any other Court even if strong, may not be actionable,  attributing
improper motives, or tending to bring judges or courts into hatred and
contempt or obstructing directly or indirectly with the functioning of Courts
is serious contempt of which notice must and will be taken. Respect is
expected not only from those to whom the judgment of the Court is acceptable
but also from those to whom it is repugnant. Those who err in their criticism
by indulging in vilification of the institution of courts, administration of
justice and the instruments through which the administration acts, should take
heed, for they will act at their own peril. We think this will be enough
caution to persons embarking on the path of criticism."



Beg C. J. said in R. v. Mulgokar (78) as follows :



"In judging whether it constitutes a contempt of court or not we are concerned
more with the reasonable and probable effects of what is said or written than
with the motives lying behind what is done."



In _Sarath Chandra Biswal v. Surendra Mohanty_ (89),



#  181



#### It was urged that where a particular action or speech of a judge is the
basis for contempt, alleged either by way of criticism or otherwise , then if
the facts stated are true, an allegation that such words or acts create a lack
of confidence or faith in the administration of justice will remain within the
limits of the exercise of the normal right of freedom of speech. This
contention was held untenable.



Even the often quoted opinion of Lord Atkin in _Ambard v. Attorney General of
Trinidad_ (57)

Has its reservations.

####  

#### "But whether the authority and position of an individual judge, or the
due administration of justice, is concerned, no wrong is committed by any
member of the public who exercises the Ordinary right of criticising, in good
faith, in private or public, the public act done in the seat of justice. The
path of criticism is a public way; the wrong headed are permitted to err
therein; provided that members of the public abstain from imputing improper
motives to those taking part in the administration of justice, and are
genuinely exercising a right of criticism, and not acting in malice or
attempting to impair the administration of justice, they are immune. Justice
is not a cloistered virtue; she must, be allowed to suffer the scrutiny and
respectful, even though outspoken comments of ordinary men.



This judgment contains "a list of qualifications to the right of criticism of
judicial actions detracting considerably from the force of a doctrine of free
speech in legal matters. Amidst the euphoric praise normally surrounding
reference to _Ambard's case_ these qualifications are overlooked", this
judgment guarantees only "the ordinary right of criticism"



#  182



which is done " temperately and fairly" and which refrains from imputing
improper motives.



The fact that the respondent merely reproduced a resolution in parliament has
no application to the issue under consideration as I am concerned, at this
point, only with the question whether the words in the news item _per se_
bring the court into disrepute and scandalises the court and I have no
hesitation in holding that they do



I now come to the question whether the respondents can avoid liability on the
ground of qualified privilege. Notwithstanding the many cases cited to us,
there is none directly in point, There are, however, a few cases that provide
assistance to decide the issue before us, which I shall consider at some
length.  


In _De Buse and Others v. McCarthy and Another_ (34), the court held that the
statute on which the defendant relied did not permit the defendants to send
notice to the public library of the borough containing a report of the
committee which was defamatory of the plaintiff in that case. The defendants
then took up the plea that the council had a common interest with the
ratepayers in the subject matter of the words complained of and that it was
the duty of the council and/or it was reasonably necessary and proper for the
council, for the conduct of its business, to publish the words complained of
by all reasonable and convenient means to the ratepayers.



Lord Greene, M.R.quoted the words of Lord Atkinson:-



"It was not disputed, in this case on either side, that a privileged occasion
is, in reference to qualified privilege, an occasion where the person who
makes a communication has an interest or a duty, legal, social, or moral, to
make it to the person to whom it is



#  183

**  **

made, and the person to whom it is so made has a corresponding interest or
duty to receive it. This reciprocity is essential."



These words are very similar to the defence put forward by the respondents in
these proceedings that the respondents have a duty to inform the public and
the public have a right to receive information of what is taking place in
Parliament. 1ord Greene went on to say :



"I cannot see that it can possibly be said that the council was under any duty
to make that communication to ratepayers. At that stage the matter was, in a
sense, sub judice, because the committee's report by itself could have no
practical value unless and until it had been considered by the council. and
the council had come to some decision on it. That decision might have been
that the report be adopted, or that the report be not adopted, or that the
report be referred back to the committee. The appointment of committees of
this kind is part of the internal management and administration of a body of
this description, and, whatever the duty or the interest of the council might
have been after it had dealt with the report and come to some decision on it,
I cannot see, that‑ at that stage in the operation of the machinery of the
borough's administration there was any duty whatsoever to tell the ratepayers
how the wheels were going round. There may well have been a duty, or if not a
duty at any rate an interest, of the council to inform the ratepayers of the
result of its own deliberation."



As regards the interest of the ratepayers to receive information, His Lordship
went on to say:



#  184



" It is obvious that ratepayers are ­interested in the proper administration
and safeguarding of their property and in the way in which their council
conducts its business, but what I may call the internal working of the
administrative machine and all the details of its domestic deliberations in a
case of this kind, are things which I should have thought ratepayers are not
in general interested in unless and until they emerge in the shape of some
practical action or practical resolution."



In the proceedings before us, the resolution was before the House and, if I
may use the words of Lord Greene, it was a "domestic deliberation in
Parliament, and of "no practical" value unless and until it had been
considered by Parliament (Council)" and the Parliament (Council) had come to
some decisions."  


In _Buse case_ (supra) at page 167,  


The judgment of Goddard, L.J. is more interesting . He said:



"The statute does not, in my opinion justify the council in doing or oblige
the council to do anything approaching that which they did, if it had
justified them in publishing, or obliged them to publish this report on the
door of the town hall, the fact that a little extra publicity was given to it
by sending it to the public libraries might merely result in the plaintiffs
being entitled to nominal, or something approaching nominal, damages, but the
statute does nothing of the sort."



Obviously, these words are intended to mean that the defendants were guilty
even if the statute had permitted the publication of defamatory matter.



#  185



If a notice sent by the Council was considered an offence, the position of the
respondents cannot be any better. I am conscious that the respondents
published a resolution before Parliament and not the proceedings of a County
council and Parliament has immunity unlike the Council. The distinction would
apply if Parliament had published or authorised the publication, but in this
case, there was no such authority. It is further to be noted that in these
proceedings, it is not the defamation of an individual that is in issue, but
the very institution of justice.



This decision of mine will decide the subject matter of the charge before us;
nevertheless, it is necessary to consider whether speeches made in Parliament
can be reported if they affect judges and the administration of justice.



In _Surendra Mohanty v. Nabakrishna Choudhoury_ (24), _Narasingham, C.J._ held
that the words of the Chief Minister in Parliament that "in many instances,
the immaturity of the High Court is apparent" contains an aspersion regarding
the competency of the Judges of this Court."



He went on to say further that the words of the Chief Minister that "in many
instances the judgments of the High Court were corrected by the Supreme Court
and that "in many instances the Supreme Court held that the High, Court has
abused the powers given to it "tend to power the authority of the High Court
to a considerable extent and bring the Judges into contempt." He said that the
use of the word "abused" conveyed the idea that the High Court had abused its
powers and "is indeed objectionable and contains an imputation to the effect
that the Powers were used improperly." Having discussed the merits on the
facts in the speech of the Minister, the Lord Chief Justice stated as follows
:‑  



#  186



"In my opinion, therefore, the Chief Minister had no justification for saying
that in many instances the Supreme Court has held that the High Court has
abused its powers.' I have no, doubt that the aforesaid speech in the passage
of Sri. Nabakrishna Choudhury (to put it mildly) was somewhat hasty and
uninformed and would clearly amount to contempt of this  Court.(emphasis is
mine) (p. 172)



Then, he went on to discuss at length the immunity that members of Parliament
enjoy and acquitted the Chief Minister.



However, the pressmen who reported the speech of the Chief Minister were not
so fortunate. If the Chief Minister's speech in Parliament "clearly amounts to
contempt of Court", the Press could fare no better and they could not claim
immunity to avoid conviction. The learned Judge said of them:



"So far as the Editor, and the Printer and Publisher of _Matrubhumi_ are
concerned, I have no doubt that they have committed contempt of Court by
publishing the speech of the Chief Minister in their daily. The slight
discrepancy between the extract of the speech as given in the daily, and as
given in the official report is immaterial. They cannot claim immunity under
clause (2) of Art. 194 because daily is not an authorised publication. In view
of their unconditional apology, I do not wish to pass any sentence on them,
but I would direct them to pay Rs. 100/- (One hundred only)  as costs to the
petitioner." (P.177, para 22)



In _Perera v. Peiris,_ (67), we find the following:-



"Reports of judicial and parliamentary proceedings and: it may be, of some
bodies



#  187



which are neither judicial nor parliamentary in character, stand in a class
apart by reason that the nature of their activities is treated as conclusively
establishing that the public interest is forwarded by publication of reports
of their proceedings. As regards reports of proceedings of other bodies, the
status of these bodies taken alone is not conclusive and it is necessary to
consider the subject matter dealt with in the particular report with which the
Court is concerned. if it appears that it is to the public interest that the
particular report should be published privilege will attach. If malice in the
publication is not present and the public interest is served by the
publication, the publication of the report must be taken for the purpose of
Roman Dutch Law as being in truth directed to serving that interest. Animus
injuriandi is negatived.



"On a review of the facts their Lordships are of opinion that the public
interest of Ceylon demanded that the contents of the Report should be widely
communicated to the public. The Report dealt with a grave matter affecting the
public at large, viz.‑i the integrity of members of the Executive Council of
Ceylon, some of whom were found by the Commissioner to have improperly
accepted gratifications. It contained  the reasoned conclusions of a
Commissioner who acting under statutory authority, had held an enquiry and
based his conclusions on evidence which he had searched for and sifted. It
had, before publication in the newspaper, been presented to the Governor,
printed as a Sessional Paper and made available to the public by the Governor,
contemporaneously with a Bill which was based on the Report and which was to
be considered by the Executive Council. The due



#  188



administration of the affairs of Ceylon required that this Report in the light
of its origin, contents and relevance to the conduct of the affairs of Ceylon
and the course of legislation should receive the widest publicity."



This case would not support the respondents for the reason that what was
published was the finding against a Member of Parliament. If the conduct of a
judicial officer had been investigated and a. finding made against him so as
to remove him from the sphere of administration of justice, the, publication
of the finding, the charges, reasons etc,, the speeches made or the resolution
to remove him are very much in the public interest. This case will be an
authority only in these circumstance. But the same thing cannot be said of a
pending inquiry, the charges made and the speeches made on that occasion. To
adopt Lord Greene M.R.' s words:



The internal working of the administrative machine and all the details of its
domestic deliberations .......... are things which I should have thought
ratepayers are not in general interested."



When pending resolutions, the charges an speeches made on that occasion are
published, i cannot be said that the public interest is "forwarded" for the
reason that the judge has a mental bar to act independently without fear or
favour and the suitors have no confidence in the judge, as justice should not
only be done but appear to be done, too. It is best under the circumstances to
await the final outcome to release the proceedings to the public. Even
assuming that these are of public interest, we are then confronted with the
further problem of a clash of two interests, the right of the public to
receive and the press to publish information of public



#  189

**  **

interest and the need to safeguard the dignity of the Courts against
scandalisation. As I hold the scales evenly between these two interests, the
scale weighs heavily in favour of the latter; for it is in the interests of
the public that the dignity of the Courts is maintained untainted as has been
stated in the various quotations I have given earlier. "It is a wrong done to
the public by weakening the authority and influence of a tribunal which exists
for their good alone." On a deeper consideration, in fact, there is no
conflict between these two interests because in protecting the dignity of the
Courts, it is the public­ interest that is served.



I am certain that the vast mass of the citizens of this country would prefer
that the independence and good name of the judiciary be protected even at the
expense of their right to know what is happening in Parliament in respect of
Judges and the Judiciary. The failure of the press to publish matters of this
nature will not prejudice that section of the public who wish to keep
themselves acquainted with Parliamentary proceedings. To them, the Order
Paper, the Hansard and other such official publications authorized by the
Parliament are available. It is the mass publicity in newspapers that reach
the common man that can cause harm to the proper administration of justice.



There are two other decisions that are relevant. I have nothing further to add
to the observations of and distinction made by Wanasundera, J. in respect of
the Judgment of Lord Denning in _Cook v. Alexander_ (23).



In _Sambhu Nath Jah v. Kedar Prasad Sinha,_ (80) the legislature passed a
resolution to hold an inquiry into certain matters pending before Courts. That
decision to appoint a Commission of Inquiry was



#  190



published in the Gazette. A Minister gave a copy of that notification to a
pressman who published. it. They were both found guilty of contempt on the,
ground that there was no provision that "allegations of the nature contained
in the offending matter must be printed in the Official Gazette or in the
public press." In appeal this judgment was reversed as there was, in fact
statutory provision for publication in the Gazette, That judgment did not go
into the question whether the press had a right to publish that resolution,"
Since the Gazette is the official organ for public information, it may well be
that the Court took the, view that it necessarily follows that the press was
entitled to publish that resolution after it had been published in the
Gazette. It may, however, be noted that what was published was the resolution.
after it had been passed. Secondly, there was. statutory provision for giving
information of that resolution to the public by publishing in the Gazette.



The question does arise what is the need for protecting the judiciary when
there are ample safeguards Provided by the Standing Order of Parliament. In
the _Orissa case_ referred to  (24), Standing order 189 of Parliament is as
follows :



"A member while speaking shall not:



(1) refer to any matter or fact judicial decision is pending.  


(2)  .......................  


(3)  .......................  


(4) reflect upon he conduct of ...... any Court of Law in the exercise of its
functions;"



#  191



` In seeking to punish the Chief Minister for his speech, "It was urged that
under the modern democratic set‑up Governments are parties in innumerable
cases in the High Court, that if they lose some cases they are inclined to
develop 'litigant's mentality and to abuse the Judges in the State Assembly
taking advantage of the immunity conferred by C1.(2) of Art. 194.
Irresponsible statements may then be made by members of the Government on the
floor of the Assembly which, after due publication in the official reports,
would cause irreparable harm to the prestige of the High Court and thereby
affect its independence." It was also urged that in many instances the
opposition may not be effective in checking such misuse of the right of
freedom of speech and that the Speaker of the Legislature also may not be
vigilant enough to call any member to order if he exceeds the limit.



"Under the modern democratic system a contingency of this type may have to be
faced, especially when both the Opposition and the Speaker are not vigilant
enough to see that no member of the Assembly abuses his right of freedom of
speech on the floor of the House.

_ "Surendra Mohanty v. Nabakrishna Choudhury_ (24).



While it is clear that our Legislature, too, enjoys the right to discuss all
matters concerning the judiciary subject to our own on which Standing Orders
safeguarding the judiciary, there is no reason whatsoever to extend the
immunity to the press whose right to publish 'stand in no better and no worse
position than any other person or body in Ceylon.' _Perera v. Peiris_ (supra).



#### Parliament is a responsible body and can well be expected to preserve and
foster the dignity of the Courts in the interest of the public. But an equal
duty rests on the Courts to safeguard that



#  192



Same dignity.



There are the various safeguards Standing Orders. But there may come an
occasion when Parliament may deem it necessary, for instance, to discuss a
pending case or to question the integrity of one or more judicial officers and
the question will then arise whether a newspaper report of proceedings would
be in the public interest. If Parliament publishes to the public authorises
the publication of the proceeding s, would be for the reason that parliament‑,
has decided that it serves the public interest. But if Parliament gives no
such authority and leaves the matter open to the discretion of the publisher,
Courts will be the best authority to decide whet such report serves the public
interest, not only from the point of view of keeping the public informed, but
also from the point of view of preventing scandalising of Court or diminishing
it authority. The publisher is not prevented from publishing such proceedings,
but



I find the respondents guilty.



As regards punishment, this news item contained a matter which was much in the
public view as newspapers had been carrying news of the decisions made against
Mr. K.C.E. de Alwis and the subsequent turn of events, of the complaint to the
Hon. President, the decision to appoint a Commission and the protest by the
Bar Association. In the past, too, newspapers had carried proceedings in
Parliament as, for instance, the resolution against a former Chief Justice who
went to the Airport to send off a Prime Minister against whom there was an
election petition pending before him. The proceedings before the Presidential
Commission had been carried extensively where the conduct of certain judges
had been discussed much to their disfavour. When the respondents published



#  193



this particular item, it would have never been in their mind to be on guard
against a charge of contempt in view of the fact that such previous reports
had never been the subject of any form of action. Even these proceedings were
not initiated by this Court, but by a citizen, the petitioner.



_Veerasamy v. Stewart_ (63), Soertsz J.said as follows at page 486 :



"No one desires to fetter unduly the freedom of the Press, least of all Courts
of Law, for the Press can be, and has often been a powerful ally in the
administration of justice, but it is essential that judicial tribunals should
be able to do their work free from bias or partiality and that the right of
accused persons to a fair trial‑ should be absolutely unimpaired."



Khanna, J. stated in _Sambhu Nath Jah_ v. Kedar _Prasad Sinha_ (80):



"It would follow from the above that the Courts have power to take action
against a person who does an act or publishes a writing which is calculated to
bring a Court or Judge into contempt or to lower his authority or to obstruct
the due course of justice or due administration of law. As intention of the
contemner to cause those consequences is not a necessary ingredient of
contempt of Court and it is enough to show that his act was calculated to
obstruct or interfere with the due course of justice and administration of
law, there would be quite a number of cases wherein the contempt alleged would
be of a technical nature. In such cases, the Court would exercise
circumspection and judicial restraint in the matter of taking action for
Contempt of Court. The Court has to take into



#  194



account the surrounding circumstances and the material facts of the case and
on conspectus of them to come to a conclusion whether because of some
contumacious conduct or other sufficient reason the person proceeded against
should be punished for contempt of Court."



Gajendragadkar, C.J. was quoted in the _Mulgaokar_ _case_ ,(78) referred to at
page 743:

####  

#### "We ought never to forget that the power to punish for contempt large as
it is, must ­always be exercised cautiously, wisely and with circumspection..
Frequent or indiscriminate use of this use of this power in anger or
irritation would not help to sustain the dignity or, status of the court, but
may sometimes  affect it adversely. Wise Judges never forget that the best way
to sustain the dignity and status of their office is to deserve respect from
the public at large by the quality of their judgments, the fearlessness,
fairness and objectivity of their approach, and by the restraint, dignity and
decorum which they observe in their judicial conduct."



Krishnar Iyer,J. stated as follows:



"The cornerstone of the contempt law is the accommodation of two
constitutional values the right of free speech and the right to independent
justice. The ignition of contempt action should be substantial and mala fide
interference with fearless judicial action, not fair comment or trivial
reflections on the judicial process and personnel.."



Having stated these principles, the older he made against the respondent was
as follows :‑



"Many values like free press, fair trial,

#  195

**  **

judicial fearlessness and community confidence must generously enter the
verdict  ........... These diverse indicators, carefully considered, have
persuaded me to go no further, by a unilateral decision of the bench. This
closure .......... puts the lid on the proceedings without pronouncing on the
guilt or otherwise of the opposite parties."



In these proceedings the respondents, it is agreed, had no malice but merely
reproduced a motion on the order paper of Parliament which was sent to them as
it was sent to other media. It had been a practice to publish such proceedings
of Parliament where the Judges have been criticised and no action had been
taken before against such publications. They have affirmed that they had no
intention whatsoever of slandering the Court or bringing the Court or the
judges into disrepute.



Under all these circumstances, I am of the opinion that appropriate order
would be to affirm the Rule and to discharge the respondents, without
punishment.



# RODRIGO, J., .



I have had the advantage of reading in draft the leading judgment proposed by
my brother Wanasundera, J. and I cannot help but admire his industrious
discussion of a vast array of cases, decisions, monographs and text writers
cited to us by the three Counsel appearing for the petitioner and the two
respondents and the Attorney‑General himself appearing as amicus reflecting
industry and painstaking research behind their submissions in the absence of
any direct authority on the point. We are unanimously agreed that the Rule
should not be pursued further and I desire to express my line of thinking
which differs from that of my brother Wanasundera, J. only in emphasis. I
shall accordingly



#  196



be brief and avoid repetitious references to ca decisions and material of a
like nature.



"The law on this subject (that is contempt Court) is and must be founded
entirely on public policy" ‑ Per Lord Reid in _A.G. v. Times Newspaper Ltd._
(12). Such policy is naturally informed by the judicial outlook of the time
and age. What is looked at with stern disapproval at one time to rein in
social indiscipline may be regarded with an indulgent eye at a more relaxed
time. Indigeneous traditions and culture , colour , outlook and attitudes.
Deep respect for elders, teachers, clergy, judicial institutions and authority
acknowledged facts of our notwithstanding inroads by permissive activity, both
political and social; administration of justice must not permit it to
deteriorate by becoming permissive itself.



"There is an abundance of empirical decisions upon particular instances of
conduct  which has been held to constitute contempt of Court. There is a
dearth of rational explanation or analysis of a general concept of contempt of
Court which is common to the cases where it has been ­found to exist." Per
Lord Diplock in the _Sunday Times case_ (12).That is because each individual
Judge took his own view of the public policy to be followed in each case no
doubt derived from clear implications from the constitution judicial
decisions,. We must therefore consider appropriate public policy or the policy
of the to be applied in this matter. But let me first examine the genesis of
this issue.



Representations have been made by no less a person than a Judge himself. The
representations have been made not in a haphazard or irresponsible manner.
They have been made to His Excellency himself His Excellency thereupon had
referred the



#  197

**  **

matter to the Parliament which under the Constitution is the body empowered to
investigate and, if the allegations are proved, to present an address for
removal in the Parliament, in the manner specified in the Constitution. To
this end the Parliament took the initial step of introducing a resolution to
appoint a Select Committee to investigate. It was this resolution that
appeared in the Order Paper of the Parliament for 8 March 1983 and it was this
Order Paper that was published in the Daily News the day before with the full
text of the resolutions appearing therein giving the names of the Judges
concerned as they appeared in the text.



The Daily News it must be observed published this merely as a news item of
interest to the public in its ordinary course of business. Nobody alleges any
ulterior motive to it. That it is also a parliamentary proceeding is, in my
view, wide of the question. That the matter arose in the Parliament is an
isolated fact in this context 'or just one circumstance in the whole business.



It is ironical, but nevertheless true, that this resolution had it been
confined to the precincts of the Parliament would not be a scandal of the
Court within its authoritative definition ‑See _Rex v. Gray_ (40) Per Lord
Russell, C.J. at page 62 and _Ambard v. A/G for Trinidad Tobago._ (57) at page
709, but the moment it is allowed to seek publicity, in the media in
particular, outside the Parliament, it falls within the definition of it
scandalising the Court". Such is the implication of judicial decisions. The
Court here is not faced with a choice between two conflicting principles, as
was argued, between freedom of expression and public interest in the
administration of justice. It is self‑evident that no reader of the resolution
in the "Daily News" is going to have that cathartic confidence in the
rightness and integrity of a



#  198



decision handed down by the Judges concerned. Let us look at it this way.
There is no provision for the interdiction of the Judges pending the Select
Committee investigation and they must continue to hear and decide cases in the
meantime. It must be a traumatic experience for the litigants to have to
submit to a case being heard by these Judges in the circumstances. How did
this result come about ? It is the publication. Freedom to communicate and
receive information can be destructive of both the communicator and the
recipient at times. It can create violence among the community at a time when
communal passions have been aroused. Under Emergency Regulations proclaimed
during such disturbances freedom to publish news having a tendency to inflame
passions or otherwise to create disturbances is curtailed or censored
altogether. No person having the public interest at heart at times like that
will dispute the need for such curtailment. Likewise when the authority of the
highest Judicial institution is threatened by a publication which has the
potential to create unrest among the public, does it not create the need for a
degree of censorship ? If it is right for the political authority to clamp a
censorship at an executive level at a time of serious communal unrest, why is
it not right for judicial authority to clamp a censorship on publications of
the nature referred to in the field of administration of justice ? The
judicial device to achieve this result is the law of contempt of Court. This
law is sui generis. It has its own dictates. It is a law born of an inherent
jurisdiction to protect the judicial machinery against attacks from any
quarter not at the dignity of Judges but at judicial authority in the
interests of law and order in which a country must be concerned as devoutly as
with any other of its important affairs. So that the law of contempt is in a
class apart from any other branch of law like qualified privilege in



#  199



reporting Parliamentary proceedings or proceedings of a Court of Law. The law
of contempt vests the Courts with an unfettered authority where a contempt has
been committed against it within its authoritative definition to decide on any
course of action, it thinks fit in pursuit of its policy. So that as Lord
Diplock has said, the decision on matters of contempt has to be empirical and
based on public policy founded on the need to maintain public confidence in
the integrity of Courts and the judiciary.



Great stress was laid on the immunity aspect of this issue but hardly any on
its public policy aspect. This being a publication of a report of a
Parliamentary proceeding, it was argued at length, attracted qualified
privilege just as much, if not more, as a report of a judicial proceeding.
Qualified privilege, it appears, has five reasons to support it in so far as
it relates to reports of judicial proceedings. Two of the reasons namely, the
one founded on the Court being open to the public is not applicable to
parliamentary proceedings as the Parliament is not open to the public in the
way the Courts are, and the other, that the publication of judicial
proceedings enables the public to obtain a knowledge of the law by which their
dealings and conduct are regulated, also does not apply to reports of
parliamentary proceedings. But it is clear that originally and in principle,
there are not many different kinds of privilege but rather for all privilege
there is the same foundation of Public interest. The term "public interest"
has also several meanings. What is the meaning to be ascribed to the public
interest alleged to exist in the publication in question ?, It is in the
public interest to maintain public confidence in judicial institutions. Is
this public interest advanced by the resolution being published at this stage?
In defamation cases reports of Parliamentary

#  200



proceedings are protected as the legitimate concern of the public with the
proceedings of Parliament outweighs the concern of the individual with the
loss of his reputation in which the public by and large may not be interested.
But not so with public confidence in the administration of justice, in which
every member of the public is concerned. A threat to judicial authority can
shake the six order to its foundations. So that the public interest behind
qualified privilege is of a different category altogether.



Two judicial pronouncements, namely, that "reports of judicial and
parliamentary proceedings  ......... stand in a class apart by reason that the
nature of their activities is treated as conclusively establishing that the
public interest is forwarded by publication of reports of their proceedings" ‑
per Lord Uthwatt in _Perera v. Peiris_ (67) and that "the object (of the Act
of Settlement) was to secure that the Judges should hold office independently
of any political or other influence and should be removed only for the most
serious judicial misbehavior and then in the most public and open manner per
Lord Birkenhead - Lord Chancellor, Shetreet, Judges on Trial, ‑ lend strong
support on the face of them in favour of immunity argued for the respondents.
But when we examine the cases where public interest attaching to reports of
findings against the integrity of public functionaries is discussed, it
appears that the public interest has been said to be served by the publication
only where the investigation has been completed and a considered verdict
arrived at ‑ _Allbutt v. General Council of Medical ‑ Education and
Registration_ (90) and _Perera v. Peiris_ (supra). In the former case the
headnote reads : "Held also that the publication of the minutes of the
Council, containing a report of their proceedings comprising a statement that
the name of a specified medical practitioner has been removed from the
Register

#  201



on the ground that In the opinion of the Council he has been guilty of
infamous conduct in a professional respect, is, if the report be accurate and
published bona fide and without malice, privileged, and the medical
practitioner cannot maintain an action of libel against the Council in respect
of the publication." In the second case mentioned, the Privy Council states
"On a review of the facts Their Lordships are, of opinion that the public
interest of Ceylon demanded that the contents of the report should be widely
communicated to the public. The report dealt with a grave matter affecting the
public at large, viz: integrity of members of the Executive Council of Ceylon,
some of whom were found by the Commissioner improperly to have accepted
gratifications. It contained the reasoned conclusions of a Commissioner who,
acting under statutory authority, had held an inquiry and based his
conclusions on evidence which he had searched for and sifted."



The statement of the Privy Council quoted above that "reports of parliamentary
proceedings stand in a class apart by reason that the nature of their
activities is treated as conclusively establishing  ......... is not meant in
my view to be a proposition of law of a "blanket" character, applicable even
outside ‑ the common law of defamation. It is not meant to be an eternal
truth. In the field of common law of defamation the statement is true as the
interests of the Public in the proceeding of Parliament, as I have said,
stands out as against the infinitesimally Mall chance of injury to private
character and the equally small interest of the public in it. But this is not
so in the case of blasphemous, seditious or obscene proceedings in parliament.
.If I am right in this, I am also right in saying that the proposition
mentioned is not true in



#  202



relation to a report of a parliamentary proceeding containing a scandal of the
Court. Such a report, is, my view, cannot advance the public interest
involved, that is, in maintaining the public confidence in the authority of
the judiciary. The public interest in information relating to proceedings of
Parliament per se is wholly disproportionate to the injury to the public
interest in maintenance of Judicial authority, caused by a publication of a
scandal to it.



I, therefore, think that, this publication attracts contempt of Court but., as
far as the Daily News is concerned, I hold that the Rule should not be pursued
further. The Press should voluntarily observe as the voice of the community
silence when confronted with matters of this nature the publication of which,
it is self-evident is not productive of any public benefit but on the contrary
destructive beyond remedy of an almost religious faith that the community hold
in the integrity of this institution and its capacity to grant relief. It is
this faith that averts civil disorder and resort to extra-judicial remedies.



_**Rule confirmed but not pursued further and Respondents discharged.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/17.html_  

