##  Jones, A.F.(Exporters) Ceylon Ltd. v. Balasubramaniam - SLR - 793, Vol 2
of 1982 [1982] LKSC 17; (1982) 2 Sri LR 793 (18 May 1982)

**793**

**  A. F. JONES (EXPORTERS) CEYLON LTD.,**

**v.**

**BALASUBRAMANIAM**

#### SUPREME COURT

WANASUNDERA, J., RATWATTE, J. AND SOZA, J.

S.C. APPEAL No. 53/81

CA. APPEAL No. 700/76

M.C. COLOMBO No. 72083/A

MARCH 5 AND 29, 1982



    Industrial Law ‑ Industrial Disputes Act, ss. 8 and 10 ‑ Collective agreement ‑Minister's right to extend application of selected clauses of collective agreement ‑ Recognised terms and conditions ‑ Failure, by employer to pay in terms of extension.



Whatever benefits a workman would be entitled to by way of an extension of an
application of a collective agreement are either the terms and conditions set
out in the agreement or terms and conditions not less favourable than the
terms and conditions set out in the agreement., Under section 8(2) of the
Industrial Disputes Act the extension operates by operation of law and there
is no room for the selective application of clauses of a collective agreement.
The recognised terms and conditions are nothing but the totality of the terms
and conditions set out in the agreement.



The Minister's order should have the effect of an equal application of the law
and not be discriminatory of either the workmen _inter se_ or the employer
_inter se._ A selective application of the clauses of a collective agreement
can result in



# 794



such discrimination. This is another reason why any extension should be of the
whole agreement.



**Case referred to:**



1\. _Express Newspapers Ceylon Ltd. v. Attorney ‑General _S.C. 14/75 ‑ S.C.
Minutes of 12.11.1975.



_H.W. Jayewardene Q.C._ with _Mark Fernando, W. Siriwardene, Miss P
Seneviratne_ and _S. Ronald Perera_ for accused‑appellant.



_M. S. Aziz,_ Deputy Solicitor‑General for Attorney‑ General.



_Cur. adv. vult._



May 18, 1982.



**WANASUNDERA, J.**



This appeal involves an important question of law as to the extent of the
Minister's discretion in extending a collective agreement and relates to the
proper interpretation of section 10 of the Industrial Disputes Act. The
question was raised by way of defence in a prosecution in the Magistrate's
Court, where the accused‑appellant Company. ‑ a tea export company ‑ was
charged with having failed to make certain payments to one ‑ of its employees
and thereby contravened an order made by the Minister of Lab our under section
10 of the Industrial Disputes Act. By this order the Minister had extended the
provisions of Collective Agreement 3B of 1971 between the Employers Federation
of Ceylon and the Eksath Thay, Rubber Saha Merate Drauwya Kamkaru Samithiya to
"every employer in the Tea Export Industry employing not less than 25 workmen
in that industry". The accused‑appellant was convicted in the Magistrate's
Court and the conviction has been affirmed by the Court of Appeal.



The accused‑appellant has challenged the validity of the extension order made
by the Minister of Labour. Mr. Jayewardene who appeared for the appellant has
referred to the Minister's order published in Government Gazette. No. 14995/8
dated 1st February 1972 and drawn our attention to the fact that the order
does not extend the whole of the collective agreement but has sought to apply
only certain selected clauses in the agreement. About ten clauses have been
deliberately omitted and Mr. Jayewardene submitted that these omitted clauses
have an important bearing on employer‑employee relationship,. He also submits
that, since the collective agreement has been hammered



# 795



out by a process of give and take and hard bargaining, none of the provisions
(except those obviously inappropriate in the present context) can be regarded
as being superfluous and therefore the entirety of the provisions has to be
considered as constituting one single and integrated agreement. He submitted
that when section 10(5) of the Act empowers the Minister to extend the
collective agreement by an order "with .... any limitation as to its
applicability", a distinction has to be drawn between the contents of the
collective agreement which cannot be modified by him and the applicability of
the collective agreement, meaning the range of its operation, i.e., as regards
the type of employer or the locality or area in respect of which the Minister
can undoubtedly exercise a discretion.

  
Part III, Section A, of the Industrial Disputes Act deals with collective
agreements and sections 8 and 10 need special examination in this case.
Section 8(1) of the Act makes a collective agreement legally binding on the
parties, trade unions, employers and workmen referred to in that agreement,
and the terms of the agreement are made implied terms in the contract of
employment between the employers and workmen bound by the agreement.

  
Section 8(2) provides for a limited 'extension' of the collective agreement to
all workmen in the same work place. It states ‑

  
"(2) Where there are any workmen in any industry who are bound by a collective
agreement, the employer in that industry shall, unless there is a provision to
the contrary in that agreement, observe in respect of all other workmen in
that industry terms and conditions of employment which are not less favourable
than the terms and conditions set out in that agreement."

  
A reading of the above provision shows that it casts a statutory obligation on
the employer to observe terms and conditions which Are not less favourable
than the terms of the collective agreement in respect of the other workmen at
the work place.

  
Section 10, as the marginal note indicates, empowers the Minister to extend
the provisions of a collective agreement to certain employers who are not
bound by collective agreement as provided by section 8. Here too, the
obligations are cast on the employer while the workmen would be entitled to
enjoy the benefits of a collective



# 796



agreement. Section 10(2) is worded as follows:‑

  
".... the Minister may, in respect of any industry to which any such
collective agreement as is referred to in subsection (1) relates, make an
order that every employer, or every employer of any class, in such industry in
any district or in Ceylon, on whom that agreement is not binding as provided
in section 8, shall observe either the terms and conditions set out in that
agreement (hereinafter referred to as the 'recognized terms and conditions')
or terms and conditions which are not less favourable than the recognized
terms and conditions."

  
Subsection (1) of section 10 sets out the conditions that have to be satisfied
for the extension of a collective agreement it states that ‑

  
"Where the parties to a collective agreement that is in force are one or more
trade unions consisting of employers in any industry and one or more trade
unions consisting of workmen in such industry, then, if the Minister considers
that those parties are sufficiently representative ‑

  
(a) of the employers and the workmen, or  
  
(b) of a class of employers and a class of workmen, or  
  
(c) of the employers and a class of workmen, or  
  
(d) of a class of employers and the workmen, in such industry in such
district, or in such industry in Ceylon, he may make an order under subsection
(2) in respect of every employer, or of every employer of such class of
employers, in such industry in such district or in such industry in Ceylon, on
whom such agreement is not binding as provided in section 8. "

  
The other clauses of section 10 contains provision setting out the procedure
for making an extension order and also a provision ‑ 10(5) ‑ indicative of the
extent of the Minister's authority in respect of such an extension order. A
party to a collective agreement could request the Minister to have the
agreement extended to other employers. When the Minister proposes to act in
terms of section 10, the Commissioner of Labour has to give public notice of
the Minister's intention and call for objections. Section 10(5), which is in
issue before us, reads 



#### "The Minister shall consider all objections to the proposed order



# 797

and may either not make the order, or make order with or without any
limitation as to, its applicability."



Section 10(3) states that an extension order shall have the force of law.
Section 10(8) states that an extension order shall be operative only so long
as the collective agreement is in force and will cease with the cessation of
the collective agreement. Section 10(7) empowers the Minister to rescind the
extension order if he considers it necessary.



Now the kind of order the Minister is empowered to make is shown in section
10(2). He can order the employers concerned to "observe either the terms and
conditions set out in that agreement (hereinafter referred to as the
recognised terms and conditions) or terms and conditions which are not less
favourable than the recognised terms and conditions. The Minister cannot alter
the statute law. For example, he cannot by order lower the standards indicated
by the legislature and tell the employers that they need not observe the
standard laid down by the law, namely terms and conditions no less favourable
than the recognised terms and conditions. Similarly  the expression
"recognised terms and conditions" has a statutory meaning. It means the terms
and conditions set out in _the_ _agreement._ I do not think it would be
legitimate for the Minister to abstract some of the terms and conditions from
the agreement and call them "the recognised terms and conditions." The order
he makes is in respect of or with reference to "the recognised terms and
conditions" which are nothing but the totality of the terms and conditions set
out in the agreement ‑



The language of section 8(2) also supports this view. Both under section 8(2)
and section 10(2), whatever benefits a workman would be entitled to by way of
an 'extension' are either "the terms and conditions set out in _the agreement_
" or terms and conditions "which are not less  favourable than the terms, and
conditions set out in _the agreement_." In fact under section 8(2) the
extension operates by operation of law and question of the selective
application of clauses does not arise. The precise extent of such terms and
conditions, namely, the rights and benefits accruing to the workmen, will have
to be gleaned from an examination of the entire collective agreement. This is
a question of interpretation which is often of a complex nature. One would not
normally expect a Minister, who is concerned with decisions on broad policy
matters to be made the arbiter in respect of detailed and factual matters of
this type. There is also no



#  798



appeal from the order of the Minister. To take any other view would be to
place an undue responsibility on the Minister and it is doubtful whether such
a view will be conducive to the maintenance of industrial peace in the
country.



There is also another aspect to the matter. The Minister's order should have
the effect of an equal application of the law and not be discriminatory of
either the workmen _inter se_ or the employers _inter se_. By a process of
selection of the clauses that should be extended and this can be done at the
absolute discretion of the Minister it is not difficult to imagine cases where
some workers may be more advantageously placed than others while on the other
hand some employers may be at a disadvantage and handicapped as compared to
others. The legislature could not have intended such a result when the whole
intention of the law was to spread the benefits won under a collective
agreement to other workers not bound by that agreement. As regards employers
who do business in a highly competitive field, it is equally necessary that
one set of employers ought not to be given favoured treatment by the State at
the expense of others.



The view I have taken above gains support from the provisions of section 10(9)
which has spelled out the intentions of the legislature in no uncertain terms.
Section 10(9) has set out the procedures for resolving problems concerning the
nature, scope and effect of the recognised terms and conditions or of terms
and conditions not less favourable than the recognised terms and conditions in
cases of such extension. These questions as stated earlier can be of a complex
nature. It is not difficult to visualise cases where rights and obligations
may be so interwoven that the greatest care and skill would be needed to come
to a finding as to what are the applicable rights and benefits. It is
therefore riot surprising to find that the legislature has provided for such
matters to be decided in the first instance by the Commissioner of Labour with
an appeal from his decision to the Industrial Court, indicating that it has
followed the accepted procedure in this country for compulsory arbitration of
matters that can lead to industrial disputes. Section 10(9) states ‑



"If any question arises as to the nature, scope or effect of the recognized
terms and conditions in any industry in any district



# 799



or in Ceylon or as to whether an employer is observing the recognized terms
and conditions or is observing terms and conditions which are not less
favourable than the recognized terms and conditions, that question shall be
decided by the Commissioner, subject to an appeal within the prescribed time
and in the prescribed manner to the industrial court, and the decision of that
court on that question shall be final."



I am therefore of the view that Mr. Jayewardene is correct when he submitted
that the words "with .... any limitations as to applicability" in section
10(5) do not refer to the contents of the collective agreement but refer only
to the range of its applicability, e. g., as regards the type of employer or
whether it should be in a district or in the whole of Ceylon.



In the Court of Appeal, Victor Perera, J., was inclined to take the same view,
but he considered that he was bound by the judgment of Pathirana, J., in
_Express Newspapers Ceylon Ltd. v. Attorney ‑General,_ and was therefore
unable to give relief. It has been submitted that the decision in Express
Newspapers has not adequately dealt with this matter and in any event that
decision is not binding on us.



Although our ruling is decisive of this case and the appeal is allowed, our
judgment should not be viewed with any sense of apprehension by labour or the
Labour Department.



It would appear that hitherto the Labour Ministry has acted on the assumption
that section 10 has vested the Minister with a wide ranging power in the
application of a collective agreement so as to enable him to select such of
the provisions as are in his opinion suitable for extension. We have ruled
that this view is not tenable in law. With the need to bring in the entire
collective agreement into the picture, labour will now have the opportunity of
extracting the full extent of the rights and privileges they are legitimately
entitled to from the agreement that has been extended. This was not possible
earlier because of the selective application of the provisions the agreement
and because of the finality of the Minister's decision.



# 800



 As far as this case is concerned, we hold that the Minister's order under
section 10(2) is bad because it deals with only portions of the collective
agreement and not with its entirety. We therefore set aside the conviction and
acquit the accused.



The appeal is therefore allowed.



**RATWATTE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**SOZA, J.** ‑ I agree..



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/17.html_  

