##  Board of Trustees of the Tamil University Movement v. De Silva and
Another, F.N. - SLR - 350, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 17; (1981) 1 Sri LR 350
(13 November 1981)

**350**

**THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE  
TAMIL UNIVERSITY MOVEMENT  
V.  
F. N. DE SILVA AND ANOTHER**

**SAMARAKOON C. J.,  
ISMAIL J., WANASUNDERA J.,  
WIMALARATNE J. AND VICTOR PERERA J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 79/80  
C. A. APPLICATION NO. 1556/79  
L. T. NO. 13/6716 - 25/97  
OCTOBER 28,1981  
**  
_Writ of Certiorari - Writ Jurisdiction - order refusing writ to quash order
permitting amendment - is an order refusing writ a final order or
intericoutory order? -Articles 128 (1) and (2) and 140 of the Constitution.  
_  
The power to issue writs like Certiorari vested by Article 140 of' the
Constitution in the Court of Appeal is a supervisory power and not an
appellate jurisdiction. The jurisdiction in respect of writs is an exceptional
one and the granting or refusal of writ is a final order within the meaning of
Article 128(11 of the Constitution and not an inter-. locutory order in
respect of which leave to appeal is granted under Article 128(2) by the
Supreme Court.  
  
Preliminary objection to appeal from judgment and Order of. Court of Appeal  
  
_K. Kanag - lsvaran_ for Petitioner-appellant.  
  
_S.  Mahenthiran _for 2nd Respondent-Respondent.

_Cur, adv. vult._

November 13, 1981  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.  
**  
The second Respondent, the Ceylon General and Industrial Workers' Union
(hereinafter referred to as the Union) presented 10 applications on behalf of
its members to the Labour Tribunal No. 13 alleging wrongful and unjustified
termination of employment. The Respondent to each application was the "Tamil
University Movement" of No. 16, Fountain House Lane, Colombo 10. The Secretary
of the Movement filed answer pleading inter alia that "the application cannot
be maintained against the Tamil University Movement and it has been filed
against the wrong party". At the. inquiry the Secretary contended that the
Movement was neither a juristic nor a natural person and therefore the
application could not be maintained in law. The Union then moved to amend the
Caption to the applications and the President granted the Union two weeks time
to make the amendments.

**351**

After a long delay -amended applications were filed in which the Appellant,
the Board of Trustees of the Tamil University Movement; was named as the
Respondent. The Appellant objected to this amendment and moved that the
original applications and' the amended applications be dismissed. The
President, by his order of 4th April, 1979, allowed the amendment. The
Appellant thereupon applied to the Court of Appeal for a Writ of Certiorari to
quash the Order of the Tribunal. This application was refused by the Court of
Appeal. It also made a further order allowing the amendment. Leave to appeal
to this Court was sought from and allowed by the Court of Appeal. This appears
to have been done in terms of Article 128(1) of the Constitution. Counsel for
the Union has taken an objection in limine to the hearing of this appeal. He
contends that the Order of the Court of. Appeal is an interlocutory Order
which could not be the subject of an application or order under Article 128(1)
but an interlocutory Order in respect of which leave to appeal could only have
been made in terms of Article 128(2) and leave granted by the Supreme Court.  
  
We have heard a lengthy and interesting argument by opposing Counsel on the
interpretation of the provisions of Article 128(1) and (2) of the
Constitution. Counsel for the Union argued that this order was not a "final
order or judgment" within the meaning of Article 128(1). He contends that in
arriving at a decision as to whether an order is final or interlocutory
recourse must be had td the nature of the original order made by the Labour
Tribunal. He states that the Order of the Labour Tribunal was an incidental
one which did not finally decide 'the dispute between the parties for the
purpose of resolving which the application was made by V Union. He called in
aid decisions of the. former Supreme Court in respect of appeals to the Privy
Council. These are not helpful in deciding this matter because Rule 1(a) of
the Schedule to the Appeals (Privy Council) Ordinance (Chapter 100) makes the
final order referable to the matter in, dispute between the parties or the
claim in respect of the property or civil right pleaded. The nature of the
order has therefore to be garnered from the original action itself. However I
do not need to make a decision on this aspect of the matter in view of the
opinion I have formed.  
  
The Writ was applied for in terms of Article 140 of the Constitution which
reads thus:  
  
"140\. Subject to the provisions, of the Constitution, the Court of Appeal
shall have full power and authority to inspect and examine the records of any
Court of First Instance or tribunal or other' institution, and grant and
issue, according to law,

**352**

orders in the nature of writs of certiorari, prohibition, procedendo, mandamus
and quo warranto against the judge of any Court of First Instance or tribunal
or other institution or any other person."  
  
This is a supervisory power and not an appellate jurisdiction. The matter has
not come up to the Court of Appeal by way of appeal from the Order of the
Labour Tribunal, but it has originated in the Court of Appeal itself by virtue
of what may be termed an original jurisdiction of that Court. In respect of
applications for Writs of Habeas Corpus or Quo Warranto for instance there
need not be any prior proceedings in a Court or Tribunal. A final Order is
made. In the case of a Writ of Certiorari, if a Writ is allowed the Order
complained, of is quashed and that is final. Refusal is equally final. As far
as the Court of Appeal is concerned its order ends the dispute which is the
subject of the application. The jurisdiction in respect of Writs is an
exceptional one and the granting or refusal of a Writ is a final order within
the meaning of Article 128(1) of the Constitution. I would therefore reject
the objection taken by Counsel for the Union and the appeal must now proceed
to be heard. Costs will abide the final decision in the appeal.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. - I** agree.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J. - I** agree.  
  
**WIMALARATNE, J. - I** agree.  
  
**VICTOR PERERA, J. - I** agree.  
  
**_Preliminary objection overruled._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/17.html_  

