##  Dayaratne and Others v. National Savings Bank and Others - SLR - 116, Vol
3 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 17; (2002) 3 Sri LR 116 (5 September 2002)

**116**

**DAYARATNE AND OTHERS  
v.  
NATIONAL SAVINGS BANK AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
GUNASEKERA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC NO. 452/2001 (FR)  
MAY 28 AND JUNE 19, 2002  
  
Fundamental Rights - Promotion to executive grades in the Bank - Time bar
under Article 16 - Scheme of recruitment - Unlawful application of the Scheme
- Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioners who applied for promotion to the executive grade in the
respondent Bank were not selected. 41 candidates were promoted. The
petitioners complained, inter alia, that 18 of them were junior to the
petitioners and sought a quashing of the promotions of the said 18. They also
alleged that the scheme of recruitment and the allocation of marks on
different criteria for selection as well as the conduct of the interview
devoting only two or three minutes per candidate vitiated the selections. The
respondents sought to justify the selection and preferred a preliminary
objection that the application was time-barred.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Time began to run against the petitioners only when the 41 promotions were
announced on 07. 08. 2001. Hence, the application filed on 30. 08. 2001 was
within time.  
  
(2) The scheme of promotion was not arbitrary and unreasonable.  
  
(3) The interview and selection process was seriously flawed in that :

(a) The original interview mark sheets indicating the assessment of each
member of the Interview Board were not produced without good reason but only
two undated mark sheets signed by the 3rd to 5th respondents (members of the
Interview Board).

**117**

(b) The interview schedule did not show the existence of one "Atapattu R. C.
M." for whom marks had been given in the mark sheet produced to the Court.
This was a serious discrepancy.  
  
(c) There was no satisfactory explanation as to how the original entries were
processed to produce the final mark sheets. The likelihood of error and
manipulation has not been excluded.  
  
(d) The allocation of marks for qualifications was irrational and arbitrary;
and the candidates were interviewed on an average of 10 minutes per candidate.  
  
(e) There was inadequate time to assess the candidates in respect of all seven
criteria and to arrive at a common mark in respect of each criterion.

**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Ranatunga v. Jayawardena -_ 1 FRD 77.  
  
2\. _Jayawardena v. AG -_ 1 FRD 175.  
  
3\. _Swissray Medical AG v. Fernando -_ SC 51/94 SCM 25. 07. 94.  
  
4\. _Hewavitharana v. Chandrawathie -_ (1951) 53 NLR 169.  
  
5\. _Selvam v. Kuddipillai -_ (1954) 55 NLR 426.  
  
6\. _Rajakaruna v. De Silva -_ (1977) 2 SRI LR 209.  
  
7\. _De Silva v. Secretary, Ministry of Health -_ SC 378/99 SCM 18. 03. 2002.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Dr. Jayampathy Wickremaratne, PC_ with _A. Panditharatne_ for petitioner.  
  
_Harsha Fernando, State Counsel_ for 1st, 2nd and 6th respondents.  
  
_Gomin Dayasiri_ with _Ms. M. Jinadasa_ for 3rd to 5th respondents.  
  
_J. C. Weliamuna_ for the 12th, 16th, 19th, 20th, 21st, 23rd, 25th, 27th,
30th, 31st, 41st and 42nd respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_

**118**

September 05, 2002  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The ten petitioners are officers of the National Savings Bank the 1st
respondent, and are presently in Grade III, Class III, which is the highest of
the supervisory grades. They complain that their fundamental rights under
Article 12 (1) were infringed by the 1st to 5th respondents, by reason of the
failure promote them to Grade III, Class II which is the lowest of the
executive grades.  
  
By a circular 20.02.1996 (as amended on 19.03.96), officers who had been
recruited or promoted to Grade IV during the period 1980 to 1988,  and who
have completed five years' service  in Grade IV", were summoned for interview
for promotion to Grade III, Class III (Grade Ill-Ill), and about 170 officers
including the ten petitioners were promoted with effect from 01. 01 1996\. In
the meantime by another circular dated 19. 03. 1996 officers promoted to Grade
IV on 01\. 01.1992, although they had not completed five years service in
Grade IV, were also called for interview, and about 60 officers were promoted
to Grade Ill-Ill with effect from October or November, 1996. The 20th and 25th
respondents were promoted to Grade III-III on 01. 12. 1999. The 23rd and 46th
respondents were promoted, by letters dated 10. 07. 2000, with effect from 10.
12\. 1993 and 01. 01. 1996 respectively, but subject to the condition that
their seniority would be reckoned from 01. 04. 2000.  
  
By a circular dated 12. 02. 2001, the 2nd respondent, the General Manager of
the Bank, announced new schemes of promotion for all seven grades of clerical,
supervisory and executive employees. The scheme of promotion from Grade Ill-
Ill to Grade III, Class II (Grade Ill-ll) was as follows :  
  
**Eligibility Requirements :** Officers confirmed in Grade Ill-Ill with a
minimum of one year's service in that Grade.

**119**

Scheme of Evaluation   | Maximum Marks  
---|---  
(i) Performance Evaluation Reports for the last 3 years according to the
rating given therein :  | 20 marks  
(ii) Service in Grade Ill-Ill (5 marks for each year) in excess of the minimum
required for eligibility :  | 30 marks  
(iii) Professional qualifications in Banking or in a specialized field (marks
will be awarded only once in the career of an officer) : | 10 marks  
(iv) Interview for the assessment of suitability : | 40 marks  
  
By a notice dated 15.02.2001 applications were called for promotions to all
seven Grades, the closing date being 08. 03. 2001. After that closing date, by
a memorandum dated 16. 03. 2001 the 2nd respondent made certain changes in
regard to two categories of promotions : promotions to Grade IV and to Grade
Ill-Ill. By notice dated 19. 03. 2001 Bank employees were informed of those
changes and that the closing date for applications had been extended to 02.
04. 2001. Those changes did not affect the scheme of promotions to Grade Ill-
ll, and hence there was no need for an extension of the closing date in
respect of promotions to Grade Ill-ll. Nevertheless, the respondents contend
that the extension did apply to those promotions as well.  
  
Interviews for promotion to Grade Ill-ll were held on eight days between 12th
and 28th June, 2001.

**120**

The interview panel consisted of the 3rd to 5th respondents, the 3rd
respondent being the Chairman. The 3rd respondent produced eight interview
schedules, one for each interview day. These schedules gave the names, places
of work, and the scheduled times of interview, but contained no information
whatever about the candidates' past performance, performance evaluations,
employment history, qualifications or experience. Each schedule contained the
names of about 25 candidates to be interviewed between 1.00 p.m. and 5.00 p.m.
each day. The 3rd respondent stated that the interview panel decided that the
40 marks for interview should be allocated equally under four heads :
leadership qualities, attitude, personality, and knowledge and management
skills; but he did not explain on what basis they decided to award marks for
the performance evaluation reports and for professional qualifications.  
  
On 07. 08. 2001, the 2nd respondent announced the names of 41  promotes (the
7th to 47th respondents), of whom 18 were junior to the petitioners.  
  
**SUBMISSIONS  
**  
The petitioners challenged the scheme of promotion on several grounds. They
complained that the basis of allocation of the 40 interview marks had not been
disclosed in advance; that since 20 marks had been allocated for performance
evaluation reports, the allocation of a further 40 marks for assessment of
suitability at the interview was excessive and amenable to abuse; that no
marks had been allocated for the period of service in senior and/or
supervisory  grades; and that no recognition had been given for academic
qualifications.  
  
The petitioners also challenged the implementation of the scheme, alleging
that the 23rd and 46th respondents did not have actual service of one year in
Grade Ill-Ill; that qualifications had not been duly considered; and that the
interviews lasted only for two or three minutes,

**121**

the only questions put being of a very personal nature, and not relevant to
test their knowledge of banking or their suitability for promotion.  
  
The respondents contended that the petitioners' challenge to the scheme
published in February, 2001, and to the interview process  which ended on 28.
06\. 2001, was time-barred, because this application was filed on 30. 08. 2001
:  
  
"The Supreme Court has consistently dismissed applications which have been
filed out of time. Ranatunga v. Jayawardena, SC No. 27/79, SCM 30. 07. 79 -
the Court held that Article 126 (2) applies both to infringements and
threatened infringements. The time limit begins to run on the day the
petitioner is aware of the threatened infringement. Jayawardena v. AG SC No.
4/91 SCM 06. 03\. 81 - the Supreme Court held that the application has not
been filed within one month of the apprehension of infringement of  the
petitioner's fundamental rights. Rajakaruna v. de Silva, [1997] 2 Sri LR 209 -
the Court held that the application was out of time but heard the application
as the petitioner was not represented by Counsel."  
  
The respondents also urged that the petitioners had not protested either about
the scheme or the interview process until long afterwards.  
  
On behalf of the interview panel, only the 3rd respondent tendered an
affidavit. In regard to the implementation of the scheme, the 3rd respondent
submitted that the 23rd and 46th respondents "had completed one year's service
in [Grade III, Class III) on 02. 04 2001", i.e. the extended closing date;
that "due recognition has been given to the academic qualifications of the
candidates and 10% of the total marks has been allocated for this purpose";
and that each candidate had been interviewed "for a minimum of 10 minutes".
(Some of the promoters claimed that they had been interviewed for a minimum of
ten to fifteen minutes). He did not explain the basis on which

**122**

the interview panel awarded marks for the performance evaluation reports and
for professional qualifications. As for the allocation of interview marks,
however, he gave a very detailed description :  
  
"Under the category "Leadership" the candidates were questioned  on the
handling of responsibilities assigned to them over and above the regular
duties allocated to them, such as signing powers, managerial duties, etc. For
example the candidates were questioned as follows : "Have you been assigned
any "A" Class signing powers during the last three years? What are the
additional responsibilities undertaken by you during the last three years . .
.? Have you been assigned the duties of your superior officers when such
officers were not available?" The candidates were also tested on whether they
had played an initiative role in various duties and functions of the 1st
respondent bank.  
  
Under the category "Attitude" the panel tested the attitude of each candidate
towards their work and the welfare of the 1st respondent bank. The candidates
were queried on their work performance and were tested on their enthusiasm for
the performance of their duties, their participation and contribution towards
various important occasions, welfare projects of the 1st respondent bank .. .  
  
Under the category "Personality" the panel evaluated the personality of the
candidate, by observing his appearance, demeanour, the manner in which [he]
presented himself for the  interview and answered questions.  
  
Under the category "Knowledge of Work and Managerial Skills" the candidates
were tested on their knowledge about the various saving schemes ... [of the
1st respondent] and about the vision and goals . . . and targets for the year
ahead . . . candidates were also questioned and tested on their ideas and
views concerning new and improved methods of carrying out various duties."
[emphasis added]

**123**

**SCHEME OF PROMOTION  
**  
Although the basis of allocation of the 40 interview marks had not been
disclosed in advance, in regard to promotions to the other grades  the
criteria stipulated in the circular of 12. 02. 2001 included leadership,
attitude, communication skills, knowledge, management skills, communication
skills, and personality. While it would have been better if the circular had
specified the criteria and the marks in the case of promotions to Grade Ill-ll
as well, the allocation adopted by the interview panel was neither
unreasonable nor unexpected.  
  
The allocation of 20 marks for performance evaluation reports was not
inconsistent with the allocation of a further 40 marks for assessment of
suitability at the interview. A review of the performance evaluation reports
was necessary to assess whether past performance was  satisfactory, while the
interview was intended to assess suitability, i.e. the likelihood of
satisfactory future performance. The quantum of marks allocated to those two
criteria was not unreasonable, either individually or cumulatively.  
  
The petitioners' complaint that no marks had been allocated for the period of
service in senior and/or supervisory grades is untenable. The 30 marks
allocated for service in Grade Ill-Ill constituted a sufficient recognition of
past service.  
  
Finally, it is unnecessary to consider the allegation that no recognition had
been given for academic qualifications, because the 3rd respondent  asserted
that academic qualifications were recognized. Whether they were satisfactorily
recognized is another matter, which I will turn to later.  
  
I hold that the scheme of promotion was not arbitrary or unreasonable.

**124**

**PRELIMINARY OBJECTION**  
  
The first limb of the respondents preliminary objection is that after the
lapse of one month the petitioners were not entitled to challenge the scheme
of promotion. The 1st respondent was entitled, from time to time, and in the
interests of the institution, to lay down the basis on which employees would
be promoted, and that became part of  the contract of employment. The scheme
of promotion published on 12. 02. 2001 was directly and immediately applicable
to the petitioners, and became part of the terms and conditions of their
employment. If they did not consent to those terms and conditions, as being
violative of their rights under Article 12, they should have complained to
this Court within one month. They failed to do so. Instead, they acquiesced in
those terms and conditions by applying for promotion without any protest. I,
therefore, uphold the objection.  
  
The second limb of the objection is that the interview process concluded on
28. 06\. 2001; that the petitioners' allegations in respect of the allocation
of marks at the interview related to that process; and that any complaint that
that process was in violation of Article 12 should have been made within one
month of 28\. 06. 2001. That contention has two aspects : either that there
was a completed infringement by 28. 06. 2001, and time ran from that date, or
that by then an infringement was apprehended, which constituted an imminent
infringement, to which too the time limit of one month applied.  
  
I must now deal with the decisions cited by the respondents. The petitioner in
Ranatunga v. Jayawardena (1) alleged that his fundamental right was infringed
by the "improper selection of a non-qualified  candidate" for political
reasons. That selection had been communicated to him in June, 1978. The
objection was taken that "the fundamental right if any which the petitioner
alleges was violated did not exist at the time of the alleged executive or
administrative action". However, the petitioner's Counsel submitted that his
allegation was that there had been a threatened infringement. The Court held
that no such

**125**

fundamental right existed in June, 1978, and that even assuming that there was
a threatened infringement which continued until 07. 09\. 1978, the time of one
month was applicable. The application, having been filed only in June, 1979,
was therefore out of time. With respect, it seems to me that the petitioner's
complaint was of an actual infringement in June, 1978, for which there was no
remedy because Article 126 was not retrospective, and even if it was
retrospective, the application was not filed within one month of 07. 09. 1978.  
  
In Jayawardena v. AG (2) the petitioner was the holder of a permit issued
under the Crown Lands Ordinance. In June, 1980, he received several letters,
to the effect that rent should not be accepted from him for the year 1980,
that his permit should be cancelled for the reason that he had not paid rent
for 1980, and that he should quit by 19. 07. 1980. In January, 1981, summons
was served on him under the Recovery of State Lands Act, whereupon he filed an
application under Article 126 alleging that he was being dispossessed to make
room for a political favourite. The Court held that 'On the question as to
whether the authorities were about to infringe a fundamental right, it seems
clear that he should have had that apprehension" in June, 1980, and that time
began to run then. Here, too, the petitioner's complaint was of an actual
infringement in June, 1980, and the application filed in January 1981, was out
of time.  
  
Both those decisions dealt with allegations, which if true, constituted actual
infringements. In neither did the question of an "imminent" infringement
really arise. Further, both decisions did not discuss when a possible (or an
anticipated or apprehended) infringement becomes "imminent". I do not agree
that the moment a person becomes aware of the possibility of an infringement
he must rush to Court : because for an infringement to become "imminent" it
must not only be very likely to occur, but must also be very likely to occur
very soon (cf Swissray Medical AG v. Fernando.(3))

**126**

In any event, those decisions do not suggest that the failure to seek relief
in time in respect of an infringement at the stage that it is imminent bars an
application for relief once the infringement actually takes place. In my view,
an aggrieved person has the right to challenge an infringement not only when
it is imminent but also after it has occurred. The failure to challenge an
imminent infringement in time will never bar a subsequent actual infringement
- just as an imminent threat to enjoyment of immovable property entitles the
owner to quia timet proceedings to prevent the apprehended invasion of his
rights, and an actual invasion of his rights entitles the owner to bring a
vindicatory or a possessory action to redress the wrong (cf Hewavitharana v.
Chandrawathie,(4) and Selvam v. Kuddipillai.(5))  
  
In this case the infringement of the petitioners' rights occurred not when the
interviews were concluded on 28. 06. 2001, nor even when the interview panel
made its recommendations, but only when the 1st respondent acted upon those
recommendations. The recommendations did not amount to an infringement,
because the Board of Directors might have refused to accept them. Even
assuming that they might have amounted to an imminent infringement, yet the
respondents have not established when they were made - and the burden was on
them as the party pleading the time-bar - and accordingly we do not know when
time began to run.  
  
Consequently, time began to run against the petitioners only when the names of
the 41 promotes were announced on 07. 08. 2001. I hold that the complaint in
respect of the implementation of the scheme was therefore within time.  
  
There remains the decision in Rajakaruna v. de Silva (6)  where it was
observed that although the petitioner may not have applied strictly within the
prescribed time, the Court was "inclined to consider his case on merits as he
was not represented by Counsel". If that principle is consistently applied,
victims of fundamental rights violations will become entitled to file belated
applications provided they do so in

**127**

person, waiving their right to legal representation; and Attorneys-at- Law
will advise clients that otherwise time-barred claims may nevertheless be made
in person. Article 126 provides that a petitioner "may himself or by an
Attorney-at-Law on his behalf, within one month . . . apply to the Supreme
Court". The time bar has thereby been made expressly applicable to a
petitioner in person, and cannot be waived. In any event, those observations
have no relevance to this application.  
  
**IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SCHEME  
**  
The 1st to 5th respondents did not produce the original interview mark sheets.
What was produced as being the interview mark sheets were two sets of
documents, signed by the 3rd to 5th respondents, but undated. One set
contained the full details in respect of all seven criteria, including the
breakdown of the 40 interview marks. The other set was identical, except that
in regard to the interview marks it gave only the aggregate. In both, the
names of the candidates had been arranged in order of merit, and it was
therefore obvious that they had not been contemporaneously entered, and must
have been prepared after all the interviews had been concluded. In the 3rd
respondent's affidavit he did not explain how the members of the panel made
and recorded their assessments as the interviews progressed each day. Were the
marks for performance evaluation reports, service in Grade Ill-Ill, and
qualifications given as each candidate was interviewed (or before or after)?
Did each member make his own assessment as soon as each candidate was
interviewed, and did the panel make a common assessment immediately
thereafter? Or did each member record his own assessment, a common assessment
being made at the end of the day?  
  
In the written submissions filed on behalf of the 1st and 2nd respondents -
after the oral hearing - it was submitted that the interview panel prepared a
common mark sheet "which has been processed by computer", that the members
have placed their signatures thereto, thus certifying to its veracity and
authenticity; that "of course

**128**

the personal notes maintained by each individual member, if at all, have not
been produced . . . [which] is not a fatal omission", and that it has been
held that a common mark sheet is valid and does not per se amount to
arbitrariness (citing de Silva v. Secretary, Ministry of Healtrf1). Those
submissions do not answer the questions raised in the preceding paragraph. The
documents in which the original entries were made on each of those eight days
by members, individually or collectively, have not been forthcoming. The
respondents' plea that the mark sheet had been "processed" by computer does
not explain whether the entries were made on to the computer directly as each
interview ended (and if so by whom), or were entered later from one or more
documents; and the likelihood of error and manipulation has not been excluded.  
  
Accordingly, it became necessary for me to scrutinize the interview schedules
and mark sheets closely. The interview schedules contained 200 names in all.
Two names were repeated. That means, therefore, that 198 candidates had been
called for interview. According to those schedule, interviews were scheduled
from 1.00 p.m. to 5.00 p.m. each day. The time spent on interviews was thus 32
hours, which means that, each interview took an average (and not a minimum) of
ten minutes. However, the interview mark sheets contained 199 names, and on
examination it turned out that the 86th candidate in order of merit was
"Atapattu R. C. M.", whose name did not appear in the interview schedules. Did
the interview panel interview a candidate who was not scheduled to be
interviewed, or did they give marks to a candidate who was not interviewed? Or
was it due to a computer error? The absence of the original mark sheets was
therefore a serious shortcoming.  
  
The last name of the interview mark sheets is that of a person  scheduled for
interview on the 2nd day. He was given no marks under each head, which means
that he did not turn up for the interview. However, that entry tends to prove
that marks for performance evaluation reports, service in Grade Ill-Ill, and
qualifications, were not given in advance, but at the interview.

**129**

The manner in which marks were allocated under the head of "professional
qualifications" was not at all satisfactory. According to the scheme, marks
were due only for professional qualifications "in banking or in a specialized
field", and not for academic qualifications. While the petitioners were not
entitled to challenge the scheme in respect of any omission to recognize
academic qualifications, the 3rd respondent categorically stated that they
were in fact recognized. The 20th and 25th respondents had qualifications,
while the 23rd and 46th did not claim any. The following is a summary of the
marks given to those four respondents and the ten petitioners :

|  | **Marks**  
---|---|---  
25th Respt  |  Associate Member, Institute of Bankers  
(I.B.) and Certificate Course in use of  
Technology | 10  
20th Respt |  Intermediate Exam I.B. & Diploma  
in Credit Management  | 10  
23rd Respt |  No qualifications disclosed | 05  
46th Respt  | No qualifications disclosed  | 05  
6th Pet  
  | Intermediate I.B. & Bachelor's Degree  
in Development Studies | 05  
2nd  | Pet B.Sc. in Administration  | 05  
8th Pet  
  | Intermediate I.B. & Diploma, Institute  
of Workers' Education; final year student  
following Bachelor's Degree in Labour  
Education  | 00  
4th Pet |  Intermediate I.B. | 00  
|  |  
  
**130**

  |   | **Marks**  
---|---|---  
1st Pet  | Bachelor's Degree in Economics  | 00  
3rd Pet  | Bachelor of Arts  | 00  
5th Pet  | Bachelor of Arts | 00  
7th Pet  | Bachelor of Arts | 00  
9th Pet  | Bachelor of Arts  | 00  
10th Pet  | No qualifications disclosed  | 00  
  
  
If the 20th respondent deserved ten marks, the intermediate examination of the
Institute of Bankers merited at least five marks; 370 and there is no rational
basis on which the 4th and 8th petitioners could have been denied any marks.
If the 2nd petitioner deserved five marks, the 6th deserved more; and the 1st
petitioner deserved some marks. If the 3rd respondent was truthful in claiming
that due recognition had been given for academic qualifications, the 1st, 3rd
5th, 7th and 9th petitioners deserved some marks \- at least to differentiate
them from candidates who had no qualifications. Why the 23rd and the 46th
respondents were given five marks is a mystery. The mark sheets reveal also
that candidates were given ten marks, five marks, or none. The allocation of
marks for qualifications was irrational and arbitrary.  
  
Those discrepancies suggest that the interview panel did not take the time to
make a detailed study and comparison of the candidates' qualifications -
although it was only a minority of candidates who appear to have had
qualifications. The impact of those discrepancies must be considered in the
light of the fact that the last 15 promoters (including the 23rd and the 46th
respondents) obtained 56 to 54 marks, while the next 16 unsuccessful
candidates (including six petitioners) scored 53 marks. If some of the
promoters got two or

**131**

three marks less, and/or the next 16 unsuccessful candidates got just 390 one
mark more, the picture would have been quite different. The seven petitioners
who were given no marks for qualifications (i.e. other than the 10th) should
reasonably have been given at least one or two marks - enough to make a
difference.  
  
The petitioners have urged that the time spent on each interview was
insufficient. The respondents did not suggest that they were provided with
interview schedules containing particulars of the candidates' past performance
appraisals, employment history, qualifications or experience. While the
allocation of marks for service in Grade Ill-Ill would have been quick, the
allocation of marks for performance on the basis of ratings received would
have required scrutiny of the performance evaluation reports. Qualifications
would have had to be reviewed and assessed. Assessment of "suitability" would
have required time - particularly, if the panel did probe "suitability" in the
exhaustive way they claim to have, including "testing" candidates. Further, if
they jointly allocated marks to each candidate for each category,
contemporaneously, some discussion and delay were inevitable. It is therefore
very probable that the average time of just ten minutes available for each
candidate was quite insufficient to assess the candidates fairly and
accurately \- and that is confirmed  by the discrepancies in regard to marks
for qualifications. The respondents cited De Silva v. Secretary, Ministry of
Health where four candidates were interviewed for about thirty minutes each.
It was in that context that I observed that particularly where the number of
candidates to be interviewed is small, a joint evaluation of each candidate,
systematically and honestly done, may sometimes be more useful than individual
evaluations - because comments and discussion would ensure better and more
consistent evaluation. The evaluation process in this case came nowhere near
those standards.  
  
I must mention also that the 23rd and the 46th respondents received nine out
of ten for each of the four heads assessed at the interviews, while the 20th
and 25th respondents received 33 out

**132**

of 40. This was more than any other candidate. Each of the other 37 promoters
had four or five years' service in Grade Ill-Ill, while those four respondents
had approximately one year each. Having regard to the small margin, of one or
two marks, between success and failure, it is highly probable that those
assessments were made with undue haste.  
  
Finally, the eligibility requirement was a minimum of one year's service in
Grade Ill-Ill. The petitioners rightly contend that the 23rd and the 46th
respondents did not have one year's actual service, and were therefore
ineligible even to apply for promotion.  
  
To sum up, the original interview mark sheets were not produced without good
reason; there was a serious discrepancy as to the allocation of marks to
candidate R. C. M. Atapattu; there was no satisfactory explanation as to how
the original entries were processed to produce the final mark sheets; the
allocation of marks for qualifications was irrational and arbitrary; there was
inadequate time to assess the candidates in respect of all seven criteria and
to arrive at a common mark in respect of each criterion; and the 23rd and 46th
respondents  were ineligible.  
  
I, therefore, hold that the interview and selection process were seriously
flawed.  
  
**RELIEF**  
  
The petitioners have asked for a declararion that the scheme of promotion be
declared null and void, and that the promotion of all the promotees be
declared void. For the reasons stated above, I uphold the scheme.  
  
In the alternative, the petitioners have prayed for the quashing, not of all,
but only of the promotions of the 7th, 12th, 16th, 19th,

**133**

20th, 21st, 23rd, 25th, 27th, 40th, 41st, 42nd and 46th respondents - on the
basis that they were all junior to the petitioners. While the entire process
was flawed, I do not consider it just and equitable to quash the other
promotions, as the petitioners had not sought that relief. The petitioners
have also asked for an order directing the 1st respondent to promote them to
Grade Ill-ll. However, the circumstances do not justify such an order.  
  
I, therefore, grant the petitioners a declaration that their fundamental
rights under Article 12 (1) have been infringed by the 1st, 3rd, 4th and 5th
respondents. The promotions of the 7th, 12th, 16th, 19th, 20th, 21st, 23rd,
25th, 27th, 40th, 41st, 42nd and 46th respondents are quashed. The 1st
respondent will have a fresh interview and selection process, conducted by a
different interview panel based on the same criteria, for the candidates who
presented themselves for the June, 2001, interviews. That interview and
selection process shall be concluded on or before 30. 11. 2002. The 1st
respondent will pay each of the petitioners a sum of Rs. 40,000 as
compensation and costs on or before 31. 10. 2002.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**YAPA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/17.html_  

