##  Mediwake and Others v. Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of Elections
and Others - SLR - 177, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 17; (2001) 1 Sri LR 177 (3
April 2001)

**177**

**MEDIWAKE AND OTHERS  
v.  
DAYANANDA DISSANAYAKE, COMMISSIONER OF  
ELECTIONS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO.412/99  
17TH OCTOBER, 14TH AND  
16TH NOVEMBER AND  
4TH AND 5TH DECEMBER, 2000  
  
_Fundamental rights - Provincial Council Elections - Poll in the Kandy
District, Provincial Council, Central Province - Provincial Council Elections
Act, No. 2 of 1988 as amended - Unlawful poll at 23 polling stations - Section
46A of the Act - Failure to declare the poll void and to appoint a re-poll -
Sections 46A(2) and 46(7)(a) of the Act - Articles 12(1) and 14(1) (a) of the
Constitution.  
  
_The four petitioners were registered voters of the Kandy District, which is
one of the three Districts of the Central Province. The election of Members to
the Provincial Council of that Province was held on 06.05.1998 under the
Provincial Council Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988 as amended (the Act.). The
petitioners were members of the United National Party (the U.N.P) while the
1st petitioner was also a candidate for the Kandy District; the 4th petitioner
was a polling agent.  
  
The 1st and the 2nd respondents were the Commissioner of Elections and the
Returning Officer, Kandy District, respectively; the 3rd respondent is the
Attorney-General; the 4th - 10th respondents were the General Secretaries of
the Political Parties and the 11th respondent was the group leader of an
Independent Group, that contested the said Provincial Council election. The
12th - 16th respondents (12th - 15th respondents being PA. candidates) were
persons against whom specific allegations were made by the petitioners.  
  
The petitioners alleged that various incidents had occurred on election day at
twenty five named polling stations in that District, including the

**178**

premature closure of one polling station as well as ballot stuffing, driving
away polling agents and intimidation at several others; and that the 1st
respondent by his failure to declare the poll at such polling stations void
(except at one polling station) under section 46A(2) of the Act, as amended by
Act, No. 35 of 1988 and to appoint a re-poll thereat under section 46A(7) (a)
infringed their fundamental rights. Leave to proceed was granted in respect of
the alleged infringement of Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(a) of the Constitution.  
  
It was established that ballot stuffing took place at twelve polling stations;
that at eleven other polling stations there were incidents of harassment and
chasing away of UNP polling agents by means of violence or threatening of
violence; and that the 12th to 15th respondents were actively involved in four
incidents.  
  
The 1st respondent annulled the poll at the Polwatta polling station, but did
not appoint a re-poll.  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. Section 46A(1) (b) of the Act requires a genuine poll, continuing
uninterrupted from beginning to the end, and compels the Commissioner to make
a qualitative assessment as to whether the poll was free, equal and secret.  
  
2\. Even before the count on 06.04.1999 there was prima facie evidence that
ballot stuffing and chasing away polling agents had taken place; and there was
no proper poll in law. The 1st and 2nd respondents had sufficient notice of
those incidents. However, the 1st respondent failed to make adequate inquiries
in respect of those incidents and decide whether there was a genuine poll. On
the available material the 1st respondent should have annulled the poll not
only at Polwatte but also at the other twenty two polling stations.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"It is true that section 46(A)(2) does not require an automatic annulment of
the poll for each and every non-compliance. The word "may" confirms that the
1st respondent has a discretionary power. However, that is a power coupled
with a duty; whenever it appears that the proved non-compliance

**179**

has interfered with a free, equal and secret ballot, that discretion must be
exercised."  
  
3\. The irregularities disclosed at the aforesaid twenty three polling
stations would have affected the result of the election for the Kandy
District; as such the 1st respondent should have ordered a re-poll at those
polling stations in terms of section 46A(7) (a).  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"The fact that the party position might have remained unchanged does not mean
that the "result" was not affected."  
  
4\. The right to a free, equal and secret ballot is an integral part of the
citizen's freedom of expression, when he exercises that freedom through his
right to vote. It makes no difference whether that right is constitutional or
statutory. That right is an essential part of the freedom of expression
recognized by Article 14(1)(a) of the Constitution, especially in view of Sri
Lanka's obligations under Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights and Article 27(15) of the Constitution.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"The citizen's right to vote includes the right to freely choose his
representatives, through a genuine election which guarantees the free
expression of the will of the electors: not just his own. Therefore not only
is a citizen entitled himself to vote at a free, equal and secret poll, but he
also has a right to a genuine election guaranteeing the free expression of the
will of the entire electorate to which he belongs."  
  
5\. The failure of the 1st respondent to ensure a genuine, free, equal and
secret poll - a poll which gave true expression to the will of all the
electors - and following upon that, his failure to annul the poll, and to
order a re-poll at all twenty three polling stations aforesaid, infringed the
right of the petitioners to the freedom of expression under Article -
14(1)(a), and to equality and equal protection under Article 12(1).  
  
6\. The 12th to 15th respondents abused their statutory right to enter the
polling station, by chasing away polling agents and procured an

**180**

executive or administrative injustice. As such they were properly joined as
respondents, but no relief was prayed against them. Hence no relief against
them is ordered.  
  
7\. The petitioners are not precluded from invoking the jurisdiction of the
court under Article 126 in view of the availability of the remedy of an
election petition which is a limited right which can be filed only by a
candidate; only upon the limited grounds set out in section 92(1) and for
redress which may be granted under section 96 of the Act.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Edrisinha v. Dissanayake_ SC No. 265/99 SCM 23.3.99  
  
2\. _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (1992) 2 Sri L.R. 1 at 54  
  
3\. _Karunatilleke v. Dissanayake_ (1999) 1 Sri L.R. 157  
  
4\. _Amaratunga v. Sirimal_ (1993) 1 Sri L.R. 264  
  
5\. _Faiz v. Attorney-General_ (1995) 1 Sri L.R. 372 at 383, 403-4  
  
6\. _Don Alexander v. Fernando_ (1948) 49 NLR 202  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Shibly Aziz, P.C_. with _A.P. Niles_ for petitioners.  
  
_Saleem Marsoof, PC_ , Additional Solicitor-General, with _L.A. Gnanadasan_
Deputy Solicitor-General, _U. Egalahewa_ , State Counsel, _Suren de Silva_ ,
State Counsel and _R. Gunatilake_ , State Counsel for 1st to 3rd respondents.  
  
_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for 16th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 3, 2001  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The four Petitioners were, at all material times, registered voters of the
Kandy District, which is one of the three Districts of the Central Province.
The election of members of the Provincial

**181**

Council of that Province was held on 6.4.99 under the Provincial Council
Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988, as amended by Act, No. 35 of 1988 ("the Act').
The Petitioners were members of the United National Party ("UNP"), while the
1st Petitioner was also a candidate for the Kandy District; the 4m Petitioner
was a polling agent.  
  
The Petitioners alleged that various incidents had occurred on election day at
25 named polling stations in that District. These included the premature
closure of one polling station, as well as ballot-stuffing, driving away
polling agents, and intimidation at several others.  
  
The Petitioners pleaded that:  
  
(1) " **. . .** it was the duty of each Presiding Officer of the relevant
polling stations to act in terms of sections 31 to 46 of (the Act), and to
keep order in the polling station, and to make it possible for the polling
agents to function freely, and to ensure that ballots were issued properly,
and to ensure that only persons entitled to vote were allowed to cast votes";  
  
(2) " **. . .** it was also the duty of each Presiding Officer **. . .** to
forthwith inform the 2nd Respondent Returning Officer of the District of the
incidents mentioned above, and it was the duty of the 2nd Respondent to then
inform the 1st Respondent Commissioner of Elections, in terms of section
46A(1) of the Act **. . .** ";  
  
(3) "upon receiving such information, it was the duty of the 1st, Respondent
to ascertain the truth of the information, and to declare the poll at such
polling station void, in terms of the same section";  
  
(4) "the Presiding Officers and/or the 2nd Respondent and/or the 1st
Respondent have failed to comply with their duties under the said section. In
fact, the purported ballots of all

**182**

the abovementioned polling stations have been taken into account in declaring
the final results"; and  
  
(5) " **. . .** if the poll was properly conducted **. . .** the final results
for the District of Kandy would have been affected."  
  
The Petitioners prayed for declarations that:  
  
(a) their "sovereign right of franchise under Article 4(e) **. . . .** has
been denied and/or violated in respect of the conduct of the poll at [the
aforesaid] polling stations," and  
  
(b) their fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 12(1), 14(1) (a), 14(1)
(e) and 14(1) (g) had been denied and/or violated  
  
(i) by the failure of the 1st and/or 2nd Respondents to conduct and/or cause
to be conducted a proper poll at the aforesaid polling stations, and  
  
(ii) by the failure of the 1st Respondent to declare void the poll at those
polling stations and to order a repoll;  
  
They also asked for an order directing the 1st Respondent to declare void the
poll, and to order a re-poll, at those polling stations, but did not pray for
compensation.  
  
The 3rd Respondent Is the Attorney-General; the 4th to 10th Respondents are
the General Secretaries of the political parties which contested the election;
the 11th Respondent was the Group Leader of an independent group; and the 12th
to 16th Respondents are persons against whom specific allegations were made by
the Petitioners, although no relief was claimed against them.  
  
Leave to proceed was granted on 20.5.99 in respect of the alleged infringement
of Articles 12(1) and 14(1) (a). The 1st Respondent was directed to produce
the Senior Presiding

**183**

Officer's ("SPO's") journal in respect of the 25 named polling stations.  
  
**SECTION 46A OF THE ACT  
  
**The decision of this case turns largely on the interpretation and
implementation of section 46A, the marginal note to which refers to
"disturbances at polling stations";  
  
"46A(1) Where due to the occurrence of events of such a nature -  
  
(a) it is not possible to commence the poll at a polling station at the hour
fixed for the commencement of the poll; or  
  
(b) the poll at such polling station commences at the hour fixed for the
opening of the poll but cannot be continued until the hour fixed for the
closing of the poll; or  
  
(c) any of the ballot boxes assigned to the polling station cannot be
delivered to the counting officer, the presiding officer **. . .** shall
forthwith inform the returning officer who shall in turn inform the
Commissioner.  
  
46A(2) On receipt of an information under subsection (1) in relation to a
polling station **. . .** the Commissioner may, after making such inquiries as
he may deem necessary to ascertain the truth of such information by order
published in the Gazette, declare the poll at such polling station void.  
  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
**  
46A(5) The returning officer shall, from the statements under subsection (7)
of section 51 furnished to him by all the counting officers, add up and
ascertain the number of votes polled by each recognized political party and
independent group, and the number of preferences secured by each candidate
nominated by each such party or group at the election for such administrative
district other than the votes polled at the polling

**184**

station in respect of which an Order under subsection (2) has been made and
shall forthwith forward a statement to that effect to the Commissioner.  
**  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
**  
46A(7) (a) Where the Commissioner is of the opinion, on receipt of a statement
under subsection (5), that the result of the election for such administrative
district will be affected by the failure to count the votes polled, or the
votes which would have been polled, at the polling station in respect of which
an order under subsection (2) has been made, he shall forthwith appoint a
fresh date for taking a poll at such polling station. [emphasis added)  
  
In view of "the experience gathered in the conduct of the Elections to North
Western Province Provincial Council", the 1st Respondent, by letter dated
27.2.99, had asked the Secretary to the President to "bring to the notice of
Her Excellency the President immediately" certain urgent amendments needed to
section 46A (1) - namely, the addition after paragraph (c) of five other
situations:  
  
(d) if it was not possible to conduct the poll due to any reason beyond the
control of the Presiding Officer;  
  
(e) if one or more polling agents are chased out during the poll;  
  
(f) non-arrival of the polling party at the polling station due to obstruction
on the way;  
  
(g) if any disturbance of the peace at the polling station makes it impossible
to take the poll; and  
  
(h) if there is any forcible stuffing of ballot papers.

**185**

There was no response. Shortly thereafter, the 1st Respondent issued several
circulars and instructions to all Returning Officers. The following are some
relevant extracts:  
  
**Circular dated 17.3.99 regarding instructions to be issued to SPO's:  
**  
"4\. SPO should guarantee  
  
(a) the freedom of the elector to cast his vote in an unhindered manner,  
  
(b) equality in treatment of all contestants, and  
  
(c) prevent discrimination or privileges to any party or group.  
  
18\. Attention is drawn to section 46A and the record of details of persons,
vehicles, incidents, threats on staff or agents, damage to or misuse of any
ballot papers, damage to ballot boxes should be recorded (sic). In such
incidents the serial numbers, number of ballot papers lost or stuffed into
ballot boxes should be recorded. Messages should be sent to Returning Officer,
Commissioner of Elections immediately thereafter for a determination. For this
purpose use Part TV of the Journal.  
  
38\. With the experience of incidents taken place (sic) at the North Western
Province Provincial Council Elections, it is necessary to take precautionary
measures in anticipating similar situations or any other incidents. The
following steps should be taken in order to safeguard the proper management of
the Polling Station. In the event of unauthorised persons in several number or
in group (sic) forcibly enter into the polling station and intimidate polling
staff and forcibly remove ballot papers and stuffing or create any other
violence or disturbances at the

**186**

polling station, immediately SPO should intimate police officers on duty and
send [a] message regarding this to R.O. and the Senior Police Officer over the
phone **. . .** SPO should send his JPO [for the] purpose of sending this
telephone message and ... make a journal entry in this regard in Part IV of
the SPO's journal."  
  
**Circular dated 17.3.99 regarding "Points to be emphasised at SPOO Class":  
  
**"10\. Section 46A- Details of persons, vehicles used, the incident and
security provided, theft of ballot papers, serial Nos. of ballot papers lost
or stuffed into box by force. Your recommendation on the annulment of the
poll." [emphasis added throughout]  
  
17\. [A repetition of the last sentence of (38) above.]  
  
**Circular on "Annulment of a poll at a polling station - section 46A":  
  
**"1\. Your kind attention is drawn to section 46A [of the Act] under which
the poll at a polling station can be annulled, due to disturbances which could
affect the result of the poll.  
  
3\. & 4\. [The need to record and report incidents was stressed.]  
  
5\. Although a decision may at the furthest depend on the written report of
the SPOO, which may reach you only on his return at the close of poll, the
other sources of information, if properly alerted, may furnish the information
to you much earlier. You are kindly requested to ensure that any such
information is transmitted to me immediately as it is received by you."  
  
These instructions are referable to the 1st Respondent's power under section
129 (b) "to issue such directions as he may deem necessary to ensure active
execution of the provisions of the Act."

**187**

A valuable procedural safeguard was introduced by the 1st Respondent. The
SPO's journal consisted of four Parts; Part I, Record of proceedings; Part II,
Log entries and complaints; and Part 111, Written complaints by candidates
etc, and Reports and messages by SPO to RO, ARO, etc (to be maintained in
triplicate). A more detailed Part IV was substituted, consisting of a form
(which I will refer to as the "section 46A (2) form"), which was one method
whereby SPO's could fulfil their duty, under section 46A (1), of informing the
Returning Officer. Not only did it facilitate the orderly and systematic
recording and reporting of incidents of the kind referred to in the above
Circulars, but it also provided for the SPO either to certify that no incident
had occurred warranting the annulment of the election under section 46A (2) or
to recommend that the election be declared null and void on account of
incidents to be specified. Part IV was issued as a separate booklet in all
three languages, in duplicate; and the instructions given to the SPO were that
the original was to be detached and enclosed in one envelope (marked "Z"); the
duplicate (together with Parts I, II and III) in another envelope (marked "M
(2)"); and both handed over to the Returning Officer.

The English version of the section 46 A (2) form is as follows:  
  
**SENIOR PRESIDING OFFICER'S (S.P.O'S) JOURNAL  
PART IV**

_Section 46A (2) of the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No.2 of 1988 as
amended by the Elections (Special Provisions) Act, No. 35 of 1988._

Disturbances at the Polling Station

From the Presiding Officer of the **. . . .** polling division situated in the
polling district of **. . . .** to the Returning Officer of **. . . .**

District.

Poll commenced at 7.00 a.m./Poll could not commence at the scheduled time.
Poll commenced at **. . . . . . . . .** Reasons for such delay are enumerated
below.

**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .**

**188**

***   **Poll continued until 4.00 p.m./Poll could not continue until the
scheduled time. Reasons for such termination at **. . . . .** are enumerated
below.

**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .**

***   **Ballot boxes could not be handed over to the Returning Officer, for
the following reasons.  
**  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .**

Particulars of Security Staff at the Polling Station:

Name | Designation & Identification Number  
---|---  
  
01\.
**................................................................................................  
  
**02.
**................................................................................................  
  
**03\.
**................................................................................................  
  
**04\.
**................................................................................................**  
  
***   **I hereby certify that no incident has occurred warranting the
annulment of the election under Section 46A (2).  
  
*****  I recommend that the election at this polling station be declared null
and void under Section 46A (2), due to the following reasons. The incidents
are briefly set out below in the order in which they have occurred.  
  
_1st incident  
_  
Time of occurrence **..........  
**  
No. of votes cast as at that time **..........  
**  
Names/identity of the persons who are responsible for the disturbances as far
as I am aware/have learnt. **  
  
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .**

**189**

***   **Delete whichever is inapplicable  
  
Registered number/s of the vehicle/s used:  
  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .**  
  
Particulars including the numbers of the ballot papers which were forcibly
stuffed into the ballot boxes.  
  
Serial No. **..............................** to Serial No.
**........................**  
  
Were any ballot papers brought into the polling station from outside, marked
and stuffed into the ballot box of the polling station?  
  
The incident/s referred to above is/are briefly indicated below.  
  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .**  
  
Injuries or any other inconveniences to the staff:  
  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
**  
Damages to or loss of election articles etc.:  
  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
**  
Reasons for the failure of the security staff for not [being] able to prevent
this incident as I perceive, are as follows:  
  
I certify that I reported this incident to

  |

the Field Assistant Returning Officer at **.............  
**Returning Officer at **.............................  
**Police Patrol at **.........................**  
---|---  
  
and that I reported so in writing/verbally/through messenger.  
  
_02nd incident  
_  
**. . . . . . . . . .**

**190**

03rd incident  
  
**. . . . . . . . . .  
**  
Particulars of any incident where agents of political parties/ Independent
groups were chased away from the polling station or where any person caused
harassment to them (including the time such incident occurred): (In submitting
these particulars regarding agents, the name/s of the party/parties or
independent group/s represented, should be stated).  
  
**. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .**

[Signature, name, designation and official  
address of Presiding Officer] [emphasis added]

Not only was the 1st Respondent conscious of the shortcomings of the North-
Western Province Provincial Council elections, but he was reminded of public
and judicial concern about possible repetitions. Upon a complaint of imminent
infringement (in respect of the poll to be conducted on 6.4.99), he tendered
to this Court a set of the letters, circulars and instructions issued by the
Inspector-General of Police and himself. Nevertheless, three other
deficiencies were brought to his notice, by Counsel and by the Court: the need
for a stern warning that swift and appropriate action would be taken against
any Police officers found to be in intentional dereliction of their duties,
the lack of adequate provision to ensure the safety and freedom of voters,
counting agents, and, particularly, polling agents, and the use of vehicles,
personnel and weapons provided by the State for political activities connected
with elections. This Court expressed "confidence that these three matters will
also be given due consideration by the Commissioner of Elections and the
Inspector-General of Police." ( _Edrisinha v. Dissanayake_ ). (1)  
  
**THE FACTS  
  
**The 1st and 2nd Respondents filed affidavits nearly four months later in
which they admitted certain incidents:

**191**

(1) Replying to the Petitioners' allegation that at about 10.00 a.m. a mob of
about 200 armed Peoples' Alliance ("PA 7) supporters stormed the Ratnajothi KV
polling station No. 15, and threatened the UNP polling agents, and snatched
ballot papers, and stuffed about 500 ballots in the ballot box, they stated
that "45 ballot papers commencing from 192455192500 and 49 ballot papers
commencing from 192601192650 totalling 94 ballot papers forcibly stuffed by
unknown persons [at that polling station] were identified and excluded from
the count **. . .** "The SPO mentioned this incident in Part 111, in a
"message" form, but all three copies remained in the journal.  
  
(2) Replying to the Petitioners' allegation that at about 1.20 p.m. PA
supporters stormed the Udupitya Muslim KV polling station No. 40 armed with
pistols and a bomb, and threatened the UNP polling agents, and snatched a
parcel of ballots, and cast them, they stated that "48 ballot papers
commencing from serial No.439652-439700 forcibly stuffed by unknown persons
[at that polling station] were identified and excluded from the count **. .
.** " The SPO recorded in the journal that a crowd of 30 persons came at 1.20
p.m., and that this was reported to the ARO and the RO, but made no mention of
ballot-stuffing.  
  
In respect of these two incidents, it must be noted that the section 46A (2)
forms were not produced, and that the 1st and 2nd Respondents have not
produced any document by which they were informed of the 'ballot-stuffing, and
the relevant serial numbers. Further, although reference has been made to 45,
49 and 48 ballot papers, the serial numbers given actually' cover 46, 50 and
49 ballot papers.  
  
(3) They added that "several ballot papers were removed from counting in
certain other polling stations such as **. . . . .** in which incidents were
reported by the respective Senior Presiding Officers." They named nine polling
stations (which are not among the 25 named by the Petitioners). They produced
neither the documents by which these incidents were reported, nor the relevant
section 46A (2) forms. Further, it is difficult to assume that they meant that
those were the only other incidents, because

**192**

such as" tends to suggest that there were other incidents as well.  
  
(4) Replying to the Petitioners' allegation that at about 12.30p.m. a mob of
PA supporters stormed the Polwatta KV polling station No. 19 and began to
stuff the ballot boxes, whereupon the Presiding Officer closed the polling
station, and sealed the ballot box, they stated that "the poll [at that
polling station] was annulled under section 46A **. . .** " They did not
explain why the 1st Respondent did not order a re-poll under section 46A (7).  
  
(5) Replying to the Petitioners' allegation that a mob of about 50 PA
supporters stormed the [Wattegama] polling station No. 34, threatened the UNP
polling agents, snatched ballot papers and stuffed about 1,000 ballots, in
consequence of which a complaint was made at the Wattegama Police station and
an agent was treated at the Wattegama Government hospital, they stated that no
incidents of stuffing ballots were reported, but that a report was submitted
to the 2nd Respondent by the SPO at 9.10 a.m. regarding an incident of
harassment to the UNP polling agents; that the report was submitted to the
Police; and that the 2nd Respondent was unaware of the action taken by the
Police.  
  
As for the Petitioners' other allegations, they stated that they were unaware
of those incidents, and that information regarding them "will have to be
obtained from the Senior Presiding Officers' journals **. . .** which have
been sealed after the close of the poll **.** **. . .** and kept in safe
custody."  
  
At the hearing the sealed packets (in the "M(2)" envelopes) in respect of 23
of the 25 polling stations named by the Petitioners were opened by the
Registrar of this Court in the presence of Counsel. (The packet for Wattegama
had not been brought to Court because of a mis-description by the Petitioners,
but no reason was given for not bringing the Polwatta documents.) The "Z"
envelopes containing the original communication by the SPO's to the Returning
Officer were not produced by the 1st and 2nd Respondents. However, that could

**193**

not have made any difference because each "M (2)" envelope (which was entitled
"SPO's Journal") should have contained copies of all four Parts of the SPO's
journal.  
  
Those journals contained entries regarding incidents Nos (1) and (2) above,
and the following incidents at ten other polling stations.  
  
(6) Kalugaloya KV polling station No. 17. The Petitioners alleged that a mob
of armed PA supporters led by the 15th Respondent, a PA candidate, stormed the
Police station, threatened the 4th Petitioner, a UNP polling agent, and
assaulted him with the Presiding Officer's chair; the agent sustained a
fracture of the hand, left the polling station, and was admitted to hospital.
The SPO's journal has three relevant entries: one in Part I, to the effect
that at 7.40 a.m. the 15th Respondent came, and assaulted and chased away the
UNP polling agents, and another in Part III that a crowd assaulted and chased
away the UNP polling agents. The 15th Respondent did not file an affidavit
denying the 4th Petitioner's affidavit.  
  
(7) Maha Assedduma KV polling station No. 37. The Petitioners alleged that at
about 3.30 p.m. the 13th Respondent, a PA candidate, accompanied by several
armed persons in Police uniform and a mob entered the polling statiori,
threatened UNP agents and the Presiding Officer, and snatched and cast
ballots. Part I of the journal contains two entries by the SPO: that until
3.00 p. m. there was no disturbance at the polling station and voting took
place very peacefully; and that at about 3.30 p.m. un known persons asked him
to allow ballots to be forcibly cast, and because of his refusal he too was
severely threatened. He made no entry about the situation thereafter. The 13th
Respondent did not file an affidavit denying the polling agent's affidavit.  
  
(8) Megodagama KV polling station No. 17. The Petitioners alleged that at
about 11.00 a.m. a mob of about 50 armed PA supporters stormed the polling
station, threatened the UNP polling agents, snatched ballot papers and stuffed
about 300

**194**

ballots in the ballot box. The SPO's journal contains two complaints: one
recorded at 11.30 a.m. to the effect that the UNP polling agent says he is
leaving because outsiders were casting ballots; and the other at 11.55 a.m.
that a named UNP candidate states that his agent left because of threats and
that near the entrance to the polling station there were eight vehicles and a
crowd of about 70 outsiders, who had come to cast illegal votes.  
  
(9) Pahala Yatawara polling station No. 18. The Petitioners alleged that at
about 11.00 a.m. a mob of about 50 armed PA supporters stormed the polling
station, threatened the UNP polling agents, snatched ballot papers and stuffed
about 300 ballots in the ballot box. The SPO has noted in Part I of the
journal (under "events of a significant nature") that at 10.00 a.m. a crowd
entered the polling station, that he instructed the security to remove them,
and that they were removed; and, in a message form in Part 111, that a
complaint was made by the UNP polling agents, who left at 11.40 a.m.  
  
(10) Girakaduwa PV polling station No. 24. The Petitioners alleged that at
about 7.10 a.m. a mob of about 20,0 armed PA supporters led by the 14th
Respondent, a PA candidate, stormed the polling station, threatened the UNP
polling agents, snatched ballot papers and stuffed about 200 ballots in the
ballot box. The SPO has noted in the journal the complaint made by the polling
agents that a group of thugs who came with a PA candidate had threatened to
kill them, and that there were illegalities in the voting. He has noted the
14th Respondent's arrival at 7.00 a.m. and departure at 7.05 a.m., and the
polling agent's time of departure as 7.40 a.m. The 14th Respondent did not
file an affidavit denying the polling agent's affidavit.  
  
(11) Yatirawana MV polling station No. 31. The Petitioners alleged that a mob
of about 200 armed PA supporters led by the 16th Respondent, stormed the
polling station, threatened the UNP polling agent, snatched ballot papers and
stuffed about 750 ballots in the ballot box; a complaint was made to the Kandy
Police. The SPO has noted in Part III that at about 9.25 a.m. a

**195**

group of unknown persons had attempted to chase away the UNP polling agents,
but the security personnel had sent away that group; later that same group
returned and chased the two of them. He then noted that if this had not
happened, a huge problem would have had to be faced! This entry is in a
"message" form, of which one copy appears to have been despatched. There is
also an entry in the section 46A (2) form (under " 1st incident"), signed by
two persons, that they were leaving because a group of unknown young persons
had threatened them at 9.30 a.m.  
  
The 16th Respondent filed an affidavit denying that he came to that polling
station. That was not rebutted, and the Petitioners failed to produce the
complaint made to the Police. Accordingly, while it is clear that an incident
did occur at this polling station, Mr. Aziz, PC, for the Petitioners, conceded
that the Petitioners had failed to establish, on a balance of probability,
that the 16th Respondent participated in that incident. For similar reasons he
conceded he could not pursue allegations against the 16th Respondent
personally in respect of another polling station.  
  
(12) Udadelthota MV polling station No. 19. The Petitioners alleged that at
about 9.40 a.m. a group of about 15 PA supporters armed with weapons and bombs
led by the 12th Respondent, a PA candidate, stormed the polling station,
assaulted and made death threats to a UNP polling agent, and began to stuff
750 ballots in the ballot box; a complaint was made to the Galaha Police. The
SPO's journal has three relevant entries, to the effect that the 12th
Respondent came with a crowd to the polling station at 9.40 a.m. and again at
10.30 a.m.; that a Police constable told him that only he could enter and not
the crowd; that he scolded the constable and created a disturbance; and that
the SPO closed the doors of the polling station, and explained matters to the
12th Respondent, but with no result. The security staff sent away the crowd.
They returned at 10.30 a.m., and the 12th Respondent threatened the UNP
polling agents and chased them away. The security staff have also noted that
this incident frightened the voters, and that one officer had to

**196**

shoot two shots in the air to prevent danger to life and property. The 12th
Respondent did not file an affidavit denying the polling agent's affidavit.  
  
(13) Metideniya MV polling station No. 17. The Petitioners alleged that
between 7.20 and 7.30 a.m., a UNP polling agent was assaulted in the polling
station; his electoral register was taken; and, after death threats, he was
chased away. A complaint was made to the Udadumbara Police. In his journal the
SPO has recorded two complaints made by the UNP agent, at 7.20 and 7.45 a.m.;
and also (as an "event of a significant nature") that at 7.20 a.m. a crowd
demanded ballot papers, which he refused, and that the UNP agents were sent
away.  
  
(14) Niyangoda MV polling station No. 37. The Petitioners alleged that shortly
after 7.00 a.m., a mob of PA supporters stormed into the polling station, and
threatened, assaulted and chased away the UNP polling agents; and that the
Presiding Officer stated that he was going to close the polling station, but
did not do so. A complaint was made to the Galagedera Police. Only Part IV of
the journal was produced. He has entered in the section 46A (2) form (under
"1st incident", seemingly in support of a recommendation for the annulment of
the poll) that between 7.05 and 7.10 a.m., when four votes had been cast, K.M.
Alahakoon Banda had assaulted and chased away the two UNP agents, and that the
Police have recorded the complaint; and later that he informed the Field
Assistant Returning Officer at 7.05 a.m., the ARO at 7.10 a.m., and the Police
at 8.00 a.m. However, he did not sign that form, and both signature pages are
intact. It appears that a part only of that form had been despatched.  
  
(15) Galagedera Jabbar MV polling station No. 8. The Petitioners alleged that
PA supporters had threatened and chased away the UNP polling agents. The SPO
records (in a "message" form) that by 8.07 a.m. the UNP polling agents had
been called by some groups of people and chased out from the polling booth,
and that he had informed two ARO's when they visited that polling station \-
one at 8.50 a.m. and other at 11.30 a.m.

**197**

It is therefore clear now, on a balance of probability, that ballot - stuffing
took place at twelve polling stations (incidents Nos. (1) to (4) above); that
at eleven other polling stations there were incidents (Nos. (5) to (15) above)
of harassment and chasing away of UNP polling agents by means of violence or
threats of violence; and that the 12th to 15th Respondents were actively
involved in four incidents (Nos. (6), (7), (10), and (12) above). What is
more, there was prima facie evidence, even before the count on 6.4.99, that
these 23 incidents had taken place. Neither the 12th to 15th Respondents nor
the General Secretary of the PA have denied those incidents.  
  
The Petitioners alleged incidents at eleven other polling stations. While each
of those allegations was supported by a single affidavit, there was neither an
admission by any of the Respondents nor a supporting entry in the SPO's
journals. I do not propose to take these into account in deciding this case.  
  
SPO's were required, by means of the section 46A (2) form, to furnish to the
Returning Officer, inter alia, (1) full particulars. of ballot-stuffing (with
serial numbers), and of harassing or. chasing away polling agents, and (2)
either a certificate as to the propriety of the poll or a recommendation for
its annulment. Despite the 1st Respondent having repeatedly stressed the
importance of Part IV of the journal, the factual position in regard to the
submission of those forms (in respect of the 23 polling stations at which
incidents have been proved) is as follows:  
  
(a) The 1st and 2nd Respondents did not themselves produce with their
affidavits the section 46A (2) forms - neither the originals nor the
duplicates - in respect of any of those 23 polling stations.  
  
(b) The SPO's journals were not called for in respect of nine of those 23
polling stations (i.e. the nine incidents of ballot - stuffing disclosed by
the Respondents - No. (3) above).  
  
(c) In regard to the fourteen (proved) incidents pleaded by the Petitioners,
the journals were not produced for Polwatta and Wattegama.

**198**

(d) In regard to the other twelve, in response to the Court order to produce
the SPO's journals, the 1st Respondent produced only the "M (2)" envelopes
(but not the "22" envelopes); of those, in six instances neither the original
nor the duplicate of the section 46A (2) form was in the "M (2)" envelope; in
one instance, there was just one copy of the first page of that form, on which
page only one entry had been made; in three instances, the entire booklet was
available intact, without any entries; in another instance, the entire booklet
was available, with entries made on one page but even that page had not been
sent; and in the last instance, about one-half of the form had been completed,
but not the signature page, and that portion only appears to have been
despatched.  
  
Thus in eleven instances (out of twelve) the section 46A (2) form had neither
been duly completed nor sent to the 2nd Respondent; in the twelfth instance
only an incomplete and unsigned form had been sent. Since the seals on the "M
(2)" envelopes were intact, it is clear that the 2nd Respondent had not even
opened those envelopes in order to examine the forms. If he had, he (and,
through him, the 1st Respondent) would have become aware that potentially
serious incidents had occurred; that none of the SPO's had certified that
there were no incidents warranting the annulment of the poll; that other parts
of the journals established that polling agents had indeed been harassed and
chased away - information expressly called for in the final paragraph of the
section 46A (2) form; and that at seven out of the eleven polling stations
concerned, polling agents had been chased away by 10.00 a.m. (and at four
within the very first hour). It is quite clear from their affidavits that the
1st and 2nd Respondents had not examined Part N of the SPO's journals (i.e.
'either the "M (2)" or the "Z" envelopes), despite the 1st Respondent's
express and repeated instructions to SPO's to use Part IV as one major channel
of communication. They were therefore unaware of all those incidents. Had the
1st Respondent been aware of them, he would have had to consider whether they
fell within the scope of section 46A (1), and, if so to make inquiries to
ascertain the truth of that information (see

**199**

section 46A (2)); and thereafter to consider exercising his discretionary
powers of annulling the poll and of ordering a fresh poll.  
  
I must now consider the impact of those incidents on the poll at those polling
stations. It is not simply a matter of _x_ ballots being stuffed, or y polling
agents being driven out. Such incidents inevitably have an effect far beyond
the actual number of ballots or polling agents involved. Their effect on other
electors needs to be analysed. Demands for ballot papers for stuffing and/or
for the ejection of polling agents, if made by a few unarmed individuals,
quietly and inconspicuously entering and leaving a polling station, are bound
to fail - unless, of course, there is collusion and connivance by Presiding
Officers and staff, security personnel, and polling agents. Such demands can
succeed only when made by armed persons or by gangs of thugs, accompanied by
violence or a credible threat of violence. Such incidents will be witnessed by
electors waiting to vote, and will, through them, become known to others yet
to come to the polling station. Undoubtedly some will be deterred from voting
- exactly how many, is a matter for speculation. But I can take judicial
notice that not every elector is so brave, that he is determined to cast his
vote even at the risk of injury (leaving aside, of course, those electors who
are resolved at all costs to cast not only their own votes, but the votes of
others as well, including the dead and the absent). As we asked Counsel, upon
seeing such an incident would a pregnant woman standing in the queue - or an
aged person, or a mother carrying an infant - be less likely to go and vote ?
Would not a man (or woman) who has just witnessed such an incident go back and
dissuade others - aged parents, or spouse, or children, or neighbours - from
voting ? Would potential voters not lose confidence in the ability of the law
enforcement authorities to protect them against unlawful acts and/or to duly
investigate them if they did occur ? Ballot-stuffing and driving out polling
agents go hand-in-hand with violence or the threat of violence - which, in
turn, will have a deterrent effect on electors in the vicinity as well as on
those still in their homes. Impersonators will not have an easy task if there
are

**200**

polling agents present who might challenge them (and demand declarations under
section 41). Obviously, polling agents are not chased away because they are
disliked, but because they hinder impersonation. Further, the practice of
seizing polling cards from electors must not be forgotten. That is seldom an
end in itself, because it does not prevent those electors from voting.
However, if those electors can somehow be deterred from voting, and if there
are no polling agents likely to object, a seized polling card will be a
passport to impersonation. Thus driving away polling agents Is a classic
symptom of graver and more widespread electoral malpractices, ranging from the
intimidation of electors and the seizure of polling cards, to large-scale
impersonation.  
  
**SECTION 46A (2) : ANNULMENT OF POLL AND RE-POLL  
  
**I have now to consider (a) whether the above 23 incidents fell within the
scope of section 46A (1) (b), and whether the 1st Respondent ought to have
declared the poll at the relevant polling stations void; and (b) if so whether
he should, acting under section 46A (7) (a), have ordered a re-poll.  
  
**1\. Was there a proper Poll ?  
  
**Mr. Marsoof, PC, ASG, submitted that the remedy of annulment was confined to
the three specific grounds mentioned in section 46A (1) :  
  
" **. . .** there was no intention to confer on the Commissioner of Elections
the power to make a qualitative assessment of the democratic nature of the
poll and annul the poll if in his opinion it was not free and fair. On the
contrary, the three grounds specified **. . .** relate to objective facts,
namely (a) the time of commencement of the poll, (b) the time of conclusion of
the poll, and (c) the ability to deliver the ballot boxes to the counting
officer. The legislature has advisedly left the qualitative assessment of the
poll to the Election Court **. . .** [Further] the result of the election at
the Administrative District or Province

**201**

would not have been affected even if the alleged irregularities took place. In
the circumstances the 1st Respondent [was] not duty bound to annul the poll in
the Administrative District and order a fresh poll **. . .** " (emphasis
added]  
  
To test that interpretation we put to Mr. Marsoof two hypothetical situations
: (1) where the poll duly commenced at 7.00 a.m., but as a result of violence
was interrupted from 7.05 a.m. until 3.55 p.m., when the poll was resumed, and
concluded at 4.00 p.m. ; and (2) where, for an hour or two, an armed thug
allowed electors to vote only for one party (or only after showing him their
marked ballot papers). His reply was that even in such circumstances the
Commissioner had no power to annul the poll - even if a large number of
electors might have been prevented from voting, or from voting for the party
or group of their choice, or from voting in secret. His contention was that if
the poll had started on time, and ended on time, what happened in between was
a matter for the Courts, in an election petition; not for the Commissioner of
Elections.  
  
I reject, without hesitation, such a narrow and mechanical interpretation,
which ignores the context in which the section appears, as well as its plain
words.  
  
Section 46A (1) appears in Part III of the Act, dealing with "The Poll" Many
of the provisions of Part III manifest a legislative intention that the poll
must be free (e. g. sections 33 (2) and 38), equal (e. g. sections 35, 36 and
40) and secret (e. g. section 37). Besides, contrary to Mr. Marsoof's
formulation, the "objective fact" to which paragraph (b) refers is not the
time of conclusion of the poll, but rather the continuation of the poll until
the scheduled time of conclusion. What that requires is that, having duly
commenced at the scheduled time, the poll must continue until closing time.  
  
What is a "poll" ? In my view, a poll is a process of voting that enables a
genuine choice between rival contenders: necessarily, one that is free of any
improper influence or pressure; equal, where all those entitled to vote (and
no others)

**202**

are allowed to express their choice as between parties and candidates who
compete on level terms; and where the secrecy of the ballot is respected.  
  
A mere semblance of a poll is not enough. The elaborate provisions of the Act,
and especially Part 111, compel the conclusion that Parliament had in mind a
genuine poll, and not a mere charade. Such a poll must "continue"; i.e. voting
must take place not sporadically, but without interruption, from beginning to
end.  
  
I therefore conclude that section 46A (1) (b) requires a genuine poll,
continuing uninterrupted from beginning to end, and compels the Commissioner
to make a qualitative assessment as to whether the poll was free, equal and
secret.  
  
If I may digress at this point, it is very clear - from the amendments which
he proposed on 27.2.99 - that the 1st Respondent fully realised that ballot-
stuffing and chasing away polling agents were factors which prevented a proper
poll, and which therefore demanded the annulment of the poll. Further, by
means of the section 46A (2) form which he himself prescribed, he required
SPO's not only to confirm that opening and closing times had been observed,
but also to describe any other incidents which warranted the annulment of the
poll. If Mr. Marsoof is right in his submission that the 1st Respondent could
annul the poll only where the poll did not commence or conclude at the
stipulated time, why did the 1st Respondent unnecessarily burden SPO's by
asking them to submit detailed reports on other matters ?  
  
Besides, if Mr. Marsoof's contention is accepted, then neither section 46A nor
any other provision of the Act empowers the Commissioner to determine that
ballot papers had been stuffed, and to order their exclusion from the count.
It is only the broader interpretation of section 46A (1) which brings ballot -
stuffing within the scope of paragraph (b), and may perhaps justify the
removal of stuffed ballot papers as being an appropriate remedy for ballot
stuffing in some cases. Thus where the ballot-stuffing

**203**

had no effect on the poll or the electors, apart from the number of ballots
actually stuffed, their removal may cure the evil - but certainly not where
ballot-stuffing is accompanied by other factors which vitiate a proper poll.  
  
Polling agents have a special role to play in a free, equal and secret poll,
and this Court emphasised the need to ensure their security shortly before the
disputed poll. Their right to be present at the polling station is expressly
recognized by section 33, in the same breath as the right of election staff,
the police, and candidates. Their duties commence from the time the empty
ballot box is sealed; and inter alia they have the right to challenge
suspected impersonators. An election, ultimately, is determined by the number
of ballots cast. It is the polling agents who play a leading part in ensuring
that only those entitled to vote do cast ballots. Chasing away polling agents
makes a poll cease to be equal.  
  
I hold that on 6.4.99 there was prima facie evidence that ballot-stuffing and
chasing away polling agents had taken place; that those incidents prevented
the "continuation" of a poll at 23 polling stations; and that there was no
proper poll in law. The 1st and 2nd Respondents had sufficient notice of those
incidents; the 1st Respondent was under a duty to inquire into the truth of
the information available in the SPO' s journals; but he failed to inquire
into the eleven incidents of chasing away polling agents, and failed to make
adequate inquiries in respect of the twelve incidents of ballot-stuffing. The
evidence before this Court establishes that if the 1st Respondent had made
proper inquiries, he could not reasonably have concluded that there had been a
genuine and uninterrupted poll at any of those polling stations.  
  
**2\. Annulment of Poll  
**  
It is true that section 46A(2) does not require an automatic annulment of the
poll for each and every non-compliance. The word "may" confirms that the 1st
Respondent has a discretionary power. However, that is a power coupled with a
duty: whenever

**204**

it appears that the proved non-compliance has interfered with a free, equal
and secret ballot, that discretion must be exercised. It is only where the
lapse was trivial, and had no effect on the rights of electors that the
Commissioner could properly refrain from exercising that discretion: as, for
instance, if the poll had commenced a few minutes late (or concluded a few
minutes early), or was interrupted for a few minutes by some accident or
misfortune (e. g. a member of the polling staff being taken ill, or a sudden
rainstorm causing a leak in the roof of the polling station, or a drunkard
creating a disturbance). If it appears that no one was consequently prevented
from voting, it would be an improper exercise of discretion to annul the poll:
the word "may" permits the application of the principle that de minimis non
curat lex. It is not necessary to consider in this case whether the
Commissioner could properly refrain from annulling the poll even where a few
electors had been affected by an incident not directed against them on account
of their political views. But very different considerations apply to organized
violence calculated to influence the poll significantly by deterring one
section of the electors.  
  
I must deal next with Mr Marsoof's submission that the Commissioner cannot
annul the poll unless the result of the election (at the District or
Provincial level) would have been affected. Section 46A(2) imposes no such
restriction on the Commissioner's powers and duties (unlike section 46A(7)
(a)).  
  
I hold that the 1st Respondent should have annulled the poll, not only at
Polwatta but also at the other 22 polling stations.  
  
**3\. Re-poll  
  
**Where the Commissioner has annulled the poll at a polling station, section
46A(7) (a) requires him, on receipt of the statements under section 51(7),
forthwith to appoint a fresh date for taking a poll at that polling station,
if he is of the opinion

**205**

that the result of the election for such administrative district will be
affected by the failure to count the votes polled at that polling station.
This must be contrasted with section 92(1) which requires proof - in an
election petition - that noncompliance materially affected the result of the
election.  
  
What is the "result" of an election under the proportional representation
system? Section 58 deals with the "Declaration of the result:" the returning
officer must declare elected candidates from each party or group, having
regard both to the votes obtained by such party or group, and the preferences
obtained by each candidate. There is no provision for the declaration of the
number of seats won by each party or group, distinct from the identification
of the candidates elected. (Section 61A provides for the Commissioner
thereafter to declare two more candidates declared elected for the two bonus
seats for the province).  
  
The statements under section 51(7) will disclose to the Commissioner (a) the
votes polled by each party or group in the district, and (b) the number of
preferences secured by each candidate. From that he would be able to determine
the number of seats to which each party or group is entitled, as well as which
candidates should be declared elected. Nevertheless, the "result" of the
election in the district is the declaration that specified candidates have
been elected.  
  
What the Commissioner had then to determine is whether the failure to count
the votes at the polling station where the poll has been annulled "will
affect" that result. That does not mean that the Commissioner has to be
certain that there would be a different result; it is enough if it appears
that a re-poll was likely to result in one or more other candidates being
elected.  
  
In the Kandy District, the PA and the UNP were each entitled to thirteen
seats, and the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP") to one seat. The votes polled
by the PA and the UNP candidates

**206**

who came 12th to 15th and the JVP candidates who came 1st to 3rd were as
follows:

  | **PA** | **UNP** |   | **JVP**  
---|---|---|---|---  
12th | 18,576 | 16,347 : | 1st | 1,794  
13th | 18,448 | 13,478 : | 2nd | 1,535  
14th | 18,003 | 12,767 : | 3rd | 1,457  
15th | 17,123 | 12,286 : |   |  
  
The 1st Respondent had annulled the poll at Polwatta. It is possible that even
a re-poll at Polwatta alone would have affected the above result: in the case
of the PA and the UNP candidate No. 14 might have got elected in place of
candidate No. 13; and the JVP candidate No. 2 in place of candidate No. 1.  
  
But, for the reasons set out above, the 1st Respondent should have annulled
the poll in another 22 polling stations besides Polwatta. Had that been done,
section 46A (7) (a) would have required him to consider the cumulative effect
of a re-poll at all 23 polling stations. It was then not merely possible, but
very likely that a re-poll would have significantly affected the preference
obtained by the "borderline" candidates, and the "result" would then have been
different in regard to which candidates were elected. The fact that the party
position might have remained unchanged does not mean that the "result" was not
affected.  
  
I must now turn to the submission which Mr Marsoof made in this connection. To
appreciate that submission, it is necessary to set out the Kandy District
election results:

Votes polled Seats won  
  
---  
PA | 247,250 | 13  
---|---|---  
UNP | 232,934 | 13  
OTHERS | 39,875 | 2  
  |   |  
Majority | 14,316 |  
  
**207**

He submitted that in order to annul the election in the Kandy District the
Petitioners must show that the UNP would have polled more votes than the PA
and the other parties combined (namely 247,250 plus 39,875 plus one, = 287,126
votes): that, but for the irregularities complained of, the UNP would have
polled another 54,192 votes, making a total of 287,126.  
  
In support of this proposition, he cited _Bandaranaike v Premadasa_ ,(2)  
  
"There is another relevant matter to which we must refer. Mr Choksy drew our
attention to paragraph 05 of the petition where it is averred that according
to the results declared by the Commissioner of Elections, the majority by
which the 1st Respondent won is 279339 votes. It was the submission of Counsel
that even if the Petitoner got one more vote than the majority obtained by the
1st Respondent she would still not have been declared elected. Mr Choksy
contended that the Petitioner in order to win had to get the total votes
received jointly by the UNP and the SLMP plus one more vote. Thus she would
have had to get 515059 more votes than she polled in order to have succeeded
at the election. It appears to us that this submission is well founded."
[emphasis added]  
  
In a Presidential election the candidate who polls 50% plus one vote is
declared elected. If no candidate polls 50% plus one, then there is a further
count at which the votes cast for all candidates (other than the first and the
second) are ignored, and preference votes are counted to ascertain which
candidate has obtained 50% plus one. Either way, the winner-takes-all, and
other candidates get nothing. That is fundamentally different to the result of
a Provincial Council election, based on the proportional representation
system. There the party or group which polls the highest number of votes does
not win every seat; and many candidates are elected, from several parties and
groups, besides the one who gets the highest number of preferences.

**208**

I entirely agree with the dictum cited. As stated therein, "in order to win"
\- i.e. to obtain a judicial declaration that he was duly elected - an
unsuccessful Presidential candidate must show that he would have obtained 50%
of the total votes plus one (and not merely more votes than the successful
candidate). But even in a Presidential election there can well be an
intermediate position between upholding the impugned election and declaring an
unsuccessful candidate elected. If it is shown, for instance, that neither the
successful candidate nor any other candidate actually got (or would have got)
50% of the total votes polled plus one, then to allow the "result" (namely,
that the successful candidate was elected) to stand would be contrary to law;
and to determine who actually was- elected an order for the count of
preference votes becomes necessary. The dictum cited does not purport to deal
with that situation.  
  
In any event, a Provincial Council election is quite different. The "result"
includes several components: which parties or groups are entitled to the seats
in the district on the basis of votes polled, which is entitled to the two
bonus seats for the province, and which candidates of such parties or groups
are entitled to be declared on the basis of preferences. Thus even those
irregularities, which affect only the preferences and thereby the
identification of the candidates elected, do affect the "result."  
  
It must also be noted that the Petitioners do not claim the annulment of the
Kandy District election and a fresh election. Their claim is that the 1st
Respondent's failure to order a re poll in certain polling stations was in
violation of their fundamental rights. The dictum in Bandaranaike v. Premadasa
is inapplicable to the Petitioners' claims in this application.  
  
I hold that the 1st Respondent could not reasonably have concluded that the
irregularities disclosed at those 23 polling stations would not have affected
the result of the poll thereat. Consequently, section 46A(?) (a) left him no
choice but to order a re-poll at those 23 polling stations.

**209**

It is true that a re-poll would have caused considerable delay in determining
the overall result for Kandy District, and consequently for the Central
Province as well. But as between avoiding delay and inconvenience, however
serious, to a large number of electors, and remedying the infringement of the
right of a much smaller number of electors at those 23 polling stations to a
free, equal and secret poll, undoubtedly the latter is far more important. It
must be noted that not only did the 1st Respondent himself remember the recent
experiences at the North Western Provincial Council elections, but he was
again reminded on 23.3.99 of the need for adequate provision to ensure the
safety and freedom of voters, counting agents, and, particularly, polling
agents. It was the failure by the 1st Respondent to insist upon the provision
of adequate security - personnel, weapons, communication equipment, vehicles,
etc - which was a principal cause of those infringements. The 1st Respondent,
as one limb of the Executive, can hardly claim infringements caused by
culpable inaction on the part of another limb of the Executive should remain
unremedied on the ground of inconvenience.  
  
The statutory powers and duties of the 1st Respondent are intended to ensure a
free, equal and secret poll. Accordingly, I am confident that at all future
elections the 1st Respondent will insist that adequate security be provided at
all polling stations, and whenever there is no genuine, free, equal and secret
poll at any polling station he will duly exercise his powers to annul an
invalid poll and to order a re-poll. Those who seek to prevent a proper poll
today must be made to understand that the 1st Respondent will ensure a proper
poll tomorrow.  
  
**NATURE OF THE RIGHT CLAIMED BY THE PETITIONERS  
  
**It is not disputed that the Petitioners, being registered voters of the
Kandy District, had a legal right to vote at that election, and that voting,
in the exercise of that legal right, was a form of "expression" guaranteed by
Article 14(1) (a), as I held in _Karunatileke v. Dissanayake_.(3)

**210**

Provincial Council elections are not expressly mentioned in Articles 4(e) and
93, and it was open to argument that the requirement that elections be "free,
equal and by secret ballot" did not apply to such elections. Even though that
requirement has not been expressly set out, in my view that requirement is
fundamental to any election in any nation which respects the sovereignty of
the People, representative democracy and the Rule of Law. I therefore hold
that the right to a free, equal and secret ballot is an integral part of the
citizen's freedom of expression, when he exercises that freedom through his
right - whether constitutional or statutory makes no difference - to vote.  
  
Further, the constitutional duty of the Commissioner of Elections (under
Article 104) extends to all elections conducted under any statute, including
Provincial Council elections. The duty imposed by Article 4(d) on all organs
of government to respect, secure and advance fundamental rights applies to him
too, and it is therefore his obligation to conduct each and every election in
such a manner as to safeguard the fundamental rights of every registered
voter.  
  
While it is clear that the rights of many voters (registered at the aforesaid
23 polling stations) to a free, equal and secret ballot were infringed, none
of the Petitioners claims that he personally experienced even the slightest
inconvenience or impediment whatsoever in regard to the exercise of his right
to vote. Even the 4th Petitioner who was chased away from a polling station
did not allege that this prevented him from voting.  
  
Thus it appears that the irregularities complained of directly infringed only
the right to vote of others. Do those infringements constitute in law an
infringement of the Petitioners' fundamental rights under Articles 12(1) and
14(1) (a)? To answer that question, I must consider the true nature of a
citizen's right to vote.  
  
Article 25 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights is a
useful starting point:

**211**

"Every citizen shall have the right and the opportunity, without any of the
distinctions mentioned in Article 2 and without unreasonable restrictions:  
  
(a) To take part in the conduct of public affairs, directly or through freely
chosen representatives;  
  
(b) To vote and to be elected at genuine periodic elections which shall be by
universal and equal suffrage and shall be held by secret ballot, guaranteeing
the free expression of the will of the electors; **. . . .** " [emphasis
added]  
  
Sri Lanka is a party to that Covenant and its sister Covenant, which together.
constitute the international Bill of Human Rights. It would be idle to argue
that our election laws pertaining to Provincial Council elections are not
founded on guarantees to every citizen of the right to "take part" in public
affairs, through representatives freely chosen by him, at a genuine election,
by universal and equal suffrage, held by secret ballot, ensuring the free
expression of the will of the electorate. Article 27(15) requires the State
"to endeavour to foster respect for international law and treaty obligations
in dealings among nations." Accordingly , in interpreting the relevant
provisions of an enactment regulating any election a Court must, unless there
is compelling language, favour a construction which is consistent with the
international obligations of the State, especially those imposed by the
international Bill of Human Rights. I hold that those guarantees are an
essential part of the freedom of expression recognized by Article 14(1) (a).  
  
The citizen's right to vote includes the right to freely choose his
representatives, through a genuine election which guarantees the free
expression of the will of the electors: not just his own. Therefore not only
is a citizen entitled himself to vote at a free, equal and secret poll, but he
also has a right to a genuine election guaranteeing the free expression of the
will of the entire electorate to which he belongs. Thus if a citizen desires
that candidate x

**212**

should be his representative, and if he is allowed to vote for X but other
like-minded citizens are prevented from voting for X, then his right to the
free expression of the will of the electors has been denied. If 51% of the
electors wish to vote for X, but 10% are prevented from voting - in
consequence of which X is defeated - that is a denial of the rights not only
of the 10% but of the other 41 % as well. Indeed, in such a situation the 41 %
may legitimately complain that they might as well have not voted. To that
extent, the freedom of expression, of like-minded voters, when exercised
through the electoral process is a collective one, although they may not be
members of any group or association.  
  
That is by no means unique. A scrutiny of Article 14 reveals that many
fundamental rights have both an individual and a collective aspect.  
  
A citizen's freedom of speech guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) is violated not
only when he is not permitted to speak, but even when others are prevented
from listening to him. A corollary of As freedom of speech is As right that
those to whom he wishes to speak should be permitted to listen to him -
provided of course that they want to listen to him. If a part of his audience
is driven away, the effectiveness of the exercise of his freedom of speech is
impaired, and thereby his right is infringed.  
  
In the exercise of their freedom of expression, a thousand people - each
unknown to the other - may decide to support a peaceful noise protest (a Jana
_Ghosha_ as in _Amaratunga v. Sirimal_ (4)). It may be organised by some
association of which they are not members. If half of them are. prevented from
participating, that would reduce the effectiveness of the noise protest by the
other half - and the latter's freedom of expression would also be infringed.  
  
The freedom of peaceful assembly (under Article 14(1) (b)) is yet another
example. If, in the exercise of that right, 50 citizens wish to meet together,
but 45 are prevented from coming to the meeting place, that is an infringement
of the rights even of the five who experienced no obstruction: true, their
right to meet

**213**

has not been completely denied, but undoubtedly it has been so severely
impaired as to be almost useless.  
  
Article 14(1) (c), (d), (e), (f) and (g) expressly recognise that those
freedoms have both an individual and a collective aspect. If ten citizens wish
to form an association (whether a political party, a trade union, or a
society), and the Executive restrains eight from joining, that necessarily
affects also the freedom of the two who are not restrained; they cannot form
the association which they wished to form, but only a pale shadow of it.  
  
This is true of Article 14(1) (h) and (1). A citizen married to a non-citizen
who wishes to reside in a particular locality may be told that he can live
there, but not his spouse. His spouse cannot complain because it is only
citizens who enjoy those rights. Particularly because the State is enjoined
"to recognise and protect the family as the basic unit of society" (Article
27(12)), a citizen's choice of residence (or freedom of movement) is
effectively denied if his spouse is not permitted to be with him. So also if a
citizen is told that he can return to Sri Lanka, but not his non-citizen
spouse.  
  
The true value of a citizen's vote can never be ascertained in isolation; only
collectively, taken together with the votes of others who think alike. To
ignore that would set the bell tolling for democracy, for in this context:  
  
"No man is an island, entire of itself,  
  
Every man is a piece of the continent, a part of the main; **. . . . .  
  
**Any mans death diminishes me because I am involved in mankind;  
  
And therefore never send to know for whom the bell tolls; It tolls for thee."
(John Donne, Devotions)  
  
I therefore hold that the failure of the 1st Respondent to ensure a genuine,
free, equal and secret poll - a poll which gave

**214**

true expression to the will of all. the electors - and following upon that,
his failure thereafter to annul the poll, and to order a re-poll at all 23
polling stations aforesaid, infringed the right of the Petitioners to the
freedom of expression under Article 14(1) (a), and to equality and equal
protection under Article 12(1).  
  
I must hasten to add that a genuine, free, equal and secret poll is not
confined to what happens within the polling station, between 7.00 am and 4.00
pm on polling day. A genuine democratic election by universal and equal
suffrage demands many other safeguards: including, but not limited to (a)
proper and timely registration procedures, which ensure the speedy inclusion
of all citizens entitled to vote and the exclusion of all those disentitled,
as well as the prevention of dual registration and the impersonation of the
dead and the absent; (b) ensuring that during the pre-election period all
candidates are allowed the freedom to campaign on equal terms and without
unreasonable restrictions, with election laws being enforced, and uniformly
enforced, and without any misuse or abuse of State media, resources and
facilities; and (c) the prevention of electoral wrongdoing, and whenever that
is not possible, the prompt investigation and prosecution of election
offences.  
  
**PRELIMINARY OBJECTIONS  
  
**At the commencement of the hearing, Mr. Marsoof took two "preliminary"
objections: that persons against whom specific allegations had been made in
the petition, in particular the. SPO's of the various polling stations and the
Inspector-General of Police, had not been made respondents, and that the
petition could not be maintained because a special procedure had been laid
down in Part V11 of the Act for investigating allegations of the kind set out
in the petition, and other remedies were thereby excluded. Mr. Jayawardene
submitted that the 16th Respondent was a private individual and his alleged
conduct did not constitute "executive or administrative action."

**215**

**1\. Non-Joinder  
  
**This objection could not be determined in limine, because the facts had
first to be determined. This judgment is based on the defaults of the 1st and
2nd Respondents in relation to incidents at 23 polling stations; it does not
depend on allegations against or defaults by the SPO's or the police, and the
need to join them does not arise. The objection therefore fails. I express no
opinion on the question whether the 1st Respondent could have been held
responsible for the acts and defaults of his subordinates, whether joined or
not.  
  
**2\. Executive or administrative action  
  
**This, too, was not really a preliminary objection, because it depended on
the facts as to the exact nature of the 16th Respondent's acts, and whether
the principle in _Faiz v. Attorney-General_ ,(5) was, applicable. Since Mr.
Aziz later conceded that the Petitioners had failed to establish, on a balance
of probability, that the 16th Respondent had participated in the incidents
alleged against him, it is unnecessary to consider this objection in relation
to the 16th Respondent.  
  
However, it is necessary to decide whether the acts of the 12th to 15th
Respondent (who were absent and unrepresented at the hearing although noticed)
constituted "executive or administrative action" and whether there is any
basis on which relief may be granted against them.  
  
It was the duty of the 1st Respondent to permit polling agents to remain at
the polling station, and to ensure that they were not compelled to leave. The
12th to 15th Respondents have not denied their involvement in chasing UNP
polling agents from four polling stations, by means of violence, or the threat
of violence, which effectively prevented the 1st Respondent (through his
officers) from discharging the duty which he owed to the polling agents and
the electorate.

**216**

Further, they were candidates at the election, and as such section 33(2) gave
them (as well as the secretaries of recognized political parties) a special
right to enter and remain at any polling station. On the other hand, the
polling staff, the police, and the polling agents had a right only to remain
in the particular polling station assigned to them, while voters could remain
there only for the period necessary to vote. That right was not given to
candidates in order to get support in one way or another, but to enable them
to observe the conduct of the poll and to satisfy themselves that it was being
conducted properly: i.e. that the executive functions of the 1st Respondent
and his subordinates were being duly performed. By chasing away polling agents
they abused their statutory right, and procured an executive or administrative
injustice.  
  
I hold that their conduct fell within the principle laid down in Faiz v.
Attorney-General, and they were properly joined as respondents, thereby giving
them an opportunity, which they did not make use of, to rebut the allegations
made against them. However, the Petitioners have failed to pray for any relief
against them, and hence none is ordered.  
  
**3\. Special remedy by election petition  
**  
Mr. Marsoof submitted that an election petition under Part VII of the Act is
the exclusive remedy for the fair or effective determination of election
disputes: that where a statute confers a right and provides for a special
mechanism for its implementation, any infringement of that right should be
redressed only by resort to the special mechanism provided by that statute;
and that election disputes cannot be adjudicated in this Court in the guise of
an application under Article 126.  
  
In my view, a fundamental rights ("FR") application and an election petition
are legal proceedings which are completely different in character, both in
respect of the disputes and the remedies involved.

**217**

Any citizen can file an FR application, seeking redress for his own benefit,
in respect of the executive violation of his constitutionally guaranteed
rights; and such redress will extend to the quashing of impugned acts,
directions to perform acts, and the award of compensation. An election
petition, however, can be filed only by a candidate; only upon the limited
grounds set out in section 92(1), which grounds not only include some types of
"executive misconduct" but also extend to wrongdoing by a successful
candidate; and the only redress which may be granted (section 96) is that an
election in a particular district was void, that a successful candidate was
not duly elected, and that some other candidate was duly elected. In this
case, the Petitioners ask the Court to declare void the poll, and to order a
re-poll, at certain polling stations - relief which could not have been
granted in an election petition. What is more, the former involves a
constitutional right, a constitutional remedy, and a constitutional
jurisdiction vested in the highest Court. Ordinary post-Constitution
legislation may validly confer new jurisdictions (including election petition
jurisdiction) on the Court of Appeal, but cannot dilute or diminish any
constitutional jurisdiction of this Court.  
  
Mr. Marsoof attempted to get over these difficulties by contending that "when
a candidate files an election petition he does so on behalf of all (sic) the
voters in a representative capacity, and the petition becomes a matter in
which the whole electorate, not to say the whole country, has an interest,"
citing _Don Alexander v. Fernando_.(6) That decision does not in any way
support the plainly fallacious proposition that a candidate ever acts on
behalf of all the voters, including those who opposed him. Further, even where
his own supporters have been prejudiced, he may refrain from filing an
election petition for reasons of his own. And even if he does file an election
petition, because his supporters have been affected by wrongdoing, he cannot
seek or obtain any relief for them - but only in respect of the election.  
  
I therefore reject that preliminary objection.  
  
**ORDER  
  
**Section 50 of the Act lays down the procedure for the count. Each ballot box
is opened; after the ballot papers are counted, the ballot papers taken from
all the boxes for that counting centre are mixed together; and they are then
counted. While the ballot papers of Polwatta were excluded from the count, the
ballot papers from each of the other 22 polling stations are now mixed with
the ballot papers from other polling stations assigned to the same counting
centre. Accordingly, if the poll at those polling stations were now annulled,
it would be virtually impossible to extract and exclude those ballot papers;
and unless that is done a re-poll would be futile.  
  
But even assuming that the removal of those ballot papers is possible, a re-
poll contemplates a prompt poll by the same electors. If ordered under section
46A(7) (a) a re-poll should have been held within a few days, and without any
change in the electoral list. If a re-poll is ordered now, nearly two years
later, the electorate would not be the same: if the old electoral list is
used, some of the voters would no longer be living; and if the current list is
used, it would include new electors who were not eligible previously.  
  
It is therefore not feasible for this Court now to order the 1st Respondent to
declare the poll to be void, and to order a re-poll, at the aforesaid polling
stations as prayed for by the Petitioners.  
  
I grant the Petitioners a declaration that their fundamental rights under
Articles 12(1) and 14(1) (a) have been infringed by the failure of the 1st
Respondent to conduct a proper poll at the aforesaid 23 polling stations; to
hold proper inquiries into the incidents of ballot-stung and chasing away
polling agents; to declare void the poll at the 23 polling stations aforesaid
(other than Polwatta); and to order a re-poll at those 23 polling Stations.

**219**

The Petitioners have not prayed for compensation. However, they have come to
Court to vindicate important fundamental rights, and are entitled to costs.
The 1st Respondent made an honest effort - although inadequate - to ensure a
genuine election, but was not given the necessary support and resources. An
order for costs against him would not be just. The State is directed to pay
the Petitioners a sum of Rs 50,000 as costs.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/17.html_  

