##  Abeyaratne v. Janatha Fertilizer Enterprises Ltd. and Others - SLR - 391,
Vol 1 of 2003 [2000] LKSC 17; (2003) 1 Sri LR 391 (10 April 2000)

**391**

**ABEYARATNE** ****

**v.** ****

**JANATHA FERTILIZER ENTERPRISES LTD.  
AND OTHERS** ****

SUPREME COURT

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J. AND

YAPA, J

SC APPLICATION (FR) 311/2000

18TH OCTOBER AND 2ND DECEMBER 2002

AND 8TH JANUARY, 2003

_Fundamental Rights-Interdiction and dismissal of the petitioner without
inquiry-Denial of natural justice motivated by alleged ill will -
Constitution, Article 12(1)_

**392**

The petitioner was the Finance Manager of the 1st respondent Company which was
a Government Owned Company. He was appointed to that post on 10.05.1996. By a
letter dated 02,03.2000, the 2nd respondent Chairman of the Company, called
for the petitioner's explanation for alleged lapses and misman­agement of
duty. The petitioner tendered a detailed explanation by his reply dated
06.03.2000. The 2nd respondent in his letter dated 23.03.2000 repeated the
alle­gation of failure to complete accounts up to 1998 and informed that a
charge sheet would follow. However, without any charge sheet or inquiry the
2nd respon­dent by his letter dated 10.04.2000 informed that the Board of
Directors of the Company had decided to terminate the services of the
petitioner. The petitioner was so removed notwithstanding a commendation by
the previous Chairman in respect of his work for the Company as Finance
Manager. __

On the suggestion of the previous Chairman the petitioner had prepared a new
"Sales Procedure" for the 1st respondent Company in order to prevent frauds
and for better credit management. The procedure suggested _inter alia,_ that
whole sale dealers should furnish Bank Guarantees. The 2nd respondent treated
the proposed procedure unfriendly towards him and suggested to the petitioner
to modify it giving the 2nd respondent a discretion to waive the requirement
of a Bank Guarantee.

**Held :**

In the circumstances the termination of the petitioner's services without an
inquiry was contrary to natural justice, arbitrary and capricious and
infringed the petitioner's rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

_Per_ Yapa, J

"Even if the petitioner had a black case yet he was entitled to a hearing."

'There appears to be some truth in the petitioner's claim that the 2nd and 3rd
respondents were not well disposed towards him and continued to harass and
humiliate him."

**Cases referred to :**

1.                     _General Medical Council_ v _Spackman_ (1943) AC 627 at 644

2.          _Amaradasa_ v _Land Reform Commission_ 79 NLR 505

3.                     _Cooper_ v _The Wandsworth Board of Works_ 14 C.B. (NS) 180 at 194

4.                     _Ridge_ v _Baldwin_ (1964) AC 40

5.                     _Izadeen_ v _The Director General of Civil Aviation_ (1996) 2 Sri LR 348

6.                     _W. P. C, Fernando_ v _Milk Industries of Lanka Company Ltd. "Milco" and others _SC 670/97 SC minutes of 05.11.1999

** **

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_ _

_Peter Jayasekera_ with _P. Liyanaarachchi_ and _Bandula Wellala_ for
petitioner.

_ _

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for 1st to 3rd respondents.

#  

# Cur. adv. vult

**393**

May 23, 2003.

**YAPA, J.** ****



The petitioner is a B.Com graduate of the Kelaniya University. He has also
passed the Licentiate Examination of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of
Sri Lanka. Petitioner functioned as the Finance Manager of Janatha Fertilizer
Enterprise Ltd. the 1st respon­dent (hereinafter referred to as the 1st
respondent company). The 1st respondent company was incorporated in terms of
the Conversion of Public Corporations or Government Owned Business
Undertakings into Public Companies Act, No.23 of 1987. The petitioner who was
appointed to the post of Finance Manager on 18.09.1996 received the letter
dated 02.03.2000 marked P20, from the 2nd respondent, the Chairman of the 1st
respondent company, calling for his explanation with regard to the delays and
other lapses arising from the petitioner's failure to complete the accounts of
the 1st respondent company. Thereafter, the petitioner by his letter dated
08.03.2000 marked P22, sent his explanation to the 2nd respondent. However,
the 2nd respon­dent by his letter dated 23.03.2000 marked P24, interdicted the
peti­tioner stating that the petitioner had failed to complete the accounts up
to 1998 as undertaken by him. This letter (P24) also indicated to the
petitioner that a charge sheet would be sent to him in due course. Thereafter,
the 2nd respondent without serving a charge sheet on the petitioner, sent the
letter dated 10.04.2000 marked P25, informing the petitioner that the Board of
Directors of the 1st respondent company on 25.03.2000 had decided to terminate
the services of the petitioner.



The petitioner in this application had complained that by dismiss­ing him
without holding a formal inquiry, the respondents had violated the principles
of natural justice. Accordingly, this court on 31.05.2000 had granted leave to
proceed in respect of the alleged infringement of Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.



It should be mentioned here that, even though the 2nd and 3rd respondents in
their objections had taken up a preliminary objection to the effect that the
petitioner's application had been filed out of time (by one day), at the
hearing of this application the counsel for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents
submitted that he was not pursuing this objection.



Learned counsel for the petitioner at the hearing, submitted that when the
petitioner assumed work as the Finance Manager of the 1st

394



respondent company in 1996, it had financial problems and subse­quently due to
industrial unrest those problems got aggravated. It was at this time that the
petitioner was served with the letter P20, calling for his explanation.
Petitioner in his letter P22, tendered his explanation, stating that the delay
in completing the accounts arose due to reasons beyond his control and pointed
out that when he took over as Finance Manager even the accounts for the year
1994 had not been complet­ed. Further the shortage of personnel in the
accounts division to han­dle the large volume of work coupled with the
industrial unrest that pre­vailed during the time delayed the completion of
the accounts. However, when the petitioner returned after a study tour in
Malaysia, he received the letter P24, interdicting him. Even though P24,
stated that a charge sheet would be sent to the petitioner in due course, it
was not done and he was dismissed from service by letter P25. Hence, Counsel
contended that apart from the merits or demerits of this case, the act of
dismissing the petitioner without charges being framed and without holding a
formal inquiry was arbitrary and capricious. Further such conduct on the part
of the 2nd and 3rd respondents prevented the petitioner from controverting the
allegations levelled against him and establishing his innocence. Therefore
counsel submitted that the net result was a denial of natural justice,
procedural fairness and the equal protection of the law.



In the course of his arguments learned counsel for the petitioner expressed
the view that the Provisions of the Establishment Code applied in this case
with regard to the procedure to show cause, inter­diction, charge sheet and
the formal inquiry. Besides, he submitted that, even if there were no such
procedural rules applicable, courts have held that the audi alteram partem
rule be applied where a per­son's rights are affected. In support counsel
cited the dictum of Lord Wright in _General Medical Council_ v _Spackmart (1)_
where he had stat­ed thus: "If the principles of natural justice are violated
in respect of any decision it is, indeed, immaterial whether the same decision
would have been arrived at in the absence of the departure from the essen­tial
principles of justice. The decision must be declared to be no deci­sion". Also
see _Administrative Law._ Wade & Forsyth 8th edition, page 501. Learned
counsel also referred to the case of _Amaradasa_ v. _Land Reform
Commission(2),_ where Sharvananda J. as he was then, quot­ed this dictum with
approval.

395

        Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand submit­ted that the failure of the petitioner to complete the accounts for the period 1996-1998, was sufficient ground to terminate his services. Counsel's contention was that, the petitioner was given several oppor­tunities to complete these accounts and further the petitioner had vol­untarily undertaken to submit these accounts by February 2000. Under these circumstances, the petitioner's failure to do so, was a clear case of negligence, callousness and dereliction of duty. Additionally, the fail­ure to submit these accounts had caused loss to the 1st respondent company in that, it was precluded from securing the much needed bank loans. Therefore, learned counsel argued that, issuing a charge sheet and holding an inquiry was not a significant fact entitling the peti­tioner to any relief. It was his contention that by sending a show cause letter (P20) and receiving his explanation (P22), the petitioner was afforded a hearing. Hence, counsel argued that in these circumstances the action taken by the 2nd and 3rd respondents cannot be considered as arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable. Learned counsel admitted that, in the normal course it may be desirable to hold a domestic inquiry after serving a charge sheet, however, in the circumstances of the pre­sent case, there was no need to do so, in view of the grave nature and extent of the petitioner's negligence. Counsel further contended that, unlike in India where the right to a domestic inquiry is vested by law to an employee, in Sri Lanka such a provision has not been adopted by our legislature and it remains only an option to an employer.



Natural justice is now built into our law and provides a fair admin­istrative
procedure. It encompasses the right to be heard by an unbi­ased tribunal,
right to have notice of charges of misconduct and the right to be heard in
answer to those charges. The _audialteram partem_ rule means that a man has a
right to be heard. This rule is so funda­mental and vital in regard to the
manner in which justice has to be administered. It constitutes one of the
basic principles of fair procedure. Therefore, each party must have reasonable
notice of the case he has to meet and he must be given an opportunity of
putting forward his case. In other. words, a person should not be condemned
without been first given a fair chance of exculpation. Where a statute
empowers an official or a body to give a decision adversely affecting the
rights of an individual, a legal presumption usually operates that the _audi
alteram_ _partem_ rule has to be observed. Statutory construction is normally

396

done in accordance with this rule and not in derogation of it. In the case of
_Cooper_ v. _The Wandsworth Board of Works (3)_ Byles, J. observed as follows
... "a long course of decisions, beginning with Dr. Bentley's case, and ending
with some very recent cases, establish that, although there are no positive
words in a statute requiring that the party shall be heard, yet the justice of
the common law will supply the omission of the legislature." This was a case
where the demolition order was quashed because the owner had no notice or
opportunity to be heard.



A leading case on this principle of natural justice is _Ridge_ v. _Baldwin(4)_
where the Chief Constable of Brighton brought an action against the members of
the Watch Committee for a declaration that his dismissal from service was
void. The Watch Committee dismissed him under the Municipal Corporation Act on
the ground of neglect of duty. But neither a charge was framed against him nor
was he given an opportunity to be heard. The act empowered the Watch Committee
to dismiss any constable for neglect of duty or unfitness. The House of Lords
gave judgement for the Chief Constable by holding that rules of natural
justice were applicable to this case and that the watch commit­tee should have
informed the Chief Constable of the charges and given him an opportunity to be
heard. The failure to observe the _audi_ _alteram partem_ rule rendered the
decision of the Watch Committee void.



In _Izadeen_ v. _Director-General of Civil Aviation (5)_ which was a case
cited by counsel for the petitioner, the Supreme Court highlighted the need
for a proper inquiry and hearing. This was a case where there was an
allegation that the petitioner with another pupil pilot dropped tear gas from
a helicopter or aircraft on a crowd assembled at Kanatta Cemetery on
28.04.1993 for the funeral of the late Mr. Lalith Athulathmudali. There was a
public condemnation of this attack and the inquiry team held an investigation
and found the petitioner guilty of contravening some of the air navigation
regulations. On receipt of the report of the inquiry team, the Director-
General of Civil Aviation by let­ter dated 14.05.1993 asked the petitioner to
show cause as to why his commercial pilot's licence and the flight instructor
ratings should not be suspended or cancelled as there was _" prima facie
_evidence" to show that the aircraft piloted by him on 28.04.1993 had
contravened certain air navigation regulations. Petitioner by his letter dated
24.05.1993 denied the allegations. However, without giving a hearing to the
petitioner,

397



the Director-General by his letter dated 14.05.1993 suspended the petitioner's
pilot's licence for one year. Petitioner applied to the Supreme Court and the
court held that "the use of the expression _prima facie_ evidence" shows that
it is not conclusive evidence which could not be rebutted." Further, the
Supreme Court held that "despite the categorical denial the Director-General
failed to hold any inquiry. Once the petitioner denied the charges, justice
plainly required a prop­er inquiry at which he could have given evidence and
called witnesses to support his position. It was essential that a fair
opportunity should have been afforded to the petitioner to be heard in his
defence. There has been a failure of a fundamental principle of justice,
namely, that a man's defence must always be fairly heard. Procedural fairness
and regularity are of the indispensable essence of liberty." Even though the
case appeared to be a black case for the petitioner, the failure to hold an
inquiry prompted the Supreme Court to direct that an order in the nature of a
_writ of certioran_ to be issued to quash the said decision of the Director-
General of Civil Aviation.



In the case of _W.P.C. Fernando_ v. _Milk Industries of Lanka_ _Company Ltd.,
"Milco" and otherd6) _the Supreme Court reiterated the imperative need to
observe the _audi alteram partem_ rule before mak­ing a decision against a
person depriving him of his right. In that case no inquiry was held and the
employee was summarily dismissed. Mark Fernando, J. observed among other
things that "if the Board was not satisfied with the petitioner's explanation
in response to the charge sheet, the circumstances cried out for an inquiry.
The failure to hold an inquiry was unreasonable and perverse," \- _vide_ page
15. Referring to the failure to hold an inquiry the learned Judge observed
that "these were not mere defects of irregularities of procedure but serious
breach­es of natural justice, which deprived the petitioner of the equal
protec­tion of the law." _Vide_ page 16.



In the present case, learned counsel for the respondents tried to make out
that the petitioner had a black case, where the petitioner's negligence,
callousness and dereliction of duty was at its highest. However, from the
explanation given by the petitioner (P22) and the other material available, it
would appear that the petitioner had suffi­cient material even to exculpate
himself from the allegations. At the lowest the allegations were not
irrefutable. Even if the petitioner had a black case yet he was entitled to a
hearing. In this regard, it is of interest

398



 to note the observations that had been made by the former Chairman of the 1st
respondent company, Mr. A.L.M. Fernando, retired High Court Judge about the
performance of the petitioner as the Finance Manager. In his report dated
10.10.1997 marked 23, among other things he stated as follows: "most of the
credit in this connection has to go to the Finance Manager who has worked with
dedication and loyalty since he assumed duties. Due to his efficiency and
dedicated work we have been able to resurrect this organization from a point
of no return." _(Vide_ P3 item 1, last para). In addition this report (P3) had
highlighted the massive frauds that had taken place prior to 1996. Hence, it
is surprising how the petitioner who had been efficient and dedicated up to
10.10.1997 turned out to be as described by learned counsel for the
respondents, "most remiss, conspicuously negligent and reckless in performing
his very important functions as Finance Manager" overnight.

Therefore, there appears to be some truth in the petitioner's claim that the
2nd & 3rd respondents were not well disposed towards him and continued to
harass and humiliate him. According to the petitioner the starting point for
this harassment arose when he submitted a mem­orandum suggesting a 'sales
procedure' for the 1st respondent com­pany in order to prevent frauds and for
better credit management. In the suggested 'sales procedure' marked P4, para
6, provided that new stockists (wholesale dealers) should register with the
company and should purchase fertilizer on cash basis for the period of first
six months and thereafter such stockists could make purchases by giving bank
guarantees to the value of fertilizer. The said draft sales proce­dure was
prepared by the petitioner on the advice of the former Chairman Mr. A.L.M.
Fernando who had left the 1st respondent com­pany by then. However, the 2nd
respondent saw this new draft proce­dure as an unfriendly and unkindly act
against him, so that he sug­gested that the petitioner should change para 6,
in P4, allowing the Chairman the latitude and final discretion to waive the
requirement of bank guarantees for credit sales. In this background, it seems
to me that, the 2nd respondent had taken the initiative to dismiss the
peti­tioner from service without giving him an opportunity of knowing
prop­erly the charges of misconduct and the right to be heard in answer to
those charges. This could only have been possible by holding a prop­er
inquiry.

In the aforesaid circumstances, I grant the petitioner a declaration

399



that his fundamental right under Article 12(1) had been infringed by the 1st
to 3rd respondents, and quash the decision to terminate the ser­vices of the
petitioner from 10.04.2000.



The petitioner in his application had moved that the decision to terminate his
services be withdrawn and to keep him under interdiction until a formal
inquiry is held against him. However, the learned counsel for the respondents
has submitted that the 1 st respondent company is now closed and the question
of treating the petitioner as being on inter­diction or in employment cannot
arise. Further, the matter of holding an inquiry is out of question.
Therefore, in view of the closure of the 1st respondent company, the only
relief this court could grant to the peti­tioner is some compensation against
the aforesaid infringement.



Accordingly, I award the petitioner a sum of Rs. 25,000/= as com­pensation.
The petitioner is also entitled to a sum of Rs. 15,000/= as costs. This total
sum of Rs. 40,000/= shall be paid to the petitioner by the State within three
months from today.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

**EDUSSURIYA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/17.html_  

