##  Balasubramaniam and Another v. Upali De Silva and Another - SLR - 229, Vol
2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 17; (1998) 2 Sri LR 229 (31 August 1998)

**229**

**BALASUBRAMANIAM AND ANOTHER  
v.  
UPALI DE SILVA AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 185/97  
C.A. REVISION APPLICATION NO. 768/95  
D.C. BATTICALOA CASE NO. 5740/M  
28TH APRIL AND 14TH AND 28TH MAY, 1998  
  
_Landlord and tenant - Death of judgment creditor before decree is fully
executed - Substitution of legal representative - Whether notice to judgment
debtor is mandatory - S. 341(3) of the Civil Procedure Code.  
_  
The plaintiff filed action against his tenant, the original defendant for
arrears of rent and ejectment from the premises in suit. The defendant died
during the pendancy of the action. After substitution of the defendant's wife
and children, the case was settled but the substituted defendants defaulted in
the payment of arrears of rent in terms of the settlement. Consequently the
District Judge issued writ. An appeal by the substituted defendants against
the order issuing the writ was dismissed by the Court of Appeal. In the
meantime the plaintiff had died, having gifted the house to one of her
daughters, the 1st appellant. She along with her husband, the 2nd appellant
applied to be substituted in the room of the deceased plaintiff. The District
Court allowed the application and issued writ. A legal objection was raised by
the 1st and 2nd respondents, another son-in-law and a daughter of the deceased
plaintiff - husband and wife - that the substitution of the appellants without
notice to the respondents was illegal.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The provision applicable to the substitution in the room of the deceased
judgment creditor is section 341(3) of the Civil Procedure Code. Having regard
to the wording of that section, the intrinsic nature of execution proceedings,
the fact that the 2nd

**230**

respondent was not a party to the action and that she had no 'apparent' or
`recognizable" right to remain in possession of the premises in suit, it was
not open to the 2nd respondent to raise the legal objection to the
substitution; and the District Court was not required to give notice of the
application to any respondent.  
  
**Case referred to:  
**  
1\. _Thyagarajah v. Perera_ (1983) 1 Sri LR 380 at 390 and 391.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_S. Mahenthiran with Mrs. F. M. Markar_ for the appellants.  
  
_Manohara de Silva_ for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 31, 1998  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.  
**  
The plaintiff instituted these proceedings on 1.3.73 against his tenant W.
Jayasinghe alias Jayasuriya for arrears of rent and ejectment from the
premises in suit. While the action was pending the defendant died and his wife
and his three children were substituted in the room of the deceased defendant.
The present 1st respondent to this appeal was appointed guardian ad litem of
the minor children and was added as the substituted 5th defendant.  
  
On 26.3.74 the case was settled. The substituted defendants, however,
defaulted in the payment of arrears of rent in terms of the settlement and,
after inquiry, writ was issued on 18.9.80. The substituted defendants
preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal against the order of the District
Court issuing writ. The appeal, however, was dismissed by the Court of Appeal
on 19.3.86. The record was received from the Court of Appeal in the District
Court of Batticaloa on 25.4.86. The District Court directed the issue of
notice on the plaintiff and 5th substituted defendant but not on the
substituted 1st defendant (the widow). On 8.7.86 the District Court was
informed that the plaintiff was dead. The plaintiff had in fact died in 1983.
The court thereupon directed the parties `to take steps and move".  
  
It was only on 28.7.94 that the present 1st and 2nd appellants moved to have
themselves substituted in the room of the deceased

**231**

plaintiff. The District Judge has expressed the view that the delay was due to
the fact that the court was not functioning for quite some time by reason of
the "unsettled conditions". The 1st appellant is a daughter of the deceased
plaintiff and the 2nd appellant is the son-in-law. In the meantime the 1st
respondent to this appeal (substituted 5th defendant) got married to another
daughter of the deceased plaintiff. This was in 1982. The daughter who married
the 5th substituted defendant is the 2nd respondent to this appeal.  
  
The District Court allowed the application made by the 1st and 2nd appellants
to have themselves substituted in the room of the deceased plaintiff and also
allowed the application for execution of writ. Against this order of the
District Court the present respondents moved the Court of Appeal by way of
revision to have the orders allowing the substitution of the appellants in the
room of the deceased plaintiff and the order issuing writ set aside. The Court
of Appeal allowed the application in revision and set aside the order
substituting the appellants in place of the original plaintiff and all orders
made thereafter including the order issuing writ. The present appeal is
against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
The principal ground on which the Court of Appeal allowed the application in
revision was the failure to issue notice of the application made by the
present appellants for substitution in the room of the deceased plaintiff on
the 1st and 2nd respondents. Mr. Manohara de Silva appearing on behalf of the
respondents contended before us that the section in terms of which the
District Court could have allowed the appellants' application for substitution
is section 341(3) of the Civil Procedure Code and that the issue of notice of
the application on the 1st and 2nd respondents was a mandatory requirement. On
the other hand, Mr. Mahenthiran for the appellants urged that the substitution
was in terms of section 339 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
Before I proceed to consider these submissions it is relevant to state that
the case for the appellants was that the deceased plaintiff by deed No. 874
dated 10.5.76 gifted the premises in suit by way of dowry to his daughter, the
1st appellant. Although the 1st respondent (the 5th substituted defendant) in
his statement of objections filed in the District Court pleaded that the
deceased plaintiff had "cancelled the purported deed of dowry" yet no evidence
whatsoever was produced to establish the alleged revocation of the deed of
gift. In fact

**232**

the deed of gift relied on by the 1st appellant is a document filed of record
(Folio 199). For the purpose of these proceedings, I hold that the deceased
plaintiff had gifted the premises in suit to the 1st appellant by the said
deed No. 874 of 10.5.76.  
  
On the basis of the gift of the premises in suit to the 1st appellant, Mr.
Mahenthiran argued that the 1st appellant was the "transferee" of the decree
within the meaning of section 339 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code and was
accordingly entitled to move for "substitution" and for execution of the
decree. With this submission, I do not agree. By reason of the gift there was
no "transfer" of the decree by "assignment in writing or by operation of law"
within the meaning of section 339 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code. I
accordingly hold that section 339 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code has no
relevance to these proceedings.  
  
It seems to me that the relevant provision in so far as these proceedings are
concerned is section 341 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code, as rightly submitted
by Mr. Manohara de Silva. Mr. de Silva, however, strongly urged before us that
the substitution purported to have been made in terms of section 341 (3) was
bad in law inasmuch as it was made without notice to the 1st and 2nd
respondents. Mr. de Silva further contended that the 2nd respondent being a
daughter of the deceased plaintiff was an "heir" and if she had notice of the
application made by the appellants she would have been in a position to
challenge the validity of the gift of the premises in suit to the 1st
appellant. In short the principal contention of Mr. de Silva was that in the
absence of notice to the 1st and 2nd respondents, the substitution of the 1st
and 2nd appellants in the room of the deceased plaintiff was made without
jurisdiction, and the order for issue of writ was also tainted with the same
illegality. This, in substance, was the view taken by the Court of Appeal. It
therefore seems to me that the true question that arises for consideration
before us is whether the provisions of section 341 (3) of the Civil Procedure
Code required the District Court to issue notice on the 1st and 2nd
respondents. The finding of the Court of Appeal was that no notice was issued
on the respondents. I think that finding of fact must remain undisturbed,
though Mr. Mahenthiran submitted that notice was served on the 1st respondent.

**233**

Section 341 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code reads thus:- "If the judgment
creditor dies before the decree has been fully executed, the legal
representative may apply to the court to have his name entered on the record
in place of the deceased and the court shall thereupon enter his name on the
record."  
  
The matter upon which the court has to be satisfied is as to whether the
person making the application is the "legal representative" of the deceased
plaintiff. If the court is so satisfied "the court shall thereupon enter his
name on the record". Having regard to the wording of the section it seems to
me that the court is not required to give notice of the application to any
"respondent". I am fortified in taking this view by reason of the significant
difference in the language used in section 341, (1). Section 341 (1) applies
to a case where the judgment debtor dies before the decree had been fully
executed. Section 341 (1) reads thus:- "If the judgment debtor dies before the
decree has been fully executed, the holder of the decree may apply to the
court which passed it, by petition, to which the legal representative of the
deceased shall be made respondent, to execute the same against the legal
representative of the deceased". In my opinion the absence of the words
underlined above in section 341 (3) is of the utmost significance. Section 341
(3) does not contemplate an application by petition to which a party "shall be
made respondent".  
  
The next question is whether the 1st appellant (that is, the daughter of the
deceased plaintiff to whom the premises had been gifted) was the "legal
representative" within the meaning of section 341 (3). Now section 338 (3) (b)
of the Civil Procedure Code defines the expression "legal representative" to
mean "an executor or administrator or in the case of an estate below the value
of five hundred thousand rupees, the next of kin who have adiated the
inheritance: Provided however, that in the event of any dispute arising as to
who is the legal representative the provisions of section 397 shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply".  
  
Having regard to the fact that the premises were gifted by the deceased
plaintiff to the 1st appellant, it seems to me she is one who has "adiated the
inheritance" and is therefore the "legal representative" within the meaning of
the definition.

**234**

Mr. Manohara de Silva contended that the 2nd respondent (the daughter of the
deceased who married the 1st respondent) disputed the validity of the gift and
relied on a last will executed prior to the gift. Counsel argued that in view
of the dispute in regard to title, there arose a "dispute" as to who the legal
representative of the deceased plaintiff was and that the court should have
tried this question as a "preliminary issue" before making an order for
"substitution".  
  
With this submission, I am afraid, I cannot agree. In the first place, the 2nd
respondent was at no time a party to the action. Whatever rights she claims
she has cannot be agitated in these execution proceedings. Secondly, she has
no "apparent" or "recognizable right" to remain in possession of the premises
in suit. Moreover, as observed by Soza, J. in Tyagaraiah v. Perera and others
(1983) 1 Sri LR 380 at 391: "At the outset it is well to remember that in
execution proceedings the statutory procedures are so designed as to assist
the judgment creditor to recover the fruits of his judgment and not to afford
facilities to the judgment debtor to defeat or delay the execution of the
decree of court". Again, at page 390 of the same judgment Soza, J. states:
"The substitution of the legal representative is merely a step in aid of
execution". Having regard to the intrinsic nature of execution proceedings and
the fact that the 2nd respondent was not a party to the action. I hold that it
was not open to the 2nd respondent to raise a "preliminary issue" as contended
for by Mr. Manohara de Silva.  
  
For these reasons, the appeal is allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal
is set aside, and the order of the District Court dated 31.10.95 allowing the
issue of writ is affirmed. In all the circumstances, I make no order for
costs.  
  
**PERERA, J. - I agree.  
  
BANDARANAYAKE,  J. - I agree.  
**_**  
Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/17.html_  

