##  Alawwa and 4 Others v. Katugampola Mpcs and Another. - SLR - 278, Vol 2 of
1996 [1996] LKSC 17; (1996) 2 Sri LR 278 (30 October 1996)

**278**

**ALAWWA AND 4 OTHERS  
v.  
KATUGAMPOLA MPCS AND ANOTHER.**

SUPREME COURT.  
DR. AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY,J.  
S.C. 89/96.  
C.A. 718/83.  
SEPTEMBER 30, 1996.

_Constitution ‑ 13th Amendment art 154(G)(1), art 154(G)(8), art 154(H)4
Cooperative Employees Commission Act 12 of 1972 ‑ Provincial Councils
(Consequential Provisions) Act 12 of 1989 ‑ Provincial Council list ‑
Co‑operative Employees Commission (N. W. Province) ‑ appointed by Provincial
Minister ‑ Validity ‑ In the absence of a statute?_

The 2nd Respondent was an employee of the 1st Respondent MPCS. After a
disciplinary inquiry the 2nd Respondent's services were terminated, and she
appealed to the C. E. C. (N.W. Province) for redress.

1‑3 Appellants the members of the CEC (NW Province) appointed by the
Provincial Minister directed the 1st Respondent Society to reinstate and to
pay her a specific sum of money as compensation. The 1st Respondent then
sought to quash the said order in the Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal dismissed the application holding that

(1) There is no institution known as CEC established to date by the North
Western Provincial Council by statute.

(2) The Provincial Minister in charge of the subject could not have resorted
either to CEC Act 12 of 1972 and Provincial Councils (Consequential
Provisions) Act No. 12 of 1989 to appoint members to a non-existing CEC.

(3) The Petitioner cannot seek relief to quash an order which is ab initio
invalid as that order was not made in the exercise of Statutory power by the
1‑3 Respondent.

On appeal by the members of the commission:

**Held :**

**279** __

**(** 1) ART 154(G)8 unequivocally serves to keep alive all the laws in force
on matters relating to the Provincial list, when a Provincial Council is
established, subject to the specified limitations. The article also makes it
clear as to when a law in force remains suspended and inoperative (not
repealed) in that Province and that is when subsequently the Provincial
Council makes a statute on the same matter which is described in its long
title as being inconsistent with the law in force and when that statute
receives assent and so long as it is in force.

(2) Section 3 of Act, 12 of 1972 ‑ CEC Act ‑ read with Articles 154(G) (1) and
(8) of the Constitution necessarily compels to recognise the lawful
estab­lishment of a Co‑operative Employees Commission in the North ‑ Western
Province.

Therefore the appointment of the 1‑3 Appellants by the relevant Minister is
valid and lawful.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Case referred to:**

1. _In the matter of a Reference under ART 154(H) (4) of the Constitution for a determination relating to the Transport Board Statute ‑ Take over of Assets and liabilities of the North and _ _Eastern_ ___Province_ _Transport Board. S.C._ 7/89 (special) PPA /2/PC./19 ‑ SCM 22.2.1991.

_R.K.W Goonesekara_ with _W. Dayaratne_ for Appellants **.**

No appearance for 1st Respondent.

2nd Respondent present in person **.**

_Saleem Marsoof D.S.G._ for A.G. as Amicus Curiae **.**

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 30, 1996.

**DHEERARATNE, J.**

The facts necessary for the determination of this appeal are briefly these.
The 2nd Respondent was an employee of the 1st Respondent MPCS. After a
disciplinary inquiry, the 2nd Respondent's services were terminated and she
appealed to the Co‑operative Employees Commission of the North Western
Province for redress. The 1st to 3rd Appellants are members of that Commission
having being appointed

**280**

by the Provincial Minister in terms of Provincial Councils (Consequential
Provisions) Act No. 12 of 1989 : and the 4th Appellant is its Secretary.

The Commission after inquiry, directed by its order dated 22.7.93 the 1st
Respondent MPCS, to reinstate the 2nd Respondent and to pay her a specific sum
of money as compensation, within a given time. The 1st Respondent then applied
to the Court of Appeal to issue a writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the
Commission dated 22.7.93. The Court of Appeal dismissed the application
holding that: ‑

(1) There is no institution known as the Co‑operative Employees Commission
established to date by the North Western Provincial Council by statute;

(2) The Provincial Minister in charge of the subject could not have resorted
either to Co‑operative Employees Commission Act, No 12 of 1972 or Provincial
Councils (Consequential Provisions) Act, No. 12 of 1989 to appoint members to
a non existing Co‑operative Employees Commission;

(3) The Petitioner (presently the 1st Respondent) cannot seek relief to quash
an order which is ab initio invalid as that order was not made in the exercise
of statutary power by the 1st to 3rd Respondents (present 1st to 3rd
Appellants).

The appeal thus raises an interesting question of Constitutional importance
relating to the application of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution. Article
154G (1) of the Constitution enables every Provincial Council, subject to the
provisions of the Constitution, to make statutes applicable to the Province
for which it is established, with respect to any matter set out in "the
Provincial Council List". In that list item 17.3 refers to the "Provincial Co‑
operative Employees Commission". What of the Laws already in the statute‑book
dealing with the delegated subjects mentioned in the Provincial Council List?
Nowhere in the Constitution it is stated that those Laws stand repealed with
the establishment of a Provincial Council for every province. As Mr.
Goonesekera correctly points out, the answer to that question is contained in
Article 154G (8). Unfortunately attention of the Court of Appeal had not been
drawn to that provision. That reads: ‑

**281**

"Where there is a law with respect to any matter on the Provincial Council
List in force on the date on which this Chapter [chapter XVIIA inserted by the
13th Amendment] comes into force, and a Provincial Council established for a
Province subsequently makes a statute on the same matter and which is
described in its long title as being inconsistent with that law, then, the
provisions of the law shall with effect from that date on which that statute
receives assent and as long as that statute is in force, remain suspended and
be inoperative within that Province."

In my view this Article unequivocally serves to keep alive all the laws in
force on matters relating to the Provincial Council List, when a Provincial
Council is established, subject to the specified limitations. [See in the
matter of a Reference under Article 154H (4) of the Constitution for a
determination relating to the Transport Board Statute ‑Take over of Assets and
Liabilities of Northern and Eastern Province Trans­port Board.(1)

Thereby in the first place it eliminates a situation where no law will prevail
on those topics until a Provincial Council makes statutes; secondly it
obviates the formidable task on the part of a Provincial Council to legislate
virtually overnight, a mass of statutes relating to several subjects in that
list, so as to substitute what is already in force enacted perhaps during a
long course of years. The Article also makes it clear as to when a law in
force remains suspended and inoperative (not repealed) in that Province: and
that is when subsequently the Provincial Council makes a statute on the same
matter which is described in its long title as being inconsistent with the law
in force and when that statute receives assent and so long as it is in force.

Let me now turn to the provisions of the Co‑operative Employees Commission Act
No 12 of 1972. Section 3 reads "for the purpose of the Act, an authority known
as the Co‑operative Employees Commission shall be established". This section
read with Articles 154G(1) and (8) of the Constitution necessarily compels us
to recognize the lawful establishment of a Co‑operative Employees Commission
in the North Western Province. Therefore, the appointment of the 1st to 3rd
Appellants by the relevant Minister in charge of that function as Chairman and
members of the Commission respectively under the provi‑

**282**

sions of the Provincial Councils (Consequential Provisions) Act No 12 of 1989
is valid and lawful.

For the above reasons, we set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
send the matter back for consideration of the application for writ on its
merits. The Commission was not made a party by the Petitioner (present 1st
Respondent) on the assumption that it was non existent; steps should be taken
to add the Commission as a party. The appeal is allowed with no costs. The
Registrar is directed to send the record back to the Court of Appeal as
expeditiously as possible to enable the Court of Appeal to hear and determine
the matter at its earliest convenience.

**AMERASINGHE, J. ‑ **I agree.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. ‑ ** I agree **.**

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/17.html_  

