##  Wickramasinghe v. Robert Banda And Others - SLR - 246, Vol 1 of 2006
[2005] LKSC 17; (2006) 1 Sri LR 246 (14 October 2005)

**246**

**WICKRAMASINGHE  
  
VS.  
  
ROBERT BANDA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
AMARATUNGA, J AND  
MARSOOF, J  
SC (APPEAL) NO. 14/2004  
12TH MAY 2005 AND 14TH AND 20TH JUNE, 2005  
  
_Kandyan Law - Daughter married in deega. - Forfeiture of rights to paternal
(mulgedera) inheritance - Re-acquisition of binna rights in mulgedera - Rights
of daughter's son to succeed to maternal grandfather's property.  
_  
The District Court gave judgement in a partition case in favour of the 1st
respondent Robert Banda on the ground that the property of his paternal
grandfather Mohotty Appuhamy who died intestate devolved on Punchi Banda (son)
and Podimahathmayo (daugther), Robert Banda's mother, who married in deega and
lived at Kegalle. That marriage was dissolved in two years on 30.01.1908. In
1915, Robert Banda was born to Podimahthmayo by an illicit

**247**

connection with one Mudiyanse ; and Podimahathmayo returned to the mulgedera
as was customarj, where she gave birth to Robert Banda (the plaintiff).  
  
The district Judge gave judgement for the plaintiff on the basis that by
reverting to mulgedera, at Halpandeniya. Podimahaththayo had by such "close
connection" with the mulgedera re-acquired her rights to mulgedera property.  
  
The Court of Appeal affirmed the District Judge's order notwithstanding that
Podimahathmayo had predeceased Mohotti Appuhamy, the plaintiff's maternal
grandfather on the strength of _Appuhamy v Lapaya_ (8 NLR 328) on the basis
that the plaintiff was entitled to inherit the acquired property of his
maternal grandfather.  
  
**HELD:**  
  
1\. In Kandyan Law, a daugther who marries in deega forfeits her rights to
mulgedera property, except that she would reacquire binna rights by proof of
several instances :-  
  
(a) having a close link with mulgedera even after the marriage;  
  
(b) by a subsequent marriage in binna ;  
  
(c) by leaving a child with the grand parents at the mulgedara ;  
  
(d) by possessing shares of property in spite of the marriage in binna ;  
  
(e) any evidence to indicate the waiver of the forfeiture of her rights by
other members of the family.  
  
2\. When it was found that Podimahathmayo had predeceased her father,
plaintiff's maternal grandfather, the Court of Appeal held wrongly that the
plaintiff is entitled to succeed to the property of his maternal grandfather,
Mohotti Appuhamy. On the strength of _Appuhamy v Lapaya_ which decision has
been criticized by Hayley and _Kiri Puncha v Kiri . Ukku_ (1981)1 Sri LR 341
as having been wrongly decided .

3\. In the circumstances and on the evidence, the plaintiff was not entitled
to judgment on any basis. Both the District Court and Court of Appeal had
erred in giving judgment for the plaintiff.

**248**

**CASES REFERRED TO :  
**  
(1) _Gunasena v Ukku Menika_ (1976) 78 NLR 524  
  
(2) _Dingiri Amma v Ukku Banda_ (1905) 1 BAL 193  
  
(3) _Tikiri Kumarihamy v Loku Menika_ (1875) RAM 1972-76 p. 106  
  
(4) _Babanisa v Kaluhamy_ (1909) 12 NLR 105  
  
(5) _Dingiri Amma v Ratnayake_ (1961) 64 NLR 163  
  
(6) _Madawalatenna_ (1834) Marshal's Judgements 329  
  
(7) _Ukku v Pingo_ (1907) 1 Leader 53  
  
(8) _Appuhamyv Kiri Menika et at_ (1912) 16 NLR 238  
  
(9) _Banda v Angurala_ 50 NLR 276  
  
(10) _Appu Naidev Heen Menika_ (1948) 51 NLR 63  
  
(11) _Emi Nona v Sumanapala_ (1948) 49 NLR 440  
  
(12) _Appuhamyv Lapaya_ (1905) 8 NLR 328  
  
(13) _Kiri Puncha v Kiri Ukku and Others_ (1981) 1 Sri LR 341  
  
(14) _Rankiriv Ukku_ (1907) 10 NLR 129  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_J. Joseph with Ms. H. P. Ekanayake and Chamindika Perera_ for appellant.  
  
_Peter Jayasekera with Gamini Peiris and Kosala Senedeera_ for respondent.

_Cur.adv.vult_

  
09th September, 2005,  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgement of the Court of Appeal dated 27.08.2003.
By that judgment the Court of Appeal affirmed the judgment of the District
Court dated 30.07.1993 and dismissed the appeal. The 1st defendant-appellant-
appellant (hereinafter referred to as the 1st defendant) appealed against the
said judgment of the Court of Appeal on which this Court granted special leave
to appeal.  
  
The main issue in this appeal is whether the plaintiff-respondent-respondent
(hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff), the son of Podimahathmayo, could
succeed to his maternal grandfather, Mohottihamy.  
  
The facts of this appeal, _albeit_ brief, are as follows:

**249**

The plaintiff instituted action in the District Court of Kurunegala to
partition the land described in the schedule to the plaint (P1). The plaintiff
had stated that one Mohottihamy alias Mohotti Appuhamy, (hereinafter referred
to as Mohotti Appuhamy) who was the original owner of the property, died
intestate and his property devolved on his son and daughter namely Punchi
Banda (son) and Podimahathmayo (daughter) and the said Podimahathmayo owned
and possessed her 1/2 share of the property, which devolved upon her death to
her only child Robert Banda, who was the plaintiff in the District Court case.  
  
According to the plaintiff, his mother (Podimahathmayo) was married in diga to
S. M. Dingiri Banda on 30.05.1906 and the said marriage was dissolved on
30.01.1908 (P2). Podimahathmayo returned to her Mulgedera and while living
with her father at Halpandeniya there had been an illicit relationship with
one Menawa Ralalage Mudiyanse and the plaintiff was born to Podimahathmayo in
1915. Thereafter Podimahathmayo had died in 1918, when the plaintiff was 3
years of age. Mohotti Appuhamy (the maternal Grandfather) had brought him up
at the mulgedera in Halpandeniya until his death in 1929 and thereafter the
plaintiff's maternal uncle (Punchi Banda) had looked after him.  
  
The contention of the 1st defendant, however, is different and his position is
that at the time the plaintiff was born in 1915, his parents were residing'
not at Halpandeniya as stated by the plaintiff, but at Menawa in Kegalle.
Further it was contended that the union between Podimahathmayo and Menawa
Ralalage Mudiyanse, though not registered, is a _diga_ marriage since
Podimahathmayo had left the mulgedera with the said Menawa Ralalage Mudiyanse.
The 1st defendant took up the position that as there is no _binna_ marriage
contracted between the parents of the plaintiff, that the plaintiff is not
entitled to the 1/2 share of the property.  
  
Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent further contended that the plaintiff
had not averred that his mother married in _binna_ and that his Certificate of
Birth (P3) indicates clearly that his parents were residing at Menawa in
Kegalle and not at Halpandeniya, the village of the plaintiff's mother and the
grandfather. The learned Counsel for the 1st respondent submitted that the
union between the plaintiff's mother Podimahathmayo and Menawa Ralalage
Mudiyanse, although not registered, is a diga marriage since the plaintff's
mother, Podirnahathmayo had left the mulgedera with the said Menawa Ralalage
Mudiyanse. Further he contended that, there was no

**250**

binna marriage between Podimahathmayo and Menawa Ralalage Mudiyanse as there
is no evidence of binna settlement. Therefore his submission is that since
Podimahathmayo married Menawa Ralalage Mudiyanse in diga, the plaintiff had
forfeited his rights to his maternal grandfather's property.  
  
It is well recognized in Kandyan Law that a daughter who marries in diga,
forfeits her right to the paternal inheritance (Gunasena v Ukku Menika (1)).
Hayley referring to the Kandyan Law that is applicable to a daughter who had
married in diga, clearly states that,  
  
 ''the general rule is that neither a diga-married daughter, nor her children,
can compete with other children by the same mother, or their descendants, in
the distribution of a deceased intestate's estate. This rule has been accepted
without hesitation ever since the Kandyan Law was first administered by
British............. Courts (The Laws and  Customs of the Sinhalese or Kandyan
Law, Reprint 1993, pg. 379)."  
  
In terms of the general rule, a diga-married daughter, or her children would
therefore not be entitled to any paternal or maternal inheritance. However,
the general rule is not to be applied thus simply as the modern case law has
clearly accepted certain exceptions, which favours the digamarried daughter
enabling her to re-acquire the rights of a binna-married daughter in the event
she fulfils certain requirements. In fact Hayley points out that 'certain
modern judgments have tended towards engrafting an exception in favour of the
diga-married daughter who has 1 kept up a close connection with her father's
home' (Supra, pg. 379).  
  
The exception to the general rule thus appears to be a development through the
case law and therefore it would be useful to examine the important judgments
to assess the circumstances in which the exception had been applied .  
  
_Dingiri Amma v Ukku Banda_ (2) is one of the early decisions, which had
considered a daughter married in diga re-acquiring the rights of a daughter
who had married in binna. In Dingiri Amma's case the plaintiff first lived
with her husband in her father's house prior to the marriage being registered.
Subsequently the marriage was registered and both husband and wife lived in
the father's mulgedera as well as in the husband's house, until the mulgedera
was demolished. Thereafter the plaintiff's husband built a new

**251**

house in the same garden where the mulgederawas situated and both the husband
and the wife were living together in that house. Pereira, J., held that even
if the plaintiff was married in diga, she had acquired binna rights.  
  
In _Tikiri Kumarihamyv Loku Menika_ (3) the Court was of the view that a
daughter originally married in binna, subsequently leaving her parents' house
and going to live with her husband in diga and still keeping up a close
connection with the mulgedera or a daughter originally married in diga and
subsequently returning to her parents house and being re-married in binna, may
preserve her rights to any share in her parents estate.  
  
The entitlement of a Kandyan woman to her parental inheritance, who had
contracted a diga marriage, but who had subsequently returned to the parental
roof and contracted a binna marriage during the lifetime of her father, was
further strengthened in _Babanisa v Kaluhami_ (4) as well as in _Dingiri Amma
v Ratnayake_ (5)  
  
It is therefore clear that a daughter who had married in diga, but under
varying circumstances had kept a close connection with the mulgedera, would
re-acquire the rights to inherit from her father as that of a daughter who had
married in binna. This position has been endorsed in an early case, namely in
_Madawalatenne_ (6) decided in 1834 where the Supreme Court was of the view
that,  
  
" ..........it appears that, though she was married in diga, she always kept
up a close connection with her father's house, in which indeed three of her
children were born; ............again it appears that the father, on his
death-bed, gave one talpot to the defendant and two others to his wife, what
had become of those two latter olas does not appear, but it is not improbable
that one of them may have been intended for the plaintiff, **more especially
considering the frequency of her visits to the paternal residence** (emphasis
added)."  
  
However, it is to be borne in mind that, as correctly pointed out by Hayley
_(Supra)_ , that the daughter in Madawalatenne was awarded only

**252**

one-sixth of what her mother possessed and not the half share to which she
would have been entitled if not for her marriage.  
  
Be that as it may, there are several other decisions that had taken the view
that depending on the circumstances, a Kandyan woman married in diga could
later re-acquire the rights of a binna marriage. I would refer to some of the
judgments to indicate the circumstances in which such reacquiring the rights
of a binna marriage had taken place.  
  
In _Ukkuv Pingo_ (7) it was held that a daughter, who married in diga, after
her father's death, retained her share by leaving behind in the mulgedera a
child previously born to her there as mistress of her brother-in-law. A
similar view was adopted in the decision in _Appuhamyv Kiri Menika et al_ (8)
where a Kandyan woman, who was married in diga went to live with her husband
about two miles away from the mulgedera. One of their children was left in the
mulgedera and brought up by her grandmother. It was also revealed that the
woman, although maried in diga, kept up a constant and close connection with
the mulgedera. Lascelle, C. J., held that in the circumstances, the woman did
not by reason of her marriage in diga, forfeit her right to the paternal
inheritance.  
  
The decision in _Banda v Angurala_ (9) on the other hand, clearly. indicates
that the Court had looked at the question from another perspective and held
that the regaining of binna rights may be evidenced by material other than in
connection with the mulgedera. Emphasising on this aspect, Bertram, C. J.,
stated that,  
  
"In all previous cases the question for the recovery of binna rights has
always appeared to turn upon something done in connection with the mulgedera,
such as a resumption of residence there; the cultivation of the paternal lands
held in connection with it; the leaving of a child in the mulgedera; or the
maintenance of a close connection with the mulgedera. But in this case nothing
of the sort is suggested. The claim to binna rights, however, in the case is
based upon circumstances of a very significant and uneqivocal
character..........."

**254**

in spite of their marriages in diga to possess their share of the land for a
long period of time, he has acquiesced in their right and cannot be permitted
to deny it.  
  
On an examination of the afore-mentioned decisions as well as the early
authorities, it is apparent that a Kandyan woman who had married in diga,
could establish the re-acquisition of binna rights by proof of several
instances, which would include -  
  
(a) having a close link with the _mulgedera_ even after the marriage;  
  
(b) by a subsequent marriage in _binna_ ;  
  
(c) by leaving a child with the grand parents at the _mulgedera_ ;  
  
(d) by possessing their shares of property in spite of the marriage in _diga_
;  and most importantly  
  
(e) any evidence to indicate waiver of the forfeiture of her rights.  
  
Having said that, let me now turn to examine the circumstances in which the
plaintiff had made a claim to the property in question.  
  
Admittedly, the plaintiff's mother, the said Podimahathmayo married one
Dingiri Banda, on 30.05.1906. The certificate of marriage (P1) states that the
marriage was in diga. The said marriage had been dissolved on 30.11.1908 (P2).
According to the Register of Dissolution, there had been no children from that
marriage. The plaintiff was born on 06.06.1915 at Halpandeniya and the
Certificate of Birth (P3) discloses that Menawa Ralalage Mudiyanse and
Podimahathmayo are the parents and that they were not married at the time of
the birth oJthe plaintiff. Podimahathmayo had died in 1918 and the plaintiff's
maternal grandfather, Mohotti Appuhamy, had died in 1929.  
  
Learned Counsel for the plaintiff, referred to the judgment of the District
Court and submitted that the learned District Judge had held that from the
fact that the plaintiff was born and bred in the mother's village, that it
could be concluded that the plaintiff's mother had close connection with the
mulgedera and therefore she does not forfeit her paternal inheritance. I
reproduce below the relevant portion from the judgment of the learned District
Judge where he had stated that -

**255**

Except for the afore-mentioned statement, learned District Judge has not
referred to any instances which had indicated that plaintiff's mother had
maintained a close and constant affiliation with the mulgedera at
Halpandeniya. The Court of Appeal was of the view that the judgment of the
District Court would not warrant interference and had stated that -  
  
"In the instant case the plaintiff's paternal grandfather (sic) having brought
up the child from tender years and admittedly in the 'mulgedera by the matemal
grandfather whose rights the plaintiff claims in the instant action, had not
obviously disapproved of the daughter's cohabitation with the plaintiff's
father."  
  
On a careful examination of the evidence of the plaintiff and the 1st
defendant and on a perusal of the documents that were produced in the District
Court, it appears that except for the Certificate of Birth of the plaintiff,
there is no other material which reveals detailed information regarding the
residence of the plaintiff's parents. The Certificate of Birth clearly
indicates that the plaintiff was born at Halpandeniya and that being the
village of the plaintiff's mother, Podimahathmayo, it would appear that she
had been at the mulgederafor the confinement. However, with reference to the
name and residence of informant and in what capacity he had given information,
it had been stated that-  
  
  
  
The inference that could be clearly drawn from this statement is that
Podimahathmayo, who had been living with there husband at Menawa had returned
to her mulgedera at Halpandeniya for her confinement, in keeping with the
customary traditions. Except for the fact that Podimahathmayo had given birth
to the plaintiff at Halpandeniya, there is no other material that indicate
that Podimahathmayo had maintained a close relationship with her mulgedera.
Although the plaintiff in his evidence in the District

**258**

disregards the general principle of representation on which the rights of
grandchildren are based and also fails to take account of the fact that
illegitimacy itself usually arose from the refusal of the grandparents to
recognize the marriage, for which very reason the issue of such marriage was
debarred from inheriting any property descending from them."  
  
The decision in _Appuhamy vs Lapaya (Supra)_ was considered by _Wanasundera,
J., in Kiri Puncha vs. Kiri Ukku and others_ (13). In that case, the question
arose as to the rights of illegitimate children to paraveni property and it
was held that although illegitimate children are entitled to succeed to their
father's acquired property, that in the general Kandyan Law an illegitimate
child cannot inherit the property of his grandfather. Further it was held that
if his father had predeceased the grandfather, he would not be in a better
position than if his father had survived and the property would still descend
as paraveni.  
  
In Kiri Puncha's (Supra) case, Wanasundera, J. closely examined the decision
of Wendt, J. in _Appuhamyvs. Lapaya (Supra)_ and was of the view that Wendt,
J.,s position was clearly not in accordance with the Kandyan Law. Referring to
Wendt J. ,'s judgment in _Appuhamyvs. Lapaya (Supra)_ , Wanasundera, J. stated
that,  
  
"This view is clearly not in accordance with the principles of Kandyan Law.
Hayley at page 392 of his book shows by reference to the passage from Armour
and other institutional writers on Kandyan Law that Wendt, J., had overlooked
certain basic features of the Kandyan Law in coming to this conclusion."  
  
On an examination of the decision in _Appuhamyvs. Lapaya (Supra)_ and _Kiri
Puncha vs. Kiri Ukku_ and the principles of Kandyan Law referred to by Armour
and Hayley, it is apparent that in _Appuhamy vs. Lapaya Wendt, J.,_ had
overlooked certain basic features applicable to Kandyan Law in coming to his
conclusion. It is also to be born in mind that in _Kiri Puncha vs. Kiri Ukku
(Supra)_ decided in 1981, Wanasundera, J. disapproved the decision in
Appuhamyvs. Lapaya (Supra) and did not follow that judgment.  
  
The Court of Appeal in considering the present appeal however has relied on
the decision in _Appuhamyvs. Lapaya (Supra)_ where it was stated that

**259**

"Even in the case of acquired property of a deceased who dies intestate under
the Kandyan Law both legitimate and illegitimate children are entitled to such
property in equal shares, vide _Appuhamy vs Lapaya 8 (Supra).  
_  
On a consideration of the above, I am inclined to the view that the impugned
judgment would not warrant interference."  
  
Thus it is evident that the Court of Appeal in deciding that there should not
be any interference with the decision of the District Court, had relied on a
decision, which was disapproved by the Supreme Court and has been regarded by
Hayley, as a decision which had overlooked certain basic features in
succession to property by illegitimate children under the Kandyan Law.  
  
The judgment of the Court of Appeal thus creates the impression that
_Appuhamyvs. Lapaya (Supra)_ is decided correctly and has to be followed in
deciding property rights of illegitimate children.  
  
The position with regard to the intestate succession of illegitimate children
in Kandyan Law is quite clear. Under the general Kandyan Law an illegitimate
child could not succeed to paraveni property if there are any other relations
however remote _(Rankiri vs. Ukku_ (14)). Considering this position Hayley
(The Laws and customs of the Sinhalese (Supra) pg 3) has clearly stated that
the illegitimate child does not succeed to the grandfather. In Hayleys words:  
  
"Illegitimate children are, however not entitled, to succeed to the _paraveni_
if there are any other relations however, remote. It follows therefore that an
illegitimate child can never inherit the property of his grandfather, for,
even if his father has predeceased the grandfather, he cannot be in a better
position than if his father had survived in which case the property would
descend as paraveni."  
  
As referred to earlier, the decision in _Appuhamyvs. Lapaya (Supra),_ clearly
constitutes a departure from the general principles applicable in Kandyan Law
dealing with property issues pertaining to an illegitimate child. The Court of
Appeal decision is based on the decision in _Appuhamy vs. Lapaya_

**262**

7. _Fernando v Perera_ (1932) 25 NLR 197  
  
8\. _Sallis and another v. Jones_ 1936 Probate Division 43  
  
9\. _Re Mainland Lloyds Bank Ltd. v. Mainland_ (1939) All ER 148  
  
10. _Miller v Solomons_ (1852) Exch 560  
  
11\. _Nolan v Clifford_ 1 CLR 453  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_Rohan Sahabandu_ for appellants in SC No. 74/2002 and SC No. 75/2002  
  
_A. R. Surendran, P. C. with K. V. S. Ganesharajan and Nadarajan Kandeepan v_
for respondent in SC No. 74/2002 and for respondent in SC No. 75/2002

_Cur. adv. vult._

**October 14, 2005  
SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**These are appeals from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 31.05.2002.
By that judgment the Court of Appeal affirmed the decision of the District
Court dated 31.12.1998 and dismissed the appeal. The petitioner-appellant-
appellant in S.C (Appeal) No.74/2002 and respondents appellants- appellants in
S. C. (Appeal) No. 75/2002 (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) appealed
to this Court where special leave to appeal was granted.  
  
The facts of this appeal, albeit brief are as follows:  
  
The appellant is a daughter of one Muthiah Pararajasingham, who had passed
away on 02.10.1997. The appellant has a sister, Vinoji who is the 2nd
respondent-appellant-appellant in S. C. (Appeal) No. 75/2002 (hereinafter
referred to as Vinoji). The late Pararajasingham was earlier married to one
Asoka Wickramasinghe and they were divorced in July 1993. During that marriage
the appellant and Vinoji were born. The said Pararajasingham had executed his
last will on 24.08.1990 appointing the appellant as his sole heir and
appointing one Nithyalakshmi Devi Pararajasingham, the respondent-respondent-
respondent in S.C.(Appeal) **74/2002 and petitioner-respondent-respondent in
S. C. (Appeal)** No. 75/2002 (hereinafter referred to as the respondent), as
the Executor. Later the said deceased had married the respondent. According to
the appellant, the said Executor had not taken steps to have the estate
administered. The appellant had therefore petitioned the District Court and
sought an

**263**

order of court that the appellant is the sole heir to the Estate of the
deceased (Case No. 738/98/T-S. C. (Appeal) No. 74/2002). Thereafter the
respondent Nithyalakshmi Devi Pararajasingham, the second wife of the late
Muthiah Pararajasingham and the step mother of the appellant had filed papers
in the District Court of Mr. Lavinia (Case No. 707/97/T-S.C. (Appeal) No. 75/
2002) seeking an order to administer the property, claiming 1/2 share of the
Estate of the deceased and the other 1/2 share to be given to the appellant
and Vinoji, the two daughers of the deceased, on the basis that the deceased
died without leaving a last will.  
  
The appellant had objected to the said application of the respondent on the
basis that the deceased in terms of his last will had bequeathed his Estate to
the appellant as his sole heir.  
  
The District Court considered both cases (Case No. 707/97/T and Case No.
738/98/T) together with one judgment binding the other and on 31.12.1998
dismissed Case No. 738/98/T and appointed the respondent Nithyalakshmi Devi
Pararajasingham as the administrator of the Estate of the deceased on the
basis that the last will was revoked by the subsequent marriage of the
Testator, which position was confirmed by the Court of Appeal.  
  
Both Counsel agree that the only question involved in this appeal is to
consider the meaning that should be given to section 6 of the Prevention of
Frauds Ordinance in order to decide whether the last will of the Testator was
revoked by his subsequent marriage. They also agreed that both cases could be
considered together with one judgment binding the other.  
  
Learned Counsel for the appellant strenuously argued that in terms of Section
6 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance, there was no revocation of the
impugned will by the marriage of the Testator to the respondent. His position
was that although ordinarily a last will could be revoked by a subsequent
marriage of the Testator by virtue of section 6 of the Prevention of Frauds
Ordinance, this rule would be applicable only where an unmarried person
contracts a marriage for the first time. Accordingly learned Counsel for the
appellant submitted that the said provision would not be applicable in a
situation where a person had married for the second time.  
  
Section 6 of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance is in the following terms:

**266**

construed as being applicable only to the first marriage of the Testator, in
as much as the Roman Dutch Law only refers to revocation of wills by a
subsequent marriage producing issues and not to any principle whereby
revocation of a prior will is postulated only by the first marriage of the
Testator. In support of his contention learned President's Counsel for the
respondent referred to the observations made by Stewart, J. _in Johannes
Muppu's case (Supra)._ Referring to the words in section 5 of Ordinance, No.7
of 1840, that 'no will.................. shall be revoked otherwise than by
the marriage of the 'testator or testatrix or by another will', Stewart, J.,
observed that,  
  
"probably the grammatical and logical equivalent of the words" no will shall
be revoked otherwise than by the marriage of the "testaror or testatrix" may
be taken, rendered into affirmative language, as enacting' that every will
shall be revoked by the marriage of the testaror or testatrix'."  
  
Having said that, Stewart, J. further proceeded to observe that there was no
occasion for the purposes of _Johannes Muppu's case (Supra)_ to determine
definitively whether the terms of section 5 of Ordinance No.7 of 1840 are
sufficiently adequate to abrogate the Roman Dutch Law. In Stewart, J.'s words,  
  
" But as will be seen hereafter, there is no occasion for the purposes of the
present case to determine definitively whether the terms of the 5th section
are sufficiently express to abrogate the Roman Dutch Law, according to which
the person should not only be married when the will was made, but the
subsequent marraige should be followed by issue to render the prior will
void."  
  
In the light of the aforementioned, it is evident that although Stewart, J.,
referred to the principles of Roman Dutch law, which are applicable mainly to
joint wills and with regard to the application when there is a subsequent
marriage, he did not proceed to make any determination regarding the
applicability and the effect of any such principle on section 6 of the
Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. On the contrary, Stewart, J., has made
reference to the English Common Law in _Johannes Muppu's case (Supra)_ and his
reasoning had been solely on that basis. Consequently, the decision by
Stewart, J., in _Johannes Muppu (Supra)_ cannot be taken as a binding
authority in construing the provision in section 6 of the Prevention of Frauds

**267**

Ordinance, which deals with the revocation of a will by a subsequent marriage.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the respondent, drew our attention to the
decision in Re Estate Koshen (5). This decision in my view, suggests an
interesting point. In that matter the Testator was a Muslim who contracted two
marriages by Islamic Rites; both of which were in terms of Islamic Law
potentially polygamous. His first wife died in 1930 and in 1932 he had made a
will which contained three (3) beneficiaries, namely his two sons and a
nephew. In 1933 the testator married his second wife and had a large family by
her. He died in 1954. The question arose as to the validity of his will made
in 1932. Hathorn, j., considering that the case relates only to the succession
of property and that it also falls within the principles of Mehta's case, held
that the Testator's marriage in 1933 was a marriage within the meaning of
section 7 of the Deceased Estates Succession Act and in the absence of an
endorsement as is described in that section that marriage renders null and
void the will made by the testator in 1932.  
  
This decision, thus clearly emphasises the fact that, priority had been placed
for the governing provisions laid down in statutes and due consideration had
been given to such provisions in interpreting the question of the revocation
of a will based on a subsequent marriage.  
  
It is also pertinent to note, both Hathorn, J., and R. W. Lee have been
specific that consideration should be given to relevant statutory provisions
in deciding the validity of a will executed prior to a second marriage of the
Testator.  
  
In such circumstances, the question arises as to whether there is any
necessity to consider the position which prevailed under the Roman Dutch Law,
despite that being our common law, where there are specific statutory
provisions which govern the question under consideration.  
  
It is common ground that express provision has been made under the Prevention
of Frauds Ordinance on revocation of a will. Accordingly, any such principle
of Roman Dutch Law concerned with revocation of a will has been superseded by
the express provisions contained in the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance. In the
absence of any doubt or ambiguity, there are no means for the appellant to
rely on principles governed by Roman Dutch Law, to be applied in their favour.  


**268**

Referring to principles of interpretation, Sutherland (Statutory Construction,
3rd Edition, Vol. II, pg. 310) stated quite clearly that,  
  
"where the words of an Act of Parliament are clear, there is no room for
applying any of these principles of interpretation, which are merely
presumptions, in cases of ambiguity in the statute."  
  
Maxwell has-confirmed this position by stating that it is not allowable to
interpret what has no need of interpretation (Interpretation of Statutes, 10th
Edition, pg. 4.). Stating that the ordinary and natural meaning to be adhered
to in the first instance, Bindra had categorically stated that,  
  
"The words of a statute must prima facie be given their ordinary meaning.
Where the grammatical construction is clear and manifest and without doubt,
that construction ought to prevail unless there be some strong and obvious
reason to the contrary.  
  
When there is no ambiguity in the words, there is no room for
construction.............No single argument has more weight in statutory
interpretation than the plain meaning of the word. 'If the meaning of the
language be plain and clear, we have nothing to do, but to obey it - to
administer it as we find it, observed Pollock CB in _Miller v Salomans._ If
the language of statute is clear and unambiguous, the court must give effect
to it and it has no right to extend its operation in order to carry out the
real or supposed intention of the legislature (Interpretation of Statutes, 9th
Edition, Bullerworths, pp 394395)"  
  
This position has been accepted by our Courts in several decisions. For
instance in _Mudanayake v Sivagnanasunderam_ (6) it was held that 'when the
language of a statute speaks clearly for itself it is not permitted to rely on
extraneous evidence in support of an interpretation, which the words of the
statute do not warrant'.  
  
It is thus evident that, when the language of a statute is clear and has no
ambiguities, there is no provision for this Court to refer to any other
material in view of giving a different interpretation. The only role for the

**269**

Court, when there is no ambiguity in the language and when it is plain and
clear, is to do nothing, but to simply give effect to the statutory provision.
It is thereby clear that the Court has no power to add any words to statutory
provision which is clear, plain and unambiguous. The contention of the learned
Counsel for the appellant is that, the words, **'the marriage'** in section 6
of the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance lays emphasis on 'marriage'. Learned
Counsel submitted that 'THE' is a functional word to indicate that following a
noun or a noun equivalent is **definite** or has been previously specified by
context or by circumstances. The resulting position of the submission of the
learned Counsel for the appellant in other terms would be to interpolate the
word **'first'** between the words 'the' and 'marriage' in section 6 of the
Prevention of Frauds Ordinance to read as by the 'first' marraige.  
  
It has been stated time and again as referred to earlier, that when there is
no ambiguity in the words in a statute there is no room for construction. if
the language of a statute is clear and unambiguous, Courts must give effect to
the words so stated in the statute, without attempting to obtain the intention
of the legislature. Moreover when the language is clear and meaningful there
is no authority for the Court to add to the language of a statute. This
position was cosidered by Jayawardene, A. J. in _Fernando v Perera_ (7) where
it was held that,  
  
"Courts have no power to add to the language of a statute unless the language
as it stands is meaningless or leads to an absurdity."  
  
It is thus evident that in view of the unambiguous language of section 6 of
the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance there is no necessity for interpreting that
section in terms of the Roman Dutch Law.  
  
Having said that let me now turn to examine the meaning given in section 6 of
the Prevention of Frauds Ordinance in a situation where there is a second
marriage after Testator had executed his last will.  
  
The second limb of the contention of the learned Counsel for the appellant was
that the court of Appeal should have followed the observations of Stewart, J.,
in _Johannes Muppu's case (Supra)_ and not the decision in _Mary Nona v Edward
de Silva (Supra)._ Learned Counsel's

**270**

position was that the better view was of Stewart, J. in Johannes Muppu (supra)
and not what was expressed by then Supreme Court in _Mary Nona v. Edward de
Silva (Supra).  
_  
In _Johannes Muppu_ (supra) a husband and wife executed a joint will disposing
of their common property. The wife died and the husband married for the second
time. It was in evidence that after the first wife's death the husband
executed conveyances of portions of the property dealt with by the joint will
to legatees under the will. The husband afterwards died leaving heirs
surviving his second wife. An executor of the joint will having applied for
probate after the husband's death, the application was opposed by the second
wife, who contended that the joint will was revoked by the second marriage.  
  
The Court held that the husband had adiated the inheritance under the joint
will and that, that being so, the joint will was not revoked by the husband's
subsequent marriage. It was further held that the provisions of clause 5 of
Ordinance No.7 of 1840, with respect to the revocation of wills by subsequent
marriage of the Testator's not to apply to the case of the joint wills made by
spouses married before the passing of the Ordinance.  
  
 It is to be borne in mind that in _Johannes Muppu's case (Supra)_ the
question was based on the validity of a joint will and Stewart, J., took the
view that the said will is irrevocable in view of the husband adiating the
inheritance. In such circumstances there was no necessity for Stewart, J. to
consider the application and scope of section 6 of the Prevention of Frauds
Ordinance and thereby his position became obiter dictum and could not have
been taken as authority on the applicability of section 6.  
  
In _Johannes Muppu's case (Supra),_ Stewart, J., had considered the issue in
hand on the basis of the corresponding statutory provisions in the English
Statute, namely section 18 of the Wills Act and came to the conclusion that
the will of the Testator is revoked only when a testator marries for the first
time. Section 18 of the Wills Act states that, -  
  
"Every will made by a man or woman shall be revoked by his or her marriage
....."  
  
Section 18 of the Wills Act had been considered by several English decisions
where it has been stated that the Testator's second marriage

**271**

would revoke a will executed prior to the marriage. Considering this position
learned President's Counsel for the respondent cited _Sallis and Another v.
Jones (8)_ where the Testator who was a widower, by his will executed in June
1927 appointed his two daughters his executrices. He married his second wife
in November 1927. In the final sentence of his will the Testator had declared
that 'this will is made in contemplation of marriage.' After his death in
1936, testamentary proceedings for the grant of probate were instituted by his
daughters on the basis of his will executed in June 1927; the second wife
resisted the application contending that in terms of section 18 of the Wills
Act, the said will was revoked by the testator's marriage to her and that
thereafter the testator died intestate.  
  
Section 177 of the Law of Property Act of 1925, excluded the operation of
section 18 of the Wills Act, if the will was made before a marriage is
expressed to be made in contemplation of a particular marriage and is followed
by the solemnization of that marriage. However, in Sallis's case Bennett, J.,
was of the view that, for the operation of section 177 of the Law of Property
Act, the will should contain 'something more than a declaration containing a
reference to marriage generally'. Therefore Bennett, J., was of the view that
the case had to be decided in terms of section 18 of the Wills Act and it was
held that the will in question was revoked by the subsequent marriage of the
deceased.  
  
In _Re Gilligan_ (deceased) the court had to consider the scope of section 18
of the Wills Act of 1837. The court while considering the purpose and effect
of section 18 stated that the section provided that wills shall be revoked by
subsequent marriage and more importantly was of the view that 'the event which
the section contemplates is the re-marriage of a person who has made a will
and the circumstances in which a will so made shall be revoked by such
subsequent marriage.'  
  
In _Re Mainland, Lloyds Bank Ltd., v Mainland_ (9) the Testaror had executed a
will prior to entering into his second marriage. After his second marriage he
had executed another will. Considering the validity of the will Lord Greene,
M. R. was of the view that,  
  
"Section 18 provides that a will shall be revoked by marriage. Here revocation
takes place, not by virtue of some action of the testator directed to the
revocation of the will, but as

**272**

a collateral consequence, imposed by law, of an action performed _alio
intuitu_...............under section 18, where revocation follows as a matter
of law, whether or not the testator wishes it".  
  
The English Wills Act has no direct relevance to the matter in issue. However,
the purpose of citing English authorities was for the reason that as correctly
pointed out by learned President's Counsel for the respondent, Stewart,J., in
his judgment in Johannes Muppu (Supra) had referred to section 18 of the Wills
Act in the process of determining whether the subsequent marriage of _Johannes
Muppu_ had revoked the will executed prior to his second marriage.

All these decisions therefore clearly indicate that section 18 of the Wills
Act provides without any doubt that a will which had been executed prior to a
second marriage would be revoked as a result of that marriage. In such
circumstances, the view taken by Stewart, J., in Johannes Muppu's case (Supra)
that in terms of section 18 of the Wills Act, the will of the testator is
revoked only when a testator married for the first time cannot be accepted.
Having given consideration to that decision I am not in agreement with the
view taken by the learned Counsel for the appellant that the Court of Appeal
should have followed the observations of Stewart, J., in Johannes Muppu's case
(Supra).  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the respondent on the other hand relied on the
decision of Mary Nona v Edward de silva (Supra) decided by the Supreme Court
in 1948, which had clearly disagreed with the view expressed by Stewart, _J.
in Johannes Muppu (Supra).  
_  
In Mary Nona's case, the question arose in relation to a joint will made by
one Charles de Silva and his wife Elizabeth in 1921.By clause A, both movable
and immovable property belonging to both of them were given to one Margaret, a
daughter of Charles by a previous marriage. Clause B went on to state that if
Charles was the survivor he would be entitled absolutely to all the property
belonging to the joint estate, and that if Elizabeth was the survivor she
would be entitled to the control of all the property and to enjoy the rest and
profits thereof, but that Elizabeth would not be at liberty to sell or dispose
of that property. Charles died in 1922 and after Charles's death Elizabeth
contracted a marriage with one Warakaulle who died in 1938 leaving Elizabeth
considerable property. Elizabeth died in 1943. Considering the question
whether the second marriage contracted by Elizabeth had revoked her will,
Wijeyewardene, A.

**273**

C. J., clearly stated that the second marriage she had entered into had
resulted in revoking her last will. Expressing his view, Wijeyewardene, A. C.
J. further stated that,  
  
"It was contended by Mr. H. V. Perera that section 6 of the Prevention of
Frauds Ordinance, did not have the effect of invalidating a will of a married
person by reason of a second marriage subsequent to the execution of the will,
and he relied on the opinion expressed by Stewart, J., _in Re the estate of K.
D. Johannes Muppu_ (1879) 2 Supreme Court Circular 14. That opinion was an
obiter dictum, as it was not necessary for Stewart, J., to consider section 6
in view of the definite decision reached by him that the last will in that
case had become irrevocable, since the testator and testatrix there had massed
their estates and the surviving testator had adiated the inheritance. **With
due respect to the learned Judge, I find myself compelled to disagree with the
view expressed by him as to the scope of section 6** (empahsis added)".  
  
Learned Counsel for the appellant submitted quite strenuously that, in _Mary
Nona v Edward de Silva (Supra)_ , although the Supreme Court decided that the
opinion of Stewart,J., in Johannes Muppu (Supra) was obiter and cannot be
agreed upon, that there was no analysis of section 6 of the Prevention of
Frauds Ordinance and that there was no comparison with other authorities like
in Stewart, J.'s judgment.  
  
It would not be correct to state that in _Mary Nona's case, (Supra)_ the Court
had not given due consideration to the applicability of section 6 of the
Prevention of Frauds Ordinance or to applicable case law. The Court had
examined the issue in question and had referred to Johannes Muppu's Case
(Supra) as a decision relied on by the Counsel. After considering the
submissions of the Counsel and the said decision, Court had held that the
opinion of Stewart, J. was an obiter dictum. It appears that Johannes Muppu
was the only authority available on the subject and therefore it would not
have been possible for the Court to have considered any other judgment,
decided by our Courts.  
  
Also if I may reiterate, when there is no ambiguity in a specific provision
there will not be any necessity for any sort of construction. Pollock C. B. ,
in _Miller v Solomons_ (10) quite clearly stated that,

**274**

"If the language used by the legislature be clear and plain, we have nothing
to do with its policy or impolicy its justice or injustice, or even its,
'absurdity', its being framed according to our views of right or the contrary,
we have nothing to do but to obey it, and administer it as we find it; and I
think to take a different course is to abandon the office of judge and assume
that of a legislator (emphasis added)".  
  
A similar view was expressed by Connor, J. in _Nolon v Cliford_ (11)when it
was specifically stated that,  
  
"The first and most important rule in the construction of statutes is to give
effect to words according to their grammatical meaning. If that meaning is
clear, then, whether an alteration is made in the com mon law or the statute
law or not, and whether of a serious character or not, is of no moment, effect
must be given to the words the legislature has used."  
  
Considering the aforementioned position it is abundantly clear that the words
given in section 6 of the Prevention of frauds Ordinance with reference to the
phrase **'by the marriage of the testator or testatrix'** conveys the meaning
of more than one marriage of the Testator or the Testatrix and has not
restricted itself only to the first marriage of the Testator or the Testatrix.
In such circumstances, out of the two decisions, which considered the effect
of the said provision, I am of the view that the observation of Wijeyewardene
A.C. J., in Mary Nona v Edward de Silva (supra) represents the correct
position of the scope and applicability of section 6 of the Prevention of
Frauds Ordinance that a will could be revoked by the second marriage of the
Testator subsequent to the execution of the will.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons, I answer the issue in the affirmative and
state that the last will made by the Testator, namely the deceased Muthiah
Pararajasingham, was revoked on his subsequent marriage.  
  
I accordingly dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment of the Court of
Appeal dated 31.05.2002.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**UDALAGAMA, J.,** \- I agree.  
  
**FERANDO, J.,** -I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._



* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/17.html_  

