##  Elpitiya Plantations Ltd v. Ceylon Estates Staff Union (On Behalf of V.I.
George) and Others - SLR - 239, Vol 1 of 2004 [2004] LKSC 18; (2004) 1 Sri LR
239 (29 January 2004)

**239**

**ELPITIYA PLANTATIONS LTD  
v  
CEYLON ESTATES STAFF UNION (ON BEHALF  
OF V.I. GEORGE) AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 70/2002  
H.C. A.LT. NO. 3/98 KANDY  
LT. NO. LT9/TK 1241/95  
SEPTEMBER 23 AND OCTOBER 01 2003  
  
_Industrial Dispute - Retirement of workman at 55 years of age - Grant of
extensions up to 60 years - Discretion of the employer.  
  
_The respondent Union acting on behalf of the workman George com­plained to
the Labour Tribunal that the appellant (the employer) had unjustly terminated
the workman's services at 55 years of age. The Labour Tribunal dismissed the
application by order dated 19.12.1997.  
  
The workman had been a driver employed in 1992. Prior to his retirement his
services had been terminated for misconduct, viz., driving under the
influ­ence of liqour. The Labour Tribunal reinstated him without back wages.  
  
Having regard to his unsatisfactory services, the employer retired the
work­man at 55 years.  
  
On an appeal by the Union against the retirement, the High Court by its order
dated 26.2.2002 held that the termination of services was unjust and ordered
his reinstatement from 1.11.94 with back wages. At the time of the High Court
decision the workman was 63 years of age.  
  
**Held:  
**1\. The optional age of retirement with the employer was 55 years, subject
to annual extensions until 60 year which is the compulsory age of retirement.  
  
2\. Whether extensions of services may be given is a discretion on the part of
the employer.  
  
3\. The termination of the workman's services at 55 was not unjust or
inequitable.

**240**

**Cases referred to:  
  
**1\. _Maskeliya Plantations Ltd v Arulananthan -_ CA Application No. 248/95
of 2.10.1995  
  
2\. _Shanmugam v Maskeliya Plantations Ltd_. - (1996) 1 Sri LR 208  
  
**APPEAL** from the order of the High Court of Kandy  
  
_Gomin Dayasiri with Manori Jinadasa_ for appellant  
  
_Geoffrey Alagaratnam_ with _M. Sithambaram_ for respondent

_Cur. adv. vult_

January 29, 2004  
  
HECTOR YAPA, J.  
  
The applicant-appellant-respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the
1st respondent) made an application to the Labour Tribunal against the
respondent-respondent-petitioner-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the
appellant) and 2nd and 3rd respon­dents-respondents-respondents-respondents
(hereinafter referred to as the 2nd and 3rd respondents) alleging that the
services of one of its members V.I.George (hereinafter referred to as the "the
work­man") had been unjustly terminated and sought reinstatement with
backwages or compensation in lieu of reinstatement.  
  
The appellant filed answer denying the termination of the services of the
workman and stated that the workman was retired from service on his reaching
the age of retirement, namely 55 years. It was further averred by the
appellant that the workman's past record of service was unsatisfactory.
Thereupon the 1st respondent filed replication stating that even though the
workman had reached the age of 55 years, he was entitled to work till 60 years
of age. After inquiry, learned President of the Labour Tribunal by his order
dated 19.12.1997, held that the workman had been duly retired by the appellant
and was therefore not entitled to any relief.  
The 1st respondent appealed against the said order of the 20 Labour Tribunal
to the High Court of Kandy. The learned High Court Judge after hearing the
parties by his order dated 26.02.2002, held

**241**

that the retirement of the workman on his reaching 55 years of age was unjust
and inequitable and therefore directed the appellant to reinstate the workman
from 01.11.1994 with back wages. Aggrieved by this order of the High.Court,
the appellant made an application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court and
on 04.09.2002 the Supreme Court granted leave to appeal on the fol­lowing
questions of law.  
  
(i) Is the order of reinstatement with backwages justifiable in respect of a
workman who is almost 63 years of age, when the 1st respondent claims that the
compulsory age of retirement is 60 years and the petitioner (appellant) claims
that the retiring age is 55 years.  
  
(ii) Has the High Court Judge failed to consider that the oral and documentary
evidence presented, which established that the retiring age was 55 years, and
has he thereby misdirected himself?  
  
At the hearing of this appeal learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
the retiring age of the employees in the Plantation  Sector has been 55 years
and the compulsory age of retirement has been 60 years. Further, the practice
has been to retire such employees at the age of 55 years and to consider the
grant of extensions on an yearly basis up to 60 years at the discretion of the
employer. In the absence of any material governing the age of retirement,
learned counsel referred to the document 'A' which has been considered in this
case to show that the practice was to retire the Plantation employees at 55
years of age and that the compul­sory age of retirement remained at 60 years.
However, learned counsel submitted that the document 'A' did not apply to this
case so for the reason that the appellant was now a privatized company. The
document 'A' dated 03.08.1994 has been issued by the Secretary, Ministry of
Plantation Industries and it reads as follows.  
  


> > _Retirement of employees over 55 years of age_
>>

>> As retirement of employees over 55 years in the Plantation Sector is before
the judiciary, it has been decided to suspend retirement of employees after 55
years of age, till a decision is made on this matter by the judiciary. However
compulsory retirement age of 60 years remains unchanged.

**242**

Learned counsel for the appellant contended that, even though the document 'A'
has no application to this case, it would show that the practice in the
Plantation Sector was to retire employees at 55 years and the compulsory age
of retirement was 60 years. Further, counsel submitted that, if the retirement
age of the Plantation employees prior to document 'A' was not 55 years, the
decision to suspend the retirement of employees at 55 years would not arise.
Therefore, counsel sought to argue that the document 'A' clearly demonstrates
the position that previously in the Plantation Sector the employees were
retired at 55 years, and the compulsory age of retirement remained at 60
years. Hence, he submitted that, at the time the workman was given employment
in the year 1992, the practice was to retire employees at 55 years of age and
any exten­sion of service was at the discretion of the management to be
con­sidered annually up to 60 years which was the compulsory age of
retirement. However, due to privatization when the appellant became a non
governmental entity, namely a limited liability com­pany, it took over the
contracts of employment of the employees on the same terms and conditions that
were in existence at the time of the take over. The Gazette notification dated
22.06.1992 marked 'Z'  makes this position clear. Learned counsel therefore
submitted that the appellant presently is an independent legal entity with no
nexus to a Public Corporation or Statutory body of the State. The employ­ees
of the appellant from the date of the Gazette notification were employees of
the private sector and not of the public sector. As such the decision made by
the Ministry of Plantation Industries to suspend the retiring age of 55 years
of the employees of the plan­tation sector is not binding on the appellant.
Learned counsel there­fore argued that the extension of service of the workman
after 55 years was at the discretion of the appellant and in this case having
regard to the unsatisfactory service record of the workman there was no
question of granting an extension. Hence, he submitted that the decision of
the appellant to retire the workman at 55 years was just and proper.  
  
Without conceding the fact that document 'A applied in this case. Counsel
further submitted that, even if document 'A which suspended the policy to
retire employees after 55 years of age till a decision was made by the
judiciary was applied, the position

**243**

would remain the same. In this regard counsel referred to the case of
Maskeliya Plantations Ltd. v K. Arulananthan(1) decided on  29.10.1995 and the
case of Shanmugam v Maskeliya Plantations Ltd(2) where it has been clearly
acknowledged the position that, in the case of employees in the Plantation
Sector the optional age of retirement is 55 years and any extension of service
until 60 years is at the discretion of the employer. Hence in the case of
Maskeliya Plantations Ltd. v Arulanathan the Court observed as follows. "Even
if one were to give a beneficial interpretation to relevant cir­culars of the
S.L.S.P.C., Circular No. 55, No. 170 and No. 329 all these circulars gave the
optional age of retirement as 55. Thereafter, the extension was at the
discretion of the management. In my view the petitioner was aware that the
extension was at the discretion of the management and as a matter of right he
was not entitled to get an extension so he was not and could not expect to
work till he reached the 60th year."  
  
The counsel submitted that in the circumstances even if decisions of Court are
taken into consideration it is clear that the optional age of retirement of
all grades of employees of the Sri Lanka State Plantation Corporation or in
the Plantation Sector was at 55 years and any extensions till 60 years was at
the discretion of the management on an yearly basis.  
  
The workman in this case was a lorry driver who was previous­ly dismissed from
service for driving a lorry under the influence of liquor and reinstated in
service by the Labour Tribunal without back wages, since his conduct was
considered by the President of the Labour Tribunal as blameworthy. Even after
reinstatement, the workman was not given regular duties but was paid his
salary and kept as a relief driver. Under the circumstances, having regard to
the unsatisfactory record of his service the appellant had exercised its
discretion not to grant any extension of service but to retire him at 55
years. Therefore, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Labour
Tribunal was correct when it held that the retirement of the workman was just
and equitable. He further submitted that the learned High Court Judge was in
serious error when he decid­ed to reinstate the workman with back wages.

**244**

Learned counsel for the 1st respondent on the other hand sought to justify the
order of the learned High Court Judge dated 26.02.2002. He submitted that the
High Court Judge's order was based on a correct assessment of the documents
marked A, & B annexed to the replication of the 1st respondent. Document 'A'
referred to above was addressed to the Chief Executive Officer of all the
Regional Plantation Companies and it suspended the retire­ment of employees on
reaching 55 years, till a decision was made on the matter by the judiciary.
Document 'B' stated that where retir­ing policy is stipulated in a collective
agreement, document 'A' will not be applicable. Therefore where there is a
collective agreement relating to retirement rules of the collective agreement
will apply and not document 'A'. However, according to Counsel for the 1st
respondent, there was no collective agreement applicable to the drivers and
therefore it was the document 'A which suspended the retirement of employees
after 55 years that was applicable to this case. Hence, counsel submitted that
the learned High Court Judge was correct when he held that in the absence of
proof that there was a collective agreement applicable to a driver, the
workman was governed by document 'A and therefore the retirement of the
work­man on his reaching 55 years of age was unjust and inequitable.  
  
In view of the submissions made by counsel in this case, one matter to be
decided here would be the applicability or non applic­ability of document 'A.
According to counsel for the appellant, since the appellant is presently a
private company, document 'A has no application. Consequent to privatization
the appellant took over the contracts of employment of the employees in the
plantation sector on the same terms and conditions that were in the existence
at the time of the take over. (Vide gazette marked Z). The earlier practice in
the Plantation Sector was to retire the employees after 55 years and any
extension of service up to 60 years on an yearly basis was at the discretion
of the management. This position is clear from the document 'A which sought to
suspend the retirement of employees in the Plantation Sector after 55 years of
age. If one were to hold as submitted by counsel for the appellant that, the
appellant is a pri­vate concern, and therefore document 'A' did not apply,
then this case has to be decided by applying the practice that prevailed prior
to the issue of document 'A seeking to suspend the retirement of

**245**

employees in the Plantation Sector after 55 years. In which event the workmen
could be retired after 55 years and any extension was at the discretion of the
appellant.  
  
If on the other hand the submission of learned counsel for the 1st respondent
is accepted that document 'A' which suspended the retirement of employees over
55 years in the Plantation Sector applied to this case, then it is seen from
the two cases referred to above that the judiciary has clearly accepted the
position that the optional age of retirement of employees in the Plantation
Sector as 55 years and that any extension of service was at the discretion of
the employer or the management. Therefore, as a matter of right a workman was
not entitled to get an extension. Regard to these cases learned counsel for
the 1st respondent sought to argue that the said cases do not concern drivers
but related to officers such as Superintendents and therefore these judgments
will not apply to this case. It is to be noted that document 'A' is of general
applica­tion to employees of the Plantation Sector and therefore such a
dis­tinction as suggested by counsel will not be permissible. Since document
'A' is of general application, it is seen that the judiciary has decided that
any extension of service after 55 years is at the sole discretion of the
employer. What is important here is that the dis­cretion should be exercised
in a reasonable and equitable manner. Therefore irrespective of whether
document 'A applies or not, the optional age of retirement of the workman was
55 years. Any exten­sion of service of the workman after 55 years was at the
discretion of the management. Hence the decision of the appellant to retire
the workman from service on his reaching 55 years without extend­ing his
services has been due to his unsatisfactory service record. Such a decision
cannot be held to be unjust and inequitable.  
  
In this case learned High Court Judge has concluded that in terms of document
'A' the compulsory age of retirement of the work­man was 60 years and
therefore the retirement of the workman at 55 years was unjust and
inequitable. However as seen from the material referred to above, irrespective
of whether document 'A' applied or not, the optional age of retirement of the
workman was 55 years and any extension of service was at the discretion of the
management. Hence the workman was not entitled to any exten­sion as a matter
of right. Therefore, one cannot blame the appellant

**246**

for not extending the services of the workman after 55 years hav­ing regard to
his unsatisfactory service record.  
  
For the aforesaid reasons first question of law is answered in the negative
and the second question of law is answered in the affirmative. Accordingly,
the judgment of the High Court dated 26.02.2002 is set aside and the appeal is
allowed with costs fixed at Rs. 2,100/-  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J**. - I agree. ****

**EDUSSURIYA, J**. - I agree.

_**Appeal allowed**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/18.html_  

