##  Lurdu Nelson Fernando and Others v. The Attorney General - SLR - 329, Vol
2 of 1998 [1996] LKSC 18; (1998) 2 Sri LR 329 (21 March 1996)

**329**

**LURDU NELSON FERNANDO AND OTHERS  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 59/95  
C.A. NOS. 90 - 93/92

H.C. COLOMBO NO. 3394/88  
MARCH 14TH, 1996

_Criminal Law - Verdict of murder - Common intention - Defects in the summing
-up - Power of court to dismiss appeal notwithstanding defects - S. 334 (1) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure Act._

The appellants were convicted of the offences of conspiracy and murder on the
basis of common intention. It was urged on behalf of the appellants that the
High Court Judge had failed to give adequate directions to the jury regarding
common intention and conspiracy.

**Held:**

Even though the points raised on behalf of the appellants might be decided in
their favour, yet no miscarriage of justice has actually occurred; hence the
appeal should be dismissed.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Ranjit Abeysuriya PC with Miss. Dilanthika Navaratne and Miss Priyadarshini
Dias for appellants.  
  
C. R. de Silva, DSG with Kapila Waidyaratne for Attorney-General._

_Cur. adv. vult_

330

March 21, 1996  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The three appellants, and two others, were charged on four counts in respect
of the murder of A. S. M. Fernando: conspiracy, murder in furtherance of a
common intention under section 32 of the Penal Code, membership of an unlawful
assembly the common object of which was to cause hurt to A. S. M. Fernando,
and murder in prosecution of the common object of that unlawful assembly. One
accused died before the trial commenced, and the other four were tried and
convicted on all four counts, and sentenced to death.

The Court of Appeal set aside the conviction of one accused on all four
counts, and the convictions of the three appellants on the two counts
involving unlawful assembly. Special leave to appeal was granted on the
question of the adequacy of the directions given to the jury. in regard to
common intention and conspiracy.

Mr. Ranjit Abeysuriya, PC, pointed out certain deficiencies in the summing-up:
the jury were not cautioned that they should not conclude that there was a
common murderous intention unless that was a necessary inference, and not
merely a possible inference, and that the case of each accused should be
considered separately; and the jury were not given any guidance as to how the
legal principles regarding common intention and conspiracy were applicable to
the facts of the case. The Court of Appeal had not dealt with these matters.
Mr. C. R. de Silva, DSG, contended that, whatever the deficiencies in the
summing-up, the evidence was overwhelming, and the proviso to section 334 (1)
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act was applicable; the order of the Court
of Appeal should therefore be allowed to stand.

The evidence is that all five accused stole a Hi-ace van at Kochchikade on the
previous day. Thereafter, in broad daylight, on 27.11.85 while the deceased
was travelling, with two others, in a car along Reclamation Road, Colombo,
that van was driven into the car, bringing it to a stop. There were five
persons in the van, but only

331

the 1st and 2nd appellants were identified. The 1st appellant got down with a
pistol in his hand. The deceased was seated in the right rear seat, behind the
driver, his son-in-law, the only eye-witness who gave evidence, was seated in
the front seat beside the driver. The 1st appellant first tried the left rear
door, and finding it locked, then tried the right rear door, with the same
result. The 2nd appellant came up to the son-in-law, and saying salli, salli,
tried (unsuccessfully) to take the money which was in his shirt pocket. An
unidentified third person also got down from the van, armed with a pistol. The
other two remained in the van. The son-in-law heard a shot (which had been
fired through the right rear window) and immediately afterwards saw the 1st
appellant with his pistol aimed at the deceased; he also saw the third person
behind the 1st appellant, with his gun pointing in the direction of the
deceased. No attempt was made thereafter to steal money or anything else, and
all five left in the van, which was abandoned some time later. The gun used
for the killing was not found.

The 3rd appellant's fingerprints were found on the van, but that was only
proof of his presence the previous day, and not at the time of the killing.
However, there was evidence that later the 3rd appellant had asked another
witness for a loan, saying that he was in financial difficulties because he
had not received payment in respect of a contract for the killing of the
deceased; he had stated that we killed the deceased.

The three appellants did not give evidence, but made dock statements denying
any involvement in the incident in which the deceased was killed. Thus if any
of them were found to have been actually present at the scene, there was no
explanation for his presence or motive.

Whether it was the 1st appellant or the unidentified person who fired the
fatal shot, the only inference from the facts was that they shared a murderous
intention. Although the eye-witness did not identify the 3rd appellant as one
of those present at the scene, his confession establishes his murderous
intention, from the time the contract was given to him, and the statement we
killed establishes his personal participation in the killing.

332

The evidence thus appears overwhelming, as against the . 1st and 3rd
appellants, that there was prearrangement and a common murderous intention.
However, Mr. Abeysuriya submitted that a common intention to murder was not
the necessary or inescapable inference from this evidence. While submitting
that the defence was under no obligation even to suggest what other inference
was possible, he relied heavily on the evidence that the 2nd appellant had
demanded money from the deceased's son-in-law. This, he said, indicated that
the 2nd appellant's intention was only to commit robbery, and also created a
reasonable doubt even as to whether the other two appellants intended murder
or only armed robbery. In the case of the 1st and 3rd appellants that is mere
speculation, and nothing more. The former did nothing indicative of a
theftuous intention, and the other had accepted a contract to kill. While the
2nd appellant's demand for money makes his case different, yet taken in the
context of his continuing participation, commencing with the robbery of the
van, the compelling inference is that he intended to rob as well as to kill,
or intended to kill in order to rob. The fact that none of the persons
involved made any attempt to steal after the murder, shows that robbery was,
if at all, an incidental consideration.

Any reasonable jury, properly directed as to the law, would necessarily have
found, on this evidence, that the three appellants shared a common intention
to kill the deceased, and that that intention was the result of a conspiracy.
I am therefore of the opinion that even though the points raised by Mr.
Abeysuriya might be decided in favour of the appellants, yet no miscarriage of
justice has actually occurred. I therefore dismiss the appeal.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
**  
WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/18.html_  

