##  Sheila Seneviratne v. Shereen Dharmaratne - SLR - 76, Vol 1 of 1997 [1995]
LKSC 18; (1997) 1 Sri LR 76 (6 September 1995)

76

SHEILA SENEVIRATNE

v.

SHEREEN DHARMARATNE



SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

P.R.P. PERERA, J.,

S.C. APPEAL NO. 122/94

C.A. 656/83(F)

D.C. MT. LAVINIA NO. 2051/M,

JUNE 29, 1995.

Civil Procedure Code - Ex parte trial - Section 84 and 85 of the Code - Ex-
parte Judgment and decree - Duty of the Court to act on legal evidence -
Section 60 of the Evidence ordinance.



The plaintiff sued the defendant for damages in a sum of Rs. 78,000/- for
failure to grant her a Diploma Certificate in Montessori Training for which
she claimed to have qualified at a course conducted by the Defendant. At the
ex-parte hearing of the action under Section 84 of the Civil Procedure Code,
the only evidence

**77**



adduced was that of the Plaintiff's sister. There was nothing in her evidence
which showed that she was testifying to the facts from her own knowledge. All
the transactions which led to the dispute had been between the plaintiff and
the defendant. There was no evidence that the witness herself played a direct
role in that regard.



**Held:**



The evidence led is clearly hearsay and hence 'no evidence at all' on which a
judgment may be entered under Sec. 85(1) of the Civil Procedure Code.
Consequently, the ex parte decree entered by the District Judge is illegal.



**Cases referred to:**

_ _

1 _. Amerasekera v. Fernando -_ 49 NLR 60.

_ _

2 _. Sarabjit Singh v. Special Manager,_ Court of Wards _Rampur Mathra Estate_
AIR 1917 _, Oudh_ 194,196

_ _

3 _. Monmatha Kumar Ray v. Josda Lal Podder,_ AIR 1924, Cal. 647, 648

_ _

4 _. Gurunath lknath Sukre v. Laximibai Govind Kanista_ AIR 1942 Born. 344

_ _

5 _. State of West Bengal v. Lakshmi Narayan Singh_ AIR 1956 Cal. 87, 89.

_ _

6 _. Eliyathamby v. Eliyathamby -_ 27 NLR 396, 401 (PC)

_ _

7 _. Fernando v. Jaward_ -77 NLR 554, 558



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal



Faisz Musthapha, P.C., with G.L. Geethananda for plaintiff-appellant.



R. E. Thambiratnam with Herman J.C. Perera for defendant-respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._

September 6, 1995.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**



The plaintiff-appellant is seeking the restoration of the ex parte decree
entered by the District Judge in the above action which decree was set aside
by the Court of Appeal. By its judgment, the Court of Appeal also directed an
inter partes trial, according to law.



The defendant had filed answer with a claim in reconvention; whereupon, the
plaintiff filed replication. The case was then fixed for trial. It was heard
ex parte on the ground that the defendant failed to appear on the date fixed
for trial. The defendant's application to set aside the ex parte decree was
refused by the District Judge on the ground that the application was not made
according to law and was

**78**



out of time, having been filed after the period of 14 days permitted by law.



The defendant's appeal to the Court of Appeal was resisted inter alia on the
ground that the defendant had failed to hypothecate security for costs of
appeal, which default the Court of Appeal purported to excuse in terms of S.
759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. In the end, the Court of Appeal set aside
the ex parte decree in the exercise of revisionary jurisdiction for the reason
that the said decree is based on a judgment given on the basis of hearsay
evidence. This was an objection which the defendant had consistently urged at
every stage of proceedings, before the trial Court and the Court of Appeal.



Special leave to appeal herein has been granted on a number of grounds but I
propose to decide the matter on one ground alone namely, whether the ex parte
decree is illegal as it is based on a judgment entered on hearsay evidence; if
so, whether the Court of Appeal was justified in setting it aside, by way of
revision. I have adopted this course particularly in view of the submission of
Mr. Musthapha P.C. for the plaintiff-appellant that the defendant had failed
to properly pursue the specific remedy which S.86(2) of the Code provided, to
have the ex parte decree vacated, due to her negligence or her own folly.
However, in fairness to the defendant it must be stated that the alleged
negligence in the case was that of her registered Attorney. If there was any
such negligence, the defendant had to suffer by reason of the acts of her
agent. This is a fact which I consider is relevant to the decision of this
case.



The plaintiff had followed a course in Montessori Training Methods conducted
by the defendant. The plaintiff claims that she sat a test and qualified for a
Diploma and was awarded a certificate at a ceremony presided over by Mrs. Siva
Obeysekera. Later she realised that the so-called certificate was a blank
sheet of paper. She claims damages in a sum of Rs. 78,000/-. The defence is
that the plaintiff did not pass the test. So she was not entitled to a
Diploma. But the plaintiff desired it to be known she had qualified for the
Diploma and requested that she be photographed at the award ceremony as
receiving a certificate. She undertook to repeat the test. Hence, the pretence
of an award when only a blank certificate was given. At the second attempt
also, the plaintiff failed to pass the test.

**79**



According to the record, on 15.07.81 the registered Attorney of the plaintiff
was present. The lawyer sister of the plaintiff says in an affidavit that she
appeared for the plaintiff that day, tendered the plaintiff's replication and
obtained a date for the trial on behalf of senior Counsel; she communicated
the date of trial namely, 02.10.81 to the Counsel; the registered Attorney for
the defendant was not present in Court.



The record shows that although the trial was fixed for 02.10.81 the first
entry made was 02.11.81 after which the reference to "11" had been altered to
"10" in such a way that at a glance one may still misread it as "11". In fact,
the clerk who had entered the date in the "Day Book" had himself first entered
it as 02.11.81 and then corrected it as 02.10.81.



On 02.10.81 the plaintiff was absent but represented by Counsel; the defendant
was absent and unrepresented; whereupon, the District Judge tried the case ex
parte. The evidence of the lawyer sister was led on the facts averred to in
the plaint which evidence was hearsay, except perhaps as regards one matter
namely a letter addressed to the plaintiff's Attorney-at-Law in which the
defendant had replied the plaintiff's claim wherein the defendant admits the
award of a blank certificate to the plaintiff. However, the letter states that
this was for the reason that the plaintiff had not qualified for a Diploma;
and that the plaintiff failed the examination when she sat for it a second
time; so that the plaintiff was never entitled to a Diploma. The said letter
is consistent with the defence raised in the answer. After recording that
evidence, the Court postponed judgment to enable the filing of documents.



Before the Court proceeded to deliver its judgment, the registered Attorney
for the defendant filed an affidavit dated 16.10.81 (together with an
affidavit of the defendant) explaining that he took down the date as 02.11.81
and later learnt that the case had been fixed for ex parte trial. He also
noted an alteration of the date. More relevantly, he drew the attention of the
Court to the fact that the sole witness for the plaintiff had given hearsay
evidence in breach of the provisions of S.85(1) of the Code; and that there is
nothing in her evidence which shows that she was testifying to the facts from
her own knowledge. He moved that the entering of the ex parte judgment be
stayed, pending investigations into the said alteration; in any event,
judgment be entered dismissing the plaintiff's action, for breach of S.85(1).

**80**



On 27.11.81 the District Judge entered ex parte judgment. Almost the entirety
of the judgment is devoted to explaining the circumstances in which the entry
of the trail date had been altered. The objection that hearsay evidence had
been led was not considered. The Judge said that "on the evidence given . . .
the plaintiff had established a prima facie case for the recovery of a sum of
Rs. 78,000/- from the defendant". Accordingly he gave judgment for the
plaintiff and directed that a decree be entered under S.85(4).



The ex parte decree was served on 18.09.92. Next, there is an application
dated 29.09.92 by the registered Attorney for the defendant seeking to vacate
the ex parte decree but there is no accompanying affidavit. On 07.10.82 a
motion has been filed moving that the said application be entertained on the
basis of the affidavit "previously filed". The application itself bears the
date stamp 07.10.82. In the written submissions filed on behalf of the
defendant, the point was made that District Judge had given ex parte judgment
per incuriam, without considering the submission that ex parte judgment had
been entered on the evidence of the plaintiff's sister, in breach of S.85(1).



On 18.10.83, the District Judge rejected the application to vacate the ex
parte decree on the ground that the said application was not in conformity
with S.86(2) and that it was time barred. The submission that the ex parte
judgment was per incuriam, and had been entered on the evidence of the
plaintiff's sister, in breach of S.85(1), was not considered.



Mr. Musthapha's criticism of most of the grounds on the basis of which the
Court of Appeal reversed the order of the District Judge is valid. Mr.
Musthapha relies primarily on the lapses of the registered Attorney for the
defendant in respect of which the District Judge has made specific findings of
fact. There is force in the submission that the Court of Appeal was not
justified in reversing those findings. Hence this Court would normally not
have affirmed the judgment of the Court of Appeal. However, the allegation
that the District Judge had given judgment on hearsay evidence raises a
serious question as to the legality or the propriety of that judgment. The
question is whether that judgment and the decree which followed it are illegal
and void for lack of legal evidence. If so, the Court of Appeal was right in
setting aside the said decree.

**81**



S.84 of the Code requires the Court to proceed to hear the case ex parte inter
alia, where the defendant is absent on the day fixed for the hearing of the
action. S.85 which prescribes the procedure for ex parte trial states that the
plaintiff may place evidence before the Court in support of his claim by
affidavit or by oral testimony; and the Court, if satisfied that the plaintiff
is entitled to the relief claimed by him may enter such judgment for him as to
it shall seem proper and enter decree accordingly. In Amerasekera v.
Fernando(1) Soertsz J. expressed the view that the evidence in support of the
plaintiff's claim at an ex parte trial should, as a rule, be given orally, and
affidavits should be resorted to only in exceptional cases.



In India, the principles applicable to the hearing of a case ex parte have
been set out as follows: -



(1)  A Court ought not to rely in an ex parte case on evidence otherwise
unreliable, simply because the case is ex parte. Sarabjit Singh v. Special
Manager, Courts of Wards, Rampur Mathra Estate (2).



(2)  If a case is heard ex parte, the Court cannot pass a decree except on
proof by the plaintiff that he is entitled to that decree Monmatha kumar Ray
v. Josda Lal Podder(3)



(3)  A direction that the Court may proceed ex parte means that the Court can
hear evidence in the absence of the defendant, and make such order as that
evidence justifies. Gurunath Iknath Sukre v. Laximibai Govind Kanista (4).



(4) If there is no such evidence the claim is liable to be dismissed, though
the defendant has not chosen to appear State of West Bengal v Lakshmi Narayan
Singh (5).



In the instant case, the District Judge gave judgment on the evidence of the
plaintiff's sister. As pointed out earlier, that evidence was oral evidence
except as regards two letters. The case rested mainly on oral evidence. In
terms of S.60 of the Evidence Ordinance, oral evidence must, in all cases
whatever, be direct meaning, that it must be given by a witness who has seen,
heard or perceived any fact which is sought to be proved. There are exceptions
to the hearsay rule but they have no application to this case.  


As urged by the defendant, there is nothing in the evidence of the witness
called at the ex parte hearing which shows that she was



**82**



testifying to the facts from her own knowledge. All the transactions which led
to the dispute had been between the plaintiff and the defendant. There is no
evidence that the witness herself played a direct role in that regard. Such
evidence is clearly hearsay and hence no evidence at all on which a judgment
may be entered under S.85(1) of the Code.



In Eliyathamby v. Eliyathamby (6), the Privy Council whilst affirming that the
rule against hearsay is part of the law of Ceylon said:



"The principle is one so reasonable in itself, fundamental and so long
established, that Their Lordships cannot conceive of its being overthrown and
discarded except designedly, and by words so plain that their meaning would
not be open to any manner of doubt.".



Well before the delivery of the ex parte judgment, the defendant had drawn the
attention of the Court to the fact that the evidence led at the ex parte
hearing was hearsay. But the District Judge proceeded to give judgment for the
plaintiff without considering that submission. It is true that once a case is
fixed for ex parte hearing, the defendant cannot seek to have such order
vacated until he receives the ex parte decree. But in the instant case, the
defendant was not seeking to have any order vacated. According to the
affidavits filed, the defendant only applied



(a)     that in view of the alteration of the date of hearing, the Court
should stay the making of the ex parte judgment, pending investigation as to
the circumstances of such alteration;  


(b)    that in view of the hearsay evidence, the Court should make order
dismissing the plaintiff's action.



It seems to me that the application made by the defendant was perfectly
legitimate and in conformity with the relevant statute and authorities.
Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has submitted on the authority of Fernando
v. Jaward (7) that the evidence led in an ex parte trial is of the bearest
minimum. But in the instant case, there is no evidence at all. Hence that
decision has no application.



I hold that ex pane decree entered by the District Judge is illegal.
Therefore, the Court of Appeal was justified in setting it aside and directing
a trial inter partes. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal and

**83**



affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal. In all the circumstances, I make
no order as to costs.



**G. P S. DE SILVA C.J.** \- I agree

** **

**P R. P. PERERA, J.** \- l agree



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/18.html_  

