##  Mohamed Ismail and Two Others v. Hussain and Others - SLR - 380, Vol 2 of
1993 [1992] LKSC 18; (1993) 2 Sri LR 380 (1 January 1992)

**380**

**MOHAMED ISMAIL AND TWO OTHERS  
v  
HUSSAIN AND OTHERS **

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE J.

AMERASINGHE J.

DHEERARATNE J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 29/89.  
C. A (L A.) S. C. APPLICATION NO 20/79.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 754/77.  
JANUARY 01, 1992.

_     Ceiling of Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973 - Vesting Order - Dominant
character of the premises - is it a flat or house or residence or business
premises in a commercial area ? Natural Justice - Definition of house -
Section 47 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 1 of 1973. _

381

Of the premises, the subject matter of the suit, 3970 square feet were used
for residence, while 290 square feet were used as a tea kiosk. Several
generations of the appellant's family had been residing in the premises since
1930. Six of the eight rooms were used as living accommodation. While two
rooms were used for running a tea kiosk. There was also a living room, toilet
and Kitchen. These premises were situated in Old Moor Street, Pettah, a
declared commercial area.

**Held** :

1\. All the attributes of residential premises existed at the time of the
vesting. Although Old Moor Street admittedly is a commercial area, it does not
follow that every building previously used as a residence has changed its
character.

2\. In terms of s. 47 of Cap. 339 a house means 'an independent living unit
.... constructed mainly or solely for residential purposes and having a
separate access and through which unit access cannot be had to any other
living accommodation". Sub-sections 1 and 2 to section 47 set out 2
exceptions. Subsection 2 provides that the aforesaid definition shall not
include "a house used mainly or solely for a purpose other than a residential
purpose for an uninterrupted period of ten years prior to 1st March 1972." As
the predominant use to which these premises were put was as a residence for
the appellant and her family and continued to be so and were not premises
mainly or solely used for some other purpose, the provisions of sub-section 2
will not apply.

3\. Although the respondent complains that he was informed of the vesting
order only after it was made, the respondent had gone before the Board of
Review who sent the case back to the Commissioner who held an inquiry. There
was no material prejudice caused to the respondent and the matter was not
raised in the Court of Appeal. The respondent was not aggrieved by order of
Court of Appeal. (which quashed the vesting).

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_H. L de Silva, P. C. with N. H. Musafer for 3rd respondent-appellant._  
  
_A A. M. Marleen for petitioner-respondent_  
  
_W. S. Marsoof, Senior State Counsel with Mrs. Wanasundera, State Counsel for
1st and 2nd respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

**BANDARANAYAKE J.**

This appeal arises from a judgment of the Court of Appeal which dealt with an
application for a writ of certiorari and/or mandamus made to it by the
petitioner/respondent to quash a vesting order made by the Minister of Housing
on 27.7.76 under section 17 (1) of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law No. 1
of 1973\. The ground on which a writ to quash the vesting order

382

was sought was that the property in question was not premises in respect of
which a vesting order could have been made in that it was not a house or flat
or residential premises which could be vested under the said law but that this
property constituted 'business premises' situated in a commercial area in
which business was carried on and therefore not amenable to an order of
vesting by the Commissioner of National Housing.

The Court of Appeal as far back as 2.2.79 took the view that the premises were
not residential premises within the meaning of Law No. 1 of 1973 aforesaid and
allowed the application of the petitioner respondent and quashed the order
made by the Minister published in Government Gazette No. 223/10 of 8.10.1976
communicated by letter dated 30.11.76 and also directed the 1st and 2nd
respondents to divest the property. To arrive at this conclusion the Court of
Appeal observed that the premises have been licensed as a tea boutique. State
Counsel had also submitted that in the opinion of the Attorney General the
vesting was not in order in as much as the premises were business premises and
not residential premises.

An application for leave to appeal from the aforesaid order was made to the
Court of Appeal on 15.2.79. The application had been made by the 3rd
respondent/petitioner who died subsequently. The present petitioners were
substituted in the room of the deceased 3rd Respondent and the Court of
Appeal, treating the following as substantial questions of law, granted leave
to appeal to the Supreme Court, to wit : 1 (a) whether in respect of premises
which are in extent 3970 sq : ft : which are mainly used for residential
purposes, the use of two rooms in extent 290 sq : ft : as a tea kiosk has the
effect of converting the entirety of the premises into business premises for
the purpose of excluding the operation of law No. 1 of 1973 ; or whether,
notwithstanding such user, the premises continue as a "house' as defined in
law No. 1 of 1973; (b) whether in the face of the uncontradicted material
placed by the appellants, it was open to the Court of Appeal to come to a
finding that the premises, to wit: No : 104 Old Moor Street were not
residential premises as a ground for quashing the vesting order made by the
Minister of Housing and Construction and published in Gazette Extraordinary
No. 233 of B/10/76.

The Court of Appeal also granted leave on a further question whether the said
vesting order should be quashed by a writ of certiorari because it was made
pursuant to an enquiry held contrary to the principles of natural justice
and/or whether the owner was denied an opportunity to appeal against the
decision of the Commissioner of National Housing to the Board of Review.

383

Learned Presidents Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the said judgement
of the Court of Appeal dated 2/2/79 had been delivered without a proper
consideration of the applicable law. The question whether the premises in
question constituted a 'house' within the purview of the Ceiling on Housing
Property Law No. 1 of 1973 has to be determined with reference to the
definition in Section 47 of that law. There was, it was submitted, a mass of
evidence relevant to this matter but ignored by the Court of Appeal which
failure constituted a substantial error of law entitling the appellants to
have the judgment of the Court set aside and the Ministers vesting order
restored. Counsel pointed to the following facts in order to show that a
substantial part of the premises was used as a residence

(a) that the applicant has been living in these premises since 1930; the said
premises No. 104 Old Moor St: was assessed as a house from 1941 to 1952.
Certified extracts from the Colombo Municipal Council registers have been
produced in evidence as 31128 and 3R29 in support ;

(b) the tenant's (3rd Respondent) Mrs T. P. Mohommed's children and grand
children were born in this house. Birth certificates 3R6 to 3R13 support this
;

(c) that the tenant's family including her children and grand children
continue to live in this house. Householders lists for 1958, 1960, 1971 and
1973 - (ie) 3R-52, 53, 54, 55 have been produced in support ;

(d) Likewise, Electoral registers for the years 1952 and 1954 to 1973 marked
3R16 and 3R 17 to 27 have been tendered to prove residence ;

(e) that this house consists of 9 rooms 6 of which are bedrooms and a sitting
room, a kitchen and a bathroom. The entire premises take up an area of 3970
sq. ft. whereas the two front rooms which were used as a tea kiosk comprised
only 190 sq. ft.

(f) the said 2 front rooms were used as a tea kiosk and licensed as such with
a license fee of Rs. 25/- from the year 1951 to 1975. Vide register of
licenses 3R37 (1951 - 1973), 3R38 (1974-75) whilst the family lived in the
rest of the house. (These documents were objected to as having been filed
without the permission of Court). These 2 rooms were not licensed as a eating
house as suggested by the respondent. - (vide 3R39)

384

(g) that the Electricity Board charged power consumption to the whole premises
at the domestic rate ;

(h) there was also filed Plan 3R14 (of the premises) and suveyer's report 3R14
(a) made by K. Thirunamakarasu licensed surveyor on 1979/78 (documents
objected to for the aforesaid reasons). It was the submission of Mr. de Silva
that the evidence clearly showed that the premises comprised a house within
the definition as its dominant use was for the purpose of residence and not
business. The premises were thus validly vested after due enquiry.

It was contended on behalf of the respondents that the respondent had become
owner of the premises on Deed 3571 dated 18/9/73 attested by T. Chelvadurai
NP. An officer of the National Housing Department informed the respondent on
3/5/76 when respondent presented himself for an enquiry that since the
premises had been bought by the respondent over the head of the tenant the
premises will be vested in the Commissioner and sold to the tenant. That, it
was submitted was the reason for the vesting, and not upon evidence that these
were residential premises. The first time that plan 3R14 and report 3R 14 (a)
and the licencing register were put in evidence was before the Court (without
permission first had and obtained) and that these documents were not before
the Commissioner at time of making of decision to vest the premises as
aforesaid. The Commissioner did not go into the question whether these were
business premises or not. In any event the plan and suveyor's report were
prepared at the behest of the tenant and cannot be regarded as final and
conclusive evidence of the facts as the respondent has had no access to these
premises to inspect and contradict their accuracy. Again, 3R28-31 and 37 - 39
show that from 1953 to 1975, a period of 20 years prior to the coming into
force of the Ceiling on Housing property law, the premises have been used even
partially for a commercial purpose. The premises is situate in an area
declared a commercial area in the Pettah. As at present, the premises have
been divested as directed by the Court of Appeal in 1979.

It is observed that the Court of Appeal order dated 2.2.79 quashing the
vesting order has been made merely for the reason that State counsel has
submitted that he cannot support the vesting and the premises had been
licensed as a tea boutique and house and not

385

upon a consideration of all the available evidence, (eg:) that from 1941-51 it
had been described only as a house.

This brings me to the question as to what was the dominant character of the
premises at the relevant time. This aspect of the case has not been considered
by the Appeal Court at all. The documents 3R14 and 3R14 (a) which in the
circumstances ought to have been admitted in the interests of justice; clearly
show that only the two front rooms of a much larger house have been used as a
tea boutique probably due to economic necessity. The said plan and report are
thus supported by the Council registers, to wit; tea boutique and house. The
respondents could have sought the assistance of Court to verify the accuracy
of the plan and report. They have not chosen to do so. They have neither
objected to the admission of those documents or taken any other step. No
commission has been taken to prepare another plan. The affidavit and other
documents tendered to the Court such as householders lists etc : show that
there were several generations of this family living in these premises since
1930\. This family continues to live there. Six of the eight rooms were used
as living accommodation at the relevant time. The other two rooms were used as
a tea kiosk. There was also a living room, toilet and kitchen. Thus all the
attributes of residential premises existed at time of vesting. Although Old
Moor Street admittedly is a commercial area it does not follow that every
building previously used as a residence has changed its character.

The statutory definition of 'house' contained in section 17 of Cap. 339
describes it as " meaning an independent living unit...............
constructed mainly or solely for residential purposes, and having a separate
access and through which unit access cannot be had to any other living
accommodation. " An examination of the surveyors plan and report taken
together with the Appellants affidavit shows that these premises satisfies the
above definition in all respects. There are 2 exceptions provided by the law
to the said definition. Section 47 sub section (1) has no relevance to the
present issue. Sub section (2) stipulates that the aforesaid definition shall
not include " a house used mainly or solely for a purpose other' than a
residential purpose for an uninterrupted period of ten years prior to 1st
March 1972 ". Respondent's Counsel relied on this sub-section which is in the
nature of a proviso to section 47 and pointed to the Assessment register which
records the premises as tea boutique and house from

386

1952 to 1975 and submitted that as at least part of these premises had been
put to commercial use for over ten years prior to the relevant date it should
be considered as business premises to which the proviso applied and therefore
not amenable to an order of vesting in terms of section 17 (1).

I am satisfied on all the evidence that the predominant use to which these
premises were put was as residence for the appellant and her family and
continued to be so and was not premises mainly or solely used for some other
purpose so as to attract the provisions of sub-section (2) aforesaid. This
finding answers the first two questions posed by the Court of Appeal in 1991.
Section 47 (2) thus has no application to the facts of this case. It was not
open to the Court of Appeal to have come to a finding that these premises were
not residential premises.

That finding drawn from the primary evidence was perverse. Although the
respondent complains that he was informed of the vesting order only after it
was made, the respondent has gone before the Board of Review who sent the case
back to the Commissioner who held an anquiry. There has therefore been no
material prejudice caused to the respondent. Nor has the respondent raised
this matter in the Court of Appeal. The respondent was not aggrieved by the
order of the Court of Appeal. The third question raised by the Court of Appeal
must therefore be answered in the negative.

The appeal is allowed. The judgement of the Court of Appeal dated 2nd February
1979 is set aside. The direction given by that Court to the 1st and 2nd
respondents dated 2/2/79 to divest the property vested is set aside. As the
property has been divested since, the 1st and 2nd respondents are directed to
vest the property in the Commissioner of National Housing, the Petitioner-
Respondent will pay costs in both Courts.

**AMERASINGHE J. -** I agree.

  
**DHEERARATNE J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/18.html_  

