##  Gunaratne Vs. Translanka Investments Ltd. and Another - SLR - 1, Vol 2 of
1991 [1991] LKSC 18; (1991) 2 Sri LR 1 (23 October 1991)

**1**

**GUNARATNE**

**VS.**

**TRANSLANKA INVESTMENTS LTD. AND ANOTHER  
 **

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO J., AMERASINGHE J. AND GOONEWARDENA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 34/91,

C.A. NO. 45/91.

D.C. COLOMBO 14918/MB,

09 OCTOBER, 1991.



_Mortgage ‑ Sale in execution of hypothecary decree ‑ Material  Irregularity‑
Publication ‑ Civil Procedure Code S. 282 ‑ Refusal to issue notice ‑ Is
summary procedure mandatory?_

_ _

The appellant consented to judgment in a hypothecary suit on a mort­gage bond.
He was given the facility of paying the decreed sum in instal­ments but
defaulted. The property was sold in execution of the decree. The appellant
moved to have the sale set aside on the ground of material irregu­larity.



**Held:**

**  **

1.Section 282(2) of the Civil Procedure Code requires an applicant to not­ify
to Court the grounds and not the particulars or evidence of such grounds of
material irregularity.



2 Summary procedure is not mandatory.



3.Although ordinarily notice should have issued, here one of the prayers was
that the mortgaged property be sold after such publication as the aucti­oneer
considered adequate. The defendant had consented to judgment as prayed for.
The adequacy of the publication cannot be tested objectively in view of the
consent. Publication which the auctioneer considered adequate viewed
subjectively, meets the requirements.

**  2**

**  **

**Cases referred to:**

**  **

1. _Muttukumaraswamy v. Nannitamby_ (1904) 4 Tamb. Rep. 34 

2. _Pitche Bawa v. Meera Lebbe_ (1893) 2 Cey. LR 174 

3. _Re Abdul Azis_ (1895) 1 NLR 196, 199 

4. _Silva v. Selohamy_ (1923) 25 NLR 113



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_  
A.K. Premadasa P.C. _with _Ikram Mohamed_ and _C.E. de Silva_ for defendant ‑
appellant.



_Romesh de Silva P.C._ with _S.C.B. Walgampaya_ for plaintiff ‑ respondent.



_F.C. Perera_ with _S. Gurugalgoda_ and _Upali Ponnamperuma_ for 2nd
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

23 October, 1991.



**FERNANDO, J.**

**  **

The Plaintiff‑Respondent ("the Plaintiff") instituted this mortgage bond
action against the Defendant‑Appellant ("the Defendant") in 1983. It is not
denied that the Defendant resorted to various dilatory tactics; finally he
consented to judgement on 26.7.89; thereafter he failed to make payments in
terms of the decree, but succeeded in delaying the sale of the property until
19.1.91. On that day the property was sold for Rs. 2,050,000/‑ to the 2nd
Respondent ("the Purchaser"). On 15.2.91 the Appellant made an application
under section 282 of the Code to set aside the sale, alleging that the
property was worth Rs. 8 million, on the ground of a material irregularity in

### 3

publishing the sale: that the sale had. not been duly published, in that
adequate publicity had not been given, resulting in only two or three bidders
attending the sale. Several other grounds were also set out in the petition,
(that the auctioneer had not notified the date of sale to the Court, that the
perfected condi­tions of sale were neither stamped nor duly attested, that the
Purchaser had not paid the required deposit of 10% etc.) but it is common
ground that these were patently untenable, in the light of material already
before the Court.



When the Defendant moved that notice of the application be issued on the
Respondents, learned President's Counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that
notice could be issued only if the Court was satisfied that the facts alleged
in the petition estab­lished that there was a material irregularity in
publishing or conducting .the sale; he then referred in some detail to the
Defendant's dilatory tactics. The learned trial‑Judge refused to issue notice;
the Defendant filed applications for leave to appeal and for revision in the
Court of Appeal; notice was refused. The Defendant then appealed to this Court
with spe­cial leave.



Learned President's Counsel for the Defendant submitted that upon an
application being made under section 282, notice must be issued almost as of
right, or as a matter of course. He was forced to concede, however, that there
were situations in which the Court could legitimately conclude that there was
no merit whatever in the application, and refuse notice; for instance, where
the application involved a pure question of law which had been long settled,
or a question of fact dependent solely on matters already contained in the
record. He submit­ted that the adequacy of the publicity given was a question
of fact which could not be determined by reference to the docu­ments and other
material in the record.



Learned President's Counsel for the Plaintiff submitted that the Court had a
discretion under section 282 in regard to the

**4**

issue of notice, and that notice should not be issued unless the Court is
convinced that there had been a material irregularity and that substantial
injury had been caused. When it was pointed out that section 282(2) prohibited
the **setting aside** of a sale on the ground of irregularity unless the
applicant proved to the satisfaction of the Court that he has sustained
substan­tial injury, and that therefore there was no similar burden at the
time **notice** was sought, he submitted that the Court must be satisfied
_prima facie_ at that stage. His attention was drawn to section 377 which
required the Court to be so satisfied in applications by way of summary
procedure, whereupon he submitted that summary procedure applied to section
282 as well. The only authority he cited was _Muttukumaraswamy v. Nannitamby_
_(1)._ There the District Judge had proceeded under Chapter XXIV, and although
Middleton, J., inclined to the view that summary procedure applied, that was
_obiter,_ because he expressly stated that the form of the proceedings did not
affect the point for decision, namely that substantial injury had not been
proved. Section 8 of the Code makes summary procedure applicable where the
Code or other statute "spe­cially provides". Learned President's Counsel was
unable to draw our attention to any other decision either as to the
applicability of summary procedure to applications under sec­tion 282 or as to
the need for the trial Judge to be _prima facie_ satisfied that there had been
a material irregularity. He further submitted that the Defendant had filed
papers in the District Court on 9.1.91 in an abortive attempt to stay the sale
fixed for 19.1.91 on various grounds, but had not made this com­plaint of
inadequate publication: this, he said, indicated that the complaint lacked
merit. There was no other material in the Court record indicating the extent
of publication. The learned trial Judge was strongly influenced by this
omission and the undoubtedly dilatory tactics adopted by the Defendant, in
ref­using to issue notice.



Section 282(2) requires an applicant to notify to the Court the grounds, and
not the particulars or evidence of such  


### 5

  
grounds; it was therefore sufficient to state that adequate pub­licity had not
been given. If the Court was of the view that sufficient particulars had not
been given, a direction may well have been given to furnish such particulars;
the time limit of 30 days applies only to the notification of the grounds, and
not to furnishing particulars thereof. As to whether summary procedure
applies, in _Pitche Bawa v Meera Lebbe (2),_ the pur­chaser applied by way of
motion to confirm the sale (under section 283); this was allowed. On appeal it
was contended that the application should have been by petition by summary
procedure. Lawrie;‑J., held‑ that application by motion was permissible, but
thought it would have been better by sum­mary procedure. Withers, J., however,
considered the proce­dure to be correct and that summary procedure was
approp­riate only in cases expressly provided for by the Code (a view which he
re‑iterated in _Re Abdul Azis_ _(3)._ Thus in regard to section 283 summary
procedure is not mandatory. Further, section 284 expressly provides for "a
petition on summary procedure", and it must be presumed that the omission of
this requirement in section 282 was deliberate. I therefore cannot accede to
the proposition that this is mandatory for section 282. There is, in my view,
sufficient compliance where the peti­tion states the particular ground
constituting a "material irregularity". A statement of the facts and
circumstances (unlike section 374(d), is not required, nor does. the Court
have to be satisfied that the material facts are prima facie estab­lished
(unlike section 377), though it may call for further par­ticulars. The Court
is not required to make an order nisi or an interlocutory order, but only to
issue notice. Even in applica­tions of summary procedure, the Court has a
discretion under section 376 to direct or permit the Petitioner to adduce oral
evidence. I must mention also _Silva v Selohamy,_ (4), where it was held that
summary procedure was applicable under section 276 ‑ which merely provided
that "no irregularity in publish­ing or conducting the sale of movable
property shall vitiate the sale unless substantial damage has been caused to
the person impeaching the sale thereby". Schneider, J., observed that it



**6**



was not the policy of the Code to throw out applications for relief on account
of defects in pleadings, and if the trial Judge thought that particulars
should have been furnished, it was his duty to direct that particulars be
submitted.



The reasons given by the learned trial Judge thus do not justify a summary
rejection of the Defendant's application, and I Would have been inclined to
direct him to issue notice and to hear and determine the application on its
merits. How­ever, learned Counsel for the Purchaser has drawn our atten­tion
to the following, which were matters of record; one prayer in the plaint was
that the mortgaged property be sold after such publication as the auctioneer
considered adequate; the Defendant consented to judgement as prayed for; the
decree included the identical provision as to publication. Accordingly, the
only grounds of complaint legitimately available to the Defendant were either
that there was no publication or that the publication was less than that which
the auctioneer (sub­jectively) considered adequate. Admittedly, some publicity
was given, and the Defendant's only complaint was that, objec­tively, it was
not adequate. That is a different ground alto­gether on which, by reason of
the consent decree, the Defend­ant was not entitled to rely. The issue of
notice would therefore have been futile, for even if the Defendant proved that
tire had been inadequate publicity, the sale could not have been set aside in
view of the express provision in the consent decree; and as he had not duly
notified the ground that there had not been such publicity as the auctioneer
consi­dered ‑adequate, he could not have been allowed to prove that ground.



I therefore dismiss the appeal. The 2nd Respondent (Purchaser) will be
entitled to costs in this Court in a sum of Rs. 5,000/‑ payable by the
Defendant‑Appellant.



**AMERASINGHE, J** ‑ I agree.



**GOONEWARDENE, J** ‑ I agree.



**_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/18.html_  

