##  Weerasinghe v. Chandananda De Silva, Commissioner of Elections and Others
- SLR - 76, Vol 1 of 1992 [1990] LKSC 18; (1992) 1 Sri LR 76 (10 September
1990)

**76**

**WEERASINGHE** **  
v.** **  
CHANDANANDA DE SILVA, COMMISSIONER OF ELECTIONS  
AND OTHERS **

SUPREME COURT  
H. A. G. DE SILVA,  
J. BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
KULATUNGA, J.  
S.C. ELECTION PETITION  
APPEAL NO. 1/89  
30 MAY, 26 JUNE, 23 AND 24 JULY 1990

_     Election petition - Preliminary objection - Proportional representation
- Distribution of seats to Digamadulla Electorate and election of successful
candidate of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party \- Preference votes - Manner of
voting and marking preference votes - Rejection of votes - Recount and
scrutiny - Inspection of preference votes and relevant Sheets/Statements -
Recount of preference votes cast - Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981,
S. 63(2) - Constitution of 1978, Article 99 - 14th Amendment to the
Constitution - Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Act, No. 15 of 1988, Third
Schedule and Ss.37(1), 29(1)(f), 39(1), 47(2), 51, 53(1)(b) and (c), 57(7),
57(9), 60(1), 63(2), 92(1)(b), 112 - 98(c) - Concise statement of material
facts - Official acts._

Porportional representation of the people in Parliament was introduced to the
electoral process by the Constitution of 1978. Article 99 provided for
proportional representation with a single list of candidates from a party or
independent group. Election to the House was to be in order of priority of the
names set out in the nomination papers. The 14th Amendment to the Constitution
replaced Article 99 which, whilst retaining the concept of proportional
representation by a party or

77

independent group, introduced the voter's choice in respect of a candidate of
a particular party or independent group, by a preference vote. The
Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Act No. 15 of 1988 provided the mechanism
in the electoral process for effecting proportional representation in
Parliament. The third Schedule to that Act was accordingly amended to enable a
voter to express his preference to the choice of a candidate. The third
Schedule gives directions for the guidance of a voter in voting more
specifically in accordance with sections 37(1), 39(1) and 53(1)(b) and (c).
For example every voter had one vote which he could give to a recognized
political party or to an independent group. The manner of voting was by
marking the ballot paper with an 'X' on the right hand side of the ballot
paper opposite the name and symbol of the recognised party or independent
group of his choice and also indicating his preferences for not more than
three candidates from among the candidates nominated by such recognised party
or group by placing an `X' mark again on the cage enclosing the serial number
corresponding to the number assigned to each candidate of his preference.

The petitioner-appellant and the 32nd respondent were candidates in the
S.L.F.P. candidate list. The petitioner-appellant had been assigned the serial
number 9. In the distribution of seats based on the votes polled by the party
or group, the S.L.FP won one seat of six seats of Electoral District No. 13 -
Digamadulla. The 32nd respondent having polled the highest number of votes
from among the S.L.F.P. candidates was declared elected to that seat. The
petitioner-appellant was behind him by 76 preference votes. The petitioner-
appellant alleged a miscount in that 642 preference votes cast for him had not
been brought into the Court on the ground that the cross "X" mark had been
placed outside the cage containing the numeral 9 assigned to him. Further in
counting centres 13 and 15 about 1,000 preference votes over and above the
preference votes secured by the 32nd respondent had been recorded in the
analysis sheet as have been secured by the 32nd respondent. The petitioner-
appellant therefore wants a recount and the election of 32nd respondent set
aside. This was done by the 47th respondent with the help of several counting
officers.

**Held**

(1) When marking his preference for a candidate or candidates, the voter is
required to place his mark **" on the cage **enclosing the serial number
corresponding to the serial number assigned to each candidate". This direction
by its very nature is mandatory. Section 39(1) which states that the voter
shall secretly mark the ballot paper **as near as may be** in accordance with
the directions can only mean one thing that when a voter is marking his
preference for a candidate the cross must be placed substantially **on the
cage enclosing the serial number** as there is no other way when several caged
serial numbers are packed one next to the other, of indicating with reasonable
certainty a

78

preference for a particular cage. It is to bring a substantial degree of
certainty into the voting process that the 3rd Schedule in formulating
directions has made this difference as to where the mark should be placed in
two situations; of voting for a party or group and later expressing a
preference for a 'particular individual of that party or group. Where the mark
is placed in an open area to the right of the number it makes the vote quite
uncertain and such a vote should be rejected as void and not taken into
account.

(2) Kulatunga, J. (dissenting):

(a) The decision of the Election Judge refusing inspection when it is stated
specifically that the voter marked his cross completely outside the cage
enclosing the serial numbers of candidates, his intention is not at all clear
is correct.

(b) Section 29(1) (f) enables the returning officer to do such acts and things
as may be necessary for effectively conducting the election. Section 51
provides for political parties and groups to appoint counting agents to attend
on the counting of votes. As a preliminary, the counting officer in the
presence of the counting agents has to show the ballot paper account to them.
He has to open each ballot box and count the ballots inside each box in the
presence of the agents. There is no prohibition against a counting agent
taking his own notes. Whilst counting, ballot papers have to be placed upwards
(enabling agents to observe them and make their own notes if necessary).
Again, in deciding whether to allow a ballot paper to be taken to the count or
rejected, the counting officer is required to show it to the counting agents
and hear their views before taking a decision. A necessary concomitant would
be the counting agent can make his observation or objection to any particular
vote being counted in any particular way and those objections or observations
have to be recorded by the counting officer. Thus in practice, the counting
officer must necessarily keep a journal which reflects the events of the day,
observations and objections taken (unless not recorded of consent) in the
process of the count. The counting agent is not a helpless passive spectator
merely gazing at ballot papers.

It is no argument, in seeking to excuse failure on the part of an agent to ask
for a recount to say that it would not have served any purpose. The complaint
is one of falsely adding votes to someone not entitled to them. Such a vote
can be checked and properly counted at a recount. If the statement contained
inflated figures the counting agent could have protested and brought it to the
notice of the Returning Officer.

The petitioner in the first instance asks for an inspection. Before the Court
moves there must be credible material before it. The particulars agitated by
the petitioner by his affidavit contain only bare allegations of misconduct by
officials assisting in the conduct of the election. Allegations alone are not
sufficient to

79

satisfy a Court that its jurisdiction ought to be exercised. The petitioner
has not claimed in his affidavit that he requested those responsible for the
Court to record his objections to the Court. The conduct of the petitioner or
his agents in not making any contemporaneous recorded protest on the alleged
misconduct deprives the petitioner and his supporting affidavit of reliability
on the fact of the complaint. Nor is there a complaint of bias against the
petitioner or in favour of the 32nd respondent. No acceptable factual
circumstances are before the Court to suggest that official acts were not
properly done at this election. No interim order for inspection could
therefore be made in the first instance.

(c) The Court has the power to dismiss an election petition in limine if there
was a failure to comply with a mandatory provision. Just as much as the public
have an interest in the election petition there is also the principle that the
election of a candidate should not be lightly interfered with.

(d) Section 98(c) requires a petition to contain "a concise statement of
material acts on which the petitioner relies. But the petitioner has failed to
place such material facts before the Election Judge in his petition for
relief. In the circumstances the Election Judge was correct in refusing
inspection and dismissing the petition in limine.

**Cases referred to:**

_(1) Woodward v. Sarsons and Sadler (1875) LR 10 CP 733, 747 (CA).  
_  
_(2) Pontdarwe (1907) 2 K.B. 313.  
_  
_(3) Kaleel v. Themis 57 N.L.R. 396, 399, 402, 405.  
_  
_(4) Rajapakse v. Kadirgamanathan 68 N.L.R. 14.  
_  
_(5) West Bromwick (1911) 60 0' M & H 257.  
_  
_(6) Bandaranaike v. Premadasa (1989) 1 Sri L.R.  
_  
_(7) Samar Singh v Kedar Nath 1957 S.C.C. 663.  
_  
_(8) Arthur Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi 1986 S.C.C. 313.  
_  
_(9) Kuruppu v. Hettiaratchy 49 N.L.R. 201._

**APPEAL** under Section 102 of the Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981
read with Article 130(b) of the Constitution.

_Faiz Mustapha, P.C. with Manohara de Silva, M. S. M. Suhaid and G. Jayakody
for appellant.  
_  
_Asoka de Silva, D.S.G. with Kumar Arulananda SC. for 1st and 2nd
respondents._

80

_E D. Wickramanayake with Javid Usuf for 32nd respondent._

_Cur adv vult._

10th September, 1990.  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

This appeal is from the Judgment of the Election Judge dismissing a petition
filed by the appellant in limine upon preliminary objections taken by the
respondents to the hearing of the petition. The petition related to the
results of the Parliamentary Election held on 15.2.89 - Electoral District
Digamadulla. The petitioner claims the right to have been returned or elected
at the said election and was one of nine (9) candidates nominated by the Sri
Lanka Freedom Party to contest the election. There were six seats and on the
party votes the distribution of seats was as follows: (a) U.N.P. - 3 seats,
(b) S.L.F.P. - 1 seat, (c) T.U.L.F. - 1 seat and (d) S.L.M.C. - 1 seat. The
appellant is not challenging the distribution of seats among the respective
parties or the election of the candidates save and except the election of the
32nd respondent who was himself amongst the candidates contesting from the Sri
Lanka Freedom Party.

The appellant challenges the election of the 32nd respondent who was declared
to have secured 21,751 preference votes against the appellant who was declared
to have secured 21,675 preference votes, the majority being 76 preference
votes, on the ground that the 32nd respondent's election was undue and seeks
the avoidance of the said election and a declaration that the appellant was
duly elected.

Two grounds were urged on behalf of the appellant that:

(i) 642 preference votes in fact obtained by the petitioner appellant were not
brought into account on the ground that the cross (X) indicating the
preference, had been placed outside the cage containing the numeral (9) in a
blank area near the said cage (9), which was the number assigned to the
appellant. The appellant further alleged that preferences indicated in a
similar manner outside the cage containing a numeral had been counted for the
11th respondent;

81

(ii) in counting centres (13) and (15) about 1000 preferences over and above
the preferences actually secured by the 32nd respondent had been recorded in
the analysis sheet as having been secured by the 32nd respondent. It was
alleged that this was done by the 47th respondent in collaboration with other
counting officers at the two counting centres despite the verbal protest of
the appellant.

Thus upon the foregoing, the appellant sought the following reliefs:

(a) a declaration that the election of the 32nd respondent was undue;

(b) a declaration that the appellant was duly elected.

Additionally, the appellant sought the following reliefs:

(a) an order for inspection in terms of s.63(2) of the Parliamentary Elections
-Act No.1 of 1981 permitting inspection of the preference votes of the SLFP
candidates and inspection of the relevant analysis Sheets/Statements of
preferences and counting of same; and,

(b) A security or recount of the preference votes of the SLFP candidates.

Proportional representation of the people in Parliament was introduced to the
electoral process by the Republican Constitution of 1978\. Article 99 provided
for proportional representation with a single list of candidates from a part
or independent group. Election to the House was to be in order of priority of
the names set out in the nomination papers. The 14th Amendment to the
Constitution replaced Article 99 which, whilst retaining the concept of
proportional representation by a party or independent group introduced the
voter's choice in respect of a candidate of a particular party or independent
group, by a preference vote. The Parliamentary Elections (Amendment) Act No.
15 of 1988 provided the mechanisms in the electoral process for effecting
proportional representation in

82

 Parliament. The Third Schedule to that Act was accordingly amended to enable
a voter to express his preference in the choice of a candidate. The Third
Schedule gives directions for the guidance of a voter in voting. These
directions in fact spell out the provisions contained in Act No. 1 of 1981
dealing with the poll and the counting of votes and the declaration of results
contained in Parts 3 and 4 of the enactment. More specifically, the Third
Schedule contains directions in accordance with the provisions of s.37(1),
s.39(1) and s.53(1) (b) and (c). For example, that every voter shall have one
vote which he may give to a recognised political party or independent group
and the manner in which he should mark the ballot paper; (i.e.) by placing a
cross (thus `X') on the right hand side of the ballot paper opposite the name
and symbol of the recognised political party or group for which he votes; he
may then indicate his preferences for not more than 3 candidates from among
the candidates nominated by such recognised political party or independent
group by placing a cross (thus 'X') at the bottom of the ballot paper **on the
cage** enclosing the serial number corresponding to the serial number assigned
to each candidate; then fold it so as to show the official mark on the reverse
to the presiding officer and place the paper in the Ballot Box and quit the
polling station. Those directions also. set out the circumstances under which
a ballot paper should be declared void and not counted.

In respect of the first ground on which avoidance was sought (viz.) that 642
preference votes obtained by the appellant were not brought into the count for
reasons given, it has been submitted on behalf of the appellant that even
where a voter has placed a mark such as an 'X' completely outside the cage,
still, in order to ascertain the voter's intention there must be an inspection
of that ballot paper without which it is not possible for a Court to declare
that a mark placed outside the cage cannot be counted. It was urged, that the
election Judge's finding that upon the averments in the petition itself that
the mark was placed outside the cage his intention is not clear and such votes
were rightly rejected for uncertainty, is wrong in law. It was submitted that
even when a cross (X) is marked completely outside a cage in an open area of
the ballot paper, still it could be taken into the count provided the
intention of the voter to cast his vote for a particular person was clear.
Directions to voters contained in the Third Schedule were merely directory.
Section 39(1) only requires a

ballot paper to be marked as near as may be in accordance with the directions.
In support of his contentions Counsel cited the following:

(1) Woodward v. Sarsons and Sadler (CA)(1)

"...votes marked outside the cage and in some instances by a line or mark
other than a cross were held valid since upon a visual examination of the vote
the Court was of the view there was a sufficient indication of the candidate".
Referring to the corresponding provisions of the Ballot Act the Court held
that the manner of voting was directory by that substantial compliance was
necessary.

(2) Pontdarwe (2)

Held that a mark placed outside the ruled compartment was a valid vote
provided that the mark is in such a position opposite the name of the
candidate as to leave no doubt.

(3) **Law and Practice of Election Petitions by Pandit Nanak Chand** , pp.
231-234.

It would be convenient to deal with this first ground of avoidance at this
stage (i.e.) that the Election Judge was wrong in determining that where a
voter has placed a mark completely outside the cage, **that itself** indicated
that that vote could not be counted in favour of the petitioner because the
voter's intention in such a situation was not clear and was properly rejected.

The English Law provided rules and forms for the conduct of elections. The
principles found in those rules were embodied into the law of Ceylon in the
course of the franchise being made available to the citizens of Ceylon. Non-
observance or non-compliance with them may have led to voidance of the
election as being contrary to the principle of an election by ballot. We see
therefore prior to the 1978 Constitution, a great similarity between the rules
of the English Law and the Sri Lankan Law in regard to how a voter should cast
his ballot. The 1978 Constitution brought a change in the mode of
representation of the people in Parliament. As already mentioned, at

84

 first the concept of representation in Parliament being made proportional to
the number of votes cast for a political party or independent group in an
electoral district as distinct from the earlier process of a candidate being
directly elected to a seat in Parliament by direct vote in a constituency was
introduced. This meant that the nuts and bolts process of indicating a voter's
choice of party or group did not need to depart from the earlier established
process of indicating a vote for an individual. Thus we see a similarity in
the directions given as to how to vote - a similarity between the English Law
and the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946 and the 3rd
Schedule to Act 1 of 1981 as it first stood spelling out the process of
election to Parliament in conformity with Chapter XIV of the Constitution . .
. "A voter shall place a cross on the right hand side of the ballot paper
opposite the name and symbol of the recognised political party or independent
group . . ." This is what had obtained under, the earlier Law in Sri Lanka.

Form 'C' of the 1981 Act giving the form of the front of the ballot paper
shows each political party and symbol listed in separate compartments shown by
ruled lines, each such compartment placed one below the other. In this
situation the mark is required to be placed on the right hand side opposite
the name and symbol shown. In this way when a mark is placed in line with any
one of the compartments containing names of parties and symbols or on the name
or on the symbol one can envisage that the voter's intention has been
sufficiently clearly expressed. That is what has happened in the English cases
cited as can be gleaned from the body of the judgments in these cases, to wit:
in the case of Woodward v. Sarsons (supra) at p. 747. - Schedule 2 "Form of
Ballot Paper" . . . the voter shall place a cross on the right hand side
opposite the name of each candidate for whom he votes thus . . ." It is seen
that the English rule is almost identical with our rule as was contained in
s.42(7) and the 2nd Schedule .to the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in
Council 1946 and followed in the 3rd Schedule to Act No. 1 of 1981. But we are
dealing here with another situation, namely, indicating the voter's preference
for a candidate or candidates of his choice of the same political party or
group for whom he has voted up to a limit of three brought in by the 14th
Amendment to the 1978 Constitution. Such a process is not available

85

in England. The directions given in the 3rd Schedule as amended by Act No. 15
of 1988 in respect of marking the preference for a candidate or candidates
upto a maximum of three is different to the directions given for marking the
voter's preference for apolitical party or independent group. The difference
is this - that when marking the preference for a candidate or candidates the
voter is required to place his mark " **on the cage** enclosing the serial
number corresponding to the serial number assigned to each candidate". **This
direction by its very nature is mandatory**. He is not permitted to place his
mark beside a number in an open space on a side of the ballot paper for the
obvious reason that that would lead to vagueness and uncertainty. The number
of candidates taken together may be very large (in the instant case 36) and
they are given serial numbers and those serial numbers are placed individually
in cages in numerical order, for example from 1 - 50. Form 'C' shows that the
number 1 - 50 are contained in 50 cages, there being 10 such cages on each
line and we have five lines one below the other each line containing 10
numbers in 10 cages. In such a situation the direction requires a mark to be
placed **on the cage** enclosing the serial number and it is apparent that
that had been intended to bring about a substantial degree of certainty in
indicating the voter's choice. Section 39(1) which was relied upon by Counsel
for the appellant and which states that the voter shall secretly mark the
ballot paper as near as may be in accordance with the directions can only mean
one thing in this context: that when a voter is marking his preference for a
candidate that cross must be placed **substantially on the cage enclosing the
serial number** as there is no other way when several caged serial numbers are
packed one next the other of indicating with reasonable certainty a preference
for a particular cage. It is to bring a substantial degree of certainty into
the voting process that the 3rd Schedule in formulating directions has made
this difference as to where the mark should be placed in the two situations;
of voting for a party or group and later expressing a preference for a
particular individual of that party or group. For these reasons the English
cases cited have no relevance and could be distinguished. The appellant has in
his petition before the Election Judge marked as 'P1' a specimen of a ballot
paper and the petitioner had contended that marking a cross (X) to the right
hand side of caged serial number (9) in an open area in the manner
demonstrated by him indicates that the

86

voter intended to vote for number (9). There are in fact 8 other numbers from
No. 1 to No. 8 in eight cages on the same line. My own observation in regard
to 'P1' and the mark placed by petitioner's Counsel to the right of number 9
in an open area is that that mark placed in that manner makes that vote quite
uncertain and such a vote should be rejected as void and not taken into
account. The directions as to the manner in which a voter should mark his
preference of a candidate or candidates as contained in the 3rd Schedule
appears to me to set out a uniform principle so as to make certain to the
officers engaged in conducting a poll the intention of the elector. This Court
has to interpret the provisions of the statute so as to bring about
substantial certainty to the process of determining the elector's choice.
Learned Counsel for the 32nd respondent has submitted that the illustration
contained in 'P1' submitted on behalf of the appellant is a clear argument
that a counting officer would be right in rejecting such a vote for
uncertainty. I am inclined to agree with this submission.

For the above reasons I hold that the decision of the Election Judge refusing
inspection when it is stated specifically that the voter marked his cross
completely outside the cages enclosing the serial numbers of candidates his
intention is not at all clear is correct. Such a vote should be rightly
rejected for uncertainty and I uphold the decision of the Election Judge on
this point.

I now turn to the second ground relied upon by the appellant to strike down
the election of the 32nd respondent (i.e.) that in counting centres Nos. 13
and 15 about 1000 preferences in excess of what the 32nd respondent actually
secured has been recorded in the analysis sheet as having been secured by the
32nd respondent by or at the instance of the 47th respondent in collaboration
with other counting officers at these two counting centres. The honesty and
integrity of those responsible for counting the votes are challenged.

It raises the disquieting prospect of officers appointed counting officers
under and by virtue of the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981 and
chosen by the Returning Officer and entrusted with the responsibility of the
proper counting of votes at counting centres and officers appointed as
assistants and clerks and other officers under the aforesaid law to assist
such counting officers, have at two centers

87

of this Electoral District, whilst being engaged in the conduct of a
Parliamentary General Election and whilst exercising statutory powers and
duties in terms of the electoral laws of this country, conspired together to
conduct this election in an unlawful manner to the detriment of the
petitioner. This is a serious allegation made against officers performing
official acts who in ordinary circumstances may be presumed to have performed
such official acts regularly.

One's attention is drawn to passages in the judgment of the Election Court in
the case of _Kaleel v. Themis_ (3). There the Election Judge refers to an
example given by the Acting Solicitor-General in the course of argument at the
hearing \- quote - "The acting S. G. gave as an instance a case in which a
petitioner **satisfies the Court** (the emphasis is mine) that a number of
counting assistants, by reason of their association with the candidate who was
returned, were so biased against the petitioner that they purposely counted
the votes cast for the petitioner in favour of his opponent". What Mr.
Tiruchelvan imagined may happen the petitioner in the instant case says
happened. This example, coupled with a narrow margin (as in the instant case)
was considered by that Court (obiter) to suffice to order a recount.

In the petition and affidavit filed by the petitioner he states that at
counting centre No. 13 he saw:

(i) the 47th respondent incorrectly recording preferences for the 32nd
respondent;

(ii) specifically witnessed the 47th respondent recording preferences over and
above the actual preferences received by the 32nd respondent;

(iii) the 47th respondent committed these irregularities with the help of
several counting officers whose identities are unknown to the petitioner;

(iv) that the 47th respondent was a counting officer assigned to counting
centre No. 15 and not to 13;

88

(v) the petitioner reported these irregularities to the person in charge of
centre No.13 but that person did not take any step in that regard; The
petitioner continued to complain and protest and eventually the 47th
respondent left that counting centre;

(vi) thereafter the petitioner received information that the 47th respondent
was committing the same irregularities at counting centre No.15;

(vii) the petitioner immediately visited counting centre No.15 with his agents
and saw the 47th respondent recording preferences over and above the
preferences actually received by the 32nd respondent. Here too the 47th
respondent was assisted in committing the irregularities by several officers
whose identities were unknown to him;

(viii) although he immediately reported the irregularities to the officer-in-
charge of counting centre No.15 that officer took no notice;

(ix) the petitioner states that altogether he saw the 47th respondent
recording more than 1000 preferences for the 32nd respondent which the 32nd
respondent was not entitled to. These preferences over and above the actual
member received by the 32nd respondent were recorded at counting centres No.
13 and 15;

(x) the petitioner reported these irregularities to the Returning Officer who
did nothing;

(xi) in consequence of these incorrect entries in the analysis sheet/statement
of preferences the petitioner states he was materially prejudiced and the
result of the election materially affected.

It was the submission of the appellant's counsel that the above material
affirmed to by the petitioner in his affidavit constituted material facts as
required by s.98(c) sufficient to move the Election

89

Court to proceed to take steps to inspect the votes under the powers contained
in s.63(2) of the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981. The position of
Counsel for the appellant was that the affidavit of the petitioner provided
sufficient requisite facts that the Election Court needed to order an
inspection and that it was not necessary for the petitioner to have appended
to his petition copies of the ballot paper account prepared by the presiding
officer in terms of s.47(2) or a copy of the statement of the number of
preferences indicated for a candidate in terms of s.53(7) (the absence of
which documents was the subject of adverse comment by Counsel for Respondents)
as those documents would not contain material that would bear out the conduct
of the officials now complained of. Counsel submitted that the present law
provided for avoidance of an election on an election petition for non-
compliance with the provisions of the Act if it appears to the satisfaction of
the Election Judge that the election was not conducted in accordance with the
principles laid down in the Act - vide s.92(1)(b) - and that therefore the
Court could have the power to order an inspection and a recount.

In his original petition the petitioner prayed for a recount and/or scrutiny
of the preference votes indicated by voters for the candidates of the Sri
Lanka Freedom Party amongst other reliefs sought. In the argument before this
Court appellant's Counsel restricted his prayer for a recount and not for a
scrutiny in terms of s.110. Counsel argued that:

(1) s. 53(9) and s.112 of the Act did not stand in the way of the Court
ordering a recount. The provisions of s. 53(9) preventing the decision of a
counting officer in regard to a ballot paper being questioned, it was
submitted, was only a fidelity clause to be applied during the progress of the
actual count in order to prevent the disruption of the counting process, but
did not prevent a Court upon a petition from deciding whether there has been a
miscount; and that the finality clause in s.112 preventing the decision of a
counting officer rejecting a vote from being questioned was referable only to
a rejection of the entire ballot paper but did not contemplate the new
situation created by the amending Act No. 15 of 1988 which also permitted a
voter's choice of candidate to be indicated on the ballot paper. Therefore it
was submitted s.112 did not operate as a finality

90

clause to prevent a voter's preference indicated on the ballot paper from
being examined by the Court.

(ii) a. That the provisions of s.92(1) (b) were wide enough to avoid the
election of candidates on preference votes if that process of counting
preference votes was not conducted in accordance with the principles of the
Act which occurrence would have materially affected the result;

(ii) b. that the petitioner has claimed a declaration that the election of the
32nd respondent was undue;

(ii) c. that in order to ascertain if the election of the 32nd respondent was
undue consequent to the misconduct of counting officers the Court has the
power to order a recount even though specific provisions for such a step have
not been enacted in Part VII of the Act.

Learned Counsel for the respondents on the other hand submitted that a recount
was not possible at the election petition stage as the Act only provides for
recounts at the time of counting and that a recount in any event was a mere
mechanical process which would not assist the Court in deciding the issues
raised. Counsel for the respondents also argued that there is no provision in
the Act to make a declaration that an election is partially void. Counsel
submitted that s.92(1) was concerned with the avoidance of an election in
respect of an entire electoral district whereas the petitioner confines the
reliefs he seeks to setting aside the election of an individual member only.

It was held in the case of _Rajapaksa v. Kadirgamanathan_ (4) that a recount
is ordered where there has been **no count according to law**. That case went
on to distinguish between a "recount" and a "scrutiny". If in fact more than
1000 votes were dishonestly added to the total votes cast for the 32nd
respondent by a counting officer then the declared result of the election of
the 32nd respondent would be undue. In my view the Court has inherent power to
order a recount so as to give effect to the principles of the Act which is an
overriding consideration. Natural justice demands the intervention of the
Court and its principles will be called in aid. The provisions of s.53(9) are

91

inapplicable as that Section applies to an ongoing count only. The provisions
of s.112 are not relevant in the instant case as the rejection of ballot
papers by a counting officer has not been brought into question in the second
ground urged for avoidance. Upon such count, if it is shown that the
petitioner has in fact obtained a majority over the 32nd respondent, then the
Court is obliged to deal with it and give the provisions of s.92(1) which has
remained unamended in the face of the introduction of a voter's choice of
candidate a purposeful interpretation in accordance with the policy of the
legislature in enacting the amended sections 53(7), 55(b) and 60(1) of Act No.
15 of 1988. The justice of the common law will supply the omission of the
statute. Thus on principle I take the view that -

(i) an order for a recount is one that is permissible and can be made by an
Election Court in appropriate circumstances, and,

(ii) the Court has the power to declare that the return of the 32nd respondent
was undue and that the petitioner was duly elected and ought to have been
returned.

The petitioner-appellant as an interim step has prayed for an inspection of
the votes as a prelude to a recount.

It is pertinent therefore to examine the machinery set up under the Act to
give effect to its aims. The Commissioner of Elections, appointed in terms of
Article 103 of the Constitution, appoints returning officers by notice in the
Gazette for each electoral district and persons to assist the returning
officers in the performance of their duties - vide s.6 of the Act. In practice
these assisting officers are appointed counting officers by the returning
officer to be in charge of the counting of votes at counting centres - vide
Article 49. Again s.29(1) permits facilities to be provided for the purposes
of an election in an electoral district. Section 29(1) (f) enables the
returning officer to do "much acts and things as may be necessary for
effectively conducting the election". Part IV of the Act makes provision for
the counting of votes. Section 51 provides for political parties and groups to
appoint counting agents **to attend on** the counting of votes. Notice in
writing stating names and addresses of persons so appointed shall be submitted
to the counting officer

92

 before the count commences. Any person whose name has not been so submitted
has no right of admission to the counting centre. Section 52 deals with the
count. As a preliminary the counting officer in the presence of the counting
agents has to show the ballot paper account to them which contains all those
matters enumerated in form 'k'. He has to open each ballot box, and count the
ballots inside each box in the presence of the agents. There is no prohibition
preventing (forbidding) a counting agent from taking down their own notes.
Whilst counting, ballot papers have to be placed upwards (enabling agents to
observe them and make their own notes if necessary).

The above duties cast on the returning officer thus opens the count to the
scrutiny of interested persons from its very inception. Again, in deciding
whether to allow a ballot paper to be taken to the count or rejected, the
counting officer is required to show it to the counting agents and hear their
views - vide x. 53(3) and (4) before taking a decision. A necessary
concomitant to all these provisions would be that the counting agent can make
his observation or objection to any particular vote being counted in any
particular way and that those objections or observations be recorded by the
counting officer. Thus in practice the counting officer must necessarily keep
a journal (may be on loose leaves in a file cover or in a register) which
reflects the events of the -day, observations made and objections taken
(unless not recorded of consent) in the process of the count. It is only
reasonable to infer therefore that the counting agent is not a helpless
passive spectator merely gazing at ballot papers. He has a role to play; he
represents the candidate contesting the election and he is there to ensure as
far as possible a proper and fair election to the satisfaction of candidates.
If he is dissatisfied with any matter he has a clear duty to point it out and
have an objection or opinion recorded and he has the right to report the
matter to a higher authority if still dissatisfied and that too recorded. Thus
there appears to be a clear duty on his part to take an objection and have it
journalised it anything improper is done during the count.

It is no argument, in seeking to excuse failure on the part of an agent to ask
for a recount to say that it would not have served any purpose and that it
would not have helped the petitioner as a

93

recount is a **mere mechanical process**. It was held to be so in _Kaleel v.
Themis_ (3) in view of the provisions of s.49(5) of the old law (Parliamentary
Elections Order in Council, Cap. 381) (s.112 of the present law) that the
decision of the Returning Officer as to whether or not a ballot paper **shall
be rejected** shall be final. But we are not concerned with such a situation
here. The complaint is one of falsely adding votes to someone not entitled to
them. Such a vote can be checked and properly counted at a recount. So one
asks the question: What is this process of counting in the presence of and
under the gaze of counting agents? Is it not to ensure that everybody present
has the opportunity of seeing each ballot paper and ensuring that it is added
to those votes cast for that particular party or person participating in the
contest so as to procure a proper result. Thus if a vote has been improperly
counted, that can be pointed out and corrected or objection recorded. Such a
record (and if the averments in this case are true) over a thousand such
objections contemporaneously taken would be recorded in the journal if not
corrected. Such a fact placed before the Court could be regarded as a material
fact for the consideration of the Court. Again, another opportunity is given
to a counting agent to raise an objection or express an opinion in a s.53(7)
situation \- (ie) to object to the information given in the written statement
of the counting officer communicated to the Returning Officer giving the
number of preference votes given to each candidate. The counting agent can
sign that statement as a witness and copy it. Thus, if the statement contains
inflated figures the counting agent could have protected and brought it to the
notice of the Returning Officer. Further provision is made by s.60(1)
permitting a counting agent to inspect the seals of the package containing the
said written statement under s.53(7) to ensure that nothing but the statement
witnessed by him is forwarded to the returning officer. Sealing would also be
done in the presence of the counting agent. So we have at several stages of
the count an election agent playing the role of the private eye scrutinizing
the conduct of the count. These provisions provide the means to obtain
agreement or acceptance of the count. A duty is cast on the counting officer
to permit counting agents' access to what is being done. Counting agents are
given an opportunity to witness the votes being counted, compare the official
figures with their own figures and have any grievance recorded and heard
before the declaration of results.

94

In the instant case however even the statement of preference votes cast for
each candidate has not been copied by the petitioner's counting agents and
produced in Court. The question thus arises, taking all these matters into
consideration, whether the conduct of the petitioner's agent or agents was due
to indifference, laziness, negligence, incompetence or something else. The
matters complained of in the petitioner's affidavit have, therefore, to be
approached with caution.

Assuming that the Court has jurisdiction in terms of s.92(1) (b) to interfere
with the election of the 32nd respondent for non-compliance with relevant
provisions of the Act if it appears that the election was not conducted in
accordance with the principles laid down in such provisions and that such non-
compliance materially affected the result of the election, learned Counsel for
the 32nd respondent submitted that the Court should distinguish between
allegations, material facts and evidence in the case for the purpose of
deciding whether an inspection should be ordered. Section 98(c) required that
a concise statement of material facts be set out in the petition. Evidence is
not required in the first instance. Counsel submitted that the averments in
the petition and affidavit contained only allegations but included no material
facts.

As it is my view that the Election Judge had jurisdiction to proceed with this
case on the grounds contemplated by s.92(1)(b) it becomes necessary for this
Court to consider the circumstances which have been placed before it. The
petitioner in the first instance asks for an inspection. Before the Court
moves it must be satisfied that there is credible material before it. The
ordinary tests of common sense and prudence suggest that the particulars
agitated by the petitioner by his affidavit contain only bare allegations of
misconduct by officials assisting in the conduct of the election. Allegations
alone are not sufficient to satisfy a Court that its jurisdiction ought to be
exercised. It has been held that a petition which alleged only that the
petitioner claimed a majority of good and lawful votes would be insufficient -
_West Bromwick_ (5) also vide Rogers on Election, 20th Edition, Vol II, P.
173. The petitioner has not claimed in his affidavit that he requested those
responsible for the count to record his objections to the count. The conduct
of the petitioner or his agents in not making

95

any contemporaneous recorded protest on the alleged misconduct deprives the
petitioner and his supporting affidavit of reliability on the fact of the
complaint. Nor is there a complaint of bias against the petitioner or in
favour of the 32nd respondent. No acceptable factual circumstances are before
the Court to suggest that official acts were not properly done at this
election. No interim order for inspection could therefore be made in the first
instance.

The remaining question not raised before the Election Judge was whether an
Election Court has power to dismiss an election petition in limine. This
question has been decided by five Judges in the Presidential Election Petition
No. 1 of 1989 - _Bandaranaike v. Premadasa_ (6). It was decided that the Court
did have the power to dismiss an election petition in limine if there was a
failure to comply with a mandatory provision - quote - "Just as much as the
public have an interest in the election petition there is also the principle
that the election of a candidate should not be lightly interfered with". Other
relevant decisions are _Samar Singh v. Kedar Nath_ (7) , and the case of
_Arthur Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi_ (8) In the instant case I have come to the
view that no acceptable factual circumstances have been placed before the
Court for it to order an inspection which is what is prayed for in the first
instance. Section 98 of Act No. 1 of 1981 contains mandatory provisions
regarding the contents of an election petition. Section 98(c) requires a
petition to contain "a concise statement of material facts on which the
petitioner relies". But the petitioner has failed to place such material facts
before the Election Judge, in his petition for relief. In the circumstances
the Election Judge was correct in refusing inspection and dismissing the
petition in limine. I affirm the judgment of the Election Judge and dismiss
this appeal with costs.

**KULATUNGA, J.**

The appellant (hereinafter referred to as the petitioner) and the 32nd
respondent were among the 9 candidates nominated by the Sri Lanka Freedom
Party (hereinafter referred to as the SLFP) to contest Parliamentary Elections
for the electoral district No. 13, Digamadulla held on 15.02.89. The said
election was contested by 5 political

96

parties. On the basis of the votes obtained by the political parties only 4 of
them became entitled to elect Members of Parliament. Of them, the United
National Party became entitled to elect 3 members whilst the remaining 3
political parties became entitled to elect 1 member each, making up a total of
6 members which that electoral district was entitled to elect.

On the basis of the preference votes accrued by the SLFP candidates under the
relevant provisions of the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981 as
amended by Act No. 15 of 1988 read with Article 99 of the Constitution the
32nd respondent was declared elected as the SLFP member by a majority of 76
votes over the petitioner.

The petitioner filed an election petition for the avoidance of the said
election for the electoral district No. 13, Digamadulla on the ground of non-
compliance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of
1981 as amended relating to elections as the said election was not conducted
in accordance with the principles laid down in such provisions which non-
compliance materially affected the result of the said election. Section
92(1)(b) of the Act provides for such avoidance.

In his petition the petitioner prayed for declarations and orders to the
following effect.

(a) a declaration that the impugned election is void to the extent that the
counting/recording of preferences indicated by voters for the SLFP candidates
had not been in compliance with the provisions of the Parliamentary Elections
Act and in accordance with the principles laid down in such provisions;

(b) a declaration that the return of the 32nd respondent as a Member of
Parliament was undue; and

(c) a declaration that the petitioner was duly elected and ought to have been
returned as a Member of Parliament at the said election;

97

(d) an order under Section 63(2) of the Parliamentary Elections Act to inspect
the ballot papers containing preferences for the SLFP candidates and of the
relevant analysis sheets/statements of preferences and to copy the same; and

(e) an order for a recount/scrutiny of the preferences indicated by voters for
the SLFP candidates, at the said elections.

The petitioner joined, in addition to the 32nd respondent, the Commissioner of
Elections (1st respondent), The Returning Officer (2nd respondent) and one
Tikiri Banda who officiated as a Counting Officer (47th respondent). He claims
no relief against any of the other candidates all of whom he joined as
parties.

The material facts on which the petitioner relies are :

(a) The failure to count a total of 642 preferences which he claims to have
accrued at counting centres 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13 and 15 on the ground that the
cross by which the voters had indicated their preference had been placed
opposite No. 9 in the ballot papers, which was the serial number allocated to
him and not on the cage enclosing the serial number.

The petitioner states that the voters who so indicated their preferences on
642 ballot papers had clearly indicated their preference for the petitioner.

(b) In counting centres Nos. 13 and 15 about 1000 preferences over and above
the preferences actually secured by the 32nd respondent have been recorded in
the analysis sheet/statement of preferences as having been secured by him.
This irregularity was committed by the 47th respondent with the assistance of
several other officers of whose identity the appellant is not aware.

In his affidavit accompanying the petition, the petitioner states that he with
his agents visited counting centre No. 13 when the preferences secured by the
SLFP candidates were being counted.

98

He saw the 47th respondent (who was the counting officer assigned to counting
centre No. 15) recording preferences for the 32nd respondent over and above
what he had actually secured and preparing the analysis sheets/statements
relating to same. The petitioner protested to the officer-in-charge of the
counting centre No.13 but the latter took no steps in that regard; when the
petitioner continued to protest, the 47th respondent left that counting
centre. The petitioner then received information that the 47th respondent was
committing the same irregularity at counting centre No. 15. The petitioner
immediately visited counting centre No.15 and observed the 47th respondent
recording preferences over and above the preferences actually received by the
32nd respondent, with the assistance of other officers. He reported it to the
officer in charge of that counting centre, but he too did not take any steps
in that regard.

Preliminary objections were filed on behalf of the 1st and 32nd respondents.
These objections were fixed for inquiry at which stage the Counsel for the
petitioner moved that the matter relating to the inspection of ballot papers
and statements also be considered as a preliminary matter. This was allowed by
the Election Judge. This was followed by a motion on behalf of the petitioner
applying for inspection, under Section 63(2) of Act No. 1 of 1981 as amended,
of the ballot papers and the written statements of the number of votes and
references given in favour of the SLFP candidates at the election for the
electoral district No. 13 Digamadulla. It is relevant to note that this motion
makes no reference to the "relevant analysis sheets" referred to in the
petition. The reason for this omission is obvious namely, that the power of
the Court to order an inspection under Section 63(2) does not extend to such
analysis sheets not being documents which the returning officer is required to
retain under Section 63(1).

At the inquiry which followed Counsel for the 1st, 2nd and 47th respondents
and the Counsel for the 32nd respondent were heard in support of the
objections and the petitioner's Counsel replied. This was followed by written
submissions. The respondents applied to have the petition dismissed in limine
on the ground that the petitioner is, on the face of the allegations set out
in the petition, not entitled to any relief. Their position may be summarized
under two heads.

99

(a) The petitioner had not specified the section under which he sought relief.
If he is seeking to have the election of the 32nd respondent declared undue
and to obtain a declaration that he was duly elected, he is not entitled to
such relief as he failed to plead the relevant grounds under Section 92(2) of
Act No. 1 of 1981. His case is really under Section 92(1)(b) in which event
the law permits a declaration that the election for the entire district is
void but the petitioner has not sought such relief, instead he is seeking to
avoid the election of the 32nd respondent i.e. a partial avoidance of the
result which he is not entitled to under Section 92(1).

(b) As regards the petitioner's allegations in respect of the preference
votes, the respondents argue that the 642 preferences referred to were rightly
rejected at the counting as the intention of the voter on each preference is
not at all clear. The Election Judge cannot reverse the decision of the
counting officer in view of the finality provisions under Section 53(9) and
the bar in section 112\. If he was not satisfied about the rejection of the
said preferences or the recording of the 1000 preferences referred to in the
petition his counting agents were entitled to obtain copies of the statements
of preferences, under Section 55(7) and to two recounts at each of the
relevant counting centres, under Section 53(8). Admittedly the counting agents
or the petitioner had not so applied for copies of statements or a for a
recount; and the petitioner is not entitled to a recount which under the law
as it stands is only available under Section 53(8). The relief of scrutiny
which was available under Section 80(c) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order in Council (Cap. 381) is not provided for under the
corresponding Section 96 of Act No. 1 of 1981; the petition is speculative and
should be dismissed in limine as the petitioner has not placed adequate
material before Court.

On the first objections the petitioner's counsel contended that the Court
should give to Section 92(1) a purposive interrelation and held that the
declaration provided by that section is not limited to a total avoidance of
the election in any electoral district but extends to a

100

claim of partial avoidance of the result based on an allegation of an abuse
relating to the counting of preference votes in favour of a candidate.

On the second objection, the petitioner's Counsel contended that in view of
the requirement under Section 30(1) that a voter shall mark the ballot paper
as near as may be in accordance with the direction given for the guidance of
voters in the third Schedule to the Act, the direction in the Schedule to
indicate the preference by placing a cross on the cage enclosing the serial
number assigned to the candidate is not mandatory but directory; as such
crosses placed "in the blank space" opposite number 9 in the ballot paper (a
specimen of which has been marked 1 R1) have to be considered; consequently
the Court may inspect the 642 ballot papers referred to in the petition. It
was also submitted that the finality under Section 53(9) is limited to the
course of the election and would not preclude a challenge to the counting of
preference votes in an election petition; and that the ouster under section
112 covers the rejection of a ballot paper and not the rejection of preference
votes; that this is clear from the fact that the Act No. 15 of 1986 which
amended Act No. 1 of 1981 to include provisions relating to preference votes
did not effect any amendments to Section 112 barring the Court from reviewing
the rejection of preference votes. As regards the 1000 preference votes
alleged to have been irregularly recorded for the 32nd respondent, the
petitioner's Counsel submits that Section 53(9) and 112 have no application to
the relevant ballot papers and the Court should hear that allegation and allow
the inspection sought even though the petitioner had failed to apply for
copies of statements of preferences under Section 53(7) or for any recount
under Section 53(8); that the right to a recount in the course of an election
petition has not been taken away by the provisions of Act No. 1 of 1981.
Counsel cited the decisions in _Kuruppu v. Hettiaratchy_ (8) and _Kaleel v.
Themis_ (3) on the power of the Court to order an inspection or a recount.

The Election Judge rejected the first legal objection. He held that Section
92(1) is wide enough to make it possible to declare that the election for the
electoral district of Digamadulla is void to the extent that the counting or
the recount of the preference votes had not been in compliance with the Act
and its principles, and therefore the return

101

of the 32nd respondent was undue and that the petitioner should be declared
duly elected. Although this legal objection has been reiterated in the
submissions for the respondents, at the hearing of the appeal before us
learned Counsel for the respondents did not advert to it. I am of the view
that the finding of the Election Judge on this issue is correct. However, the
Election Judge proceeded to consider the other submissions of the respondents
and held that on the face of the petition and on the averments contained
therein, the petitioner has not made out that he is entitled to any of the
reliefs he has claimed. He upheld the preliminary objections on that basis and
dismissed the petition. The reasons for so dismissing the petition given in
the judgment show that the Election Judge has substantially adopted the
submissions of the respondents which I have summarized earlier in this
judgment.

Thus, the learned Judge held that the intention of the voters on the 642
ballot papers relied upon by the petitioner is not at all clear and the
preference votes thereon were void for uncertainty and were therefore rightly
rejected under Section 53(7)(c) that such decision was final and conclusive
under Section 53(9) and cannot be questioned in an election petition in view
of Section 112.

The learned Judge next considered the alleged irregularity pertaining to the
recording of about 1000 preference votes along with the prayer for the
inspection of the relevant ballot papers and statements of preferences and
prayer for a recount of the SLFP votes. The learned Judge repeats without
comment the fact that Section 96 of the present Act does not provide for a
scrutiny. He accepts the availability of provision in Section 63(2) for an
inspection, does not adopt the submission that there is no right to a recount
except under Section 53(8) but proceeds to hold on the strength of Kaleel's
case that no recount can be allowed as the petitioner or his agents had failed
to apply for it at the counting. He also held against an inspection under
Section 63(2) in view of the failure to apply for copies of statements of
preferences or for recounts. He thought that the petition had been filed on
insufficient material and the petitioner is now seeking to use Section 63(2)
to obtain material to support his case and ruled that this is not permissible.

102

Mr. Faiz Musthapha, PC strongly criticized the learned Judge's reasoning and
confidently submitted that it contains several misdirections on the law and
that the learned Judge erred in dismissing the petition in limine particularly
for the reason that the respondents had not joined issue on the allegations
levelled in respect of the irregularity pertaining to about 1000 preference
votes which allegations had been supported by an affidavit. Before I consider
these submissions, I wish to determine an issue which I myself raised during
the argument namely whether the dismissal of the petition can be defended with
reference to Section 98(c) of Act No. 1 of 1981 on the ground that the
petition does not contain a concise statement of material facts on which the
petitioner relies.

On reflection, I am satisfied that the petition cannot be thrown out for non-
compliance with Section 98(c) as the petitioner has set out therein a concise
statement of material facts on which he relies. In Kaleel v. Themis (supra)
where the petitioner prayed for a declaration that the 1st respondent's
election was undue and for a declaration that the petitioner was duly elected
and ought to have been returned as the 3rd member for Colombo Central, all
that he pleaded was that there was a miscount of the votes. Pulle, J. said
that one of the possible meanings of this allegation was that votes cast for
the 1st respondent were counted in favour of the petitioner but in the context
the word "miscount" would amount to a statement that votes cast for the
petitioner had been counted as votes for the 1st respondent or for one or more
of the other opposing candidates. On an objection that the position was on the
face of it bad Pulle, J. said (58 NLR 396 at 402) (3).

"I do not think it would be fair to throw out a petition because an
examination of its language, as strictly as one would examine the penal
provisions of a statute, reveals matters which have no bearing on the reliefs
claimed. There is implicit in paragraph 5 much that is germane to the relief
claimed, namely, that votes that should have been counted for the petitioner
were counted for his rivals".

103

In the instant case, there is a more specific statement of the facts relied
upon and hence the petition cannot be rejected on the ground that it has been
filed on insufficient material.

In Kaleel's case, after deciding to entertain the petition, Pulle, J.
proceeded to consider the petitioner's prayer for a recount which was vital to
the further prosecution of the petition. A recount was refused. In so
exercising the Court's discretion Pulle, J. took into consideration the fact
that the honesty, care and competence of those responsible for the counting
were not challenged and the failure of the petitioner to avail himself of the
right of seeking for a recount under Section 48(7) of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council (Cap. 381) from which the Court
presumed that "he (the petitioner) was not then dissatisfied with the
counting".

In the instant case, the petitioner has prayed for an inspection of the ballot
papers and statements of preferences for SLFP candidates and a recount which
in my view are vital for the further prosecution of the petition. The
application for inspection was itself argued as a preliminary matter at the
request of the petitioner's Counsel and the learned Judge refused it. I am of
the view that if such refusal is right, the application for a recount cannot
be pursued, in which event the petition has to be dismissed. I shall therefore
proceed to consider the question whether in the circumstances of this case the
refusal of the application for inspection is right.

I agree with the submission of Mr. Faiz Musthapa, PC that the finality
provided by Section 53(9) to the decision of the counting officer as to any
question arising in respect of any ballot paper applies only to the process of
counting and does not preclude a challenge by election petition to the
recording of preferences; I also agree that the exclusion of judicial review
of a decision whether or not a ballot paper shall be rejected does not
preclude the power to review a decision regarding a preference vote. I hold
that the opinion of the Election Judge to the contrary appearing in his
judgment where he considers the allegation relating to 642 preference votes
constitutes a misdirection on the law. Although Mr. Musthapha complains that
even the consideration of the alleged irregularity

104

pertaining to 1000 votes is vitiated by such misdirection, the judgment does
not bear out this submission. On the other hand, the Election Judge
considering that allegation has stated that the operation of the sections
under reference "is subject to the overriding provisions of Section 92(2) (an
erroneous reference to Section 92(1)) which states that an election for any
district can be avoided for non-compliance with the provisions of the Act and
such noncompliance has affected the result of the election".

The Election Judge's decision refusing the inspection pertaining to 642
preference votes is primarily referable to his opinion that such preferences
were void for uncertainty and were therefore rightly rejected. Mr. Musthapha,
PC submits that the Court could not have decided the question without an
inspection which would have revealed different combinations of marks including
the case of voters who would have indicated two out of the three preferences
by placing a cross on the cage enclosing the relevant serial numbers and the
third by placing the cross on the space opposite number 9 assigned to the
petitioner. Counsel also submits that the presence of "a cage adjacent to
numeral '9' identical to the vacant cages adjacent to party symbols" may have
confused the voter and led him to indicate his preference by placing the cross
in that cage. I am unable to agree with these submissions, for the following
reasons.

(a) Where a voter marks two out of his three preferences by placing the cross
on the cage enclosing the relevant serial number and third by placing the
cross outside the cage enclosing number 9, the preference claimed by the
petitioner is more uncertain than in the case of a voter who exercises only
one preference by placing the cross outside the cage enclosing serial number
9. In the latter case the extent of the deviation from the guidelines
contained in the Third Schedule to the Act are such as cannot be permitted
under Section 39(1).

Any deviation, if it is to be valid, should be rational in all the
circumstances. The intention of the voter cannot be the sole criterion of such
validity. A mark placed outside the cage

105

enclosing number 9 would not be rational. If such mark is claimable, then the
petitioner will have an advantage over the other candidates he can only claim
a preference if it is placed on the relevant cage.

(b) I do not accept the contention that there is a cage adjacent to number 9
resembling the cage opposite the party symbols. The specimen ballot paper 1R1
strictly conforms to the specimen appearing as Form C in the First Schedule to
the Act except that in Form C provision for 10 candidates, has been included
whereas 1131 has provision only for 9 candidates i.e. the number of members
that the electoral district of Digamadulla is entitled to elect. The deletion
of the cage enclosing number 10 has resulted in the presence of a space
opposite number 9 but the ballot paper itself strictly conforms to law and
there is no such cage as alleged which would excuse a voter being misled.

Accordingly, I hold that the decision of the Election Judge refusing the
inspection applied for by the petitioner with reference to the said 642 voter
preferences is right and constitutes the only decision the Judge could reach
in the exercise of his discretion on the facts before him.

The application for inspection pertaining to the alleged irregularity relating
to 1000 voter preferences was refused as the petitioner had not availed
himself of the right to obtain copies of statements under Section 53(7) and
recounts under Section 53(8). The learned Judge relied on the decision in
Kaleel's case (supra). He took the view that the Act made detailed provision
for counting including provision giving the right to the petitioner's agents
to obtain copies of statements of the votes for the recognized parties and
preference votes for candidates. The right to obtain copies of such statement
was not available under the Order in Council (Cap. 381). The Judge expressed
the view that if the 47th respondent committed the alleged irregularities the
petitioner or his agents could have asked for a recount then and there and
further taken copies of the figures and

106

furnished them to Court; but he has not done any of these things. The Judge
proceeded to refuse the inspection sought in that context and on the ground
that the petition has been filed on insufficient material and the recourse to
Section 63(2) was merely an effort to cure this deficiencey.

I think that the instant case is different from Kaleel's case. Firstly, in
Kaleel's case the honesty, care and competence of the counting officers were
not challenged. In this case, a serious irregularity which raise's the issue
of the bona fides of the 47th respondent and other officers has been alleged.
Secondly, the kind of recount which a candidate was obliged to ask for in
Kaleel's case was different from the recount provided for under Section 53(8).
Under the previous law, a recount meant the verification of the final result
based on the first post past the system of voting. At present, recounts can be
applied for at such counting centre whether in relation to the votes for a
recognized political party or the preference votes for a candidate. The effect
of such recounts would be known only after the final count by the Returning
Officer. In this context, the legal implications of the failure to ask for a
recount cannot be the same as under the previous system, particularly at the
General Election in question which was the first such election held under the
new law. The petitioner states that he repeatedly protested and complained to
the officer-in-charge of counting centres Nos. 13 and 15 against the
irregularities committed by the 47th respondent but that the officer took no
steps. In the context of the new election law, the need to ask for a recount
of preferences at two counting centres may not strike the mind of a candidate
as much as the need to lodge a complaint against an irregularity in the
counting of preferences. The failure to obtain copies of statements of
preferences is also not of such relevance because these statements would only
contain the totals of preferences counted for the candidates. The petitioner
is challenging such totals. Such statements themselves may not be of any
assistance in adjudicating upon such challenge; but an inspection of the
ballot papers may assist the Court.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Election Judge was wrong in
refusing the inspection sought relating to about 1000 voter preferences. The
decisions in Kaleel's case (supra) and in _Kuruppu v. Hettiaratchy_ (9) show
that our Courts have considered applications for

107

inspection and recounts with the indulgence appropriate to a fair hearing of
the petition. I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment appealed from so
far as it relates to the alleged irregularity pertaining to about 1000 voter
preferences. The Election Judge is directed to allow the inspection sought in
that regard limited to counting centres Nos. 13 and 15 and to proceed with the
trial of the petition or to dismiss it, whichever is appropriate on the result
of the inspection. As the petitioner has succeeded partly, I allow him half
the costs of this appeal.

**H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading the judgments prepared by my brothers
Bandaranayake and Kulatunga, JJ. On the first matter that comes up for
consideration, viz; whether the 642 preference votes obtained by the
Petitioner-Appellant were rightly not brought into account on the ground that
the cross (X) indicating the preference, had been placed outside the cage
containing the numeral 9, the number assigned to the petitioner-appellant, I
am in agreement with the conclusion arrived at by them that those preferences
were rightly rejected for uncertainty and vagueness and the reasons given by
for such a conclusion.

On the second question however, as to whether an order should be issued for
inspection in terms of Section 63(2) of the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1
of 1981 of the preference votes of the S.L.F.P. candidates, as well as an
inspection of the relevant analysis sheets/statements of preferences and the
cage of the same and a scrutiny/recount of the preference votes of the
S.L.F.P. candidates. I am in agreement with the views expressed by my brother
Bandaranayake, J. in the result that I too would dismiss the appeal with
costs.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/18.html_  

