##  Finnegan v. Gatadari Hotels Lanka Ltd. - SLR - 272, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989]
LKSC 18; (1989) 2 Sri LR 272 (9 November 1989)

**

272

FINNEGAN  
v.  
GALADARI HOTELS (LANKA) LTD.

**

SUPREME COURT  
H.A.G. DE SILVA, J  
BANDARANAYAKE, J., AND KULATUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO- 21/89  
C.A. REVISION APPLICATION NO 528/89.  
DC. COLOMBO NO. 3000/SPL.  
SEPTEMBER 18,19,20, 21 &  
OCTOBER 3, 4, AND 5. 1989

_

Civil Procedure Code - Enjoining order - Inherent Powers - Suspension of
enjoining order - Civil Procedure Code, section 839 - can enjoining order be
suspended exparte? Inter partes order

_

A management agreement, A was entered into between the Galadari Hotels (Lanka)
Ltd. the plaintiff and Societe Des - Where under the 2nd and 3rd floors
comprising 80 rooms (which as they were not commissioned as guest rooms) were
allocated to the International Irrigation Management Institute (IIMI) for us
office accommodation. The defendant Paul Finnegan was the General Manager of
the Galadari Meridien Hotel. The management and operation of the Hotel were
entrusted to the Societe Des Hotels Meridien (Meridien). The plaintiff-
respondent Galadan Hotels (Lanka) Limited filed action on 27.6.89 against the
defendant petitioner Paul Finnegan, praying for a declaration that defendant,
is not entitled under the terms of the management agreement "A" to allocate
the 2nd and 3rd floors of the Galadari Meridien Hotel or any same day
(27.6.89) on the application of Counsel an enjoining order was issued
retaining the allocation, conversion alteration, along with notice of the
application for an interim injunction. The enjoining order was not to apply to
rooms 318 and 320 as they had already been converted. The enjoining order was
served on the same day.

On 3.7.89 the defendant filed objections moving for a suspension of the
enjoining order, refusal of the injunction and dismissal of the action. When
Counsel moved to support the objections on the same day Mr. Balasubramaniam
appeared for the plaintiff and moved that the matter be supported thy
following day as tie had had no notice and did not have the papers. The Court
held it was not obliged to hear the plaintiff and on the defendant's
application suspended the enjoining order. The plaintiff moved the Court of
Appeal in revision The Court of Appeal stayed the suspension and later on
25.7.89 vacated the suspension order of 3 7 89. Against this order the
defendant moved the Supreme Court

**273**

**

Held **-

(1) The Court has an inherent power under section 839 of the Civil Procedure
Code to vacate or set aside or suspend an enjoining order, but it must be done
inter parties in an appropriate case as ii is an interference with a benefit
already granted.

(2) An enjoining order in the first instance is in the nature of an immediate
prohibition made against a person at the discretion of the Court pending the
hearing and determination of the application for interim injunction. It is
different to an injunction in the sense that  normally an injunction may be
granted only after the petition of application with the accompanying affidavit
testifying to the truth of the averments is served on the opposite party. An
exception is made only where the object of granting the injunction would be
defeated by delay. The exercise of the Court's discretionary powers gives the
Court, in a sense, a broad undefined jurisdiction to act fairly to prevent
wrongs and its effect is immediate. Then it is imperative that accurate,
complete and compelling grounds be adduced when praying for the exercise of
such discretionary jurisdiction. If the grounds do not justify the exercise of
such jurisdiction then even in the absence of express powers, inherent powers
of the Court to make orders to meet the ends of justice and prevent abuse of
the process of the Court would be in place and could properly be exercised.

(3) The order of the District Judge was based on the finding that the
defendant is not a party to the agreement and cannot be inject but this was
the question to be argued and decided inter parts, at a later stage of the
action and not to be decided ex parte by the Court. By deciding that the
defendant was not rightly before Court the Judge has prejudged an issue to the
prejudice of the plaintiff.

(4) Mr. Balasubramaniam appearing for plaintiff on 3.7.89 and stating that he
came to know about the application only that morning and he had no papers with
him and moving the matter be postponed for the following day does not make the
proceedings inter parties. The proceedings on 3.7.89 were ex parte.

There must be fair procedure and the plaintiff should have been heard on the
allegation of non - disclosure of material facts.

The plaintiff is impeaching the legality or propriety of the order of the
District Judge of 3.7.89 _on_ fundamental issues including the failure to hold
a fair inquiry.  

Considerations of urgency and the balance of convenience demand an immediate
review of the Judge's order. There were thus exceptional circumstances
warranting the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal.

**

Cases Referred to:

**_

1\. Thomas A. Edison Ltd. _v. _Bullock_ (1912) 15 CLR 679, 682

_

2\. W.S. Alphonso Appuhamy v. L Hettiarachchi _77 NLR 131, 135, 139

_

3\. Rex _v. _Rensington Income Tax Commission_ (vide _11_ NLR 131)

_

4\. Seneviratne _v. _Abeykoon_ (1986) 1 CALR 434, 440

_

5\. Sirinivasa Them _v. _Suddassi Them_ 63 NLR 31

_

6\. Salim _v. _Santhiya_ 69 NLR 490

7\. _London City Agency_ v. Lee _and others_ (1969) 3 All ER 1376, 1379  

8\. _Duwearaichchi_ v. _Vincent Perera_ (1984) 2 Sri LR 94, 103

_

9\. Hounslow _v. _Twickenham Garden Development Ltd._ (1970) 3 All ER 326, 347

10\. _Stassen Exports Ltd._ v. _Hebtulabhoy & Co. _(1984) 1 Sri LR 129

**274**

_

11.Hotel Galaxy Ltd. _v. _Mercantile Hotel Ltd._ (1987) 1 Sri LR 5, 26. 27 -
30

_

12\. Fernando _v. _Dias_ (1980) 2 Sri LR 48

_

13\. Andradie _v. Jayasekera Perera (1985) 2 Sri LR 204

_

14\. Cooper _v. _Wandsworth Board of Works_ (1863) 143 ER 414

_

15\. Lewis _v. _Heffer_ (1978) 3 All ER 354

_

16\. Wiseman _v. _Borneman_ (1969) 3 All ER 275. 286, 287. 288

_

17\. R.V_ _Wareham_ Magistrates' Court (1988) 1 All ER 746

_

18\. Anisminic _v. _Foreign Compensations Commission_ (1969) 1 All ER 208, 233

_

19\. Rasheed AH _v. _Mohamed AH And another_ (1981) 1 SRI LR 262

**

APPEAL** from order of the Court of Appeal

_

K. Kanag - Iswaran, P.C.. _with _M.S.M. Suhaid, Anil Tittawela, Ms. Jesmin
Gafoor_ and

_Ms. Inoka Perera_ for defendant - petitioner.

_

Eric Amerasinghe, PC, _with _C. Manohara, R Balasubramaniam_ and _Eardley

Seneviratne _for plaintiff - respondent.

_Cur.adv.vult_

November 09, 1989

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.

**

I **** have had the advantage of reading the-judgments prepared by my brothers
Bandaranayake, J., and Kulatunge, J. ! agree with the conclusion arrived at by
them that the District Court order of 3.7.89 should be set aside and the
reasons therefor. I also agree with the order as to costs.

**

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

**

The Plaintiff-Respondent, Galadari Hotels (Lanka) Ltd., brought an action in
the District Court of Colombo on 27.6.89 against the Defendant-Petitioner,
Paul Finnegan, the General Manager of the Galadari Meridian Hotel praying for-
an order and decree declaring that the Defendant is not entitled under the
terms of Management Agreement marked 'A' to allocate the second and third
floors of the said Galadari Meredien Hotel or any portion thereof to the
International Irrigation Management Institute; (referred to hereafter as IIMI)

(B) a permanent injunction restraining the Defendant from

(i) so allocating, renting or leasing to the Institute the said second and
third floors of the said Hotel,

**275**

(ii) placing the Institute in occupation of the said floors,

(iii) permitting the conversion of furnished equipped guest rooms on the said
second and third floors into official accommodation,

(iv) causing structural alterations to alter or modify the structural form of
the said guest rooms on the said floors etc.

(C) An interim injection restraining the Defendant from doing any act sought
to be prevented by the aforesaid permanent injunction pending final
determination.

On the same day the Court having heard Senior Counsel for the Plaintiff, Mr.
Eric Amerasinghe, P.C., ex parte issued an Enjoining Order restraining the
matters referred to in prayer (C) above and also issued notice of application
for an interim injunction to the Defendant. The order was declared not to
apply to rooms 318 and 320 as they had already been so converted. Summons and
notice of application issued returnable on 17.7.89. Defendant admits that the
order and connected documents were served on the defendant the same day. it is
common ground that the said Enjoining Order dated 27.6.89 was a lawful order
made ex parte within jurisdiction in terms of s.664 of the Civil Procedure
Code.

However, on 3.7.89 before the aforesaid notice returnable and summons
returnable date, the Defendant-Petitioner filed his objections by petition and
affidavit - S.C. 21 - praying for,  
  
(a) suspension of the operation of the Enjoining Order or for its discharge
and vacation;  
  
(b) refusal of the application for an injunction;  
  
(c) Dismissal of the action as having been instituted wrongfully and
unlawfully and without a cause of action ex facie and without jurisdiction.

On the same date (ie) 3.7.89 the Court heard Senior Counsel for the Defendant-
Petitioner, Mr. Kanag-lswaran, P.C. In the course of the proceedings of that
day - S.C. 25 - the Court has made this observation :- "At this stage Mr. R.
Balasubramaniam appears instructed and states he has come to know about the
application ( of the Defendant } only this morning and he has no papers with
him although it is an ex parte application  and makes submissions and wants
the case to be heard tomorrow. Mr. Kanag-lswaran for the

**276**

Defendant vehemently objects to the application on behalf of the Plaintiff. In
the light of this situation I propose to make an order that the original order
was made on an application made by the Plaintiff, and now the Defendant seeks
by his submissions to vary, suspend or dismiss the Enjoining Order so given on
the material facts placed before me by the plaintiff. In this connection it is
my view that I am not obliged at this stage to hear the Plaintiff. I propose
to make an order on the facts represented by the Defendant today." The Court
then made the following order:- " Addressing my mind to the facts submitted by
Mr. Kanag-lswaran the agreement ... ( marked A ) ... appears to have been made
by the Plaintiff and Meridien as evinced in the preamble to the Agreement A."

" In the first instance it is my view that the Defendant is not a party to
this agreement."

" Secondly, flowing from this, it is my view that the Defendant cannot be
inject which the Plaintiff seeks to do. Adverting to matters of fact .........
the purported renting of the two floors has already been done by letter of 9th
June Further, though alleged by the Plaintiff  that the 80 rooms in floors 2
and 3 .... are guest rooms they have not been commissioned which fact is borne
by letter marked 'B' annexed to the plaint."

" In the light of these facts I suspend the Enjoining Order issued.  Copy of
this order to be served on the Plaintiff ........ Counsel for Plaintiff takes
notice of this order made today. Call case on 17th July 1989."

The Plaintiff thereupon moved the Court of Appeal in Revision to set aside the
order of the District Court made on 3.7.89 suspending its earlier order. The
Court of Appeal then first made order staying the aforesaid order of
suspension and proceeded to consider the legality of the said order of
suspension. By its decision of 25.7.89 the Court of Appeal allowed the
application made by the Plaintiff -Petitioner and vacated the suspension order
of 3.7.89 and directed the District Judge to proceed to inquiry.

The Defendant-Petitioner then moved the Supreme Court to make an interim order
staying the operation/execution of the judgment of the Court of Appeal; and
for special leave to appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal.
Special leave to appeal having been granted on the questions referred to in
sub-paragraphs a-f of

**277**

paragraph 33 of the petition the matter now comes up for our consideration.

Learned President's Counsel for the Defendant-Petitioner made the following
assertions among others by way of background facts:

(a) that the Management Agreement marked 'A1 was between the Plaintiff
Galadari Hotels (Lanka) Ltd and " Societe Des Hotels Meredian (Meridien)" and
not between the Plaintiff and the Defendant. This fact was brought to the
notice of the District Judge on 3.7.89.  
  
(b) the Defendant was an agent of Meridien though employed and paid by the
Plaintiff, Meredien was the foreign principal not resident in Sri Lanka with
the power of dismissal over the Defendant.

(d) Meredien was the only party who could have sued and therefore a necessary
party but not made a party.

(e) the 2nd and 3rd floors of the hotel comprising 80 rooms were never
commissioned nor taken over as guest rooms - vide para 1 of document 'B' and
para 4 of document D1 annexed to plaint but that fact was suppressed and not
brought to the attention of the District Court in the first instance;

(f) that the said 80 rooms were in a bad state of repair from the outset and
therefore never commissioned as guest rooms. These facts were not brought to
the notice of the District Court.

(g) the letter 'C indicated that as at 16.6.89 the 2nd and 3rd floors had
already been let to IIMI which fact had been suppressed by  
the Plaintiff.

All these facts of suppression were brought to the notice of the District
Judge on 3.7.89 by the Defendant. Upon the foregoing, Counsel for petitioner
argued:

(i) that as the Agreement 'A' was not one entered into between the Plaintiff
and the Defendant, the Defendant cannot be injuncted there being no cause of
action;

(ii) that the renting of the two floors had already taken place;

(iii) that there was suppression and non-disclosure of material facts upon
which Plaintiff obtained relief in the first

**278**

instance; that if on an ex parte application the Plaintiff does not make
sufficient disclosure the application will be dismissed upon discovery of such
non-disclosure and suppression. This was a rule based on Public Policy
designed to prevent abuse of procedure of Court when Court was dealing with a
matter ex parte. Thus uberrimae fidei is required. Counsel relied on
paragraphs from the judgements in the cases of _Thomas A. Edison Ltd. v.
Bullock_ (1), _W.S. Alphonso Appuhamy v. L Hettiarachchi_ (2), _Rex v.
Rensington Income Tax Commission_ referred to in the _11_ NLR case cited (3),
_Seneviratne v. Abyekoon_ (4), _Srinivasa Thero v. Suddassi Thero_ (5), _Salim
v. Senthiya_ (6). Counsel also cited SPRY - Equitable Remedies, 3rd Ed. P.329,
476 et seq and FRIDMAN - Law of Agency, 5th Ed, pp.188,217.

(iv) that the rule of audi aiteram partem, the absence of which was the
complaint of the Plaintiff regarding the proceedings of 3.7.89 which made the
suspending order, did not apply to those proceedings because that suspending
order was itself an interim order which could be made ex parte depending on
the imminent urgency of a matter in the discretionary opinion of the Court.
The matter of the injunction is yet pending before the District Court.

In support learned Counsel relied upon the decisions in the following cases.
_London City Agency v. Lee and Others_ (7) _Halsbury's Laws of England,_ 4th
Ed, para 1111, _Duwearatchchi v. Vincent Perera_ (8) _Hounslow v. Twickenham
Garden Development Ltd_ (9) per Hegarry, J., "Natural Justice" by Paul
Jackson, 1979 2nd Ed, p. 104.

(v) the matter before the District Judge on 3.7.89 was in fact _inter paries_
as is borne out by the record which refers to Mr. Balasubramaniam making
submissions and wanting the case to be heard "tomorrow" (supra). It was
submitted therefore that submissions were made and the request for a
postponement until tomorrow was objected to and refused. The Respondent cannot
contradict the record.

(vi) On the question whether an enjoining order can be suspended in the
absence of express provision permitting such a course, it was submitted that
it can on the twin

**279**

application of the principle of -

(a) inherent powers of Court and,

(b) the doctrine of uberrimae fidei - full disclosure. Counsel distinguished
the case of _Stassen Exports Ltd v. Hebtulabhoy & Co. _ (10) which it was
submitted was authority only for the proposition that an interim _injunction_
cannot be _suspended_ in the exercise of inherent powers under s.839 of the
Civil Procedure Code as there is express provision in s.666 for the
_discharge, variation or setting aside_ of an interim _injunction_ with no
provision to suspend; and inherent powers cannot be invoked to violate or
override express provisions of the Code. It follows that power to suspend
interim orders including enjoining orders stems from the Court's inherent
powers secured under the provision of s.839 of the Code in the absence of
provision to vary, set aside or discharge an enjoining order under s.666
aforesaid. It was further submitted that this principle was expressly
reaffirmed and re-established in the _Galaxy_ case \- vide _Hotel Galaxy Ltd.
v. Mercantile Hotels Ltd._ (11) and it extended to the exercise of such
inherent  
powers ex parte.

(vii) that the Plaintiff-Respondent could not have moved the Court of Appeal
in Revision :-  
  
(a) without first seeking to have the order suspending the enjoining order
canvassed before the District Court itself. The cases of _Fernando v. Dias_
(12), _Andradie v. Jayasekera Perera_ and _Hotel Galaxy Ltd v. Mercantile
Hotels Ltd_ (11) were cited.

(b) in any event the petition did not disclose any exceptional circumstances
warranting the exercise of the extraordinary discretionary jurisdiction of
revision. Such circumstances must be shown.  
  
(c) where an alternate remedy exists - to wit: with leave first had and
obtained from the Court of Appeal in terms of s. 754(2) of the Civil Procedure
Code,

**280**

revisionary powers will not be exercised. This alternate remedy which should
have been first sought was not sought.

(d) the petitioner had suppressed material facts and documents from the Court
of Appeal, to wit: that the 2nd and 3rd floors had never been commissioned and
never handed over by the contractor because of several defects in the rooms
itemized in those documents. Wilful suppression is a violation of Rule 46 of
the Supreme Court Rules _-_ 1978 which have been held to be mandatory. The
petitioner also had failed to produce at the time it supported the application
before the Court of Appeal the order of the District Judge dated 3.7.89.
Several authorities were cited in this regard.

It was also contended that there were grave errors and misdirection's of law
in the judgment of the Court of Appeal which warrants that it be set aside.
Counsel for Petitioner submitted that the Court of Appeal has come to the
following among other wrong conclusions and propositions.

(i) that there is no statutory authority to suspend an enjoining order before
the decision on the application for injunctions;

(ii) that where express provisions of the Code request steps to be taken,
inherent powers of the Court cannot be invoked;

(iii) that the course adopted by the District Judge was in violation of
provisions of s.666 of the Code.

The Defendant-Petitioner seeks in this appeal to have -

(1) the order of the Court of Appeal set aside,

 (2) the District Court's order of suspension dated 3.7.89 restored, and for
any consequential orders.

The questions that arise for adjudication are -

(a) whether the enjoining order dated 27.6.89 having been lawfully made by the
District Court ex parte within jurisdiction as provided for in s.664 of the
Civil Procedure Code and normally operative until the hearing and
determination of the application for interim injunction could be lawfully
suspended by that Court

**281**

(b) even if so, whether on the averments in the Defendant's petition dated
3/7/89 the District Judge had the judicial power to suspend its earlier
enjoining order grained ex parte to the Plaintiff without hearing the
Plaintiff.

(c) in any event were the grounds set out in the Order of suspension correct
and were they matters upon which the District Court could have taken a
decision at that stage of the application for interim injunction?

(d) should the judgment of the Court of Appeal be affirmed ?

Under the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code - ss.664 and 666 usually an
enjoining order granted ex parte in the exercise of discretion is valid until
the determination of the interim injunction application. There is no right of
appeal from such an order or refusal to grant such order. A party aggrieved by
the grant of such order usually abides the disposal of the application for
interim injunction inter partes in due course. Similarly there is no right of
appeal from an order granting or refusing to grant an interim injunction in
the first instance ex parte. An aggrieved party must follow the express
procedure laid down in s.666 for relief in view of such express provision he
District Court has no residual inherent powers to deal with the matter.

Then again, a District Court has no inherent power to vary its own order
except to the extent permitted by s 189. Section 404 and s. 408 of the Code
may be relevant in such situations. Thus usually a District .Judge has no
judicial power to vary his earlier order upon a change of mind-even if he
later thought that the earlier order was wrong. In this case it has been
contended for the Defendant-Petitioner that the District Court had an inherent
power in terms of s. 839 of the Code to make such orders as may be necessary
for the ends of justice or the prevention of abuse of the process of the
Court; that in the light of the suppression of material facts and the absence
of a cause of action, the District Judge had in this case an inherent power,
in the absence of express provisions to vacate, discharge, suspend or set
aside an enjoining order made in the first instance under s. 664 of the Code.
Indeed it has not been contended for the plaintiff-respondent that the Court
had no inherent power in an appropriate case to vacate or suspend an enjoining
order. For the purpose of this action, Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent
has submitted that the Court did have such a

**282**

power. But it was contended for the plaintiff-respondent that the District
Court could not have exercised such a power in the manner it did on 3.7.89
without hearing the plaintiff against the application of the defendant.

It was submitted that the order of suspension was therefore both illegal and
void.

In the absence of any positive or express provision in the Code for dealing
with an enjoining order before _i\\\e_ stage of determination of an injunction
application and in the absence of a prohibition one may consider situations
and appropriate remedies where an enjoining order has been obtained on
inadequate or incorrect or improper grounds. An enjoining order in the first
instance is in the nature of an immediate prohibition made against a person at
the discretion of the Court pending the hearing and determination of the
application. It is different to an injunction in the sense that normally an
injunction may be granted only after the petition of application with the
accompanying affidavit testifying to the truth of the averments is served on
the opposite party. An exception is made only where the object of granting the
injunction would be defeated by delay. The exercise of the Court's
discretionary powers gives in a sense the Court a broad undefined jurisdiction
to act fairly to prevent wrongs and its effect is immediate. Thus it is
imperative that accurate, complete and compelling grounds be adduced when
praying for the exercise of such discretionary jurisdiction. If the grounds do
not justify the exercise of such jurisdiction then it is my view that even in
the absence of express powers, inherent powers of the Court to make orders to
meet the ends of justice and prevent abuse of the process of the Court would
be in place and could properly be exercised. The _Hotel Galaxy Ltd v.
Mercantile Hotels Ltd_ (11) and other cases cited there are on point.
Incidentally the inherent power exercised disturbing the earlier ex parte
order has been made inter prates in the _Galaxy_ case.

 One ground urged for the suspension or setting aside of the enjoining order
was that the Plaintiff was in law not entitled to injunctive relief against
the Defendant as the Management Agreement 'A'(301) was not between the
Plaintiff and the Defendant but between the Plaintiff and a foreign company to
wit: Meredien of France and that the Defendant in his capacity as General
Manager was "managing agent and an instrument of Meredien''. Therefore it

**283**

was contended that this 'agent' could not be sued vis a vis the agreement 'A\
It was contended for the Defendant that all acts done by the Managing agent
were in terms of the Management agreement 'A'. Thus it was contended in the
first place that there was no cause of action against the Defendant. The
learned trial Judge has used this submission of Counsel for the Defendant as a
ground for making his order of suspension. As already stated elsewhere in this
judgment the District Judge in his order of 3.7.89 has stated ".... the
agreement purported to have been made between the Plaintiff and the Defendant
as stated by the Plaintiff appears to have been made between the Plaintiff and
Meredien .... the Defendant is not a party to this agreement .... flowing from
this .... the Defendant cannot be injunct which the plaintiff seeks to do..."
Learned Counsel for the Plaintiff-Respondent has on the other hand submitted
\- relying on certain Articles in the agreement that the agreement 'A' does
not authorise the Defendant to let guest rooms to the Institute as office
space. Counsel has cited paragraph 5(1 )(3) of the plaint where the Plaintiff
relies on the provisions of Article 4.1 of the Agreement as permitting
'Meredien' to perform " those duties coming within the scope of the management
and marketing of the hotel .... it shall not set up in the Hotel any other
activities except for ancillary and complementary activities as normally
connected with this type of operation or becoming so connected as a result of
changes in the standard practices of the international hotel trade. Again
Counsel referred to Article 4.5.1 of the agreement where it is stated that
"Meredien shall perform successfully on behalf of and for the account of the
Contracting Party (the plaintiff) all appropriate and necessary management
services including at Article 4.5.1 (b) ... negotiating contracts which are
normally entered into within the scope of the hotel operation  " Thus it was
Plaintiff-Respondent's Counsel's submission that the Defendant has acted
outside the scope of his authority wrongfully in letting out two floors to the
Institute to be used as office space in consequence of which the plaintiff
suffers loss. In any event the plaintiff is entitled to establish a right
which is disputed. Counsel thus submits that the Defendant is liable in tort.
In support The Law of Agency by Raphael Powell, 2nd Ed, pp.277,283 was cited.
At page 277 the writer deals with the Personal Liability of an Agent and
states: "Any person who commits a tort is himself liable for that tort. It
follows that an agent who commits a tort is liable whether he acted on behalf
of a principal or not and even if he acted for his principal's benefit. He
cannot escape liability by pleading that

**284**

he acted with the authority of his Principal, unless the existence of that
authority means that the agent has not committed a tort at all.." At page 283
the author states "where the principal and agent are both liable for a tort
committed by the agent, they are said to be joint tort feasors and their
liability is joint and several. The Plaintiff can sue either principal or
agent separately or he can sue both together jointly." Thus it was contended
for the Plaintiff that there was indeed a cause of action against the
Defendant in tort and that the Defendant has rightly been made a party to the
action. It may be that the Defendant disputes the Plaintiff's position as to
the nature and extent of the Agreement A'. Indeed the Defendant takes the
position that letting of the floors to the Institute was warranted by the
Agreement 'A' - vide - Article 4.5.1 (e). But it is the submission for the
Plaintiff that this first ground upon which the District Judge's order was
based was a question to be argued and decided inter partes at a later stage of
the action and not to be decided ex parte by the Court as it did. It is my
view that there is merit in the submissions of Plaintiff's Counsel that this
is a question that must be determined at the inquiry inter partes into the
application for injunction. The District Court was in error in corning to its
conclusion on this question at this stage as to whether the Defendant is
rightly before the Court. It has reached this conclusion at this stage no
doubt because the Court only heard one party. By this process the Court has
prejudged an issue to the prejudice of the Plaintiff. This can never be a
proper exercise of inherent powers as it does not meet the ends of justice.
The question as to whether the Defendant is properly before the Court can only
be decided at a later stage inter partes and is therefore still open for
decision. Thus it seems to me that a District Judge may in the exercise of
inherent powers under s.839 of the Civil Procedure Code in the absence of
express provision, suspend or set aside an enjoining order already made \-
vide Hotel Galaxy Ltd case cited but it must be done inter partes in an
appropriate case as he is interfering with a benefit already granted to a
Plaintiff by a Court having been satisfied on the averments in the petition
and affidavit and it is therefore nothing but fair procedure in appropriate
circumstances, before interfering with the earlier exercise of discretion, to
give the Plaintiff a fair chance of meeting such grave accusations (eg) of
wilful suppression of material facts or the lack of a cause of action as the
suspension or setting aside of an earlier discretionary order remains the
exercise once again of discretionary power.

**285**

There is the further ground whether there was wilful suppression by the
Plaintiff of material facts when supporting his petition for injunction. The
Defendant-Petitioner relies on documents SC 8 and 9. By SC 8 dated 1.6.89 the
Defendant informs the Executive Manager of Galadari Hotels that the 2nd and
3rd floors are to be given out to IIMI as (the rooms) were never commissioned.
SC 9 dated 9.6.89 is a copy of an agreement between the Defendant and IIMI....
"As of this date the hotel will rent to IIMI the entire 2nd and 3rd floors
comprising 80 rooms for a period of 27 months. The occupancy of those rooms
will commence today. Rental payment will commence from 1.9.89 for a rental of
US$ 20833/33 per month." The Defendant-Petitioner states that these matters
were communicated to the Plaintiff-Company by letter of 16.6.89 - SC 11, but
the Plaintiff had failed to mention them in the plaint. Instead the Plaintiff
averred that only 2 rooms had been rented when it applied for injunction
relief from the Court on 23.6.89. The Plaintiff's answer is that the agreement
SC 9 is not an agreement between Meredien and IIMI. SC 9 is merely signed by
the Defendant and the General Manager of MMI and is a private communication
between them and the Plaintiff was unaware of the facts set out therein. It is
not a notarially executed agreement and is of no force or avail in law to
create any proprietory or real right in the Institute. The Plaintiff therefore
does not need to take cognisance of SC 9 which has also been referred to as
X3\ Hence it was submitted there was no suppression of a material fact. It is
my view that this question of fact should have been considered at a later
stage at the inquiry into the injunction application inter partes. The
District Court has prejudged an issue that goes to the merits. This ground too
for the exercise of discretionary power ex parte in this case is
unsupportable.

The next contention of Defendant-Respondent was that the proceedings of 3.7.89
was _inter partes._ In aid of this submission reference was made to that part
of the record \- SC 25 (Supra) which stated "... Mr. Balasubramaniam appears
instructed by Mr. Eardley Seneviratne and states he has come to know about the
application only this morning and he has no papers with him although it is an
ex parte application. Mr. Balasubramaniam makes submissions and wants case to
be heard tomorrow."

This contention is unconvincing. It is apparent that the Counsel for Plaintiff
Respondent was not informed of the application of Defendant-Petitioner that
day. They have been taken by surprise.

**286**

The Attorney said he had no papers. He asks for a postponement. It may well be
that this submission was that Senior Counsel for the Plaintiff had had no
chance of considering the charges travelled against the plaint. The papers
filed in this appeal clearly state on behalf of the Plaintiff that proceeding
was ex parte. The record of the proceedings is to my mind quite consistent
with that position. It is my view that the Plaintiff Respondent has satisfied
this Court that the District Court proceedings of 3.7.89 was ex parte.

In deciding whether the Court of Appeal could have heard the application in
Revision one has to consider the factual situation that had arisen before the
District Court. An ex parte inquiry was held on 3.7.89 upon an application of
the Defendant-Petitioner which had fully set out the objections of the
Defendant to the issue of interim injunction in the course of which an
application for a postponement of the inquiry made by the Plaintiffs was
refused on the footing that the Court was not obliged to hear the Plaintiff.
Order was made ex parte suspending the operation of the earlier enjoining
order and an order made " call case on 17.7.89 ". There was no indication that
the Court would hear the Plaintiff against the order of suspension on 17.7.89
or on a later date. Earlier, when the enjoining order was made the Court had
given the summons and notice returnable date as 17.7.89. That date would in
the ordinary course be a date on which objections are received and an inquiry
date fixed. After the refusal by the Court to hear the Plaintiff in position
to the Defendant's application for dismissal of the Plaintiff's case at an
adjourned hearing and the act of the Court in suspending its earlier order ex
parte there seems to have been little purpose in making the order for 'call
case' that the Court did. This does not indicate whether the Plaintiff would
be given a chance on 17.7.89 to meet the Defendant's allegations and have the
enjoining order once again restored. The probabilities are that that would
have been most unlikely. The Court had already reached findings of fact. The
order for "Call Case" on 17.7.89 means just what it says. There must be fair
procedure and the facts as stated above suggest that there was an end to the
ex parte enjoining order matter. In this situation the justice of the case
should relieve the Plaintiff from further pursuing the matter of the enjoining
order before the same Court. There were thus exceptional circumstances which
justified the course of action taken in this case thereafter.

**287**

Next, the fact that the order of 3.7.89 was before the Court of Appeal is
supported by the reference to the District Court order in a sentence from the
order of the Court of Appeal - viz: "I am not obliged at this stage to hear
the Plaintiff". The Court of Appeal could have permitted it to be filed later.
This matter must be considered in the peculiar circumstances of this case. It
has been contended that there has been a violation of Rule 46 of the Supreme
Court Rules in that the Petitioner failed to produce at the time it supported
the application before the Court of Appeal the order of the Judge complained
of with a certified copy of the proceedings of 3.7.89. The Court has dealt
with the petition and disposed of it. The application in revision has been
made the very next day (ie) 4.7.89 because of urgency. Taking the facts and
circumstances into consideration the Court of Appeal was within jurisdiction
in proceeding to hear the Plaintiff's complaint in the exercise of its
revisionary powers.

There is left the question of the correctness of the findings of the Court of
Appeal. That Court, dealing with the general question as to whether a District
Judge could have in the exercise of discretionary power made order suspending
an enjoining order held that it could not as (i) there is no statutory
authority to suspend an enjoining order before the decision on the application
for injunction, (ii) where express provisions regulate steps to be taken,
inherent powers cannot be invoked and, (iii) that the course adopted by the
District Judge was a violation of s.666 of the Code. These findings are wrong
and are set aside.

It is my view as I have already stated that a District Judge could in the
exercise of discretionary power make an order such as of suspension or
vacation or setting aside of an earlier enjoining order provided that in a
suitable case the proceedings are had inter partes. The contest before the
District Judge on 3.7.89 went to the root of the case - whether there was a
cause of action at all against the Defendant as well as a challenge that the
Plaintiff had wilfully suppressed material facts and misled the Court earlier.
In such a situation it was appropriate for the District Judge to have dealt
with the Defendant's application inter partes before interfering with his
earlier order.

The order of the District Court of 3.7.89 is set aside. The District Judge is
directed to proceed to fix the inquiry into the interim injunction and the
trial if parties so agree and conclude it expeditiously. Paragraph 2 of the
order of this Court made _on_ 21.8.89

**288**

requiring the District Court to conclude the inquiry into the interim
injunction before 31.10.89 cannot be implemented as that date has passed. The
Defendant-Petitioner is liable in costs fixed at Rs. 1500/-in the Court of
Appeal and Rs. 1500/- in this Court.

**

KULATUNGA, J.

**

The principal issue in this appeal concerns the legality or propriety of an
order of the District Court in the above action by which it suspended an
enjoining order which had been issued for restraining the defendant, The
General Manager of Galadari Meridien Hotel, Colombo owned by the plaintiff
company from proceeding with certain proposals for allocating the entire 2nd
and 3rd floors of the Hotel to the International Irrigation Management
Institute for use as office space. The enjoining order had been issued on
27.06.89 ex parte in terms of Section 664 of the Civil Procedure Code until
the hearing and determination of the application for an interim injunction.
The notice of the said application was returnable on 17.07.89. However on
03.07.89 the defendant filed his objections alleging that -  
  
(1) the action has been instituted without a cause of action against the
defendant ex facie on the averments in the plaint;  
  
(2) the enjoining order had been obtained by fraudulent suppression of
material facts relevant to the plaintiff's right to sue the defendant and the
acts sought to be restrained; and praying for;  
  
(a) suspension of the operation of the enjoining order or for its discharge or
vacation;  
  
(b) refusal of the application for an injunction;  
  
(c) dismissal of the action instituted without a cause of action.

On the same day the District Judge heard the defendant's application ex parte
despite an application by the plaintiff's junior Counsel to fix it for hearing
the next day and suspended the enjoining order and directed that the case be
called on 17.07.89 which is the date originally fixed for return to the notice
of the application for an interim injunction.

On 04.07.89 the plaintiff made a revision application to the Court of

**289**

Appeal against the order of the District Judge. The Court of Appeal having
stayed the operation of the impugned order proceeded to hear the matter and
made order setting it aside inter alia on the ground that it had been made
without giving a hearing to the plaintiff and directed the District Judge to
proceed to hear the objections to the issue of the interim injunction. The
defendant has appealed to this Court from the judgement of the Court of Appeal
and seeks to have the order of the District Judge suspending the enjoining
order restored.

Despite the lengthy submissions in support of the appeal and the numerous
authorities cited, we have informed Counsel that specially in view of the fact
that ail the proceedings and orders in the District Court which constitute the
subject of this appeal have been ex parte, we propose to determine this appeal
without expressing any views which may prejudice the parties in the
adjudication of their claims in the application for the interim injunction or
the main action pending in that Court.

Mr. Kanag-lswaran, PC for the defendant-appellant justifiably criticised the
view expressed by the Court of Appeal that the implication of the provisions
of Sections 664 and 666 of the CPC is that the district Court cannot in the
exercise of inherent power suspend an enjoining order until the hearing and
determination of the application for the injunction. This view is plainly
erroneous in the light of the case law on the subject and in particular the
decision of this Court in _Hotel Galaxy Ltd. v. Mercantile Hotels Ltd._ (11).
The Court also appears to have entertained the erroneous view that the
District Judge revising an enjoining order is always bound to hear the party
affected. There can be no such restriction on the inherent power of the Court
under Section 839 of the CPC. This power is very wide both as regards its
content and the procedure the Court may adopt in a particular case. The scope
and extent of inherent power was examined by this Court in _T.W.U. Seneviratne
v. Francis Fonseka Abeykoon_ (4). Tambiah J. cited the following passage from
Chitaley and Rao Code of Civil Procedure 3rd Ed. Vol. 1 on the corresponding
section in the Indian Civil Procedure Code.

"Every Court, whether a Civil Court or otherwise, must therefore, in the
absence of express provision in the Code for that purpose, be deemed to
possess, as inherent in its very Constitution, all such powers as are
necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in the course of the
Administration of

**290**

Justice" (p. 1199).

He also cited Sarkar (Code of Civil Procedure) Vol. 1 at page 842 where it is
stated -

"Where a contingency happens which has not been anticipated by the framers of
the Civil Procedure Code, and therefore no express provision has been made in
that behalf, the Court has inherent power to adopt such procedure, if
necessary to invent a procedure, as may do substantial justice, and shorten
needless litigation".

On the question of the duty of hearing the affected party in discharging or
varying an injunction granted ex parte Counsel for the defendant-appellant
cited _London City Agency (JCD) Ltd. and another v. Lee and others_ (7).
Megarry J. said -

"The Court will grant an interlocutory injunction on an ex parte application
if a case of sufficient cogency is made, and no reason has been suggested why,
if an application ex parte to discharge or vary such an injunction is
supported by sufficiently cogent grounds, the Court should not do what is
sought. If time permits, it is plainly preferable that any such application
should be made on due notice, but in a case of sufficient urgency, I do not
see why an injunction granted ex parte should be immune from being varied or
discharged on an ex parte application."

Mr. Eric Amarasinghe, PC for the plaintiff-respondent concedes that the Court
has the inherent jurisdiction in an appropriate case to vacate an enjoining
order but contends that in the circumstances of this case it could not have
lawfully suspended the enjoining order without hearing the plaintiff. He also
questions the propriety of the order in particular on the first ground i.e.
the lack of a cause of action against the defendant and complains that the
District Judge has pre-judged the main and sole issue in the action; and
already formed an opinion ex parte on a question upon which the plaintiff had
the right to be heard. On this and other grounds, he submits that the order of
the Court of Appeal is right and ought to be affirmed.

On the other hand, the Counsel for the defendant-appellant whilst not denying
the necessity for hearing the affected party in an appropriate case
confidently contends that in the instant case the Court was not obliged to
hear the plaintiff at that stage; that the plaintiff had, particularly in view
of the suppression of material facts,

**291**

lost his right to be heard on the merits of the defendant's application; and
that the Court had the jurisdiction to vary its order so soon as it discovered
such suppression.

Thus the question whether the District Judge was right in suspending the
enjoining order without hearing the plaintiff is crucial. There are two other
issues namely whether the plaintiff could have maintained his application in
the Court of Appeal without first having canvassed the order of suspension
before the District Court and whether there were exceptional circumstances
which warranted the Court of Appeal setting aside the order of suspension by
way of revision. All these issues can be determined only after an examination
of the facts of the case. In this connection, the Counsel for the defendant-
appellant in his written reply contends that the _Galaxy_ judgment is binding
authority for the principle that a party seeking to canvass an ex parte order
must first apply to the Court that made it; that this principle as affirmed in
the _Galaxy_ case is unqualified; the judgment cannot be distinguished; the
principle cannot be restricted in any form; and if that is to be done, the
matter ought to be referred to a fuller bench. Since the _Galaxy_ case is
being relied upon by Counsel on more than one issue it would be appropriate to
first examine the facts of that case.

Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent does not deny the binding force of the
principle affirmed in the _Galaxy_ judgment that the District Judge had the
power to vary the enjoining order. He however does not concede that the
plaintiff was required in the circumstances of this case to apply to the
District Judge before seeking to revise his order in the Court of Appeal
particularly for the reason that the District Judge was not ready and willing
and did not intend, to hear the plaintiff on the order of suspension. In the
submission of the Counsel for the defendant-appellant the principle is
unqualified and cannot be waived except perhaps in an extreme case where
access to the original court is denied by Act of God, force majeure and such
perils.

In the _Galaxy_ case, the plaintiff company exercising rights of management,
control and operation of a hotel on behalf of the owning company under a
management agreement complained that the owning company had with the
assistance of thugs interfered with their rights of control and management and
forcibly ejected Samarakoon, The General Manager of the plaintiff from the
hotel.

**292**

The plaintiff prayed, inter alia, for a declaration that it was entitled to
operate and manage the hotel without interference by the defendants, their
servants and agents; that its rights had been unlawfully interfered with by
the defendants, their servants and agents; for an order for the ejectment of
all persons who had no authority from the plaintiff; and for an interim and a
permanent injunction restraining the defendants, their servants and agents
from interfering with the plaintiff's rights.

The District Judge directed notice of the application for an interim
injunction on the defendants and issued an enjoining order restraining them
from committing the acts the commission of which the plaintiff sought to
restrain by way of an interim injunction. Subsequently, the defendants applied
to the Court to vacate the enjoining order, inter alia, on the ground of
wilful suppression of a material fact namely an order of the Primary Court in
proceedings instituted by the Police under Section 66 of the Primary Courts
Procedure Act, No.44 of 1979 declining to make an interim order restoring to
the plaintiff the rights of management of the hotel. The affidavit of
Samarakoon filed with the plaint only stated -

"I made complaint to the Police.... The Police have referred the matter to the
Fort Magistrate's Court and the matter is pending therein"

After receiving the written objections of the plaintiff and hearing the
parties the District Judge vacated the enjoining order on the ground of wilful
suppression of a material fact without going into the merits of the
defendant's application to vacate the enjoining order.

This Court affirmed the order of the District Judge on the following grounds;

1\. That in view of the _Scott v. Avery_ Clause in the management agreement,
the plaintiff had no cause of action to sue; the action should fail in limine
for want of a cause of action and the District Judge should have refused to
entertain the plaint as disclosing no cause of action.

2\. That the relationship between the defendant company and the plaintiff
being that of principal and agent or master and servant the only remedy
available to the plaintiff was damages and not specific performance. The
plaintiff cannot sustain the reliefs of declaration and injunction prayed for
by him. Hence the enjoining order was misconceived.

**293**

3\. That the order of the District Judge suspending the enjoining order on the
ground of a material fact was right; and there were no exceptional
circumstances for the Court of Appeal to have exercised revisionary powers;
the exercise of such power on the assumption that the plaintiff was in lawful
possession of the hotel was untenable since it was the defendant company which
was in possession of the hotel of which the plaintiff was only the managing
agent on behalf of the defendant company.

4\. That It was legally competent for the District Judge to vacate the
enjoining order which was made by him ex parte.

 Consequently, this Court set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
proceeded to direct the District Court to take further steps according to law
in the light of the judgment of this Court.

I presume that pursuant to the direction of this Court, the District Judge
would have dismissed the plaintiff's action. This was possible in view of the
fact that the District Judge had held a full inquiry after hearing the
parties; all the facts were before the Court of Appeal and this Court and the
issues were exhaustively argued by Counsel; and in the end this Court was in a
position to give a clear direction touching the rights of parties. In the case
before us, there has been no such proceedings or determination of facts; as
stated earlier we can only decide the limited question whether the ex parte
order of the District Judge suspending the enjoining order is valid and any
incidental issues but without causing prejudice to the claims of the parties
pending before the District Court. In reaching a decision, I would have to
refer to the salient facts and set out the contending positions advanced by
the parties in relation to such facts. In the _London City Agency (JCD) Ltd.
v. Lee_ (Supra) Megarry J. in considering an application to discharge an
interlocutory injunction said -

"I therefore turn to the facts of the case. I propose to deal with them as
briefly as possible, bearing in mind that there is an acute conflict of
evidence, and that therefore it would be quite wrong for me to attempt to
resolve this conflict at this stage"

In the instant case, affidavits and documents have been filed by both sides;
the case has reached us before there had been any inter parte

**294**

hearings on evidence in the District Court; and Counsel have made
diametrically opposed submissions touching the available evidence. The caution
exercised by Megarry J. should therefore guide us with equal force.

Details of the dispute which culminated in the filing of this action can be
gathered from the correspondence copies of which are annexed to the plaint.
The entire correspondence commencing on 30.05.89 and ending on 16.06.89
relating to the proposed allocation of the 2nd and 3rd floors of the hotel as
office space to the International Irrigation Management Institute (hereinafter
called NMl) has been produced. The plaintiff also produced with the plaint a
copy of the agreement under which the management and operation of the hotel on
behalf of and for the account of the plaintiff had been entrusted to a company
called 'Societe des Hotels Meridien' (hereinafter called 'Meridien') situated
in Paris. Admittedly Meridien has no place of business in Sri Lanka; and the
plaint states that the powers and discretions granted to Meridien under the
agreement were at all times material to this action exercised by the defendant
as General Manager of the Hotel. Under the agreement the relevant provisions
of which have been fully reproduced in the plaint, the selection, transfer and
dismissal of the General Manager is by Meridien; and he shall be under
Meridien's exclusive control but employed and paid by the plaintiff.

The two floors in question consist of 80 guest rooms. The correspondence shows
that they are furnished and equipped. Thus in one of his letters the defendant
states -

"The furniture on the two floors in question will be suitably stored on
another floor of the hotel. The client will be basically using his own office
furniture".

The correspondence bears out the fact that these guest rooms will be converted
for use as office space. Defendants letter to IIMI containing the terms of the
proposed lease shows that the use of the rooms by IIMI would involve
alterations and damage. One such term states -

"The cost of rehabilitating the rooms or corredors consequent to any breakage
of or damage to furniture, furnishings, fittings and equipment must be borne
by IIMI....".

A copy of this letter had not been furnished to the plaintiff at the

**295**

time of instituting this action. The only information in the possession of the
plaintiff regarding follow up action on the proposal consisted of a letter
from IIMI which states.

".... We reached an agreement with the General Manager of the Galadari
Meridien Hotel whereby the Institute would rent offices on this hotel's second
and third floors", and a letter from the defendant in which he states -

"We have .... given out the 2nd and 3rd floors of the hotel to IIMI in the
manner we mentioned to you by our earlier correspondence". In one of the
letters produced with the plaint the defendant states -

"Space to be allotted consists of the 2nd and 3rd floors of the hotel. These
floors never having been commissioned since the opening of the hotel and being
presently in a very bad state of repair i.e. wall paper peeling off walls,
carpets stained etc. etc."

The plaint alleges, inter alia, that the defendant has, in pursuance of his
proposal allocated two of the guest rooms of the 3rd floor of the said hotel
bearing numbers 318 and 320 as office space in the purported exercise of his
alleged rights as General Manager of the hotel and states that the plaintiff
reasonably apprehends that the defendant will, wrongfully and unlawfully and
in violation of the management agreement, proceed to allocate the 2nd and 3rd
floors; and that thereupon by such wrongful and unlawful allocation the
Institute will use the said space for office purposes by converting the lay
out of the guest rooms; effect structural alterations and modifications and
cause the furniture fixtures, fittings and other amenities of the guest rooms
to be shifted; and that in such event grave and irreparable loss and damage
will be thereby caused to the plaintiff. The plaintiff prays for a declaration
that the defendant is not entitled under the management agreement to allocate
the 2nd and 3rd floors to the Institute for office space; for permanent
injunction restraining the defendant from allocating, renting and/or leasing
to the Institute the 2nd and 3rd floors or committing the other acts
enumerated above; and for an interim injunction in the same terms. An
affidavit from K. Abootty, Executive Manager of the plaintiff accompanied the
plaint.

On the basis of this plaint, affidavit and documents and after hearing Counsel
for the plaintiff, the District Judge issued an enjoining order but excluded
from its operation rooms 318 and 320 in

**296**

view of the fact that the plaintiff's Counsel informed the District judge that
these rooms had already been converted into offices. His subsequent order
reads -

"Addressing my mind to the facts submitted by Mr. Kanag-lswaran the agreement
purported to have been entered between the plaintiff and the defendant as
stated by the plaintiff appears to have been made by the plaintiff and
Meridien as evinced in the preamble to the agreement 'A'.

In the first instance, it is my view that the defendant is not a party to this
agreement.

Secondly, following from this it is my view that the defendant cannot be
injuncted where the plaintiff seeks to do so.

(Advertising) to the facts of this case, it appears to me that purported
renting of the two floors has already been done by the letter dated 9th June,
reflected in the document marked 'C annexed to the plaint. Further, though
alleged by the plaintiff that the 80 rooms in floors 2 & 3 of this building
are guest rooms they have not been commissioned which fact is borne by letter
marked 'B'.

In the light of these facts, I suspend the enjoining order issued in this
case.

Copy of this order to be served on the plaintiff .... call case on 17th July,
1989"

According to this order, the plaintiff had stated that the management
agreement was between the plaintiff and the defendant. Counsel for the
plaintiff-respondent complains that this observation is based on the erroneous
record of submissions made in support of the application for an injunction;
that the agreement with Meridien was annexed to the plaint; relevant portions
of the agreement were also cited in the plaint; and it is inconceivable that
Counsel would have misrepresented the agreement. It is true that a party to a
suit will not be permitted to contradict the record; but Counsel informed us
that he had no opportunity of suggesting corrections to these proceedings. It
is not possible for this Court to decide what submissions Counsel in fact made
before the District Judge. I can only observe that had the District Judge held
an inter partes inquiry into the defendant's application, there would have
been no room for such complaint.

Counsel for the defendant-appellant confidently submits that this

**297**

being an action based on the agreement, Meridien who is the disclosed foreign
principal of the defendant alone can be sued and not its agent the defendant.
He has cited authority for this proposition. (Fridman - Law of Agency 5th Ed.
pp.187-188; Chesire, Fifoot and Furmston's Law of Contract 11th Ed. p.510).
Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent submits with equal confidence that the
defendant can be sued for his acts which are not authorised by the agreement.
He pointed out that the agreement prohibits the setting up of any other
activities except for ancillary and complimentary activities, as normally
connected with hotel operation according to normal practices of the
international hotel trade; he submits that the question whether the proposed
conversion of 80 guest rooms into offices is a permitted practice ought to be
decided at the trial. To a question by Court he stated that this action is
based on tort.

In his written submissions, he has cited authority in support of the principle
that an agent who commits a tort is liable whether he acted on behalf of a
principal or not, and even if he acted for his principal's benefit. He cannot
escape liability by pleading that he acted with the authority of his
principal. Where the principal and the agent are both liable for a tort
committed by the agent, they are said to be joint tortfeasors, and their
liability is joint and several. The plaintiff can sue either principal or
agent separately, or he can sue both together jointly. (The Law of Agency by
Raphael Fowell 2nd Ed. pp. 277,283).

The dispute relating to the classification of the cause of action is not an
issue for our decision. It is an issue for the District Court. This Court will
therefore not pursue the matter except to observe that a Court should not
reach even a provisional decision on so serious a question without hearing the
affected party.

The District Judge appears to have taken the view that the plaintiff had
suppressed the fact that the renting of two floors had already been done by
letter dated 9th June reflected in the document marked 'G'. The defendant had
not furnished to the plaintiff the letter dated 9th; document 'G' is a letter
wherein the defendant informed the plaintiff that he had 'given out' the 2nd
and 3rd floors of the hotel to IIMI; it is vague. Besides, Counsel for the
plaintiff-respondent strongly contends that on the face of it the letter of
the 9th is not an agreement by Meridien acting for and on behalf of the
plaintiff. On the basis of these facts and circumstances, I hold that the
District Judge should have heard the plaintiff before forming his view in the
matter.

**298**

The District Judge has also formed the view that the plaintiff suppressed the
fact that the 80 guest rooms had not been commissioned- Counsel for the
plaintiff-respondent submits that the question whether any facts were
suppressed and whether they are material facts should be decided inter partes.
I am in agreement with this submission. Incidentally, if the 2nd and 3rd
floors were never commissioned and never handed over by the contract as
submitted in SC 30 A, and "never taken over by the plaintiff-respondent" as
stated in the petition of appeal, it is a moot question how Meridien or the
defendant as their agent could have taken over and rented those floors under
the management agreement. If dealing with such property is unlawful, how
should such wrong be classified? Is it based on contract or tort? These are
matters for decision in the pending action.

The enjoining order in question was issued upon a consideration of the plaint,
the affidavit, the documents and submissions of Counsel. It is an order which
is exfacie regular and made in the exercise of the ordinary jurisdiction of
the Court, for maintaining the status quo until the hearing and determination
of the application for an interim injunction. Section 664 of the CPC empowers
its issue exparte in the discretion of the Court, upon considerations of
urgency and the balance of convenience.

It is the plaintiff's position that the hotel was established with the
approval of and with tax and other concessions by governmental authorities
which would be forfeited if 80 guest rooms are converted info office space;
this would result in irremediable loss and damage to the plaintiff. Even
assuming that the letter of 9th June constitutes an agreement, the plaintiffs
submission is that the enjoining order is a continuing restraint against
further acts such as the physical occupation of the rooms except 2 rooms
already occupied by IIMI, the conversion of the rooms, structural alterations,
shifting of furniture and equipment etc., As against this, the defendant's
ground for the suspension of the enjoining order is the hardship to the
defendant and to 1IM1. This is presumably the loss of rent money and the delay
in providing office space to IIMI. As the lease is on behalf of the plaintiff
the loss of rental is no loss to the defendant as much. Even if hardship to
IIMI is relevant, it is nothing more than a delay in shifting its office to
Colombo from Digana in Kandy where its centre is presently situated. Assuming
that the plaintiff has a right of action,

**299**

urgency and the balance of convenience would therefore appear to be in favour
of the plaintiff. This is relevant to the question whether the plaintiff
should have been given a hearing before suspending the enjoining order.

The dissolution of the enjoining order was effected in the exercise of the
inherent power on the ground that the plaintiff had no right of action, which
fact the plaintiff has suppressed; and that in any event the lease had already
been signed and the guest rooms given for occupation which facts had also been
suppressed. The question is whether the District Judge had failed to exercise
this power according to law by declining to hear the plaintiff. No such issues
arises as regards the procedure for vacating an interim injunction for which
there is express provision in Section 666 of the CPC. That section requires an
application to be made by way of summary procedure with notice to the
plaintiff. This procedure does not apply to an enjoining order; it may be
discharged or varied ex parte. However, as Megarry J. said in _London City
Agency (JCD) i td. v. Lee_ (Supra)

"If time permits, it is plainly preferable that any such application should be
made on due notice."

Such applications should generally be on notice - Halsbury 4th Ed. Vol. 24
para 1111; The Principles of Equitable Remedies, Spry 3rd Ed. 490. Notice is
dispensed with only where considerations of urgency and the balance of
convenience would warrant such procedure.

The rule audi alteram partem or the principle of fairness is rooted in Common
Law. In _Cooper v. Wandsworth Board o! Works_ (14) Bytes, J. called it
"justice of the Common Law". Principles of natural justice which are discussed
in numerous cases reviewing the orders of administrative authorities
exercising 'quasi judicial' powers were originally applied to the process by
which Courts themselves made their decisions. Constitutional and
Administrative Law, Hood Phillips & Paul Jackson 6th Ed. p. 602; that these
principles apply to proceedings in a Court of Law "is hardly open to
question". Natural Justice, Paul Jackson 2nd Ed. 104.

Counsel for the defendant-appellant submits that as the order suspending the
enjoining order is a temporary order, the complaint of breach of audi alteram
partem rule at this stage cannot be taken seriously. The decisions in Lewis v.
Heifer (15) and London Borough of Hounslow v. Twickenham Garden Developments
Ltd. (9) cited by

**300**

Counsel do not assist us. In the first case, an injunction to restrain the
suspension by the Labour Party of certain officers and committees of a local
branch pending inquiries was refused. In the second case, the plaintiff
applied for an injunction to restrain a building contractor whose contract had
been terminated from trespassing on the building site. This was refused mainly
on the ground that the balance of convenience was in favour of the contractor.
The dicta of Megarry J. on the principles of natural justice relied upon by
Counsel before us were made in relation to the Architect's notice by which the
contract was terminated which notice was attacked by the contractor inter alia
on the ground that it was given in breach of the principles of natural
justice.

In Wiseman v. Borneman (16) Lord Wilberforce said -

".... I cannot accept that there is a difference in principle as to the
observance of the principles of natural justice, between final decisions and
those which are not final...."

Lord Wilberforce continued

'Secondly, in my opinion, a residua! duty of fairness rests with the tribunal.
I would, therefore, think them empowered, if in any case where they are
exercising their functions under Sub S. (5) they consider exceptionally that
material has been introduced of such a character that to decide on it ex parte
would be unfair, to take appropriate steps to eliminate that unfairness. I do
not think that rules need be formulated or procedures laid down...."  
  
In R _v. Wareham Magistrates' Court_ (17) the transfer of an application for
the revocation of an order for maintenance to a Court 300 miles from the
recipient of maintenance resided was quashed on the ground that such transfer
was without notice to her, even though the rule under which the Magistrate
acted required no such notice to be given.

McCullough, J. said (at 753)

"Thus the question is not one of the implication into the provision under
consideration a rigid requirement applicable in every case. It is one of
fairness. In some cases fairness will require steps to he taken which in other
cases it will not require".

I am of the view that having regard to the complicated questions of

**301**

Law and the serious allegation of fraudulent suppression of facts the
plaintiff including a suggestion that the plaintiff Counsel himself had misled
the Court in stating the case for an interim injunction, the Direct Judge
should have heard the plaintiff before suspending the enjoining order. In the
Galary case the enjoining order was vacated after hearing the plaintiff. In
Lee's case although the application was ex parte, Counsel for the plaintiff
was present and considerably assisted the Court. It is significant that megary
J. did not discharge the interlocutory order but varied it only to the extent
of enabling the defendants to draw a sum not exceeding 625 form the bank
account mentioned in the order .

I cannot _tee_ what s`erious mischief it would have caused to the defendant if
the District Judge acceded to the request of the junior Counsel for the
plaintiff to fix she matter for hearing on the next day On the other hand,
mischief to the plaintiff would appear to be irremediable. Besides the
conversion of 80 guest rooms into offices the defendant had selected as a
tenant IIMI which claims inviolability of premises and community from every
form of legal process in Sri Lanka under Act No. 6 of 1985. if this is
correct, in the absence of an _order_ restraining the defendant from
completing the transaction with IIMI, steps for converting two floors of the
hotel would continue and MMI would be installed there. In that event, any
judgement which the plaintiff may obtain would become completely ineffectual.

Counsel for the defendant-appellant has placed much reliance on the rule that
the complaint of a party found guilty of wilful suppression of facts will be
dismissed on that ground alone and he would in particular be liable to have
any ex parte order obtained by him vacated at once.

Counsel cited -

Spry Equitable Remedies 329, 476,

_

Thomas A. Edison Ltd- v. Bullock (1) Alponso Appuhamy v. Hettiarachchi (2)
Galaxy _case (Supra)

Halsbury 4th Ed. Vol. 24 para 1112.

These authorities are 5f no assistance in deciding whether the District Judge
was wrong in suspending the enjoining order ex parte. In the decisions cited
relief was refused or an order made was vacated after hearing the parties. The
effect of suppression _is_ to _make_ the offender liable to have his claim
thrown out of Court without going into the merits of the case. There is no
authority for the

**302**

proposition that an allegation of suppression by itself forfeits to a party
the right to be heard before his claim is rejected.

I am of the view that whilst the District Judge has the power to vacate or
suspend the enjoining order, he has on the facts and circumstances of this
case failed to properly exercise his power by declining to hear the plaintiff.
In other words, the particular order he made lacks jurisdiction. In _Anisminic
v. Foreign Compensations Commission_ (18) Lord Pearce said -

"Lack of jurisdiction may arise in various ways.... or while engaged in a
proper inquiry, the tribunal may depart from the rules of natural justice.
Thereby it would step outside its jurisdiction".

It remains to decide the two incidental issues raised in this appeal, namely,
whether on the authority of judicial decisions the plaintiff could not have
maintained his application in the Court of Appeal without first seeking to
have the order suspending the enjoining order canvassed before the District
Court, and whether there were exceptional circumstances warranting the
exercise of the revisionary powers of the Court of Appeal. On the first
question, Counsel relies on the decisions in _Fernando v._ D/as (12) and the
_Galaxy_ case (Supra).

_

Fernando's _case is authority for the proposition that a defendant cannot seek
to have an interim injunction issued by the District Court revised in the
Court of Appeal without first having recourse to the Court which issued it to
have it set aside in terms of Section 666 of the CPC. In his judgment,
Rodrigo, J. refers to certain other judgments in which it had been held that a
party seeking to set aside an ex parte order not covered by any express
provision for setting it aside must first apply to the Court which made it,
which is always competent to set it aside. Atukorale J. in his judgment in the
_Galaxy_ case cites more decisions on this point for determining the question
whether the District Judge was competent to vacate the enjoining order. These
are cases in which a decree or an order had been made without due notice to
the defendant. In one case, the Court without fixing a date for the answer of
the defendant fixed the case for ex parte trial on the basis that the
defendant was in default and entered decree nisi against her.

Atukorale, J. said "these authorities clearly establish the principle that a
Court which makes an ex parte order without notice to the

**303**

entitled to set it aside on the application of such party in the same case".

In the instant case, the issue before us is not whether the District Judge is
or is not entitled to suspend the enjoining order but the manner in which he
made his decision to suspend it. The plaintiff concedes the inherent power of
the Court in an appropriate case to vacate an enjoining order but contends
that the Court did not in the circumstances of this case have the power to
make such order without hearing him; that the Court formed an opinion ex parte
on the fundamental issue of maintainability of the action by the plaintiff
upon which he had the right to be heard; that the Court fixed the case to be
called on 17.07.89, the date on which notice on the application for an interim
injunction -.was returnable; that the Court was thus not ready and willing and
did not intend to hear the plaintiff in the meantime against the order of
suspension. I am of the view that the decisions relied upon by the defendant
have no application to the issue before us and the plaintiff was entitled to
seek to have the order of the District Judge revised by the Court of Appeal.

On the question whether there was exceptional circumstances for the exercise
of revisionary powers of the Court of Appeal, Counsel cited several decisions
in particular _Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali and others_ (19) and the _Galexy_
case (Supra). In _Rasheed All's_ case the applicant who was in occupation of
the premises in suit resisted execution of the decree. This Court held that he
was in possession on a sham transaction and was without a legal interest to
prefer a bona fide claim to resist the judgment creditor; the District Judge
had rejected his claim and directed that the judgment creditor be placed in
possession of the premises; and his remedy was to institute action in terms of
Section 329 of the CPC to establish his right of title to such property; there
were no exceptional circumstances, and that the fact that the Judge's order
may be merely wrong would not be a sufficient ground for the exercise of the
powers of revision. It is apparent that this decision does not assist the
defendant-appellant.

In the Galaxy case, the Court of Appeal took the view that the defendants had
by employing thugs forcibly ejected the plaintiff who was in lawful possession
of the hotel taking the law into their own hands and this constituted
exceptional circumstances to exercise its revisionary powers. Atukorale J.
held that the plaintiff was only the Manager of the hotel of which the 1st
defendant as owner always

**304**

was and continued to be in possession through its Manager, the plaintiff and
hence the approach of the Court of Appeal to the vital issue as to whether
there were or were hot exceptional circumstances to warrant the exercise of
revisionary powers was untenable. It also failed to address its mind to the
important question why the plaintiff, without pursuing the application for an
interim injunction pending in the District Court invoked the revisionary
jurisdiction to vacate the order of the District Judge setting aside the
enjoining order.

The facts of this case are different. As discussed above, the plaintiff is
impeaching the legality or propriety of the order of the District Judge on
fundamental issues including the failure to hold a fair inquiry.
Considerations of urgency and the balance of convenience demanded an immediate
review of the Judge's order; there were thus exceptional circumstances
warranting the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal.

For the above reasons, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment of the
Court of Appeal subject, however, to the rulings as regards the errors of law
contained therein which have been enumerated earlier in this judgment; the
defendant-appellant is directed to pay a sum of Rs. 1500/- as costs of this
appeal and the sum of Rs. 1500/- which has been ordered in the judgment of the
Court of Appeal, as costs in that Court.

__

_Appeal dismissed._

_Order of District Judge set aside._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/18.html_  

