##  Dayawathie and Others v. Dr. M.Fernando and Others - SLR - 371, Vol 1 of
1988 [1988] LKSC 18; (1988) 1 Sri LR 371 (25 April 1988)

**

371

** **

DAYAWATHIE AND OTHERS  
 v.  
DR. M. FERNANDO AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
RANASINGHE, C.J., ATUKORALE, J., AND TAMBIAH, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 37 OF 1987.  
NOVEMBER 30, 1987, JANUARY 20, 1988.  
AND FEBRUARY 08, 1988.

_

Fundamental Rights - Article 12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution - Equality
-Classification.

_

The petitioners complained of inequality of treatment and discrimination on
account of their political opinion in the selection for post-basic training
course for nurses. Those who had obtained less marks than the petitioners had
been selected.

**

Held-

**

For a permissible classification, there are two essential ingredients: (a) an
intelligible differentia and (b) a rational relation between such differentia
and the object sought to be achieved by such differential treatment.

The ground that those who defied an Essential Services Order cannot be relied
upon thereafter to be entrusted with supervisory duties of a responsible
nature while similar defiance by Doctors and Dental Surgeons did not bring on
them such disqualifications was not a good reason for the discrimination.

The classification relied on by the respondents to justify the admitted
unequal treatment adopted by the administration in the selection of nurses for
the said post-basic training course, has not been done bona fide. The
petitioners assertion of not being equally treated and of being discriminated
against is entitled to succeed.

**372**

Fresh selections should be made on the basis of the marks obtained by those
who presented themselves (including the petitioners and added petitioners) for
the examination, without any disqualification being imposed upon them on the
ground of participation in any trade union action between 18.3.86 and 17.4.86.

**

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.

_

P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C._ with _Mahanama de Silva_ for 2nd, 6th 7th and 8th
petitioners.

_

Faiz Mustapha, P. C._ with _H. Vithanachchi._ for 1st , 2nd, and 3rd
petitioners.

_

S. Mahenthiran_ with _Jayampaihi Wickremaratne_ for 4th and 5th petitioners.

_

Prins Gunasekera_ with _Mahanama de Silva_ for 9th and 10th petitioners.

_

R. K. W Goonasekera_ with _Mahanama de Silva_ and _Miss Weerasuriya_ for
intervenient petitioners 1st to 40th added petitioners.

_

M. S. M. Aziz, D.S.G._ with _A. Kasturiarachchi, S.C._ for 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents.

_Rajith de Silva_ with _George Rajapakse_ for 39th, 49th, 59th, 112th, 120th,
122nd, 126th, 143rd and 145th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult.

_

April 25, 1988. **  
  
RANASINGHE, C.J.

**

The Petitioners; who are nurses in the State services and are also members of
the Public Service United Nurses Union, have come into court complaining of
violations of the Fundamental Rights guaranteed to them under Articles 12(1)
and 12(2) of the Constitution: their rights to equal protection of, and
equality before the law and also to non-discrimination on the ground of
political opinion.

The Petitioners state: that their Union had, for several years prior to March
1986, been campaigning for several demands: that, in the course of their
agitation to win their demands, they have encountered resistance from a rival
trade union, namely, Jathika Saukkya Seva Heda Sangamaya, which enjoys the
support and the patronage of the government, presently in power: that, in
consequence of a work-to-rule campaign launched by the petitioners' Union in
1985, the members of this Union had been black-listed and victimized in
various ways: that, as a result, they were deliberately excluded from the
post-basic training course for appointment as trainees, in October 1985: that
such exclusion resulted in several of these Petitioners having to come, into
court: that these proceedings were settled on 25th June 1986, on the
undertaking given by the, state that the

**373**

Petitioners in that case would be accommodated at the very next course: but
that the said undertaking has not been honoured up to date: that, thereafter
during the month of December 1984, and during the year 1985 several circulars
were issued for the holding of limited competitive examinations for selection
for various posts and grades of Nursing Tutors, Public Health Sisters and Ward
Masters: that, by a circular issued in May 1985, applications were called from
Nursing Sisters, Grade II, Segment 'A' for Post-Basic Nursing Training for
appointment to Grade 1: that the Petitioners applied to be selected for such
course: that, thereafter, in order to win several demands which had been put
forward by their Union, an island-wide campaign of reporting 'sick' on the
18th and 19th March 1986, was launched by the Union: that the Administration,
however, treated such trade union activity to be a "strike" and declared that
the participants of that campaign had vacated their posts: that,. purporting
to act under the Emergency Regulations, the Administration, locked them out
from their places of work and even sought to eject them from the quarters
which they were in occupation of; that, thereafter, on the 17th April 1986,
those who had participated in such trade union activities, were allowed to
return to work unconditionally: that subsequently the Administration has
sought to victimize the participants in various ways, such as making penal
transfers and holding disciplinary ,inquiries: that the selections for the
said Post-Basic Training course had been finalised by December 1985 and
January 1986: the selections, however, were not announced until March 1987 :
that the rival union, referred to above, had made representations to His
Excellency they President, by their letter P8 dated 15.5.1986, inter alia, for
the-

_

(a) _Payment of two extra increments to those who did not participate in the
campaign held on 18.3.86 : and

_

(b)_ withholding of the promotions of nurses who had "struck" work, and to
stay the announcement of the selections:

that the selections were announced on 30th March, 1987, but the individuals so
selected were requested to attend the course which was said to commence from
1st April 1987 : that this was a variation from the practice which had
hitherto been adopted, namely, for the names of the selectees being posted to
the various hospitals; that this was so done deliberately to prevent aggrieved
parties obtaining interim relief from the court: that the Petitioners have not
been so selected,

**374**

whilst those, who have obtained less marks than the Petitioners, have been
selected. The Petitioners, therefore, complain that they have been unequally
treated and discriminated against, on account of their political opinions.

The 1st Respondent, who is the Secretary to the Ministry of Health, has, in
his affidavit dated 28th April 1987 averred that:

"in consultation with my Minister it was decided that all nurses who had
defied an Essential Services Order made under the Public Security Ordinance by
His Excellency the President will not be considered for this course which
involved upon completion the grant of further responsibilities to the nurses
who were selected. It was our decision that all nurses which included those
petitioners who had participated in the strike commencing 18th March 1986,
which was rendered illegal in consequences of Essential Services Order dated
18.3.86, made by the President (copy of which order is annexed hereto marked
X) should not be considered for this course. Hence, the names of all nurses
who had participated in the illegal strike were deleted. It was our opinion
that the irresponsibility and gross dereliction of duties shown by the
"striking" nurses which paralysed the Health Services and seriously risked the
lives of patients who had entered hospitals to receive treatment taken
together with their defiance for over a month of the Essential Services Order
making nursing an essential service render them unfit to be considered for
supervisory positions Which successful completion of the course entail."

The position so taken up by the 4th Respondent; has been submitted by- learned
Deputy Solicitor General, who appeared for the 1st and 3rd Respondents, as
constituting a permissible classification justifying the deliberate exclusion
of the Petitioners, who would otherwise have been eligible far selection to
follow the said course. It was contended that She two essential ingredients,
namely (a) an intelligible differentia, and (b) a rational relation between
"such differentia" and the object sought to be achieved by such differential
treatment, exist to bring such difference in treatment within the sphere of
permissible classification.

It has, however, been contended on behalf of the petitioners: that there is no
such intelligible differentia in the treatment so meted out: that even, if
there was, there was no reasonable connection between

**375**

such differentia and the object sought to be achieved by the adoption of such
differential treatment: that the discrimination, which is being sought to be
justified, is, in fact, arbitrary, capricious and done at the behest of a
rival union and is lacking in good faith.

On a consideration of all the facts and circumstances; which have been
established by the pleadings filed by the respective parties, several factors
seem to exist which tend to militate against the bona fides of the
discrimination which is being sought to be advanced.

One of the submissions made on behalf of the Respondents to justify the
classification made in the case of these nurses is that those who defied an
Essential Services Order cannot be relied upon thereafter to be entrusted with
supervisory duties of a responsible nature. The Petitioners have, however, in
paragraph 7 of the affidavit of 27.5.87, given several specific instances of
the manner in which Dental Surgeons Government Hospitals, who had, in February
1986, themselves defied a similar Essential Services Order, brought into
operation in consequence of trade union activities launched by them, had
thereafter been treated by the Administration. These averments show that, far
from being penalised for such conduct, several such Dental Surgeons had been
even promoted thereafter. The Petitioners have further averred expressly that
Doctors who had participated in similar trade union activities, had also
neither been penalized nor discriminated against, and that promotions and
other benefits had not being withheld. The Petitioners contend that, in the
case of the Dental Surgeons and the Doctors, who had conducted themselves in a
manner similar to the way in which they (the Petitioners) themselves had, had
not been found by the Administration to have disqualified themselves to have
entrusted to them even thereafter duties of a more responsible nature. It must
be noted that these averments have not been contradicted by any counter
affidavit filed on behalf of the Respondents. It was submitted by learned
Deputy Solicitor-general that, whilst the Dental Surgeons and Doctors were out
in defiance of the essential Services Order only for a few days, the nurses,
on the other hand; were out for almost one month. What has to be noted in
regard to this matter is that the position taken up by the Petitioners is that
they were compelled to be out for that period of time, because several of them
had, after the Essential Services Order had been promulgated, even been locked
out from the quarters in which they were resident, and that, in any event;
when they were taken back on the 17th April, 1986, they were taken back
unconditionally.

**376**

Document P8 is a copy of a letter, dated 15.5.1986, addressed to His
Excellency the President by the Jathika Saukkya Seva Heda Sangamaya setting
out several matters in respect of which they desire to have discussions with
His Excellency. In P8, item 3(1) states "that in matters of promotions, as a
matter of policy, no promotions should be granted to those nurses who have
participated in strikes", and item 3(2) that "the list of promotions which has
been prepared, be stayed until further discussions with the two Honourable
Ministers take place:" and item 8, that "steps be taken forthwith to grant two
increments to those in the Nursing Services Staff Officers who had not
participated in this strike, inclusive of the 18th and 19th March, and one
increment to those Nursing Services Staff Officers, who, gave up the strike
half way. It is in evidence that the increments set out in item 8 have in fact
been obtained by the members of the Union after their discussions with His
Excellency the President. It was strongly contended on behalf of the
Petitioners that the position taken up subsequently by the Administration in
denying the petitioners the promotions which they were entitled to was as a
result of the pressure exerted by this particular rival union, which, as has
already been referred to, had the patronage of the government in power.

It has also been contended that, as the ban that the 1st Respondent imposed
upon those nurses, who had participated in trade union activities during the
relevant time, has not been stated to be limited to a particular period, the
said ban would, therefore, operate to the detriment of the Petitioners
indefinitely. Although, during the course of the inquiry before this court,
the learned Deputy Solicitor-General, in answer to an inquiry made by this
Court, did, after consulting an officer who was present in court, inform this
Court that the ban so imposed would operate only in respect of the particular
selection which is the subject matter of the present application, yet, no
averment to that effect is to be found in the affidavit filed by the 1st
Respondent: nor in any other document tendered to this court by or on behalf
of the 1st Respondent.

Furthermore, although the 1st Respondent, in his first affidavit, has, in
paragraph 21, averred that the decision not to select those nurses who had
defied the Essential Services Order was made "in consultation with my
Minister, "yet, no particulars of any such meeting with the Minister has been
set out in the affidavit. Nor has any document been produced in support of any
such consultation.

**377**

Upon a consideration of the averments before this court it becomes clear that
the selections (or at any rate the markings obtained by those who sat the
examination) had been finalised by December 1985/ January 1986. Even so, no
announcement had been made even as late as 12.3.87, the date on which the
letter P9 had been addressed by the Petitioners' Union to the Minister of
Health. No satisfactory explanation has been tendered by the 1st Respondent in
respect of what would seen an inordinate delay. Even when those selected were
in fact informed of their selection the procedure adopted by the
Administration to communicate such selections had been, as maintained by the
Petitioners; different from the procedure which had been followed up to that
time to communicate such selections. The explanation tendered by the 1st
Respondent, in regard to the change in procedure so made, sounds rather lame
and unconvincing.

On a consideration of the matters referred to above, it seems to me that the
classification, upon which the 1st Respondent relies to justify the admitted
unequal treatment adopted by the Administration in the selection of nurses for
the said training course, has not been done bona fide. I am, therefore, of
opinion that the Petitioners' assertion of not being equally treated and of
being discriminated against is entitled to succeed.

I accordingly make order directing: that all selections made for the said
training course - as for instance set out in P10 and P11 \- as Grade I Nursing
Officers (Hospital Services), be and the same are hereby set aside: that fresh
selections be made on the basis of the marks obtained those who presented
themselves (including the Petitioners and the Added Petitioners) for the
examination, without any disqualification being imposed upon them on the
ground of participation in any trade-union action between 18.3.86 and 17.4.86.

The 1st and 2nd Respondents are directed to pay the 1st-10th Petitioners a sum
of Rs. 2100 as costs.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** -I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree.

_

Selections for training course set aside.

_

_Fresh selections ordered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/18.html_  

