##  Udugamkorale v. Mary Nona and Another - SLR - 7, Vol 2 of 2003 [2003] LKSC
18; (2003) 2 Sri LR 7 (1 January 2003)

7

UDUGAMKORALE  
V.  
MARY NONA AND ANOTHER

SUPREME COURT

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J. AND

JAYASINGHE, J.

SC APPEAL NO. 78/2002

CA NO. 435/89(F)

DC MATARACASE NO. 109/RE

21ST FEBRUARY, 2003

_Landlord and Tenant - Judgment for the landlord -Lack of clarity in issues
and apparent contradiction in the answers to issues_ \- _Judgment which is
well rea­soned may be sustained notwithstanding such weakness - Long delay in
deliv­ery of judgment irrelevant, if no questions of demeanor of witnesses are
involved._

The original plaintiff instituted action in the District Court seeking
ejectment of the 1st defendant and the 2nd defendant on the ground that the
1st defendant who was the plaintiff's tenant had sublet the premises in suit
to the 2nd defen­dant.

**Held :**



1\. Although the issues raised in the case were not very clear, and the
answers to the issues appeared to be contradictory, on the basis of the
pleadings the matters in issue are very clear and the judgment gave adequate
reasons in conformity with section 187 of the Civil Procedure Code. In the
circumstances the judgment should be upheld.

 8



2\. The fact that the judgment was delivered two years after the conclu­sion
of the trial did not vitiate it in view of the fact that the judgment has not
referred to the demeanor of witnesses,

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_ _

_S. Mandaleswaran_ with P. _Peramunagama_ for substituted plaintiff-
appellant.

_Vidura Gunaratne_ for 2nd defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March, 26, 2003. **  
  
EDUSSURIYA, J.**  


The plaintiff-appellant (appellant) instituted action in the District Court of
Matara seeking the ejectment of the 1st defen­dant-respondent and the 2nd
defendant-respondent on the ground that the 1st defendant-respondent who was
the appel­lant's tenant had sublet the premises in suit to the 2nd defendant-
respondent.



After trial the learned District Judge entered judgment in favour of the
appellant. In appeal, the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the
District Court on the grounds (1) that the issues are not clear and that it is
the duty of the Court to frame 10 issues, (2) the answers to the issues in the
judgment appear to be contradictory and (3) that the judgment was dictated two
years after the conclusion of the trial.



On the first point mentioned above, it is seen on a reading of the pleadings
and the issues, that the matters in issue are very clear. On the second point
mentioned above, namely, that the answers to the issues given in the judgment
appearing to be contradictory, it is seen on a reading of the judgment that
any contradictions that may arise on the reading of the answers to the issues
pale into insignificance. As far as the third point is concerned, namely, the
judgment being dictated two years after the conclusion of the trial, it must
be said that at no point in the course of the judgment has the learned
District Judge referred to the

9



demeanour of the witnesses. The findings are based on the oral and documentary
evidence placed before court.



It must also be mentioned that the answers to issues in a judgment are almost
always monosyllabic and are a follow up on the matters in issue discussed,
dealt with and decided in the body of the judgment. Hence the decision of the
case must be arrived at by a careful reading of the body of the judgment and
not on a 30 superficial reading of the answers to the issues.



In this connection I will refer to section 187 of the Civil Procedure Code
which states;



"that the judgment shall contain a concise statement of the case, the points
for determination, the decision thereon and the reasons for such decision".



I have perused the evidence and the judgment of the learned District Judge and
found that there is no reason or cause for any confusion in view of the fact
that the learned District Judge has categorically held (1) the appellant had
rented out the premises in suit to the 1st defendant, (2) that during the
period the 1st defendant ran a business therein the 2nd defendant had assisted
the 1st defendant, (3) that after a period of time the 1st defendant had left
and the 2nd defendant had run a business therein with­out the knowledge of the
plaintiff-appellant and that therefore the 1st defendant had sublet the
premises to the 2nd defendant-respondent.



The learned District Judge has also set out in the course of the judgment the
reasons for his so holding; that although the 2nd defendant claimed to have
entered into a contract of tenancy with the plaintiff-appellant the 2nd
defendant had failed to substantiate that position by producing rent receipts
or any document to prove tenancy. Further, the learned District Judge has also
set out therein that he cannot accept the evidence of the 2nd defendant-
respondent that even after the letter of demand had been sent that he had been
told by the plaintiff-appellant to allow the rent to accumulate.



For the abovementioned reasons I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal
directing a trial _de novo,_ and restore the

**10**

judgment of the District Court. The plaintiff-appellant is also entitled to
costs in a sum of Rs. 3150/-.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** **** \- I agree.

**JAYASINGHE, J.** **** \- I agree.



> > _**Appeal allowed; judgment of the District Court restored.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/18.html_  

