##  Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera, A.S.P. and Three Others - SLR - 375, Vol 2 of
1985 [1985] LKSC 18; (1985) 2 Sri LR 375 (9 August 1985)

**

375

NANAYAKKARA  
v.  
HENRY PERERA, A.S.P. AND THREE OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN-THOME, J., ATUKORALE, J., TAMBIAH. J. AND L. H.  
DE ALWIS, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION No. 19/85.  
JULY 15, 16 AND 17, 195.

_

Fundamental Rights - Illegal arrest and detention - Regulations 18 and 19 -
The Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1985
- Distribution of pamphlets without the I. G .P.'s permission by proscribed
organization - Article 13 (1), (2) and (4) of the Constitution.

_

Vasudeva Nanayakkara on behalf of a proscribed organization, the Nawa Same
Samaja Party distributed leaflets in support of and inciting student protest
against certain proposed amendments to the Universities Act. He was arrested
by the 1st respondent on the orders of his superior on 17.2.1985 and detained
at the Harbour Police Station.

The questions raised were that the 1st respondent who actually arrested
Vasudeva Nanayakkara had of his own knowledge no reasonable grounds for
suspecting him to be concerned in contravening the Emergency Regulations. The
reason for the detention was not given and the detention was for search and
not for investigation. Further the detention was mala fide and a punishment.

**

Held -

**

(1) The 1st respondent knew that the detenu had distributed leaflets and
contravened the Emergency Regulations. There is no requirement in the
Regulation that the knowledge should be first hand. It could be acquired on
statements to others in a way which justifies a police officer giving them
credit.

(2) The detention of a person arrested without a warrant under Regulation 18
can be justified only if the detention is for search. The expression search is
synonymous with investigation. Hence the detention here for further
investigation was lawful.

(3) The order by the Inspector General of Police (or Deputy Inspector General)
to detain a person at a specified location under Regulation 19 (2) should be
delivered to the detenu and state the reason for the detention so that the
detenu could make a purposeful and effective representation for his release.

(4) While the effect of Regulation 18 in combination with Regulation 19
(making. sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act not
applicable) does not require a judicial order in regard to the duration of the
detention (up to a maximum of 90

**376**

days) and the place of the detention, yet the requirement for production of an
arrested person before a Magistrate within a reasonable time (not later than
30 days) remains under the proviso to Regulation 19 (1). The Constitutional
requirement that a detained person shall be brought before the Judge of the
nearest competent Court remains untouched. While the Magistrate is powerless
to interfere with the arrest and detention of a suspect made under Regulation
18 read with Regulation 19 he is not powerless to investigate the reason for
the detention and to notify the authorities if in his view the detention is a
"punishment" infringing Article 13 (4) of the Constitution.

(5) Vasudeva Nanayakkara admitted that he distributed the impugned leaflets
and that he incited the students. Hence, his detention was not mala fide and
not a "punishment infringing his rights under Article 13 (4) of the
Constitution.

**Cases referred to

** _(1) Muthusamy v. Kannangara (1951) 52 NLR 324.

(2) Corea v. The Queen (1954) 55 NLR 457.

(3)Gunasekera v. De Fonseka (1972) 75 NLR 246.

(4) Vimlabai Despande A.I.R. 1945 Nagpur 8.

(5) King Emperor v. Deshpande (1946) 47 Cr. L.J. 831.

(6) Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam (1985) 1 S.L.R. 100.

(7) Christie v. Leachinsky [1947] 1 All E.R. 567, 575 ; [1947] AC 583.

(8) Lallubhai Jegibhai v. Union of India A- L R. 1981 S. C. 728

_ **

APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights under Article 126 of the
Constitution.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C. with Kithsiri P. Gunaratne,

Miss S. B. Senaratne, Saliya Mathew, A. B. Dissanayake, Taranga Silva and Miss
A. D. D. N. Telespha for petitioner.

Sunil de Silva, Additional Solicitor-General with A. R. C. Perera, S. S. C.
and Lal de Alwis, S. C. for respondents.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

August 9, 1985. **  
COLIN-THOME; J.

**

This is an application under Article 126 of the Constitution. The petitioner
is the brother of D. Vasudeva Nanayakkara. He avers that on the 17th February
1985 the 1 st respondent and a party of Police officers armed with machine
guns and rifles arrived at his brother's house at about 8.30 p.m. and took his
brother into custody and detained him at the Harbour Police Station overnight.

**377**

The petitioner stated. that the arrest and detention of his brother were
illegal and mala fide for promoting the political interest of the United
National Party and its leaders by eliminating effective political opposition
and misusing the provisions of the Public Security Ordinance for that purpose.

He pleaded that the fundamental rights of Vasudeva Nanayakkara in Articles 12
(1), 12 (2), 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution have been infringed and he
prays for a declaration that his arrest and detention were an infringement of
his fundamental rights.

Vasudeva Nanayakkara in his affidavit stated that on the 17th February a
Police party suddenly entered his house and the 1 st respondent informed him
that he had orders to take him into custody and that he would be detained at
the Harbour Police Station under the Provisions of the Emergency Regulations.

The 1st respondent, he averred, did not inform him who gave him orders to take
him into custody nor did the 1 st respondent state under which Emergency
Regulation he was arrested or was being detained. On the 18th February at
about 10.30 a.m. he was given an order (marked 'A') by the Officer-in-Charge
of the Harbour Police. At no time was he informed that he had violated any
Emergency Regulations.

In paragraph 6 of his affidavit Vasudeva Nanayakkara stated that he verily
believed that his arrest and detention was part of a plan of the United
National Party to eliminate all opposition.

In paragraph 10 of the affidavit he stated "I state that I have been and I am
the Organising Secretary of the Nava Sama Samaja Party which was proscribed
under the Emergency Regulations from July 1983.

Henry Perera, A.S. P., the 1 st respondent, stated in his affidavit that on
17.2.85 he received an order from A.C.A. Gaffoor, Senior Superintendent of
Police, Colombo South, to arrest Vasudeva Nanayakkara for having distributed
pamphlets on 13.2.85 in front of the Fort Railway Station, in contravention of
Regulations 28 (1) and 68 (3) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulation No. 1 of 1985.

**378**

The 1st respondent was aware of the fact that Vasudeva Nanayakkara had
distributed leaflets in Colombo on 13.2.85 in contravention of the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 1 of 1985.

On 17.2.85 at about 19.45 hours he went to the house of Vasudeva Nanayakkara
accompanied by Inspector Fabian Mitchell, Officer-in-Charge of Narahenpita
Police and other Police Officers. He tapped at the door. Vasudeva Nanayakkara
came out and they exchanged greetings as they knew each other earlier. He
informed Vasudeva Nanayakkara that he had come to take him into custody in
connection with the allegation that he had distributed leaflets in
contravention of the Emergency Regulations. Vasudeva Nanayakkara admitted
having distributed the pamphlets and when the 1st respondent told him that a
photograph depicting him distributing pamphlets in front of the Fort Railway
Station had been published in the "Sun" newspaper, Vasudeva Nanayakkara said
he had heard about it although he had not seen the newspaper. A photocopy of
the "Sun" newspaper dated 14.2.85 carrying this photograph was produced marked
1R1.

He arrested Vasudeva Nanayakkara, with the assistance of Inspector Mitchell,
in exercise of the powers vested in him by Regulation 18 (1) of the Emergency
Regulation No. 1 of 1985.

He informed Vasudeva Nanayakkara that he was taking him to the Harbour Police
Station and gave him time to take a change of clothing and a bag containing
toilet articles. He also told Vasudeva Nanayakkara's wife to contact the
Commissioner of Police or him in case she wanted to ascertain her husband's
whereabouts. He gave her his telephone number. On the way to the Harbour
Police Station he allowed Vasudeva Nanayakkara to buy a parcel of food.

The 1st respondent averred that the Nava Sama Samaja Party had been proscribed
under the Emergency Regulations and by virtue of such proscription the
distribution of the pamphlet marked 1R2A, annexed to the affidavit of
Inspector L. 1. R. de Silva, Officer-in-Charge of the Fort Police Station,
amounted to a contravention of Regulation 68 (3) of the Emergency Regulations
published in Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 332/12 dated 18.1.1985.

Inspector L. I. R. de Silva in his affidavit stated that on 13.2.85 he saw
Vasudeva Nanayakkara distributing pamphlets in front of the Fort Railway
Station. He annexed a specimen leaflet marked 1 R2A. He

**379**

recorded Vasudeva Nanayakkara's statement at the Harbour Police Station on
18.2.1985. He showed Vasudeva Nanayakkara the leaflet 1 R2A and he admitted
that it was the leaflet distributed by him on 13.2.1'985, in front of the Fort
Railway Station. 1 R2A was against the new Act of the Government concerning
Higher Education. Vasudeva Nanayakkara signed his statement admitting that he
distributed these leaflets on 13.2.1985. He also admitted inciting the
students. A certified copy of his statement has been produced marked 1 R2B.

Inspector Fabian Mitchell in his affidavit has stated that the 1 st respondent
informed Vasudeva Nanayakkara that he came to arrest him for distributing
leaflets in contravention of the Emergency Regulations.

A. C. A. Gaffoor, Senior Superintendent of Police, has stated in his affidavit
that Vasudeva Nanayakkara was arrested on 17.2.1985 by the 1st respondent on
orders given by him. From about the 21st January, 1985, there was unrest among
the students of the Colombo University over the amendments to the Universities
Act. On several occasions the Police had to intervene to prevent the students
from committing unlawful acts. As the Colombo University came within his area
he carefully followed the developments in the protest campaign of the students
and he received information that Vasudeva Nanayakkara was in constant touch
with the student leaders and was using the student dissatisfaction to draw the
school children into the protest campaign and to incite them to commit
unlawful acts and to have confrontations with the Police.

In February 1985 there was an organised campaign to distribute leaflets in
Colombo condemning the amendments to the Universities Act and alleging that
the Government was attempting to repress the underprivileged.

On the 13th February, 1985, Vasudeva Nanayakkara and a large number of
students had distributed leaflets in front of the Fort Railway Station and
similar acts were done by other groups in various parts of the city. The
timely intervention of the Police prevented the commission of unlawful acts
and a serious breach of the peace was averted.

Superintendent Gaffoor averred that permission had not been obtained from the
Inspector-General of Police for the distribution of pamphlets among the public
and the said act of Vasudeva

**380**

Nanayakkara in distributing or conspiring with others to distribute or the
abetment of others to distribute pamphlets was in contravention of Regulation
28 read with Regulation 45 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and
Powers) Regulations, No. 1 of 1985.

He stated that an examination of the leaflets distributed by Vasudeva
Nanayakkara on 13.2.1985 revealed that the Nava Sama Samaja Party which had
been proscribed under Regulation 68 was among the groups supporting the
campaign,

After carefully studying the situation and information compiled by
Intelligence Agencies Superintendent Gaffoor formed the opinion that it was
necessary to arrest Vasudeva Nanayakkara and investigate the offences of
distributing leaflets without the I.G.P."s permission and on behalf of a
proscribed organization. Accordingly, he ordered the 1 st respondent to arrest
Vasudeva Nanayakkara for distributing leaflets among the public in
contravention of the said Emergency Regulation and to produce him at the
Harbour Police Station.

It appeared necessary to detain him in custody pending the conclusion of
investigation as to his complicity in the student protest campaign. On 18.2.85
h made a report to D.I.G. Edward Gunawardene setting out briefly the
information available to him and recommending the detention of Vasudeva
Nanayakkara for the purpose of further investigation. The arrest of Vasudeva
Nanayakkara and the recommendaton of his detention for further investigation
were made in good faith.

S. D. E. S. Gunawardena, D.I.G., Metropolitan Range, the 2nd respondent has
averred that after he studied the report of Gaffoor and other reports he
formed the opinion that it was necessary to detain Vasudeva Nanayakkara who
had been arrested under the Emergency Regulations pending the completion of
investigations. By virtue of his powers under Regulations 18 and 19 (2) of the
Emergency Regulations he authorized the Officer-in-Charge of the Harbour
Police to detain Vasudeva Nanayakkara at the Harbour Police Station. Vasudeva
Nanayakkara was released from detention on the 18th March. 1985.

The virtual petitioner (hereafter called the petitioner) originally came into
court on the basis of two complaints

(i) that his arrest was in circumstances which contravened Article 13 (1) of
the Constitution ;

**381**

(ii) that his detention was an infringement of Article 13 (2) of the
Constitution.

At the hearing of this application learned President's Counsel confined
himself to the submission that the arrest of the petitioner by Henry Perera
was illegal and infringed Article 13 (1) as Henry Perera at the time of
arresting the petitioner did not have a reasonable ground for suspecting the
petitioner to be concerned in or to be committing or to have committed an
offence under any Emergency Regulation. Henry Perera was merely carrying out
the orders of Gaffoor, S.P., to arrest the petitioner. There was no material
in Henry Perera's affidavit from which it could be inferred that he had "'a
reasonable ground" for suspecting the petitioner to have committed an offence
under any Emergency Regulation. Learned Counsel submitted that the expression
"reasonable ground" had to be treated as an objective fact to be proved by the
1 st Respondent and to be determined by Court.

Learned Counsel cited Muttusamy v. Kannangara (1) (per Gratiaen, J.) where it
was held that a peace officer is not entitled to arrest a person on suspicion
under section 32 (1) (b) of the Criminal Procedure Code, except on grounds
which justify the entertainment of a reasonable suspicion.

It was further held in this case that section 69 of the Police Ordinance does
not authorise a police officer without a warrant to enter and search premises
for alleged stolen property except on reasonable suspicion. A suspicion is
presumed to be reasonable only if the facts disclose that it was founded on
matters within the police officer's own knowledge or on statements by other
persons in a way which justify him in giving them credit. See also Corea v.
The Queen (2).

Learned President's Counsel also relied on the judgment in Gunasekera v. De
Fonseka (3) which held that although

**382**

Regulation 19 of the Emergency Regulation No. 6 of 1971, published in Gazette
of 15th November, 1971, empowers any officer mentioned therein to arrest
without' a warrant a person whom he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be
concerned in an offence punishable under any Emergency Regulation, a condition
precedent for such arrest is that the officer who arrests should himself
reasonably suspect that the person arrested had been concerned in some offence
under the Emergency Regulation. Accordingly, where an Assistant Superintendent
of Police has purported to arrest a person under Regulation 19 merely because
he had orders to do so from his superior officer, the Superintendent of
Police, and was not personally aware of the actual offence of which the person
arrested was suspected by the Superintendent of Police, such arrest is liable
to be declared in habeas corpus proceedings to have been unlawful.

The Indian case of Vimlabai Despande (4) dealt with the interpretation of Rule
129 (1) of the Defence of India Rules which provided that -

R. 129 (1) "'Any police officer.... may arrest without warrant any person whom
he reasonably suspects of having acted.....

(a) . . . in a manner prejudicial to the public safety or to the efficient
prosecution of the war."

The High Court of Nagpur held that "under R. 129 all that the Provincial
Government can do is to specify the place of detention and up to a limit of
two months, its duration. The power to arrest or detain under R. 129 is not
conferred on the Provincial Government. The only authority we are concerned
with under R. 119 is the police officer who made the detention, and it is for
him to show that he had reasonable grounds for suspicion .... The only
affidavit we have on the side of the Crown is one which tells us about the
suspicions entertained by the Provincial Government, not by the police officer
making the arrest. But what we have to determine here is what were his
suspicions, and were they reasonable, and not what the Provincial Government's
suspicions are." This decision was affirmed by the Privy Council in King
Emperor v. Deshpande (5).

**383**

Regulation 18 (1) of the Emergency Regulations published in Gazette No. 332/13
of January 18, 1985, states 8(l) "Any police officer, any member of the Sri
Lanka Army, the Sri Lanka Navy or the Sri Lanka Air Force, or any other person
authorised by the President to act under this regulation may search, detain
for purposes of such search, or arrest without a warrant, any person who is
committing or has committed or whom he has reasonable ground for suspecting to
be concerned in or to be committing or to have committed, an offence under any
emergency regulation, and may search, seize, remove and detain any vehicle,
vessel, article, substance or thing whatsoever used in or in connection with
the commission of the offence."

Regulation 18 11) empowers anyone of the numerous persons mentioned therein to
search, detain for purposes of such search or arrest without a warrant, any
person :

(a) who is committing an offence under any Emergency Regulation , or

(b) who has committed an offence under any Emergency Regulation , or

(c) whom he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in or to be
committing or to have committed, an offence under any Emergency Regulation.

In Gunasekera v. De Fonseka (supra) the affidavit of the Superintendent of
Police, stated that the corpus Gunasekera had been arrested on 18th March,
1975 "on suspicion" of being concerned in a conspiracy to overthrow the
Government. It was clear from the affidavits of the Superintendent of Police
and the Assistant Superintendent of Police that the corpus was arrested
because the Superintendent suspected that he had been concerned in some
offence, and that the Assistant Superintendent who arrested him had no such
suspicion and could not and did not inform the corpus of the particulars of
the alleged offence.

In the instant case, however, although Henry Perera, A.S.P. was ordered by A.
C. A. Gaffoor, S.P. to arrest the petitioner, both these police officers,
according to their affidavits, were aware before the arrest that the
petitioner had distributed leaflets on 13.2.85 in front of the Fort Railway
Station in contravention of Regulation 28 of the Emergency Regulations. The
evidence objectively examined went beyond a matter of suspicion. Both police
officers had knowledge that the petitioner had committed an offence
contravening the Emergency Regulations and so Henry Perera was able to inform
the petitioner of the reason for his arrest on the 17th February 1985\.
Learned President's Counsel submitted that the knowledge of the police officer
making the arrest had to be first hand. There is no such requirement in
Regulation 18 (1). Knowledge may be first hand or acquired on statements by
others in a way which justifies a police officer giving them credit.

On the material available in this case I hold that the procedure followed in
the petitioner's arrest was lawful and did not infringe his fundamental rights
under Article 13 (1).

**384**

Learned President's Counsel submitted further that Regulation 18 only provides
for detention for purposes of search. He submitted that detention for the
purposes of further investigation is not authorised by Regulation 19. The
affidavit of S.P. Gaffoor makes it clear that the reason for the detention of
the petitioner was "pending the conclusion of investigations as to his
complicity in the student protest campaign''

Regulations 19 and 20 of the Emergency Regulations read as follows :

" 19\. (1) The provisions of sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979, shall not apply in relations to persons arrested
under Regulation 18.

Provided that where any person has been arrested and detained under the
provisions of Regulation 18 of these regulations, such person shall be
produced before any Magistrate within a reasonable time, having regard to the
circumstances of each case, and in any event, not later than thirty days after
such arrest.

The production of any person in conformity with the provisions of these
regulations shall not affect the detention of such person under paragraph (2).

(2) Any person detained in pursuance of the provisions of Regulation 18 in a
place authorised by the Inspector-General of Police may be so detained for a
period not exceeding ninety days reckoned from the date of his arrest under
that regulation, and shall at the end of that period be released by the
officer-in-charge of that place unless such person has been produced by such
officer before the expiry of that period before a court of competent
jurisdiction.

(3) Where a person who has been arrested and detained in pursuance of the
provisions of Regulation 18 is produced by the officer referred to in
paragraph (2) before a court of competent jurisdiction such court shall order
that such person be detained in the custody of the Fiscal in a prison
established under the Prisons Ordinance.

20\. The provisions of section 115 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No.
15 of 1979, shall not apply in relation to any person who is produced before a
Magistrate under the provisions of Regulation 19 (3) or appears before a
Magistrate in any other manner and is detained or remanded in the custody of
the Fiscal in any prison in respect of being suspected or accused of any
offence under any emergency regulation. Such person shall remain in such

**385**

custody for a continuous period of three months and shall not be released at
any time prior to the expiry of such period, except in accordance with the
provisions of Regulation 64.

It has been held in Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam (6) that a person can be taken
in for detention under Regulation 18 (1) either for purposes of search or by
way of arrest without warrant and such a person can be detained up to a period
of ninety days in a place authorised by the Inspector General of Police or by
a Deputy-Inspector General of Police. Regulation 19 (2) applies to all persons
arrested and detained under Regulation 18 and not to a limited class of
persons "detained for the purposes of such search". I am in agreement with the
dicta in this judgment.

The question arises whether a persona who is arrested without a warrant can be
detained under Regulation 19 for an unspecified and unknown purpose.
Regulations 18 and 19 although they throw no light on this matter have to be
read with Article 13 (4) of the Constitution. The relevant portion of Article
13 (4) reads

''The arrest, holding in custody detention or other deprivations of personal
liberty of a person, pending investigation or trial, shall not constitute
punishment."

Under Article 15 (7) of the Constitution laws may be made in the interests of
national security which modify certain articles of the Constitution. Emergency
Regulations under the Public Security Ordinance are by Article 15 (7) equated
to legislation. Under Article 15 (7) fundamental rights declared and.
recognised by Articles 12, 13 (1), 13 (2) and 14 shall be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national
security, but may not affect Article 13 (4).

It is manifest, therefore, that the detention of a person arrested without a
warrant under Regulation 18 can be justified in law only if the detention is
for further investigation. It would be unlawful to detain such a person for an
unspecified and unknown purpose as this would be an infringement of Article
13(4). It necessarily flows from this that no sooner the further investigation
is concluded the suspect is entitled to his release from detention without
waiting for the duration of ninety days to be over.

**386**

It is now necessary to examine the expression "detain for the purposes of such
search." Provisions for detention of a suspect in custody "pending further
investigation" is specifically contained in section 115 (1) and (2) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979.

"115\. (1) Whenever an investigation under this Chapter cannot be completed
within the period of twenty-four hours fixed by section 37, and there are
grounds for believing that further investigation is necessary the officer-in-
charge of the police station or the inquirer shall forthwith transmit to the
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case a report of the case, together with
a summary of the statements, if any, made by each of the witnesses examined in
the course of such investigation relating to the case, and shall at the same
time forward the suspect to such Magistrate.

(2) The Magistrate before whom a suspect is forwarded under this section, if
he is satisfied that it is expedient to detain the suspect in custody pending
further investigation, may after recording his reasons, by warrant addressed
to the superintendent of any prison authorise the detention of the suspect for
a total period of fifteen days and no more. The provisions of section 264
shall apply to every such warrant. If at the end of the said period of fifteen
days proceedings are not instituted the Magistrate may subject to subsection
(3) either discharge the suspect or require him to execute a bond to appear if
and when so required."

Regulation 20 of the Emergency Regulations permits the period of such
detention being extended from fifteen days provided in section 115 to three
months. Article 1 3 (4) of the Constitution also authorises detention pending
investigation provided it is bona fide and not a punishment.

According to the Shorter Oxford Dictionary the expression "search" is
synonymous with "to investigate". This is demonstrably implicit in the scheme
of Regulations 18 and 19 of the Emergency Regulations. The object of these
regulations is to extend and not to attenuate the powers of a police officer
in a state of emergency. I hold, therefore, that. the expression -detain for
purposes of such search" in Regulation 18 of the Emergency Regulation empowers
a police officer to detain a suspect pending further investigation.

**387**

Learned President's Counsel also submitted that the detention of the
petitioner was mala fide and an infringement of Article 13 (4) of the
Constitution.

According to the affidavit of Gaffoor, S.P., he had received information that
the petitioner and other anti-Government political elements were attempting to
make use of the student dissatisfaction to draw the school children into the
protest campaign and to incite them to commit unlawful acts and to have a
confrontation with the Police. Accordingly, he recommended to Edward
Gunawardena, D.I.G. that the petitioner should be detained pending the
conclusion of investigations as the petitioner's complicity in the student
protest campaign.

The petitioner has admitted in his signed statement to Inspector L.I.R. de
Silva, recorded on 18.2.1985, that he distributed the impugned leaflets near
the Fort Railway Station on 13.2.1985. He also admitted inciting the students.

I hold that there is no substance in the allegation that the petitioner's
detention was mala fide and a "punishment" infringing his fundamental rights
under Article 13 (4) of the Constitution.

Another question that arises for consideration of this Court is whether an
order by the Inspector-General of Police (or Deputy Inspector-General) to
detain a person at a specified location under Regulation 19 (2) should state
the reason for the detention.

In the instant case the order of detention (3131) reads as follows

"By virtue of the powers vested in me under Regulation 19 (2) of the Gazette
of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Extraordinary No. 332/13 of
18.01.1985, I, S. D. E. S. Gunawardena, Deputy Inspector-General of Police,
Metropolitan Range, do hereby authorise, Officer-in-Charge, Police Station,
Harbour, to detain Vasudeva Nanayakkara of No. 34/8, Fife Road, Colombo 5, who
had committed offences in contravention of Regulation (blank) of the said
Gazette Extraordinary, for a period of one month with effect from 18.02.1985
at Police Station, Harbour, Colombo 1.

Police Hdqrs,  
Colombo.  
18.02.1985.  

**

Sgd. S. D. E. S. Gunawardena,**

 D.1.G., Metropolitan range."

**388**

A person is arrested and detained by an officer exercising his powers under
Regulation 18 (1). The duration of the arrest and detention in pursuance of
the provisions of Regulation 18 is provided in Regulation 19.

Regulation 19 (2) merely authorizes the Inspector General of Police (or Deputy
Inspector General of Police) to nominate the place of detention. It is in
effect an authorization to the Officer-in-charge of a place of detention to
hold a particular person in custody within the premises under his control.

This interpretation is fortified by an examination of Regulation 17 (1) which
empowers the Secretary of the Ministry of Defence to make an order of
preventive detention of any person who in his opinion is acting in any manner
set out in Regulation 17 (1) (a) and 17 (1) (b). Once such an order is made
Regulation 17 (2) authorizes a police officer or other member of the armed
services to implement such an order using such force as is necessary for the
purpose. Regulation 17 (3) provides that a person detained in pursuance of
such an order shall be detained. -in such place as may be authorized by the
Inspector General of Police'".

It is clear, therefore, that under Regulation 19 (2) and 17 (3) the Inspector
General of Police merely nominates the place of detention. This provision also
enables the family of a detenu to ascertain from the Inspector General of
Police the exact location of such detention so that they can contact the
detenu.

In the instant case the reason of the arrest, communicated by Henry Perera,
A.S.P. to the petitioner was that the petitioner had distributed leaflets in
contravention of Emergency Regulations. The offence had already been committed
on 13.2.1985, four days prior to his arrest. The reason for his subsequent
detention at the Harbour Police Station according to Gaffoor, S. P., was to
facilitate further investigation into the petitioner's alleged complicity in
the student protest campaign. This reason for his detention was not
communicated to the petitioner with sufficient particularity. Although
Regulation 19 (2) does not state that the order of the Inspector General of
Police nominating a place of detention should state the reason for the
detention we think that it is in the interest of natural justice that the
reason should be communicated to the detenu in the written order and that he
should be supplied with a copy of the order.

**389**

Arrest and detention are inextricably linked. Article 13 (1) of the
Constitution states that "Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason
for his arrest." The reason why the observance of this fundamental right is
mandatory is succinctly explained in the House of Lords case of Christie v.
Leachinsky (7) (per Lord Simonds) "Arrested with or without a warrant, the
subject is entitled to know why he is deprived of his freedom, if only in
order that he may without a moment's delay take such steps as will enable him
to regain it". See also at p. 578 (per Lord Du Parcq)

"The principles established by the authorities are agreeable to commonsense,
and follow from the governing rule of the common law that a man is entitled to
his liberty, and may, if necessary, defend his own freedom by force. If
another person has a lawful reason for seeking to deprive him of that liberty,
that person must as a general rule tell him what that reason, is, for, unless
he is told, he cannot be expected to submit to arrest or be blamed for
resistance".

In Lallubhai Jegibhai v. Union of India (8) it was held that Article 22 (5) of
the Indian Constitution requires that grounds of detention must be
communicated to the detenu. The whole purpose of communicating the ground to
the detenu is to enable him to make a purposeful and effective representation.

There is one other matter which requires elucidation. While the effect of
Regulation 18 in combination with Regulation 19 does not require a judicial
order in regard to the duration of the detention and the place of detention,
yet the requirement for production of an arrested person before a Magistrate
remains under the proviso to Regulation 19 (1), "to ensure the safety and
protection of an arrested person" (per Wanasundera, J. in Edirisuriya v.
Navaratnam, (supra)). The arrested person "Shall be produced before any
magistrate within a reasonable time having regard to the circumstances of each
case, and in any event, not later than thirty days after such arrest"".

Under Regulation 19 (1) the provisions of sections 36, 37 and 38 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Code Act No. 15 of 1979 shall not apply in relation to
persons arrested under Regulation 18. These sections are as follows :

"36\. A peace officer making an arrest without warrant shall without
unnecessary delay and subject to the provisions herein contained as to bail,
take or send the person arrested before a Magistrate having jurisdiction in
the case.

**390**

37\. Any peace officer shall not detain in custody or otherwise confine a
person arrested without a warrant for a longer period than under all the
circumstances of the case is reasonable, and such periods shall not exceed
twenty-four hours exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the
place of arrest to the Magistrate.

38\. Officers in charge of police stations shall report to the Magistrate's
Courts of their respective districts the cases of all persons arrested without
warrant by any police officer attached to their stations or brought before
them ;and whether such persons have been admitted to bail or otherwise."

While Regulation 19 (1) rules out the applicability of sections 36, 37 and 38
it leaves untouched Article 13 (2) of the Constitution, which states :

"13 (2) Every person held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of
personal liberty shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent
court according to procedure established by law, and shall not be further held
in custody, detained or deprived of personal liberty except upon and in terms
of the order of such judge made in accordance with procedure established by
law."

The constitutional requirement that a detained person "shall be brought before
the judge of the nearest competent court" remains untouched except that "any"
has been substituted for "nearest" in Regulation 19 (1). While the Magistrate
is powerless to interfere with the arrest and detention of a suspect made
under Regulation 18 read with Regulation 19 he is not powerless to investigate
the reason for the detention and to notify the authorities if in his view the
detention is a "punishment" infringing Article 13 (4) of the Constitution.

On the material placed before this Court and for the reasons stated in this
judgment I hold that the arrest and detention of the petitioner were lawful
and did not infringe his fundamental rights under Article 13 (1), 13 (2) and
13 (4) of the Constitution. The complaint that the

**391**

petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) and 12 (2) have been
infringed has not been pressed. The application is dismissed but without
costs.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J. **\- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/18.html_  

