##  Visuvalingam and Others v. Liyanage and Others - SLR - 123, Vol 2 of 1984
[1984] LKSC 18; (1984) 2 Sri LR 123 (14 June 1984)

**  123**

** **

# VISUVALINGAM AND OTHERS

**v.**

**LIYANAGE AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

WIMALARATNE, J., COLIN‑THOME', J., RANASINGHE, J., ABDUL CADER, J. AND

RODRIGO, J.

S.C. APPLICATIONS No. 85/83 AND No. 6/84.

MAY 7. 9, 10, 11, 16, 17, 18 AND 21, 1984.



_Fundamental Rights ‑ Articles 12(1), 14 (1) (a) and 126 of the Constitution
‑Regulation 14 (3) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)
Regulations Banning and printing of Saturday Review by Competent Authority ‑
Violation of fundamental rights of equality and freedom of speech and
expression of readers and contributors ‑ Discretion of Competent Authority 
Locus Standi of readers and contributors ‑ Article 15 (7) of the Constitution
‑ Sections 5 and 8 of the Public  Security  Ordinance. _



The 1 to 3 and 6 to 8 petitioners in application No. S.C. 85/83 and the
petitioners in SC 6/84 are readers of the newspaper "Saturday Review' and the
5th petitioner in S.C. 85/83 is a regular contributor to a column in the said
paper. On the declaration of a State of Emergency, the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations were brought into force and
renewed with every monthly renewal of the State of Emergency. The Competent
Authority with every such renewal made orders under Regulation 14 (3) sealing
the Saturday Review and so banning its printing and publication. The two
applications before Court relate to the banning of the printing and
publication of this newspaper by orders dated 18.11.1983 and 18.12.1983. The
petitioners complain of unfair treatment and discrimination by the Competent
Authority and urge that there was no justification for his orders.
The‑Competent Authority merely the allegations against him but gave no reasons
to justify his orders.

##  124



The respondents in opposition contend that the petitioners have no locus
standi, that the orders being reasonable are not reviewable by Court and that
the burden is on the  petitioners to prove they have been unfairly treated and
discriminated against,



## Held ‑



 (Rodrigo, J. dissenting) As the fundamental right to the freedom of speech
and expression includes the freedom of the recipient the petitioners as
readers  and  contributors have a _locus standi_ to seek relief under Article
126. But the fundamental right of the recipient is also subject to the
restrictions prescribed by law (including Emergency Regulations) in the
interests of national security, public order and the protection of public
health or morality or for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect
for the rights and freedoms of others or of meeting the just requirements of
the general welfare of a democratic society (Article 15 (7)).



Section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance which provides that no emergency
regulation and no order, rule or direction made or given thereunder shall be
called in question in any court cannot prevent the petitioners from obtaining
relief if they succeed in establishing that their fundamental rights
guaranteed under Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) _(a)_ have been infringed
otherwise than in accordance with the restrictions enumerated in Article 15
(7)



**Held further (unanimously) **

** **

(1)        In reviewing the exercise of discretion the Court must not
substitute its own opinion for that of the Competent Authority. If his
decision is within the bounds of reasonableness, it is not the function of the
Court to look further into the merits. What is obnoxious. during a crisis or
state of emergency may not be so in normal timed the necessity for quick
action for the preservation of public order which means the prevention of
disorder and for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity has to be
recognised. As long as the Competent Authority has acted in the honest belief
that his action was necessary to achieve the object set out in the Regulation
the Court will not interfere. Having regard to the material published in the
issue of the Saturday Review of  May and June 1983 it is not possible to say
that the Competent Authority had been unreasonable. The fundamental rights of
the publishers of the Saturday Review have been lawfully restricted by the
Competent Authority and accordingly the fundamental right of the petitioners
as readers and contributors have also been lawfully restricted The
petitioners' claim under Article 14 (1) _(a)_ thus fails.



(2)        Article 12 does not forbid a reasonable classification because all
persons are not  similarly situate and all situations can never be the same.
Discrimination to be violative of Article 12 must be discrimination between
equals. In a permissible classification mathematical nicety and perfect
equality are neither possible nor required in the case of newspapers and their
readers. The executive, in implementing an administrative scheme is free to
recognise degrees of harm and may confine its restriction to those cases where
the need is deemed to be the clearest. The Saturday Review was established in
Jaffna where there was considerable disorder and where there was  threat to
national security unlike in other parts of the country.

##  125



When a person invokes the provisions of Article 126 and complains of a
violation of the fundamental right to equality the burden is on him to
establish the discrimination by executive or administrative action. A person
relying on a plea of unlawful discrimination must set out with sufficient
particulars his plea showing how between persons similarly circumscribed,
discrimination has been made which is not founded on any intelligible
differentia. If the petitioners establish similarity between persons who are
subject to differential treatment it is for the State to establish that the
differentiation is based on a rational object sought to be achieved by it. But
where similarity is not shown the plea of the infringement under Article 12
must fail. The petitioners have not discharged the burden which was on them to
establish discrimination .





**Cases referred to :**



(1)        Grosjean v. American Press Co. 297 U. S. 233 (1936).



(2) _         Romesh Thapar's case _AIR 1950 S. C. 124 _._



(3) _         B. A. Siriwardena, and Others v. D. J. F. Liyanage and Others
(Aththa case) _S.C. Application No. 120/82 S.C. Minutes of 2 7.1.83 __

_ _

(4)        _Liversidge v. Anderson_ (1942) A. C. 206, 239.

_ _

_ _ (5) _        In Re W (An infant_) [ 1971] A. C. 682, 700.



(6)        Secretary of State for Education & Science v. Tameside Metropolitan
Borough Council [1976] 3WLR 652, (1976) 3 ALL ER 655,[1977]A.C. 1014.

_ _

(7)        Shri Ram Krishna Dalmaia et al v. Justice S. R. Tendolkar at al AIR
1958 S.C. 538\.



(8) _         Eleko v. Officer Administering the Government of Nigeria _(1931)
AC 662.

_ _

(9)        R v. Brixton Prison Governor [ 1969] 2 All E R. 347.



(10) _       Probhudas Morarjee v Union of India _AIR 1966 S. C, 1044.

_ _

(11)      Dr. N. R. W Perera v. The University Grants Commission: S.C.
Application No. 5 7/80 S.C. Minutes of 4.8.80.



(12)      Dr. Neville Fernando and Others v. Liyanage and Others : S. C. Nos.
116/82 and  134/82-S.C. Minutes of 14.12.82 and 7.2.83.



(13) _       Stanley v. Georgia _394 U.S. 557, 564 (1969).

_ _

(14)      Secretary of State for Employment v. ASLEF (No. 2) [1972] 2 QB 455,
493, [1972] 2 ALL E.R. 949, 967.



(15)      I.R. C. v. Rossminister [1980] 1 All E. R. 80.



(16) _       A.G. of St. Christopher v. Reynolds _[ 1979] 3 All E. R. 129 (P.
C.).



(17)      Nakkuda Ali v. Jayaratne (1950) 51 NLR 457, [1951] A.C. 66.

_ _

(18)      Narayana v. The State AIR 1973 Kerala (FB) 97.





_S Nadesan_ Q.C. with _S. Mahenthiran_ and _A. R. Surendra_ for the
petitioners in both Applications.



_Sarath N. Silva Deputy Solicitor General_ , with  _N.Y. Casiechetty_ , _State
Counsel_ for the respondents in both Applications.  


_Cur. adv. vult._



##  126

June 14, 1984

WIMALARATNE, J.



The "Saturday Review" is an English weekly newspaper published in Jaffna by
the New Era Publications Ltd. Its objects are described in a publication
brochure as being to establish a two way communication between all persons and
nationalities in Sri Lanka, and to stand up against injustices, acts of
discrimination and violations of human rights and freedoms. It devotes itself
not only to political but also to cultural matters, concentrating mainly on
events in the Northern province. The Petitioners in the two Applications Nos.
85/83 and 6/84 claim to be and to have been regular readers of this newspaper
from the time it commenced publication in January 1982 whilst the 5th
Petitioner in No. 85/83 has also been a regular contributor to a column for
which he was paid Rs. 250/= each week. They are all citizen of Sri Lanka and
claim to be entitled to the fundamental right of equality with other readers
of newspapers, guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution and to the
fundamental right of speech and expression guaranteed by Article 14(1 ) _(a)_.
They say that there has been a violation of these fundamental rights as a
result of the complete banning of the publication of this newspaper.



On 18.5.83 the Government declared a state of emergency under the Publice
Security Ordinance (Cap. 40) Acting under Sections 5 of that Ordinance the
President made certain Emergency Regulations, known as the Emergency
(Miscellaneous Provisions and powers) Regulations, No. 1 of 1983. With the.
extension of the state of emergency from month to month these regulations were
also renewed each month. The 1st Respondent is the Competent Authority
appointed for the purpose of the regulations ; the 2nd Respondent is the
Inspector General of Police and the 3rd Respondent is the Inspector General.



On 1. 7.83 the 1st Respondent, acting in terms of Regulation 14(3) of the said
Regulations made order that‑



_(a)_        no person shall print, publish or distribute or in any way be
concerned in the printing, publication or distribution of the  "Saturday
Review" for a period of one month from the date of that order



_(b)_        the printing press in which the said newspaper was printed shall
for a period of one month from that date not be used‑' purpose whatsoever.

##  127



This order has been renewed from time to time. The present applications relate
to the banning of the printing and publication of the newspaper by subsequent
orders dated 18.11.83 and 18.12.83.



The Petitioners state that in the 'Saturday Review" at no time has there been
publication of matter calculated to be prejudicial to the, interests of
national security or the preservation of public order or the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the life of the community. Neither has
there been any matter inciting persons to mutiny, riot or civil commotion. The
Competent Authority could not therefore have formed the opinion which he says
he had prior to acting in terms of Regulation 14(3). The Saturday Review has
from its inception been critical of some aspects of Government policy besides
publishing views of the manner in which the security forces and the police
behaved in exercising their powers. The Competent Authority's order banning
the Saturday Review was void and consequently the fundamental rights of the
petitioners to the freedom to receive information from and to contribute to
that paper have been violated.



Under the Emergency Regulations the Competent Authority had the power to
impose censorship under Regulation 14(1) which he has exercised in the case of
virtually all other newspapers. Instead of making such an order in respect of
the Saturday Review the Competent Authority has prohibited the Saturday Review
from being published at all and thereby its readers including the petitioners
have been deprived of valuable information from that paper or from
contributing to it, their views on public questions. Thereby there has been
discrimination between readers of and contributors to the Saturday Review,
vis‑a‑vis readers of and contributors to other newspapers, thus violating the
fundamental rights of the petitioners guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.



They pray for a declaration that the orders of the Competent Authority are
null and void and that the consequent acts of the 2nd respondent and his
subordinates are in contravention of the provisions of the Constitution. They
ask for damages by way of compensation and costs.



In the affidavits of the Competent Authority he states that the Saturday
Review is a political newspaper advocating the cause of dividing the country
and the establishment of a State known as Eelam for the Tamils in the North
and East of the Country ; many of the

##  128



articles and items published suggested that its publishers eschewed democratic
processes, negotiations and campaigns based non‑violence as a means of
resolving the problems facing the Tamils Sri Lanka and that they openly
encourage the adoption of force and terrorism as the only means ; the
newspaper also gave prominent publicity to the acts of the terrorist movements
operating in the North, particularly of the organisation calling itself the
Tamil Eelam Liberation Front (T.E.L.F) and often eulogised such conduct with a
view to encouraging the growth of such movements and the use of force against
the lawfully established government ; and the tenor of the articles and news
items were blatantly communalistic and constantly highlighted alleged
grievances and injustices committed against the Tamil community which was
capable of arousing communal feelings' among this community and encouraged
conduct prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and security.



Immediately prior to the first order of the Competent Authority made on
1.7.83, hartal organised by the T.E.L.F led to large scale violence in the
North resulting in serious loss and damage to proper. He was of the view that
the sealing of the "Saturday Review" (and another newspaper in Jaffna), was a
measure which was necessary to prevent further escalation of violence. The
orders made by him were made w bona fide and on being satisfied that, upon a
consideration of the contents of the Saturday Review newspapers published
prior to 1.7.83 (random extracts of articles and news items of which were
produced marked  1R1 to 1R14), they contained matter which was prejudicial to
the interests of national security, preservation of public order and matters
likely to encourage or cause unrest communal disharmony and civil commotion in
the country. The 1st respondent specifically denies that there has been any
violation of the fundamental rights of the petitioners guaranteed under
Articles 12 (1) or 14 (1) _(a)_ of the Constitution.



_Locus Standi_ : At the arguments before us the learned Deputy Solicitor
General raised an argument that the petitioners have no locus standi to make
these applications under Article 126 of the Constitution, for the reason that
the orders of the Compete Authority are directed at the printers, publishers
and distributors of the Saturday Review only. If any persons can complain of a
violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12 (1) and 14
(1) _(a)_   they are the printers, publishers and distributors of that paper,
and

##  129



certainly not readers and contributors. The printers, publishers and
distributors of the Saturday Review have not invoked the provisions of Article
126, may be for the reason, surmises the Deputy Solicitor General, that they
are satisfied with the order of this Court made on their applications in
respect of the banning of the paper during the four previous months. So how,
then, he asks, can readers and contributors complain ? Equal protection should
have its bounds and should not be extended to limitless areas. If so extended
the flood gates would be open for the dependants of printers, publishers or
distributors and even newspaper vendors to claim that their fundamental rights
have been violated as a result of closure of a newspaper, and accordingly
claim damages for such violation.



Mr. Nadesan's answer to this contention is that within the ambit of the
freedom of speech and expression is included the freedom of the recipient of
information. In order to give a meaning to the freedom of speech and
expression one has of necessity to recognise the freedom of the recipient of
information, and of news and of views. The State is pledged to establish in
Sri Lanka a Democratic Socialist Society, one of the objects of which includes
the full realisation of the fundamental rights and freedoms of all people. How
can that object be achieved, he asks, if a restricted interpretation is placed
on the fundamental rights to equality and freedom of speech and expression ?
The freedom of speech will be a hollow concept if the freedom of the recipient
is not recognised. In this connection he has referred us to ‑



_(a)_        The International Bill of Human Rights. Sri Lanka became a
signatory to the Covenant on Civil and Political Rights on the full moon day
of Vesak, 1980. Article 19 (2) enjoins that "everyone shall have the freedom
of expression ; this right shall include the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information and ideas of all kinds regardless of all frontiers, either
orally or in writing or in print or in the form of art or through any media of
his choice".



_(b)_        A booklet published by our present President Mr. J. R.
Jayewardene when he was the Leader of the Opposition in the National State
Assembly being the written submissions which he and his lawyers submitted to
the then Constitutional Court

##  130



which considered the constitutionality of the Press Council Bill. Under the
heading _ "The freedom of thought and expression and the freedom of the Press"
_appear the following paragraphs :



_"_ 1.2     It is submitted that there are two priorities involved in the
concept of freedom of speech, namely ‑

_ _

_(a)_         the source from which the communication issues ,and



_(b_ )        perhaps the more important one, the recipient of the
communication.



The freedom to express one's thoughts is confined to a few compared to the
wider circle to which freedom of expression  is extended in so far as the
recipient is concerned, namely the community.



1.3       It is in the freedom of the recipient that public opinion has its
birth. The Press provides the data by which such opinions find their fullest
expression. Therefore it is man's right as the recipient of information to
look to as many sources of information as he likes ; and it is equally the
duty of the Press which provides the information to seek it from as many
sources as possible. If, however, the sources of information become
concentrated in one, or restricted to a few bodies, then the. formation of
ideas is limited. It is in such circumstances only proper that the sources of
information available to the public should be enlarged rather than restricted
; therefore there can be no justification for interference with the freedom of
the Press."





_ _

_(c)_ The decision in _K. Narayana v. State_ : (18) where the Court held that
the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by Article 19(l) _(a)_ of the
Indian Constitution (which corresponds to Article 14(1) _(a)_ of our
Constitution) included the freedom to acquire knowledge, to read books and
periodicals and to read any type of literature, subject only to reasonable
restrictions being placed on such right.



_(d)_ The decision in _Stanley v. Georgia_ (13) where the U.S. Supreme Court
held that in the First Amendment freedom of Speech and the Press encompasses
"the right to receive information and ideas". These rights are, however, not
absolute but subject to important qualifications.

##  131



The learned Deputy Solicitor General contended in this connection that what
has been restricted is not the right of the recipient of information but the
right of the publisher. The right to read flowed from publication. Since the
paper was banned there has been no publication. So how can one conceive of a
right to read what has not been published ?



One has to bear in mind that the freedom of speech and expression is one of
the most cherished of the fundamental rights enshrined in the Constitutions of
all civilised countries. Text books and decisions of the highest Courts in the
United Kingdom, the United States and India are studded with quotations
expressing sentiments such as these‑



"Without freedom of speech the appeal to reason, which is the basis of
democracy, cannot be made". _Sir Ivor Jennings in "Cabinet Government_" _p.
13._



"A free Press stands as one of the interpreters between the government and the
people. To allow it to be fettered is to fetter ourselves" Justice Sutherland
in _Grosjean v. American Press Co_. (1).



The freedom of expression is an essential prerequisite for the communication
of ideas. When more than one view is possible on a problem which the State is
called upon to settle, then it is best that all views be heard, and if the
Press is an important medium of communication of the various views how is a
contributor to a newspaper which espouses a particular cause able to put
forward his case if there is a total ban on the publication of that newspaper
? How will a regular reader of a particular newspaper be able to gather views
and form views if that particular newspaper is banned ? It is only a free
Press which can, therefore, propagate a diversity of views and ideas and
advance the right to a free and general discussion on all matters of Public
importance within, of course, the limits prescribed by the law. The eloquent
sentiments as those quoted above only go to confirm the liberal view
propounded by our President that "the victory of persuasion over force could
be ensured and achieved only by Permitting public discussion". Public
discussion is not a one sided affair. Public discussion needs for its full
realisation the recognition, respect and advancement, by all organs of
government, of the right of the person who is the recipient Of information as
well. Otherwise the freedom of speech and expression will loose much of its
value.

##  132



I am of the view that the fundamental right to the freedom of speech and
expression includes the freedom of the recipient. Accordingly the Petitioners
have a locus standi to seek relief under Article 126. But like all fundamental
rights, the fundamental right of the recipient is also subject to the same
restrictions. Just as much as the exercise and operation of the fundamental
rights declared and recognised by Articles 12 & 14 are subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law (including emergency regulations) in
the interests of national security, public order and the protection of public
health or morality or for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect
for the rights and freedoms of others or of meeting the just requirements of
the general welfare of a democratic society, the fundamental rights recipients
of information are subject to the very same restrictions (Article 15 (7)).



Emergency Regulations which impose the necessary restriction are made by the
President under section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance. Section 8 of the
Ordinance provides that no emergency regulation, and no order, rule or
direction made or given thereunder shall be called in question in any Court.
The effect of such finality clauses has best been stated as follows :



"The Courts have made it a rule that such clauses cannot hamper the operation
of judicial control ......... there is a firm judicial policy against allowing
the rule of law to be undermined by weakening the powers of the Courts.
Statutory restrictions on judicial remedies given the narrowest possible
construction, sometimes even against. the plain meaning of the words. This is
sound policy, since otherwise administrative authorities would be given
uncontrollable power and could violate the law at will"‑ _Administrative Law
by Wade (4th Ed) 566._



Section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance does not in my view prevent the
petitioners from obtaining relief if they succeed in establishing that their
fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 12 (1) & 14(1) _(a)_ have been
infringed otherwise the accordance with the restrictions enumerated in Article
15(7).



_The freedom of speech and expression, including_ _publication_ is guaranteed
to every citizen by Article 14 (1) _(a)_. In discussing the question of _locus
standi_ I have taken the view that within this freedom is encompassed the
freedom of the recipient of

##  133



information, but that just as much as there may be placed restrictions on the
freedom of speech and expression, the self same restrictions would apply to
the freedom of the recipients. These restrictions contained in Article 15(7)
and referred to earlier are much wider than any restrictions on the freedom of
speech and expression provided for in the Constitutions of India and the
United States. In the U.S. the First Amendment which provides that "Congress
shall make no law ......... abridging the freedom of speech or of the press"
does not permit of any constitutional restrictions. But the Supreme Court has
worked out reasonable restrictions for example, that the restriction of this
freedom is only justified if there is "a clear and present danger" or on "a
balancing of the competing interests" between free speech and the needs of
society. The freedom of expression, therefore, depends to a large extent on
the philosophy of the Judges.



In India, before the First Amendment to the Constitution was effected in 1951
no restriction could have been placed on the freedom of speech and expression
on the ground that such restriction was necessary in the interests of "public
order". Soon after in the decision in _Romesh Thapar's Case_ (2) restrictions
were permitted to be placed on this freedom "in the interests of public
order". I have in my judgment in _B. A. Siriwardena and Others v. D. J. F._
_Liyanage_ _and Others_ (also known as the _" Aththa"_ case) (3) interpreted
the words "for the preservation of public order" in Regulation 14(3) to mean
"for the prevention of disorder or the maintenance of peace and tranquillity".



Regulation 14(3) vests a discretion in the Competent Authority. It is a well
established rule that in reviewing the exercise of discretion the Court must
not substitute its own opinion for that of the Competent Authority. If his
decision is within the bounds of reasonableness, it is not the function of the
Court to look further into the merits ‑ _Wade p, 348_. The approach of the
Courts to this question has been explained in several cases.



In _Liversidge v. Anderson_ (4)Lord Atkin said :



"If there are reasonable grounds, the Judge has no further duty of deciding
whether he would have formed the same belief"

##  134



In _Re W (An infant)_ (5) Lord Hailsham said thus :



 "Two reasonable parents can perfectly reasonably reasonably come to opposite
conclusions on the same set of facts without forfeiting their title to be
regarded as reasonable .......... not every reasonable exercise of judgment is
right, and not every mistaken exercise of judgment is unreasonable. There is a
band of decisions within which no Court should seek to replace the
individual's judgment with own".



In _Secretary of State for Education & Science v. Tameside_ _Metropolitan
Borough_ _Council_ (6) Lord Denning said in the Court of Appeal :



"No one can properly be labelled as unreasonable unless he is not only wrong
but unreasonably wrong, so wrong that no reasonable person could sensibly take
that view".



Said Lord Diplock in the House of Lords, in the same case :



"The very concept of administrative discretion involves a right to choose
between more than one possible course Of action upon which there is room for
reasonable people to hold differing opinions  as to which is to be preferred."
at p. 681.



These were the principles which influenced this Court in its determination in
the _Aththa Case_ (above). It is now necessary to see whether there existed
material in the publications of the "Saturday Review" on which the Competent
Authority could reasonably have formed the opinion which he says he did.



In a consideration of the reasonableness of the orders of' the Competent
Authority the Court has to bear in mind that they have been made during a
period of Emergency. The need for a State of Emergency is a matter to be
decided solely by the President. The restrictions on the freedoms enshrined in
the Constitution will necessarily be greater during a period of emergency than
in periods of peace, and tranquillity. What is obnoxious during a crisis or a
State of Emergency may not be so in normal times. The necessity for quick
action for the preservation of public order, which means the prevention of
disorder, and for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity has to be
recognised. Sometimes he may err in his

##  135



Judgment, sometimes he may be over cautious, but as long as he has acted in
the honest belief that this action was necessary to achieve the object set out
in the Regulation, then the Court will not interfere.



The State of Emergency was declared at 5 p.m. on the 18th of May 1983, on the
day when election to the local bodies, including local bodies in the Northern
and Eastern Provinces were being held. There had admittedly been certain
incidents on that day at Kantharamadam in Jaffna . It is alleged that some
militant youth had fired at the security, forces killing Corporal Jayawardena
and injuring several soldiers at the poling station and that in retaliation
the security forces had run amok and set fire to no less than 64 houses and a
large number of vehicles in Arasady Road. These incidents were given
prominence in the saturday Review of 21.5.83. Another incident involving the
shooting of two Air Force personnel in the heart of the Vavuniya town, and
retaliation by way of setting fire to the "Gandhiyan Farm" and several shops
in Vavuniya were reported in the Saturday Review of 4.6.83. In the  Eastern
Province violence had erupted on 11.6.83 at a time when a curfew was in force.
Bombs were alleged to have been thrown at the house of the M.P. for
Trincomalee and the Saturday Review of that Ay reported that the armed forces
or their hired thugs were suspected of this violence. There were two issues of
the Saturday Review thereafter ; they were the issues of 18.6.83 and 25.6.83,
to which reference will be made later. At about the same time a "hartal" .was
organised by the T.E.L.F to be staged in Jaffna on some date 'before the 1st
of July 1983. The Competent Authority had thereupon decided to ban the
publication of this newspaper which he did by his first order dated 1 .7.83.

** **

**The material on which the Competent Authority says he formed his opinion
is** :



(A)       _In Paragraph 15_ of document marked 1R1 (which was the affidavit
the, Competent Authority filed in the previous application No 47/83 in which
his orders dated 1.7.83 and 18.7.83 were Challenged) he states that the
Saturday Review is a political newspaper advocating the cause of dividing the
country and the establishment of a State known as Eelam for the Tamils in the
North and East of the Country.



Mr. Nadesan submits that there was nothing illegal in espousing the cause of
separatism by peaceful means prior to the enactment of the Sixth Amendment to
the Constitution in August 1983. A noteworthy

##  136



fact is that during the first six months of its publication (1.1.82 to
30.6.82) the paper had been sent free to all Members of Parliament and to
several other persons occupying public positions in Sri Lanka , Subsequently
some of these persons have subscribed and obtained copies of the newspaper.
But no action had been taken against the paper for the cause it espoused.



In the early editions of the paper there could be no doubt that the Saturday
Review lived up to its task of espousing a cause and no exception could
therefore have been taken to such a policy  prior to the Sixth Amendment.



(B)       _In paragraph 16_ the Competent Authority says that many of the
articles and items published suggested that the publishers eschewed democratic
processes, negotiations and campaigns based on non-violence as a means of
resolving the problems of the Tamil people and openly encouraged the adoption
of force and terrorism as the only means to a solution. Mr. Nadesan denied
this allegation and stated that this was far from the truth. He referred us to
several articles and editories where the paper had  advocated non violence
,and I have selected just two illustrations.



(i)         _Editorial of 20.2.82_ under the heading "Why breed more
terrorists ?" appears the following passages.



"Terrorists, whether we like them or not, cannot be equalled with robbers and
thieves and thugs and looters and arsonists. The only thing in common between
the two is their addiction to violence ; and violence certainly cannot be
condoned by any civilised society which believes in the rule of law".



"Military solutions are no answer to political problems"



(ii) _The issue of_ _14.5.83_ published an article by K. Shanmugan Bar‑at‑Law
titled "The cause is just, but guns are not the answer" in which appears the
passage "If no satisfactory solution is reached. the Tamil leadership will
have no alternative but to devise effective methods to achieve their goal. The
one and only practical and effective method is to organise the entire Tamil
nation for a  non‑violent struggle on the lines of the Gandhian campaign in
India. Gandhiji defeated the mighty British power not with guns but with his
non‑violent satyagraha"



On the other hand the learned Deputy Solicitor General indicated that much
water had flowed under the bridges of the Aruvi Aru since  about April 1983.
He referred us to several issues of the paper which

##  137



according to him were calculated to exacerbate communal feeling, to ridicule
any further negotiations with the Government, to ridicule the T.U.L.F. which
was keeping up a dialogue with the Government and to deflate the value of the
Parliamentary system. They also published grossly distorted versions of the
incidents in the North and East with a view to creating a climate for further
violence.



_The issue of 21.5.83_ contains two letters written by the Eelam .Tamil
Association of Australia. The first is an open letter addressed to Mr.
Amirthalingam, General Secretary of the T.U.L.F. written by Dr.
Sundarasingham, President of the Association and it calls upon Mr.
Amirthalingam to step down. It says "We strongly point out to you that the
Tamil people gave you and your T.U.L.F. Parliamentarians a clear and
unequivocal mandate to strive for and achieve an independent sovereign State
of Tamil Eelam and not to compromise for anything short of this. You were most
certainly not given any right to conduct back door dialogues asking for D.D.Cs
and other petty concessions ......... You are most definitely not capable of
leading Eelam Tamils to freedom. Therefore please step down"



The other is "A call to all Eelam Tamils at home and abroad to stand up and be
counted". It states that every Eelam Tamil, no matter where he lives today is
part and parcel of the struggle. It eulogises the soul‑stirring acts of
heroisms of Kuttimani, Jegan, Thangathurai and others in the face of death . .
. . . .  the martyrdom of Sivakumaran, Inbam, Selvam and countless numbers of
other Tamil youth for the cause", which is something of a Tamil 'miracle' in
modern times.

_ _

_The issue of 11. 6.83_ contains an Article "Taking a close look at Non
Violence" by Kumar. It says "It is clear that the Tamil people in Sri Lanka
will not be given their right to self‑determination without a struggle"



"The satyagraha strategy is for another lot to try again and be met with more
violence. This cannot go on for ever and we are back in square 1. There is not
a single country in the world which has liberated itself through non‑violence"



"Freedom fighters must carry on their struggle in the territory of their
choosing with weapons of their choosing :‑ non‑co‑operation, strikes, boycott
etc. Each area will have to work out ways best suited to itself. In the final
stages, if and when necessary, guns will have to be used. By then the freedom
fighters would have so integrated with the People that they would move among
the people like fish in the ocean".

##  138



"Non‑violence should not be allowed to be the sacred cow before which we must
all kneel. National liberation struggles deal with matters of life and death
for millions of people and every care must be taken to see that the weapons
used are effective. To announce at the outset of a struggle that it is
completely non‑violent is to give great comfort and cheer to an opponent fully
armed. He will use weapons with abandon knowing that no physical harm will
happen to  him".



Also in the same issue was a news item about new posters signed by the Peoples
Liberation Organisation of Tamil Eelam appearing on the walls of Jaffna
calling upon the people to take up arms against the repression of the State.



_The issue of 18.6.83_ contains an Article "Freedom's Journey" S. D. A.
Ariyadurai. He states that after the Moses of the Tamils (Mr. Chelvanayagam)
had marched with the Tamil people for 25 long years, always confining his
strategies to Gandhian principles, the mantle of leadership fell on the
present leader of the T.U.L.F. who, according to the author is looked upon as
Joshua of the Tamils. Either he would prove his hilt or fall by the way for
Gandhian style leadership seems to have taken a back seat as especially proved
during the local Government Elections (18.5.83)  and subas Chandra Boses and
Baghat Singhs have emerged to the fore" Again  "Perhaps the Tamil Nation has
lost its faith in Gandhian particularly when the forces of evil stationed in
Tamil areas have not even spared Gandhiyam itself, which is only a social
service organisation".



_In the issue of 25.6.83_ is published a letter to the Editor by Miss
Niranjana Sellathurei of Sandilipay under the heading "what Gandhi's assassin
said in his own defence". After observing that Gandhi's inner voice, spiritual
power and doctrine of non‑violence crumbled before Mr. Jinnah's iron will, the
assassin is alleged to have said "I felt that Indian Politics in the absence
of Gandhiji would surely be practicable to retaliate and would be powerful
with armed forces". The writer says that it is a strange irony that
satyagrahis and peace lovers like Gandhiji, Martin Luther King and Anvar
Sadat met with their end by violence.

##  139



The same issue reported a draft plan for a form of Regional Autonomy as an
alternative to Tamil Eelam being drafted by three Ministers of the Government,
in consultation with a member of the T.U.L.F. The following passage, Deputy
Solicitor General contends is indicative of the attitude of the paper to these
negotiations :



"Militant Tamil Youth have yet to make known their stand on these peace plans
and regional autonomy moves. So far the only reaction has been from the Tamil
Eelam Liberation Army. This group believed to be aligned to Kuttimani and
Thangathurai distributed a 4‑page pamphlet on Thursday (23rd June)
categorically declaring its opposition to any peace talks which rule out Tamil
Eelam".



The learned Deputy Solicitor General contends that these articles were
calculated to instigate and incite the Tamil Youth to violence. These and
similar articles have debunked non‑violence and the Gandhian principles, they
have ridiculed the elected representatives of the Tamil people who were
seeking to achieve a settlement to their problems by peaceful means, and have
if not explicitly, certainly implicitly eulogised the activities of the
terrorists in no uncertain terms. The Competent Authority was therefore well
justified in the opinion he formed prior to the banning of the paper.



Mr. Nadesan has addressed us at length on the purpose for which these articles
were published and the reasonable interpretation that is capable of being
placed on each of them. Some were intended to make people think and form their
own views on the present situation, others like "Freedom's Journey" are
inspiring studies whilst still others like the posters were news items to
enable the authorities to know the thinking of the Tamil People. He claimed
that the paper had an intelligent readership representing the elite of society
who could not have been incited by such articles.



(C) _In paragraph 17_ the Competent Authority states that prominent Publicity
was given by this paper to the terrorists in the North and it often eulogised
their conduct with a view to encouraging the growth Of terrorist movements and
the use of force against the Government. Besides the material referred to in
the discussion under paragraph 16 the Deputy Solicitor General referred also
to news items appearing in the first page of the issue of 21.5.83 where under
the heading "Army Run Amok" is an account. of the happenings at the Saiva
Prakasa Vidyalayam polling booth on 18.5.83. It says that "about eight youth

##  140



had come there at 4 p.m. and exchanged fire for about 25 minutes. Later they
coolly wheeled away on their bicycles leaving behind Corporal Jayawardena dead
and soldier Bandara, P.C. Tillekeratne and. Premadasa badly injured. Eye
witnesses said that the youth had spoken to the public as they cycled along
Adiyapatham Road, Tinnevelly, according to Mr. Nadesan, was a news item which
appeared in other newspapers as well. The Deputy Solicitor General submits
that no  reasonable newspaper should have referred to this "cool" attitude of
the terrorists. Instead of condemnation the paper has indulged in eulogising.



( _D) In paragraph 18_ the Competent Authority states that the paper has given
undue prominent coverage to so called excesses committed by the armed forces
and the police in an effort to arouse communal passions. In support of this
allegation the Deputy Solicitor General referred us to the following issues :



_The issue of 21.5.83_ where the headline of the first page read 



"ARSON, THEFTS, ASSAULTS: ARMY RUN AMOK"



Mr. Nadesan says that this is a correct account of what happened on polling
day at Kantharmadan. If the newspapers did not give publicity to such excesses
of the law enforcement and military officers how was the Government to know
and to take preventive action. He referred us to the news items of the
"Island" paper of 20.5.83 and the "Sun . paper of 19.5.83 which referred to
the same incidents. It was as a result of such publicity that the Commander of
the Army was able to take certain disciplinary action against certain officers



_The issue of 28.5.83_ contains several photographs of the destruction under
the caption "Army Orgy at Kantharmadam" on Election night 18.5.83. One of the
pictures is that of the wooden chariot of a Hindu temple at Palam road which
is alleged to have been set on fire and partially burnt.



This issue carries also an eye witness account of certain incidents said to
have taken place in the Yal Devi train on the morning of 19.5.83 under the
heading "Police Rowdyism in Jaffna‑Colombo Train."



There are also eye witness accounts of how the Army prevented the Police from
dousing the fire when the house of the Chief Manager of the Bank of Ceylon at
Kantharmadam was set on fire by the Army soon after the elections on 18.5.83.

##  141



_The issue of 4.6.83_ has a headline "Armed Forces attack Gandhiyan farm ;
Vavuniya shops burnt". Mr. Nadesan says that this is a news item and nothing
said there is an exaggeration.



Also in the same issue are accounts of the deaths of Navaratnarajah and of
Sriskandarajah, both of whom had died whilst in Army custody. The judicial
verdicts were verdicts of homicide.



_The issue of 18.6.83_ carries a letter to the editor from one Samudran
written from Tokyo under the heading "State terrorism and T.U.L.F.
opportunism". The army attack on Kantharamadam is compared to the horrors of
the American occupation of Vietnam and the Pakistani occupation of Bangaladesh
which according to the writer "are not remote imaginations any more to the
children of Jaffna". "State terrorism as most blatant manifestation of
national oppression as produced its inevitable dialectical opposite ie.
resistance from the oppressed". The growing consciousness of the Tamil masses
to State terrorism is seen as "the negation of the T.U.L.F. as an inimical
anarchronism". The T.U.L.F. is branded as being fathered by liberals and
nurtured in parliamentary opportunism with "Amir as the tragic figure of this
historic transition".



(E)       _In paragraph 19_ the Competent Authority states ‑



(i)         that the tenor of the articles and news items were blatantly
communalistic and constantly highlighted alleged grievances and injustices
committed against the Tamil community capable of arousing communal feelings
among that community ;



(ii)        that the editorial policy in the context of the circumstances
prevailing in the country at that time, was extremely prejudicial to the
security and safety of the country and its citizens.



(i)         As illustrating the communalisitic policy of the paper reference
has en made to the following among other articles ‑



_In the issue of 28.5.83_ there has been published an anonymous postcard. It
purports to be an ultimatum issued by the Sinhala United Liberation Front of
the U.N.P. from its headquarters at Siri Kotha. It enjoins the Tamils to leave
Sri Lanka and go back to Tamil Nadu, their traditional homeland. It alleges
that "you bloody Tamils invaded our Sinhala homeland and grabbed our lands,
property, jobs etc.". The Deputy Solicitor‑General asks why, even if some
fanatic Sinhalese wrote such a letter, a responsible newspaper considered it
desirable to Publish it ? Would not the publication of this type of anonymous
letterer naturally rouse the feelings of the Tamil People ?

##  142



_In the issue of 18.6.83_ there is reproduced a letter by a Hindu reader
writing from Ooty bearing the heading "Appearances are dangerously deceptive
in Sri Lanka". It refers to the several acts of discrimination perpetrated
against the Tamils and observes that "What is at stake is the identity of the
Tamils as a separate ethnic,  cultural and linguistic minority and the right
to live in the land of their birth with dignity and self respect as equal
citizens with the Sinhalese.  It is this right that is attacked by the
Chauvinist philosophy which Informs and guides the Enoch Powells of the
Sinhalese ruling clique".



A sinister and calculated move is on, the writer says, to deprive the Tamils
of their soul by depriving them of their language, denying  them their
fundamental rights and destroying their culture. As an illustration there is a
reference to the famous 'muruga' at Kataragama being converted into a
Sinhalese deity.



Also in the same issue is an Article titled "Cultural Racism in Vavuniya". It
is an attack on the architecture of the recently built Archaeological Museum
in Vavuniya, alleging that it symbolises. Sinhala Buddhist arrogance and
oppression rather than tolerance and maitriya. It calls upon the Tamil people
as a mark of protest not to participate the opening ceremony of the Museum
erected behind the "enigmatic Buddha Statue".



(11)  Mr. Nadesan denies that the editorial policy was calculated to endanger
the safety of the country or to be prejudicial to National security. The
Saturday Review, he claimed, had always stood for national interest. It was,
however, bold and forthright and expressed views on all matters of public
interest. The primary function of a newspaper is to convey information to the
public and  in the performance of that function the Saturday Review published
articles and letters from readers expressing various shades of opinion. The
ideas contained in them in no way reflected the editorial policy of the
Saturday Review.



If the Army ran amok, for instance, a newspaper must report is so that
preventive steps could be taken. Also such news stories as will as  activities
of the terrorists, be they from the North or the South would arouse tremendous
public interest ; so why should such stories be suppressed, he asks, because
they had nothing to do wit security.

##  143



He referred us in particular to the earlier editions of the paper published in
the year 1982 where there was nothing to indicate anything prejudicial to the
national interest. On the other hand the views expressed resulted in
rectifying some of the injustices perpetrated by the Government on the Tamil
people. As an illustration he referred us to the editorial in the issue of
6.2.82 which criticised the proposal of the Government to decentralise the
issuing of passports by opening passport offices in Kandy & Galle but leaving
out Jaffna. The substance of the editorial was that by such conduct the
Government was making the Tamils feel that they did not belong to the me
family. The editorial yielded results as the Government soon thereafter opened
a passport office in Jaffna as well.



It was factually wrong, he contended, for the Competent Authority to have
thought that Saturday Review had conducted itself in a manner prejudicial to
the national interest for the reason that it had n critical and outspoken.
That is what a newspaper has to be. If not for newspapers the Watergate
scandal would never have been exposed nor would Tanaka the former Prime
Minister of Japan been jailed for bribery.



He therefore invited us to examine all the material published in the paper and
come to the conclusion whether the Competent Authority has made a correct
assessment and acted fairly in dealing with the paper. We have examined the
material as fully as is relevant for the purpose of these cases. It appears to
me, as it did appear to wanasundera, J. who observed in his judgment in S.C.
Application No. 47/83 that "the publishers have tried to be as objective as
possible, and  have sought to produce a weekly newspaper which appears to be a
cut above the average newspaper judged by journalistic standards" ; but that
"unfortunately there has also crept into this publication material that must
necessarily attract the attention of the authorities at a time when there were
unsettled conditions in the country". The evaluation of the material which has
been referred to by me is not the function of the Court but the function of
the Competent Authority. All that law permits the Court to decide is whether
the Competent Authority can possibly be labelled as unreasonable on his
evaluation of this material. He cannot be labelled as unreasonable unless, in
the words of Lord Denning (above) "he is not only wrong, but unreasonably
wrong, so wrong that no reasonable person could

##  144



sensibly take that view". it is not possible for me to say the Competent
Authority was unreasonable, having regard to the material contained in the
issues of May and June 1983.



I am therefore of the view that the fundamental right of the publishers of the
Saturday Review has been lawfully restricted by the Competent Authority and
accordingly the fundamental right of the Petitioners as readers and
contributors have also been lawfully restricted. The Petitioner's claim under
Article 14(1) _(a)_ thus fails



**The Fundamental Right guaranteed by Article 12 (1) :**



"All persons are equal before the law and are entitled to the equal protection
of the law". Mr. Nadesan's contention is that readers of all newspapers are
entitled to equal treatment by the law without discrimination. The object of
this Article is to ensure that arbitrary  discrimination shall not be made by
the State or its organs b person A and person B who answer to the same
description.



Equality before the law does not mean that the same set of laws or the same
set of administrative orders, shall apply to all persons under every
circumstance, ignoring differences between men and situations. Article 12 does
not, therefore, forbid a reasonable classification because all persons are not
similarly situate, and all situations can never be the same. Discrimination to
be violative of Article 12 must be discrimination between equals. There can be
no infringement of this Article where unequals are treated differently.



In the operation or implementation of an administrative scheme, such as the
imposition of a censorship or the prohibition of the publication of a
newspaper, the State is permitted to take unequal administrative action in its
dealings with individuals or groups whose circumstances or situations are
different. Newspapers differ in their respective policies, opinions and
tastes. No two newspapers, as in the case of individuals, are alike. Each
newspaper caters to a different readership, and so among the readership too
there is a difference. In a  permissible classification, mathematical nicety
and perfect equality are not possible and are not required in the case of
newspapers and their readers. The executive: in implementing an administrative
scheme is free to recognise degrees of harm, and may confine its restrictions
to those cases where the need is deemed to be the clearest. _Shri Ram Krishna
Dalmaia et al v. Justice S. R. Tendolkar et al_ (7)

##  145



Mr. Nadesan's complaint is that the Competent Authority has not, in his
affidavits in reply to the Petitioner's averment of discrimination, specified
the reason as to why he imposed a total ban on the publication of the Saturday
Review whilst imposing only a censorship in the case of other publications.
The answer of the Competent Authority to this allegation of discrimination is
a bare denial. No reasons have been given for such differentiation. In the
absence of valid reasons for such discrimination learned Counsel invites us to
draw the inference that there is no intelligible differentia on which the
orders of the Competent Authority are based.



This raises the question 'on whom is the burden of proof of infringement of
the fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12(1) ?' Nadesan has emphasised
Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution, and in particular Article 4 _(d)_ which
ordains that the fundamental rights that are declared and recognised by the
Constitution shall be respected, secured and advanced by all organs of
government, and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied save as provided
in the Constitution. He drew our attention to the fact that provision similar
to Article 4(d) is not incorporated in the Indian Constitution and that
decisions of the Indian Courts on the burden of proof may not be appropriate
in interpreting Article 12 of our Constitution.



In this connection Counsel referred us to _Eleko v. Officer administering the_
_Government of Nigeria_ (8) and _R. v. Brixton Prison Governor_ (9) both cases
of illegal detention, where Lord Atkin in the former case, and Chief Justice
Lord Parker in the latter, stated the cardinal principle of English Law that
no member of the executive can interfere with the liberty of a British subject
except on the condition that he can support the legality of his action before
a Court of Justice, that at the end of the day it was for the members of the
executive satisfy the Court as to the validity of the order.



What was challenged in _Eleko's case_ was an order made by the Government of
Nigeria providing that the appellant who was the applicant for the writ of
habeas corpus shall leave a specified area and on his failing to comply,
ordered his deportation to another place in the colony. The Governor could
only make that order validly if the applicant was a native chief ; if he had
been deposed ; and there was a native law or custom which required him to
leave the area. These were the conditions precedent to a valid order of
deportation and there could be no doubt that the executive had to establish
that these conditions existed.

##  146



In the latter case under the Commonwealth Immigration Act, 1962, an
immigration officer had a discretion to ad provided for in a schedule to the
Act, the relevant portion of which stated that a person shall not be required
to submit to examination under this para after the expiration of the period of
24 hours from the time he lands in the U.K. Lord Parker took the view that it
was for the immigration officer and not for the ‑immigrant, to establish the
time at which the immigrant had landed in the U.K.



But we are in the arena of fundamental rights, and I think different
principles are applicable ‑ It seems to me that where a person invokes the
provisions of Article 126 and complains of a violation of the fundamental
right to equality the burden is on him to establish the discrimination by
executive or administrative action. The principle finds support from the
decision in _Probhudas Morarjee v. Union of   India _(10) "To make out a case
of denial of equal protection, a plea of differential treatment is by itself
not sufficient. The petitioner pleading that Article 14 (corresponding to our
Article 12(l)) has been violated must make out that not only had he been
treated differently from others, but that he has been so treated from persons
similarly circumscribed without any reasonable basis, and that such
differential treatment is unjustifiable".



This principle was affirmed by the Court in the case of _Dr. N.R.W_.  _Perera
v. The University_ _Grants Commission_ (11) "A person relying on a plea of
unlawful discrimination must set out with sufficient particulars his plea
showing how between persons similarly circumscribed, discrimination has been
made, which discrimination is founded on no intelli gible differentia If the
petitioner established similarity between persons who are subject to
differential treatment it is for the State to establish that the differention
is based on a rational object sought to be achieved by it But where similarity
is not shown, the plea as to infringement of Article 12 must fail " per
Sharvananda, J. at p. 13.



The petitioner have not discharged the burden which was on them to establish
discrimination. Their claim that their fundamental right to equality has been
violated must also fail for the reason that the Saturday Review was publish in
Jaffna where there was considerable disorder , and there was a threat to
national

##  147



Security unlike in other parts of the country. The publications in Jaffna
could not therefore be said to be "similarly circumscribed " as the
publications in other parts of the Country at the same time.



For these reasons these Applications are dismissed, but without costs.



**COLIN- THOME, J.** -I  agree.  


**RANASINGHE, J.    **  -I  agree.  


**ABDUL CADER, J.**   -I  agree.



**RODRIGO ,J.**



I have come to the same conclusion. The Saturday Review' keeps knocking at
the door of this  Court with each monthly renewal of the ban on the paper
following each extension of the Emergency. The dirge it sings is the same. But
the choir changes. The company owning the paper and its share-holders had on
different occasions separately petitioned this Court against the ban without
success. The present applications are by some alleged readers of the paper.
Counsel for the Competent Authority argues that the application is
misconceived. He says that  the ban is on the printers, publishers and
distributers of the papers and not on the readers. This point is resisted with
the argument that the right of publication granted to one person carries with
it of necessity the right to another to  read the publication. That is to say
that Art. 14 (1) _(a)_ of the Constitution enacts that every citizen is
entitled to the freedom of speech and expression including by implication the
right to receive information. So, the argument runs that if the ban on
publication is invalid giving rise to a cause for complaint by the publisher
so does it give a cause for complaint by the  publisher so does it give a
cause for complaint to the reader. Publication in the Roman Dutch Law of
defamation can be understood, it is said, in ten different senses. It means
basically in that  law "to put the matter in the way of being read and
understood by someone......... " (Salmond p.353 ‑ 13th Ed.) This word read in
the context of Art. 19 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights simply
means imparting information and ideas through any media. To impart information
there must be recipient to receive it. So a reader or hearer is inseparably
linked to the concept of publication. One does not exist without the other.
Likewise if one ceases to exist, so does the other. Where a publisher is free
to publish any matter he is also free to discontinue the publication and a
reader has no vested right to have

##  148



the matter published. This freedom to publish is granted as a fundamental
freedom to a citizen by the Article referred to in the Constitution. Where the
publisher is not a citizen he has no fundamental freedom of publication. Where
the right of a person other than a citizen to publish is lost through whatever
cause he cannot complain against it as the loss of a fundamental right. The
proprietor of this paper is not a citizen, it being an incorporated company. A
reader of the contents of this paper published as it is by a non-citizen
cannot be in a better position than the company itself, in regard to the
fundamental right of publication. The company cannot do indirectly what it
cannot do directly. See _Dr. Neville Fernando and_ _Other v. Liyanage and
Others_ (12). If it cannot complain against the ban as it has no fundamental
right how can a reader raise a cry on its behalf since in effect that is what
he is doing when he complains that he is not  getting his usual paper ? It is
conceded that where the paper voluntarily discontinues publication the reader
has no ground of complaint. Likewise, it is conceded that the reader and the
publisher are bound alike by restrictions imposed on publication by the law of
defamation, sedition and so on. This applies where the publisher is a citizen
or otherwise, and likewise where the reader is a citizen or otherwise.
Inasmuch as the relief sought here is in relation to violation by
administrative action of a fundamental right of publication the petitioners
must establish that the fundamental right violated is that of a citizen. Where
no citizenship is claimed for the publisher there is on bottom to hold the
complaint by any person such as a reader of it on  its behalf. Just as a
reader cannot meaningfully seek to compel a publication by a person who has
voluntarily ceased to  publish any matter so a reader cannot effectively seek
to have recourse to law to lift a ban on a publication the right to publish
which the publisher has no fundamental right, it being remembered that relief
is being sought under provisions relating to enforcement of fundamental
rights.



The Deputy Solicitor‑General (D.S.G.) nevertheless started from a more
advanced starting‑block, namely, lack of protest by the publisher himself and
a lack of an order directed at the readers. He was content to do so as it was
presumably unnecessary for him to burrow into questions of legal incapacity in
the publisher to complain and follow the consequences to the readers. I have,
however, examined it as it is staring in the face from the immediate
background. Be that as it, might ­The fact of the matter is that the
publishers protested twice earlier in

##  149



different capacities and on each occasion this Court was obliged by law to
refuse a locus standi to the publishers To grant one to the present
petitioners who are alleged to be readers of the paper is to close one's eyes
to the mask behind it. All the petitioners barring the 5th  petitioner in the
application No. 85/83 are the self same petitioners in application No. 47/83
that was dismissed for want of legal capacity in the petitioners in that they
as shareholders of the incorporated company were held incapacitated from
maintaining the petition where the company itself. ‑ 7th petitioner ‑ could
not maintain it. They did not claim the present alleged capacity in that
application. In application No. 6/84 the petitioners are new still claiming to
be readers. The subterfuge is all too transparent. To legally shut the front
door to the publishers and to say that they are entitled to come through the
back door is sophistry. Every member of the literate public is a potential
reader of every newspaper and to recognise the right in an alleged actual
reader and not recognise it in every other member of the literate public which
in fact means a vast and amorphous public does not seem right. To hold
otherwise is a  self‑evident fallacy. Anyway, in case I am wrong in this view,
I shall address myself to the contention that the fundamental right implied in
Art. 14 (1) _(a)_ of receiving information that every citizen is entitled to
has been infringed by the closure of the paper. Notwithstanding the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and the Covenant on the Civil d Political Rights
to the latter of which Sri Lanka has become a signatory and the submissions
contained in a booklet made by the President as Leader of the Opposition to
the Constitutional Court then against the Press Council Bill which recognised
a fundamental right to receive information, I do not think it necessary to
reach a conclusion this alleged right in this application. It is perhaps
significant that it finds no place specifically in the present Constitution.
There is no pronouncement by the Supreme Court of India on it though there is
a provision in the Indian Constitution corresponding to our Art. 14 (1) _(a)._
The U.S. Supreme Court decision in _Stanley v. Georgia_ (18) deals with the
First Amendment relating to Freedom of the Press and not to a provision
corresponding to our Art. 14 (1) _(a)._ The subject is too vast and uncertain
to make a pronouncement where it is unnecessary to do so in considering an
application that can be disposed of otherwise. It is safer to approach this
application from an angle of the validity or otherwise of the banning order.
If the order banning the paper is valid

##  150



under Emergency Orders then the petitioners too are bound by its validity. I
shall therefore consider the validity of the order complained of.



In the judgments delivered previously in connected applications I have
repeatedly addressed myself to the limited role that this court can play when
considering orders made by the Competent Authority under Emergency Regulations
that empower him to make this kind of order merely if in his opinion it is
required by the exigencies of national security and public order. References
have been given in those judgments to the view expressed by Courts here and
abroad as to the judicial approach to the consideration of these orders made
in times of Emergency.



"in times of grave Emergency it is unlikely that a theoretical judicial
control will be able to come to play as the ingredient of policy is so  much
by comparison with the ingredient of ascertainable and relevant facts." _Wade_
pp. 375‑6\. The fact that issues of the paper and affidavits by the
petitioners have been placed before us does not, remove the ingredient of
policy that underlies the opinion of the  Competent Authority when he made the
order banning the publication.



In regard to the exercise of a discretion in an Emergency situation Lord
Denning, M. R. expressed himself in _Secretary of State for Employment v.
ASLEF_ _(No. 2)_ (14). as follows :



"But  when he honestly takes a view of the facts or the law which could
reasonably be entertained, then his decision is not to be set aside simply
because thereafter someone thinks that his view was wrong. After all, this is
an emergency procedure. It has to be set in motion quickly, when there is no
time for minute analysis of fact or of law. The whole process will be made of
no effect if the Minister's decision was afterwards to be coined word by word
letter by letter, to see if he has in any way misdirected himself. That cannot
be right. Take this very case. He had made a mistake in  . . . . . . . . but,
that, in my opinion, was not sufficient to invalidate the application on the
basis on which he acts."  



As late as in 1980 Lord Diplock in _I.R.C. v. Rossminister_ (15) observed  :



"The decision‑making power is conferred by the statute on the officer of the
Board. He is not required to give any reasons for his decision and the public
interest eminently provides justification for any‑refusal to do so. Since he
does not disclose his reasons there

##  151



can be no question of setting aside this decision for any error of law on the
face of the record and the only ground on which it can be attacked on a
judicial review is that it was ultra vires because the condition precedent to
his forming the belief which the statute prescribes namely that it should be
based on reasonable grounds was not satisfied. Where Parliament has designated
a public officer as decision‑maker for a particular class of decision, the
High Court acting as the, reviewing Court . . . . .  is not a Court of Appeal.
It must proceed on the presumption omnia praesumuntur rite esse acta until
that presumption can be displaced by the applicant for review on whom the onus
lies of doing so. Since no reasons have been given by the decision‑maker and
no unfavourable inference can be drawn from this fact because there is obvious
justification for his failure to do so, the presumption that he acted intra
vires can only be displaced by evidence of facts which cannot be reconciled
with there having been reasonable cause for his belief."



The Competent Authority in his order merely states why he made the order but
he does not seek therein to give his reasons for forming his opinion. When in
the last case referred to the statute required reasonable grounds for the
exercise of a discretion by an officer, Lord Diplock was satisfied with the
application of the presumption attaching to official acts. The vires of the
order or the bona fides of the Competent Authority in a personal sense are not
challengea. What is argued is that the Competent Authority has not been
reasonable in banning this publication apart from the allegation of
discrimination. .When the officer concerned is empowered by statute to act in
a particular way if in his opinion it is right to do so then I think following
Lord Diplock's view we are all the more restricted in scrutinising the
sustainability of the Competent Authority's order. In fact, the Privy Council
in the case of _A.G. of St. Christopher v. Reynolds_ (16)  per Lord Simon, has
stated :



"The facts and background of the _Tameside case_ (6), _Liversidge v.
Anderson._ (4) _Nakkuda Ali case_ (17) and the present case are of course all
very different from each other. This is why their Lordships have reached their
conclusions as to the true construction of Reg. 3(1) of the Emergency powers
Regulations 1967, in reliance chiefly on the light shed by the Constitution
rather than on such light as may be thrown on that regulation by the
authorities to which references have been made."

##  152



It would, therefore, seem, the opening allowed to a Court to look at a
Competent Authority's order is narrow. This is because there cannot be two
masters in conditions of Emergency to control the same threat. If there are,
the miscreants will exploit it. It is not the Constitutional task of the
Supreme Court to be a 'generallissimo' over the authorities empowered to
combat an Emergency. Given good faith and legal competence it must be, in the
nature of things, on the rarest of occasions that we may set aside an
Emergency order and uneasily hope that the authorities will respect it and not
bring out two orders in its place the next day.



Even so, the issues of the paper from its inception have been supplied to us
and we were invited to read them and Judge for ourselves whether the order of
the Competent Authority (C.A) banning the paper outright was reasonably
required by the exigencies of national security and preservation of public
order and so on. Though this Court on two previous occasions had unanimously
declined to intervene after consideration of the self same issues of the paper
and the material supplied in the affidavits furnished in relation to those
applications, we indicated to Counsel that we will consider ourselves not
technically bound by the conclusions reached in those judgments. In an
affidavit filed by the 4th petitioner in these proceedings there is a
paragraph (para 28) averring facts not supplied to us in the earlier
proceedings. Having considered the averments in that paragraph for the first
time and reconsidered the rest of the material all over again I see no reason
to reach a different conclusion. For a detailed examination, see the judgment
of Wimalaratne, J.



There is however, the submission that the order of the C.A.  is in
contravention of Art. 12(1) which guarantees equal protection and equality for
all persons before the law. Emergency Orders in their nature are unequal in
imposition as they deal with individual persons or individual situations in
circumstances that vary from each other. One paper may be banned altogether
and another only censored depending on the degree of harm that the contents in
the respective papers may cause to the security situation. That is not
discrimination See _Shri Ram Krishna Dalmaia et al v. Justice S. R. Ten dolker
et al_. (7)  Counsel says that if the ban was imposed in that kind of
circumstances the C.A. should have said so in his affidavit. The C.A. has
merely denied discrimination. One can understand the reason for the bareness
of the affidavit. During Emergencies public officers entrusted

**  153**



with grave assignments should not fritter away their energy and time in
meeting complaints against them in Court. In fact, that is the rationale
behind section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance that no order, rule or
direction etc., can be called in question in any Court. Though the Courts,
just the same, exercise a limited supervisory jurisdiction, it must not give a
platform to litigants to demand exacting pleadings and proceedings from public
officers whose orders they are challenging. Any way the burden is on the
petitioners to establish discrimination. See Dr. _N. R. W Perera v. The
University Grants Commission_ (11) and _Probhudas Morarjee v. Union of India_
(10). The two cases cited by Counsel namely _Eleko v._ _The Officer
Administering the Government Nigeria_ (8), _R. v. Brixton Prison Governor_ (9)
do not deal with emergencies. The petitioners have proved nothing beyond
making a Plea of differential treatment. In any case in relation to steps
dealing with exigencies of national security and public order taken by a
public officer, I cannot imagine a situation ever arising in which this
Article can be applied. Even if it does arise, the instant case is definitely
not one.



_Applications dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/18.html_  

