##  Jayasinghe v. Jayakody and Others - SLR - 77, Vol 2 of 1985 [1983] LKSC
18; (1985) 2 Sri LR 77 (18 May 1983)

**

77

JAYASINGHE  
v.  
JAYAKODY AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN-THOME, J., ATUKORALE, J. AND  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S. C. ELECTION PETITION - APPEAL No. 4/84.  
C.A. No. 3/83.  
FEBRUARY 25, 26, 27 AND 28 AND MARCH 1, 4, 5, 7 AND 8, 1985.

_

Election Petition - Sections 80A, 80B, 80C of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council 1946 as amended by Act No. 9 of 1970 - Rule .12 of
the Parliamentary Election Petition Rules 1946 as amended by Act No. 9 of 1970
of the Third Schedule to the Order-in-Council - Non-joinder of parties -
Security - Affidavit - Effect of defective affidavit - Full particulars -
Power of amendment.

_

The petitioner challenged the election of the 1st respondent to the Mahara
seat at the Parliamentary Election held on May 18, 1983 on the grounds that -

1\. The corrupt practice of undue. influence was committed by the 2nd and 3rd
respondents as agents of the 1st respondent.

2\. By reason of general intimidation (of which 14 instances were
particularised of which three were acts of undue influence committed by
Suranimala Rajapakse, S. D. Tennison Wimalaratne and Jayantha Rajapakse and
three were instances of assaults and threats by several supporters of the 1 st
respondent) or other misconduct (like

**78**

organised impersonation or other circumstances like arrest and detention of
polling agents and one Chief Organiser. Police and officials permitting entry
of unauthorised persons into polling booths and refusal of loudspeaker
permits) the majority of the electors may have been prevented from electing
the candidate whom they preferred.

3\. By reason of non-compliance with the provisions of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council 1946 relating to elections and with
the principles of such provisions the results of the election were affected
and under this ground reference was made to the fact that the votes counted in
three ballot boxes did not tally with the number of ballot papers issued.

4\. Full particulars of the several corrupt practices alleged had not been set
out of the four preliminary objections the Election Judge upheld three and
dismissed the petition

(1) There was non-joinder of Suranimala Rajapakse, S. D. Tennison Wimalaratne
and Jayantha Rajapakse as respondents as required by section 80A (1) (b) of
the Ceylon Parliamentary Elections (Order in Council) as amended by Act No. 9
of 1970.

(2) The security lodged was insufficient in terms of Rule 12 (2) of the
Parliamentary Election Petition Rules 1946 as amended by Act No. 9 of 1970 set
out in the Third Schedule to the Order in Council.

(3) The affidavit was defective in terms of section 80B (d) of the Order in
Council.

**

Held -

**

(a) The grounds on which an election can be avoided are set out in section 77
of the Order in Council.

There is a distinction between -charge- and -ground- in new Rule 12 (2) of the
Third Schedule to the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council 1946.
There can be several charges under each distinct ground and such charges
attract security. The first charge on each distinct ground attracts Rs. 5,000
as security and each additional charge on the same ground attracts Rs. 2,500.

(b) There is only one single ground of avoidance under section 77 (a) namely
the prevention or likely preventing of free voting of which the components
enumerated in the section are general bribery, general treating or general
intimidation or other misconduct or other circumstances. Thus the first
charge, namely, general bribery attracts Rs. 5,000 as security and every
additional charge of general bribery or general treating or general
intimidation attracts Rs. 2,500. Also every allegation of misconduct and every
distinct circumstance under other circumstances would constitute additional
charges.

(c) Non-compliance with the provisions relating to the conduct of elections
and the failure to conduct the election in accordance with the principles of
such provisions constitute aground of avoidance and there being one charge on
this ground the security under this head would be Rs. 5,000.

**79**

(Wanasundera, J. dissenting)

(d) The Election Judge applied the right principles of computation of security
and correctly decided that the security required was Rs. 52,500 whereas the
security. deposited was only Rs. 50,000.,

(e) Rule 12 (3) of the Rules set out in the Third Schedule stipulates that no
further proceedings should be heard on the petition if the security required
is not furnished. Hence the dismissal of the petition on this ground by the
Election Judge was correct.

**

Held further (unanimously)

**

(2) Suranimala Rajapakse, S. D. Tennison Wimalaratne and Jayantha Rajapakse
were not alleged to be agents of the 1 st respondent nor has it been alleged
that the corrupt practice alleged to have been committed by them was done with
the knowledge or consent of the 1 st respondent. Proof of the said corrupt
practice is not by itself sufficient to avoid the election. It has to be
further established that the majority of the electors were prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred` by the said acts of corrupt
practice. Hence they need not have been joined as respondents. Only those
persons should be joined as respondents to the petition whose acts by itself
render the election void. There must be a nexus of cause and effect, between
the offence complained of and the prayer for the avoidance of the election.

(3) The petitioner cannot be expected to mention the names of persons whom he
cannot identify or whose names he does not know. Hence he cannot be faulted
for not naming the offender in regard to the assaults and threats.

(4) Although the affidavit accompanying the petition was defective in that it
included averments based on information received from others the petition
should not have been dismissed on this ground of defect in the verification.
The allegation of corrupt practice cannot be ignored merely on this ground of
defect in the verification because the form of the mandatory affidavit is not
prescribed and it is not a requirement of law that the source of information
or the ground of the deponent's belief should be set out Hence the dismissal
of the petition on the ground that the affidavit was bad is wrong.

(5) The petitioner has furnished as full particulars as he could. If more
particulars were needed in the opinion of the Judge recourse could be had to
the Judge's power of amendment under section 80C (i) of the Order in Council.

**

Case referred to

** _

(1) In re Fred E. de Silva f 1949) 51 NLR 55, 57.

_ **

APPEAL** from the judgment of the Election Judge.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C., with Saliya Mathew, Nimal Siripala de Silva, K.
Balapatabendi, Sanath Jayatilleke, Mrs. A. B. Dissanayake, L. M. Samarasinghe,
and Miss A. D. D. N. Telespha, for the petitioner-appellant.

_

**80**

George Candappa, P.C. with Ben Eliyathamby, Daya Pelpola and Ronald Perera for
1 st respondent.

2nd respondent absent and unrepresented.

K. N. Choksy, P C. with Daya Pelpola, Lakshman Perera and Ronald Perera for
the 3rd respondent.

S. W. B. Wadugodapitiya, Additional Solicitor-General with N. Y Cassie Chetty
-S. C. for the 4th respondent-respondent.

_Cur adv. vult_

July, 8, 1985. **  
SHARVANANDA, C. J.

**

The petitioner-appellant filed an election petition under the provisions of
Article 7 61 E of the- Constitution -as amended by the 5th Amendment to the
Constitution read together with sections 79, 80, 80A and 80B of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council, to set aside the by-election to
the Mahara Electoral District held on 18.5.1983. The 1st respondent was, at
the election, returned by a majority of 45 votes.

The petitioner-appellant alleged that the election of the 1st respondent was
void. in the grounds that

(a) The corrupt practice-of undue influence was committed by the agents of the
1st respondent -

(b) By reason of general intimidation or other misconduct or other
circumstances the majority of the electors may have been prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred ;

(c) Non-compliance with the provisions of the Ceylon- (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council 1946, relating to elections and the failure to
conduct elections in accordance with the principles of such provisions, which
non-compliance affected the results of the election.

In his petition, he had joined as parties the 2nd and 3rd respondents who he
alleges as agents of the 1st respondent, committed the corrupt practice of
undue influence. In paragraph 3(a) as against the 2nd respondent, he has
alleged three distinct acts of undue influence committed on three different
persons who are voters. In paragraph 3B, he has alleged, as against the 3rd
respondent, two separate acts of undue influence on the same person who is a
voter.

**81**

Paragraph 4A. contains an allegation, that the majority of electors may have
been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred by reason of
general intimidation or other misconduct or other circumstances. In regard to
general intimidation, the petitioner has furnished 14 items or instances of
intimidation. In regard to "other misconduct", in paragraph 4 B, the
petitioner has given 41 cases of impersonation and has stated that the said
acts of impersonation and numerous other acts of impersonation of electors
were organised by the 1st respondent's : supporters and facilitated by several
police officers and members of the official staff at polling stations. In
paragraph 4 C, the petitioner has 'set out matters that constitute "other
circumstances". In paragraph 4C(i) it is alleged that 31 polling agents of the
Sri Lanka Freedom Party candidate attached to 12 polling booths were arrested
by the Veyangoda' and Nittambuwa Police on the election day at about 4 a.m.
and held in custody ;for several hours after the polling had commenced until
pre-noon and thereby they were unable to perform :their functions ; that their
detention facilitated impersonation, demoralised the sympathisers of the
S.L.F.P. and created the impression that government machinery could be used-
against persons sympathetic to or espousing the S L.F.P. cause. In paragraph
4C(ii), the petitioner, alleges that applications for loudspeaker permits to
hold three public meetings of the S.L.F.P. were refused by the police officers
anxious to support the U.N.P. In paragraph 4C (iii) (a), the petitioner
complains that police officers throughout the electorate harassed and
threatened the S.L.F.P. party organisers and supporters throughout the
election campaign and on election day, that they permitted unauthorised
persons to enter polling booths and to intimidate electors in the polling
queues (4C) (iii) (b), that they unlawfully arrested the Chief Organiser for
the S.L.F.P. in Uruval Peruwa area, one Reggie Ranatunga, on 5.5.83, and held
him in unlawful custody and that this was done in order to prevent him from
carrying out his functions and to dissuade other organisers and supporters of
the S .L .F P. - 4(C) (iii) (c).

Finally in paragraph 5, the petitioner makes the allegation that there was
non-compliance with the provisions of the Elections Order-in-Council, which
non-compliance has affected the results of the election. Three, instances are
set out-a ballot box from Netbuduwa polling booth contained 4,9 ballot papers
more than the number issued at the polling station ; a ballot box from Ihala
Karagahamuna polling booth contained one ballot paper less than the total
issued at the

**82**

polling station ; a ballot box from Kahatana polling booth contained one
ballot paper less than the total issued at the polling station.

The petitioner filed his own affidavit to verify the allegations of fact
stated by him in his petition. He deposited Rs. 50,000 as security.

At the hearing of the election petition four preliminary objections were
raised on behalf of the 1 st, 2nd and 3rd respondents

1\. Sufficient security has not been given by the petitioner.

2\. Persons required to be joined as respondents to the petition have not been
joined.

3\. The petition has failed to set out full particulars of the several corrupt
practices alleged by the petitioner.

4\. The affidavit filed by the petitioner is inadequate.

The Election Judge upheld the preliminary objections

(a) That sufficient security has not been given by the petitioner,

(b) That persons required to join as respondents to the petition have not been
joined,

(c) The affidavit filed by the petitioner is defective, and has dismissed the
Election Petition. The petitioner has preferred this appeal from the said
order of dismissal.

I shall first deal with the holding of the Election Judge that the petitioner
has failed to join as respondent to his petition persons required to be joined
in terms of Section 80 A (1)(b) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-
in-Council, 1946 and that non-compliance with the requirement invalidates the
entire petition. (All references in this judgment to sections are references
to sections in the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council 1946)
Section 80A(1) provides "A petitioner shall join as respondents to his
election petition

(a) where the petition, in addition to claiming that the election of all 'or
any of the returned candidates is void or was undue, claims a further
declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected, all
the contesting candidates, other than the petitioner, and where no such
further declaration is claimed, all the returned candidates , and

**83**

(b) any other candidate or person against whom allegations of any corrupt or
illegal practice are made in the petition."

Section 80A (1) in clear premptory terms obligates the petitioner to join as
respondents to his petition not only the returned candidate but also any other
candidate or person against whom allegations of corrupt or illegal practice
are made in the petition. The petitioner has accordingly in this petition
joined not only the 1 st respondent, the returned candidate, but also the 2nd
and 3rd respondents who he alleges have committed the corrupt practice of
undue influence as agents of the 1st respondent. He has specifically pleaded
that the election of the 1st respondent is void on the ground of corrupt
practice- of undue influence committed by the 2nd and 3rd respondents, agents
of the 1st respondent.

In paragraph 4A the petitioner has further alleged that by reason of general
intimidation the majority of electors may have been prevented from electing
the candidate whom they preferred and that hence the election of the 1st
respondent was void. He has set out fourteen instances of general
intimidation. Paragraph 4A (iv), (viii) and (ix) are three such instances. In
each of these the petitioner mentions the names of the persons alleged to have
committed the acts stated therein

**84**

Name |

Date |

Place |

Act  
---|---|---|---  
  
4 (a) (iv)  |

  |

  |

  
  
Suranimala

Rajapakse  |

18.5.83

at about

2.30 p.m.  |

At Weboda near

the polling booth of

Weboda North  |

Assaulting Appuhamillage Somasin who was

an organiser of the Sri Lanka North Freedom Party in the presence of several
electors, to instil fear into the minds of several electors who were present
and to place them under duress.  
  
4 (a) (viii)  |

  |

  |

  
  
S.D.Tennison

Wimalaratne

UNP supporter

and another

UNP supporter  |

18.5.83  |

At Enderamulla  |

Using force on one Ratnasena, a supporter of the SLFP. The attack on the said
Ratnasena was

directed to intimidate and to UNP induce electors

favourable to the Sri Lanka Freedom Party to

refrain from voting.  
  
4 (a) (ix)  |

  |

  |

  
  
Jayantha

Rajapakse and

Several other

Supporters of the

1st respondent  |



18.5.83  |

At Buthpitiya Malwathu

Hiripitiya

Public Road  |

Jayantha Rajapakse fired two shots killing one Nimal Premasiri a SLFP
supporter standing very close to Wijaya Kumaranatunga the SLFP candidate in
order to instill fear in to the minds of several electors present and to place
them under duress and to prevent them from voting. The other supporters of the
1st respondent who came with Jayantha Rajapkse threatened to ' assault with
clubs and swords the supporters of the SLFP

candidate in order to instil fear into the minds of several electors present
and to place them under duress and to prevent them from voting.  
  
It was not the case of the petitioner and he has not averred that the
aforesaid acts of undue influence were committed by agents of the 1st
respondent or with the knowledge or consent of the 1st respondent.

It was the contention of counsel appearing for the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents that since these items disclose allegations of corrupt practice of
undue influence against persons other than the respondents cited, they should
have been joined as respondents to the petition and since the petitioner has
failed to comply with the mandatory provision of section 80A (1) (b) the
petition was bad and should be rejected.

The Election Judge.has accepted this contention that the aforesaid (i)
Suranimala Rajapakse, (ii) S. B. Tennison Wimalaratne and (iii) Jayantha
Rajapakse, referred to in paragraph 4(a) of the petition, should have been
joined as respondents as allegations of corrupt practice have been made
against them in the petition.

In appeal, Mr. Senanayake contended that the Election Judge has misdirected
himself in construing the word "allegation" in paragraph80A (1) (b) to mean an
assertion or averment. According to the Election Judge every person against
whom it is asserted or averred for whatever purpose; that he had committed a
corrupt or illegal practice in the petition has to be joined as a respondent.
Mr. Senanayake has

**85**

sought to put a restricted interpretation upon. the word 'allegation', in
section 80A (1) (b). According to him section 80A (1) (b) should be read as
""any other candidate or person against whom allegations of any corrupt or
illegal practice such as would avoid the election are made in the petition. He
submitted that in the context of election petitions the meaning of the term
'allegation' is well settled : -every allegation which, if proved, would
suffice to avoid an election on any of the grounds of avoidance enumerated in
section 77, should be treated as a charge within the meaning of Rule 12.""
(Per Wimalaratne, J. in Election Appeal 1, 2 and 3 of 1977). He urged that the
word "allegation" in section 80A (1) (b) should be construed in relation to
the concept of 'charge'. He referred to the words in section 83 (1), proviso
(a) -

"an election petition questioning the return or the election upon the ground
of a corrupt practice and specifically alleging . . ." and the words in
section 83 (2) "an election petition presented in due time may, for the
purpose of questioning the return of the election upon an allegation of
corrupt or illegal practice'' and submitted that the 'allegation' in section
80A (1) (b) is referable to a corrupt practice which avoids the election.

Mr. Senanayake submitted that only a corrupt practice committed in connection
with the election by the candidate, or with his knowledge or consent, or by
any agent of the candidate will invalidate an election - section 77c, and that
a corrupt practice committed by any other. person without the knowledge or
consent of the candidate will not be a ground for avoidance of an election and
will not be sufficient to constitute a charge. He drew attention to section
80B which requires an election petition to contain a concise statement of the
material facts on which the petitioner relies and to set forth full
particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including as
full a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have
committed such corrupt practice and date and place of the commission of such
practice. He elucidated that by the averments in paragraph 4 of the Election
Petition, the petitioner was seeking to avoid the election on the ground that
by reason of general intimidation or other misconduct the majority of electors
may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred.
Section 77 of the Order-in-Council provides that -

**86**

"The election of a candidate as a Member shall be declared to be void on an
election petition on any of the following grounds which may be proved to the
satisfaction of the Election Judge, namely -

(a) that by reason of general bribery, general treating or general
intimidation, or other misconduct, or other circumstances, whether similar to
those before enumerated or not, the majority of electors were or may have been
prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred......

According to him 'general intimidation' consists of a series or aggregation of
acts of undue influence, and that each one of the allegations in paragraph 4
(a) of the petition may constitute acts of undue influence in terms of section
56 (1). He admitted that each one of the acts referred to in paragraph 4 (a)
in the petition constituted a corrupt practice, in terms of section 58(1) (b).
He urged that the several acts of undue influence pleaded in paragraph 4 (a)
generated 'general intimidation' and that they had the consequence of
preventing the majority of electors from electing the candidate whom they
preferred (section 77 (a)). He submitted that to establish the grounds set out
in section 77 (a) it was not sufficient to establish individual acts of undue
influence. The petitioner had to establish that the effect of the several acts
of undue influence was to prevent the majority of electors from electing a
candidate whom they preferred. His case was that when a petitioner seeks to
found his petition on the ground of 'general intimidation' under section 77
(a), he is not charging anybody with the commission of any corrupt practice,
though he incidentally had to prove a number of acts of undue influence to
establish that ground under section 77 (a) It was therefore not necessary for
him to join the persons who had committed the acts of intimidation. Mr.
Senanayake's submission in short, was that section 80A (1) (b) requires that
the petitioner should join as parties to the election petition only the
returned candidate and any agent who commits a corrupt practice and any other
person who commits a corrupt practice with the knowledge or consent of the
candidate.- According to him section 80 A does not require the joining of
persons as respondents whose alleged acts of corrupt practice will not be a
ground for invalidating the election. He pointed out that if the
interpretation that he contends for is not given to section 80A(1) (b) then
great inconvenience will be caused. He gave as illustration the case of
general intimidation or general bribery where fifty instances of such corrupt
practice are alleged in the petition. The petitioner would

**87**

then have to join the fifty persons as respondents to the petition and the
proceedings will become unmanageable. Counsel for the respondents on the other
hand argued that the legislature has used the word 'allegation' in the sense
of an 'assertion' or 'averment' and that is the meaning that should be given
to the word 'allegation' in section 80A (1) (b). They submitted that since the
petitioner had in paragraph 4 (a) (iv), (viii) and (ix) made allegations that
Suranimala Rajapakse, Tennison Wimalaratne and Jayantha Rajapakse had
committed the corrupt practices of undue influence, they should have been
joined as parties.

Mr. Choksy submitted when a charge of general intimidation is alleged in a
petition and several instances are relied upon to substantiate the charge, the
court has to examine whether any such instance discloses an allegation of
corrupt practice against any person. He referred to the dual functions of an
Election Judge at the conclusion of the trial (a) he will have to make a
determination whether the election was void or not and also (b) make a report
whether any corrupt practice had been committed by the candidate or with his
knowledge and consent or by his agent, and whether any person had been proved
at the trial to be guilty of any corrupt or illegal practice (Sections 81 and
82). He said that the hazard of being reported to the President rendered
obligatory on the petitioner the joining as respondents to his petition all
persons against whom he was making allegations of any corrupt practice in the
petition (Section 80A(1) (b)).

The Election Judge has agreed with Counsel for the respondents that the term
'allegation' in section 80A(1) (b) is used in the sense of 'assertion' or
'averment' and has held that in deciding this question whether a person should
be made a party or not, one has to look at the petition to see whether it
discloses any allegation of corrupt practice against such person and that the
court cannot be controlled by the purpose or reason given by the petitioner
for making specific charges of corrupt practice of undue influence in the
petition, whether to establish a charge of corrupt practice by an agent or to
establish general intimidation such as may have prevented the, majority of
electors from electing the candidate whom they preferred. According to him
whenever there are allegations that persons exercised undue influence then
such persons have to be impleaded as respondents, irrespective of their nexus
to the relief claimed by the petitioner.

Section 80A(1) (b) cannot be looked at in isolation. One has to appreciate the
scheme relating to election petitions to give the correct

**88**

answer as to who are the persons who ought to be joined as respondents in
terms of that section.

Section 77 spells out the grounds for the avoidance of an. election on an
election petition.

Section 77 (a) provides' that an election shall be declared void on the ground
that by reason of general bribery, general intimidation or other misconduct,
the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from electing the
candidate whom they prefer.

Section 77 (c) provides that the election of the candidate shall be declared
void on an election petition on the ground of corrupt practice committed in
connection with the election by the candidate or with his knowledge or consent
or by any agent of the candidate.

Section 79 states as to who may present: an election petition.

Section 80 sets out the relief which the petitioner may claim on an election
petition.

Section 80A sets out as to who shall be joined as respondents to the election
petition.

In my view section 80A is related to section 77, which sets out the grounds
for the avoidance of an election. The petitioner who

claims that the election is void will have to base his claim on any one or
more of the grounds set out in section 77 and for the purpose he will have to
cite as respondents to his petition persons whose conduct constitutes the
ground of avoidance set out in section 77 and for which the candidate is
liable. The petitioner is only interested in having the election declared void
on the charges made by hire. The person joined as respondent and the act which
is alleged to vitiate the election must have a nexus to the relief sought.
Thus when the election of the 1 st respondent is sought to be avoided on the
ground of corrupt practice of undue influence committed by the agents of the 1
st respondent (1) S. Rajakaruna, (2) Ranil Wickremasinghe, they had to be
joined as 2nd and 3rd respondents respectively. If the petitioner succeeds in
proving any one of the corrupt practices referred to in paragraph 3 of the
petition he succeeds in his election petition and the election will be
declared void. The corrupt practice, if established committed by either 1 st
(the returned candidate) or the 2nd or 3rd respondents (the agents of the
returned candidate) will be sufficient to avoid the election.

**89**

On the other hand in paragraph 4 of this petition, the petitioner has also
stated that the election of the 1 st respondent is void on the ground that by
reason of general intimidation . . . . . the majority of electors may have
been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred. The petitioner
then particularised in paragraph 4 (a) fourteen acts of undue influence which
resulted in. the general intimidation complained of. Of these fourteen acts,
three have been committed by the 2nd respondent, two by the 3rd respondent and
four by the 1 st respondent himself, then two by unnamed supporters of the 1
st respondent, three by Suranimala Rajapakse, Tennison Wimalaratne and
Jayantha Rajapakse, third parties who are neither the agents of the 1 st
respondent nor persons who had committed the impugned acts with the knowledge
or consent of the 1 st respondent. The acts of corrupt practice alleged to
have been committed by the last category of persons viz : Suranimala
Rajapakse, Tennison Wimalaratne and Jayantha Rajapakse, cannot by themselves
constitute grounds of avoidance of the election. In order to, succeed in his
petition, the petitioner has got to prove a further ingredient viz that the
majority of electors may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom
they preferred, in order to succeed in his election petition.

The corrupt practice referred to in section 77 (c) has a consequence different
from that of the corrupt practice that may be exhibited by general
intimidation under section 77 (a). If it is proved that a corrupt practice had
been committed by the returned candidate or an election agent or by any other
person with the knowledge or consent of the returned candidate, then the
Election Judge has to declare the election void. But if the corrupt practice
had been committed by a person other than the persons mentioned in 77 (c),
then it must be further established that majority of electors thereby were or
may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred, for
the Election Judge to declare the election void. In the absence of an
allegation that general intimidation has affected the result of the election,
pleading of the several acts of undue influence which individually or
cumulatively constitute general intimidation is irrelevant to the relief
prayed for by a petitioner under section 80. The allegations in the petition
have to be related to the relief sought and accordingly in my view only those
persons need be joined as respondents against whom charges of corrupt practice
vitiating the election are made in the petition.

**90**

Section 82 relating to the report of the Election Judge draws the distinction
between the two categories of corrupt practice, founded on the kind of impact
it has on the determination under section 81.

(a) corrupt practice committed by, or with the knowledge and consent of any
candidate at the election, or by his agent - this affects the validity of the
election.

(b) the corrupt practice committed by other persons -.this will not vitiate
the election.

In my view this distinction between the two categories of offenders in section
82 is based on. the fact that all those who are mentioned in section 82 (a)
would be necessary parties to the election petition in terms of section 80A(1)
(b), while the other class of offenders referred to in section 82B would not
be necessary parties and need not be joined in the election petition and their
non-joinder will not affect the proper constitution of the election petition.

Persons who are not necessary parties and therefore have not been joined as
parties, will, under the proviso to section 82, before being reported, be
given an opportunity of being heard and of giving and calling evidence to show
why they should not be so reported.

But it was argued that, had they been parties to the election petition, they
would have had the opportunity of showing, before the conclusion of the trial
that they are not guilty of any corrupt practice and they should not be placed
under a handicap, as they would be, of having to show cause under the proviso
to section 82 after they have been proved without their being heard at the
trial, to have been guilty of a corrupt practice. I see the force of this
submission. But in my view, it has to yield to the argument of inconvenience
urged by Mr. Senanayake. This submission will involve having trials within the
election trial and the proceedings will become unmanageable. The main trial
will miss its focus and the parties being not interested in the main trial
will have to be helpless spectators of the trial. I prefer the construction
urged by Mr. Senanayake as to who should be joined as parties under section
80A(1) (b) especially as the proviso to section 82 provides as required by
principles of natural justice for an opportunity of being heard, to those who
had not been joined before they are reported.

The Election Judge is in: error in holding that all those against whom
allegations of corrupt. practice are made, for whatever purpose, have to be
joined as respondents to the petition. In my view only those persons whose
alleged acts of corrupt practice will, in terms of section.

**91**

'77(c), vitiate the election will have to be joined as respondents in addition
to the returned candidate. On this construction of section 80A (1) (b) 'any
other candidate' referred to in that section will mean any other candidate who
is charged in the election petition with having committed a corrupt practice
such as would avoid the ejection in terms of section 77(e). The reference to
such candidate is significant. Any allegation against him of a corrupt
practice must have some relevancy to the prayer for the avoidance of the
election.

In paragraph 4 (a) of his petition the petitioner alleges that by reason of
general intimidation the majority of electors may have been prevented from
electing a candidate whom they preferred and has set out fourteen instances or
items in substantiation of the ground of general intimidation. Paragraph 4 -
(iv), (viii) and (ix) refer to three such instances ; in each of these the
petitioner mentioned the names of the persons who are alleged to have
committed the acts stated therein. In paragraph 4 (a), (i) and (x) the
petitioner has not specifically named any offender but has stated "assaults
and threats by several supporters of the 1 st respondent." The petitioner
cannot be expected to mention the names of persons whom he cannot identify or
whose names he does not know. It is necessary to reproduce paragraphs 4 (a)
(iv), 4 (a) (viii) and 4 (a) (ix), to appreciate the question in issue :

4 (a) (iv) |

|

|  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
Name  |

Date |

Place |

Act  
  
Suranimala

Rajapakse  |

18.5.83

at about

2.30 p.m.  |

At Weboda near

the polling booth

of Weboda North  |

Assaulting Alahakoon

Appuhamillage Somasiri who was

an organiser of.the Sri Lanka freedom Party in the presence of several
electors, to instil fear into the minds of several electors who were present
and to place them under duress.  
  
4 (a) (viii)  |

|

|  
  
S.D.Tennison

Wimalaratne

UNP supporter

and another

UNP Supporter  |

18.5.83  |

At Enderamulla  |

Using force on one Ratnasena a supporter of the SLFP. The attack on the said
Ratnasena was directed to intimidate and to UNP supporter induce electors
favourable to the Sri Lanka Freedom Party to refrain from voting.  
  


4 (a) (ix)  |

|

|

**92**  
  
Jayantha

Rajapakse and

Several other

supporters of the 1st respondent  |



18.5.83  |

At Buthpitiya

Malwatu

Hiripitiya public

Road  |

Jayantha Rajapakse fired two shots killing one Nimal Premasiri a SUP supporter
standing veryclose to Wijaya Kumaranatunga

the 1st the SLFP candidate in order to respondent instil fear into the minds
of several electors present and to place them under duress and to prevent them
from voting. The other supporters of the list respondent who came with
Jayantha Rajapakse threatened to assault with clubs and swords the. supporters
of the SUP candidate in order to instil fear into the minds of several
electors present and to place them under duress and to prevent them from
voting.  
  
|

|

|  
  
The aforesaid three persons namely Suranimala Rajapakse, S. D. Tennison
Wimalaratne and Jayantha Rajapakse were not alleged to be the agents of the 1
st respondent nor has it been alleged that the corrupt practice alleged to
have been committed by them was done with the knowledge or consent of the 1 st
respondent. Proof of the said corrupt practice is not by itself sufficient to
avoid the election. It has to be further established that the majority of the
electors were prevented from electing the candidate whom they, preferred by
the said acts of corrupt practice. Hence in my view they need not have been
joined as respondents. In my view, only those persons should be joined as
respondents to the petition, whose acts by itself render the election void.
There must be a nexus of cause and effect between the offence complained of
and the prayer for the avoidance of the election.

**

Objection regarding security

**

that the security shall be an amount not less than Rs. 5,000 in Elections)
Order-in-Council 1946 provides that -

"that the security shall be an amount not less than Rs. 5,000 in respect of
the 1 st charge constituting a distinct ground on which the petitioner relies,
and a further amount of not less than

**93**

Rs. 2,500 in respect of each additional charge constituting any such ground".

In the election appeals S.C. 1, 2 and 3 of 1977, it was held by a majority of
four Judges constituting the Divisional Bench of five Judges that -

(a) There is a distinction between 'charge' and 'ground' in the new Rule 12
(2). A 'charge' is not the same thing as a 'ground' and cannot be equated with
it.

(b) The grounds on which an election can be avoided are found in section 77 of
the Order-in-Council.

(c) There can be several charges under each distinct ground and such charges
attract security. The 1 st charge on any one distinct ground attracted Rs.
5,000 as security and each additional charge on the same ground attracted Rs.
2,500.

This view of the majority was accepted in S.C. Appeals No. 2 & 3 of 1978
(Election Petition No. 10/77 -Avissawella.) The Supreme Court agreed with the
observations of Wimalaratne, J. that -

"every allegation which, if proved, would suffice to avoid an election on any
of the grounds of avoidance contained in section 77 should be treated as 'a
charge within the meaning of Rule 12, and each such charge attracts security".

and with the observation of Samarawickrema, J. that -

"the word 'charge' has been applied to any allegation against the validity of
an election".

I agree with the Election Judge that there is only one single ground of
avoidance under section 77 (a), namely the prevention or likely prevention of
free voting: That each component enumerated in section 77 (a) namely -

"general bribery, general treating or general intimidation, or other
misconduct,' or other circumstances. . . . . . ."

which is alleged to have resulted in the majority of electors being prevented
from electing the candidate whom they preferred would constitute a charge. The
first charge, namely 'general bribery' attracts Rs. 5,000 every additional
charge of general bribery or general treating or general intimidation would
attract Rs. 2,500.

**94**

I agree with Wimalaratne, J. "s observation in the above case that -

"Under the category of 'other misconduct' there can be more than one charge.
So also under the category of 'other circumstances' each distinct circumstance
specified in the petition will attract security . . . . . . 'other misconduct'
or other circumstances' would constitute at least two othor charges."

It would appear from the material facts given in the petition more than one
type of "other circumstances" or "other misconduct" may be disclosed and each
distinct type will constitute a separate charge attracting security.

For a proper appreciation of the computation of the total amount of security
that had to be deposited by the petitioner it is relevant to reproduce that
part of the petition containing the allegations made by the petitioner in his
petition for the avoidance of the election.

"3\. And your Petitioner says that the election of the 1 st respondent is void
on the ground that -

(a). the corrupt practice of undue influence was committed by an agent of the
1 st respondent - Sarathchandra Rajakaruna the 2nd respondent above-named.

(i) 18.5.83 |

At-about

8.30 a.m.  |

Near Buthpitiya

Polling Booth  |

By intimidating W. A. Chandrasena Weerasuriya an elector by threats of bodily
injury to induce Chandrasena to refrain from voting and turned him away from
the polling booth at Buthpitiya. Later he went back to vote but his vote had
been cast by an impersonator  
---|---|---|---  
  
18.5.83 |

At about

7.30 a.m.  |

Near Buthpitiya

Polling booth  |

By intimidating U. B. Kumara Pathirana an elector by threatening to assault
Pathirana with clubs and iron bars in order to compel him to refrain from
voting and forcing him to go away without voting.  
  
18.5.83  |

At about

10.00 a.m.  |

Near Buthpitiya

Polling booth  |

By intimidating D. K. Piyasena a voter at Mahara Electorate by threatening to
assault him with clubs and iron bars to compel him to refrain from voting and
forcing him to go away without voting. He came back to the polling booth and
voted later.  
  
**95**

(B) The corrupt practice of undue influence was committed by an agent of the 1
st respondent namely Ranil Wickremasinghe, the 3rd respondent above-named on -

(i) 18.5.83

|

At about

2.30 p.m.  |

At Weboda near the

polling booth of

Weboda North  |

By exhorting about thirty persons who were with him to hit, kill, cut tyres
and to catch the blue T- shirt fellow and not let him go (referring to
Alahakoon Appuhamillage Somasiri who was the chief organiser for the
Narangodapaluwa for SLFP). The aforesaid acts of the 3rd respondent were in
order to prevent the free exercise of the franchise by several electors who
witnessed the incident by placing them under duress.  
---|---|---|---  
  
(ii) 18.5.83  |

At about

3.30 p.m.  |

Near the Kadawata

Police Station on

the Kandy Road  |

By unlawfully using force on AlahakooAppuhamillage Somasiri who was the Chief
SUP The Kandy Road organiser for the Narangodapaluwa (Mahara Electorate) and
by grabbing Alahakoon"s hand and dragging him saying "Ado Pariah, we intend to
teach you politics." The aforesaid acts of the 3rd respondent were in order to
prevent the free excercise of the fanchise by several electors who witnessed
the incident by placing them under duress. Alahakoon Appuhamillage Somasiri
complained to the Kadawata Police who have deliberately falsified the entry
and in fact deleted the words "Ado Pariah" and refused to take down the
complaint referred to at 3 (B) (i)and ordered Alahakoon Appuhamillage Somasiri
to quit the Mahara Electorate promptly.  
  
**96**

4\. (A) And your petitioner says that the election of Kamalawarna Kumarasinghe
Jayakody is void on the ground that by reason of general intimidation or other
misconduct or other circumstances the majority of electors may have been
prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred The petitioner says
that general intimidation resulted from

Impersonation of the At the polling booth of Voters No. following voters

Impersonation of the

following voters |

  |

At the polling booth of  |

Voters No.  
---|---|---|---  
  
(i) Assaults and

threats of several supporters of the 1st respondent  |

18.5.83 at about 2.30p.m.  |

At Weboda North in close proximity to the Weboda North polling  |

Assault on several electors who were with Alahakoon Appuhamillage somasiri,
who was an organizer of SLFP and who was with several electors, using hands
and clubs and threatening to give the same treatment to those who were known
to be SLFP supporters.  
  
(ii) Ranil Wickremasinghe above named by himself  |

18.5.83 at about 3.30 p.m.

|

At Kadawata on the Kandy Road near the Kadawata Police Station  |

Grabbing the SLFP organizer Alahakoon Appuhamillage Somasiri by the hand and
dragging him when he was in the company of several electors.  
  
(iii) Ranil Wickremasinghe and other persons  |

18.5.83 at about 2.30 p.m.  |

At Weboda near the polling booth of Weboda North  |

In an organized gang exhorting people in his gang to hit kill and cut tyres
and grab the T-shirt fellow to instill fear into the minds of several electors
present and to place them under duress.  
  
(iv) Suranimala

Rajapakse  |

18.5.83

at about 2.30 p.m.  |

At Weboda near the polling booth of Weboda North  |

Assaulting Alahakoon appuhamillage somasiri who was an organizer of the SLFP
in the presence of several electors who were present and to place them under
duress.  
  
(v) Saratchandra Rajakaruna the 2nd Respondent above-named and other persons
on his behalf and at his instigation  |



18.5.83  |

At Buthpitiya polling booth  |

By intimidating W.A. Chandrasena Weerasuriya and several other electors
approaching the polling booth with threats and preventing those electors from
voting by threatening to assault with clubs and iron bars and forcing them to
go away without voting.  
  
(vi) Sarachandra Rajakaruna the 2nd respondent above-named and other persons
on his behalf and at his instigation  |



18.5.83  |

At Buthpitiya polling booth  |

By intimidating U.G. Kumara pathirana an elector and several other electors
preventing with threats of bodily injury and preventing them from voting by
threatening to assault with clubs and iron bars and forcing him to go away
without voting.  
  
(vii) Sarachandra Rajakaruna the 2nd respondent above-named and other persons
on his behalf and at his instigation  |

18.5.83  |

At Buthpitiya polling booth |

By intimidating D.K. piyasena an elector and several others electors present
with threats of bodily injury by threatening to assault them with clubs and
iron bars and forcing him to go away without voting. In consequence of the
aforesaid threats several other electors went away without voting.  
  
(viii) S.D.Tenison Wimalaratne UNP supporter and another UNP supporter  |

18.5.83  |

At Enderamulla  |

Using force on one Ratnasena a supporter of the SLFP : the attack on the said
Ratnasena was directed to intimidate and to induce electors favourable to the
SLFP to refrain from voting.  
  
(ix) Jayantha Rajapakse and Several other supporters of the 1st respondent  |

18.5.83  |

At Buthpitiya

Malwatu Hiripitiya Public Road  |

Jayantha Rajapakse fired two shots killing one Nimal Premasiri a SLFP
supporter standing very close to Wijaya Kumaranatunge the SLFP candidate in
order to instill fear into the minds of several electors present and to place
them under duress and to prevent them from voting. The other supporters of the
1st respondent who came with Jayantha Rajapakse threatened to assault with
clubs and swords the supporters of the SLFP candidate in order to instill fear
into the minds of several electors present and to place them under duress and
to prevent them from voting.  
  
(x) Supporters of the 1st Respondent  |

18.5.83  |

At Kandeliyadda paluwa East Jayakody Maha Vidyalaya  |

About 150 supporters of the 1st respondent entered forcibly into the polling
booth of the Kandaliyadda Paluwa East Jayakody Maha Vidyalaya polling booth
shouting loudly and behaving in an aggressive manner thereby placing electors
under duress.  
  
(xi) 1st respondent and his supporters  |

18.5.83  |

About ¼ mile from Mahara Nugegoda polling booth  |

The 1st respondent and his supporters assaulted K.A. Sirisena a SLFP
supporter. The 1st respondent and his supporters dragged him into the jeep of
the 1st respondent and forcibly took K.A. Sirisena to the 1st respondent's
residence; having assaulted him again he was chased away after removing his
clothes. The aforesaid act of the 1st respondent and his supporters were in
order to prevent the free exercise of franchise by several electors who
witnessed the incident by placing them under duress.  
  
(xii) 1st respondent and his supporters  |

18.5.83  |

About ¼ mile from Kandaliyadda polling booth.  |

The 1st respondent and his supporters assaulted Sunil Wettawa a SLFP supporter
and dragged him into the 1st respondnet's jeep ; the jeep drove towards the
1st respondent's residence and the people in the jeep continued to assault
Mr.Wettawa. The aforesaid act of the 1st respondent and his supporters were in
order to prevent the free exercise of franchise by several electors who
witnessed the incident by placing them under duress.  
  
(xiii) 1st respondent and his supporters  |

18.5.83  |

At the main SLFP Election office Kalawatta Ragama Road  |

1st Respondnet and his supporters assaulted Lalith Wanigaratne a SLFP
supporter and attempted to drag him to the jeep of the 1st respondent. The
aforesaid act of the 1st respondent and his supporters were in order to
prevent the free exercise of franchise of several electors who witnessed the
incident by placing them under duress.  
  
(xiv) 1st Respondent and his supporters  |

18.5.83  |

At the Main SLFP Election office Kalawatte Ragama Road  |

1st Respondent and his supporters assaulted Jerimies Fernandopulle a SLFP
supporter and attempted to drag him to the jeep of the 1st Respondent. The
aforesaid act of the 1st Respondent and his supporters were in order to
prevent the free exercise of franchise of several electors who witnessed the
incident by placing them under duress.  
  
  |

  |

  |

  
  
4\. (B) The Petitioner states that the following acts constituted other
misconduct.

Impersonation of the                             At the polling booth of
Voters No.

following voters

1\. , Dandeni Hewage Wieman                         Pasgemanna
165

2\. Nilwala Pathirana Unnehelage                 Mahara-Nugegoda
688

Sediris

3\. ..............................................
..........................................................
...........................................

4\. ..................................................
..........................................................
............................................

41\. Hettiarachchige Suneetha Mallika             Sooriyapaluwa
363

Silva

42\. Weerasinghe  Arachchige-                     Kandaliyadda Paluwa
1,520

Kamalawathie

The aforesaid acts of impersonation along with numerous other impersonation of
electors was organised by the 1 st Respondent's supporters and facilitated by
several Police Officers and members of the official staff at Polling Stations.

**101**

(4) (C) The petitioner states that the following matters constitute other
circumstances referred to above

(i) The following polling agents of the' SLFP candidates were - arrested by
officers from Veyangoda and Nittambuwa 'Police Stations on 1 8th May 1983 at
about 4.00 a.m. and " held in custody for several hours after polling had
commenced, 'thereby no t being able to 'perform their functions till the time
shown below

Name of the Polling Agent Polling Booth.. Time 'of Arrival at the Booth

1\. P. L. Weerasinghe Ambagaspitiya 11 :00 a.m.

2\. E. A. Piyasena : - do. - 11.09 a.m.

3\. - - -

4\. - - -

30\. W. Jayakody Henegama-Katukurunda 11.30 a.m.

31\. W. Dharmawardena do. 11 .30 a.m.

The detention, of the polling agents resulted in

(a) The facilitation of impersonation.

(b) The demoralisation of sympathisers of; the SLFP candidates.

(c), Creating the impression that Government machinery could be used against
persons sympathetic to or, espousing the SLFP -cause. _

(ii) Loudspeaker permits for holding' of public meetings of the Sri Lanka
Freedom Party were refused by Police Officers anxious to support the
Government Party namely the United National Party. The details are set out
below.

Application on To Police Station For Meeting at Refused on

(a) 29.04.83 Weerangala Malwatu- 07.05.83 Hiripitiya

(b) 03.05.83 Kadawatte Enderamulla 07.05.83

(c) 03.05.83. Kadawatte Kadawatte 07.05.83

(iii) Police Officers throughout the electorate -

(a) harassed and threatened the Sri `Lanka Freedom Party Organisers and
supporters throughout the election campaign and on election day ;

**102**

(b) permitted unauthorised persons to enter polling booths and to intimidate
electors in the polling queues ;

(c) unlawfully arrested Reggie Ranatunga on 5th May, 1983 and held him in
unlawful custody in order to prevent him from carrying out of his functions of
a Chief Organiser for the S.L.F.P. in Uruval Peruwa area and to dissuade the
other organisers and supporters of the S.L.F.P.

5\. The petitioner states that the election of the 1 st respondent aforesaid
is void on the ground of non-compliance with the provisions of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946 relating to elections and the
failure to conduct the election in accordance with the principles of such
provisions which non compliance affected the results of the election.

The petitioner states

(a) that ballot box from Natbuduwa polling booth contained 49 ballot papers
more than the number issued according to the return sent by the Senior
Presiding Officer of that booth and announced by him at the polling booth ;

(b) that a ballot box from Ihalakaragahamune polling booth contained one
ballot paper less than the total issued at the polling station according to
the announcement: of the Senior Presiding Officer and the returns made by him.
,

(c) that a ballot box from Rahatara polling booth contained one ballot paper
less than the total issued at that potting station according to the
announcement of the Senior Presiding Officer and the returns made by him.

The Election Judge has after a careful analysis of the several submissions
made by Counsel for the appellant-petitioner and respondents computed the
total amount of security that should have been furnished by the petitioner to
be Rs. 52,500. The amount of security in fact deposited by the petitioner is
Rs. 50,000. The Election Judge has held that the amount deposited is short by
Rs. 2;500 and as Rule 12(3) states that no further proceedings should be heard
on the pet ion, if the security as stipulated is not deposited, , he dismissed
the petition on that ground.

**103**

The learned Election Judge's computation is as follows :

Para 3 (a) (i)- 1st charge of undue influence against the 2nd Respondent -
Attracts

|

5,000.00  
  
---|---  
  
Para 3,(41 (ii) and (iii) - 2 additional charges of undue influence against
the 2nd Respondent - Attracts

|

  5,000.00  
  
Para 3 B (i) and (ii) -2 charges of undue influence against the 3rd'
Respondent \- Attracts .

|

 5;000.00  
  
Para 4A - 1 st charge of general intimidation on the distinct ground of likely
prevention of free voting -Attracts

|

           5,000.00  
  
Para 4A (v)-(vii) - 3 "additional charges of undue influence against the 2nd
Respondent - Attracts

|

 7,500.00  
  
Para 4A (xi)-(xiv)- 4 charges of undue influence against the 1st Respondent
-Attracts

|

 10,000.00  
  
Para 4B - Misconduct - the 2nd charge on the distinct ground of likely
prevention of free voting - Attracts

|  2,500.00  
  
Para 4C(i) = 1 st distinct type of "other circumstances- -Attracts

|  2,500.00  
Para 4C(ii) & (iii) (a) and (c) - 2nd distinct type of "other circumstances"
\- Attracts |  2,500.00  
  
Para 4C (iii) (b) - 3rd distinct type of "other circumstances" \- Attracts

|  2,500.00  
Para 5 - 1 st charge on the distinct ground of "non compliance" . |
5,000.00  
Total      |    _52,500.00_  
  
There was no controversy as regards paragraphs 3A(i) to (iii), 313(i) to (ii)
of the petition. There was also no controversy in regard to paragraph 5 of the
petition. Mr. Senanayake referred to Rule 12(2):

"Security shall be an amount.... in respect of the 1 st charge constituting a
distinct ground on which the petitioner relies, and a further amount . . . in
respect of each additional charge constituting any such ground" and submitted
that the security is payable in respect of a charge which the petitioner
relies to sustain his prayer. He stated, that in paragraph 4A the petitioner
has set out the ground of general intimidation and in connection therewith he
has set out several items, some of which, might amount to acts of undue
influence. His explanation is that the petitioner is relying on the cumulative
affect of the several incidents pleaded in paragraph-4(A) to establish the
ground of prevention or

**104**

likely prevention of free voting. He said that the corrupt practices of undue
influence relied upon by the petitioner for the avoidance of the election have
been set out in paragraphs 3A and 3B of the petition. He contended that it was
not open to the counsel for respondents to extract items pleaded under general
intimidation and say that they are tantamount to corrupt practice of undue
influence and therefore attract security, for the reason that the petitioner
is not relying on those items to support his charge of corrupt practice.

The Election Judge did not agree with this submission of Mr. Senanayake. In my
view, he is correct in rejecting this submission.

In appeal, Counsel for the petitioner submitted that Rule 12(2) confines the
amount of security to charges on which the petitioner relies. According to
him, section 77(a) sets out one ground viz prevention of free vote, and one of
the means by which this could be effected is by intimidation of a generalised
nature. He said -that though in paragraph 4(a) (v) to (vii) the 2nd respondent
is alleged to have committed four separate acts of undue influence and in
paragraph 4(a) (xi) to (xiv) the 1 st respondent (the returned candidate) to
have committed four separate acts of undue influence, the petitioner was not
seeking to avoid the election on the basis of the allegations in 4(a), (v) to
(vii) and 4(a) (xi) to (xiv). He stated that since the'-petitioner-wa§ not
relying on those charges to avoid the election, the petitioner was not obliged
by Rule 12(2) to furnish security in respect of those charges. It is to be
noted that each of these allegations contains all the ingredients of: the
charge of corrupt: practice of undue influence committed in connection with
the election by the candidate or by an agent of the candidate sufficient, in
terms of section 77 B, to avoid the election. The question arises whether the
Election Judge is bound by the charges preferred by. the petitioner on the
material facts furnished by him in the petition and is inhibited from
identifying the charges which the averments reveal. Section 81 requires the
Election Judge to determine at the conclusion of the trial of an election
petition whether the election was void. In terms of this section, if at the
conclusion of the present election petition the Election Judge finds that any
one of the allegations set out in 4(a), (v) to (vii) or 4(a) (xi) to (xiv) is
proved to have been committed he will have to hold-that a corrupt practice has
been' committed in connection with the election by 'the returned candidate (1
st respondent) or by the 2nd respondent, an agent of the 1 st respondent (vide
paragraph, 3 of the petition) and consequently determine that the impugned
election is void.

**105**

Mr. Senanayake's reply was that section 81 does. not give jurisdiction to the
Election Judge to declare, the election void on any ground or charge which had
not. been specifically. relied, on by the petitioner, in his petition for the
avoidance of the election; I cannot accept this limitation placed on the
jurisdiction vested in the Election Judge by section 81. This section provides
that "at the conclusion of the trial of. an election petition the Election
Judge shall determine ... whether the election was void, and shall certify the
:determination in writing under his hand." There is no warrant for, reading
into this section the words "whether the petitioner has proved the charge
relied on by him and if ,so whether the election is void". The section does
not place any limitation on the Election Judge to declare void the election if
the evidence on record led under any head establishes any one of the grounds
set out in section 77. The Election. Judge's. jurisdiction to determine an
election void is not confined to the charges` preferred by the petitioner.
Section 81 read with section. 77 obligates the Election Judge to declare void
the election of the 1 st respondent when a corrupt practice in connection with
the election, whether relied on by the petitioner. or not has been proved to
his satisfaction to have been committed by the 1 st respondent or by his
agents, the 2nd or 3rd respondent.

It is true the petitioner has pleaded in paragraph 4(a) the aforesaid acts of
undue influence committed by the 2nd respondent and the 1 st respondent, in
support of the ground of general intimidation and not in connection with the
charge of corrupt practice and has studiously abstained from labelling them as
corrupt practice by the candidate or his agent. But they could have, without
any further averment appropriately been included in paragraph 3 of the
petition where the petition sets out items of the corrupt practice of undue
influence committed by the agents of the 1st respondent and been proper
subject-matter of charges under section 77(c).

If Mr. Senanayake's submission is accepted it would enable the petitioner to
avoid furnishing security in respect of allegations of corrupt practice by the
candidate or his agent by categorizing them as instances of general bribery,
intimidation etc., while putting the candidate and/or his agent in hazard of
punitive consequences under section 81 or 82. The candidate or his agent will
then be put in a situation of having to defend themselves against the charges
of such corrupt practice without the petitioner furnishing necessary security
for such charges. In my view this cannot be permitted. Under Rule

**106**

12(2) to determine the grounds or charges on which the petitioner is asking
relief court is not restricted to what he specifically alleges for his ground
or charge in the petition but what are the grounds or charges which the
petition discloses. If the material facts on which the petitioner relies
exhibits a ground or charge for avoidance of an election under section 77,
irrespective of the fact whether the petitioner has chosen to prefer a charge
based on them, the petitioner will have to give security for such charge. The
petitioner relies on the facts set out in his petition for the avoidance of
the election and if the facts so set out disclose a charge or ground for the
avoidance of the election, it is immaterial whether the petitioner has framed
such a charge or ground for the avoidance of the election. The petitioner is
relying on facts which constitute a charge or ground and hence has to give
security in respect of such charge or ground. The security is for the benefit
of the respondents and it is from their perspective as to the hazard they are
put to that the amount of security has to be calculated.

The instances of undue influence given in 4A (ii) and (iii) are the same as
instances given in 3B (i) and (ii) and therefore do not constitute new charges
of undue influence.

I agree with the Election Judge that in respect of the matters pleaded in
paragraph 4A of the petition the petitioner should have deposited a total sum
of Rs. 22,500.

The acts of impersonation pleaded in paragraph 4B of the petition constitute
other grounds of 'misconduct' and attract Rs. 2500 as security.

The arrest of the agents of the S.L.F.P. by the Police on 18.5.1.983 (the
election day) and keeping them in custody as set out in paragraph 4C(i)
_constitute one distinct type of 'other circumstances' and attract Rs. 2500 as
security.

I agree with the Election Judge that the refusal by the Police of loudspeaker
permits for holding public meetings and acts of misconduct by the Police, set
out in paragraph 4C (iii) (a) and (c) committed during the election campaign
constitute a distinct type of 'other circumstances' and attracts Rs. 2500.

The acts of the Police in permitting unauthorised persons to enter polling
booths and to intimidate electors in the polling queues on the election day
referred to in paragraph 4C (iii) (b) constitute a third distinct type of
'other circumstances' and attracts Rs. 2500 as security.

**107**

The allegation of non-compliance with the provisions of, the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946, relating to elections,
constitutes a distinct ground and attracts Rs. 5000 as security.

I therefore agree with the Election Judge on the computation of the security
required to be furnished by the petitioner in respect of the allegations
contained in the petition.

The Election Judge has held that- the petitioner has set out as best as he can
full particulars of the several corrupt practices alleged by the petitioner
and that the Election Judge could in the exercise of his power under section
80C (i) direct amendment or amplification of-.the particulars; if, he thinks
necessary. No argument was urged, faulting this conclusion. -

The Election Judge has upheld the objection that the affidavit filed by the,
petitioner is inadequate.

Paragraph 2 of the: affidavit of the petitioner, accompanying the petition
states "that the averment of facts set out. in my petition and the particulars
of commission of corrupt practice set out therein are made : from my own
personal knowledge and observation or: from personal inquiries conducted by me
in order to ascertain the details of the incident referred to in the
petition." The Election Judge states that the petitioner does not say in his
affidavit which facts in the petition are based on personal knowledge and
which of them are based on information. He however holds that the affidavit
can be one based on personal knowledge or on information and belief provided-
that if the latter, the deponent must disclose the source of information and
the grounds of His belief. He also held that the function of an affidavit is
to certify and support the allegation of corrupt practice made in the petition
and an affidavit that fails to perform the function is- not an affidavit in
the eye of the law. The Election Judge has held that the affidavit is
defective in that the deponent has not disclosed, the source of information
and the ground of his belief. He concludes.

"I reject the affidavit filed by the petitioner on the ground that the
petitioner has not verified and confirmed the facts stated in the petition. I
uphold the objection that there was no proper affidavit supporting the
allegation of corrupt practice pleaded in the petition and therefore the-
petition was defective.

**108**

Section 80 of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council provides
that -

"The petition shall also be accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form
in support of the allegation of such corrupt or illegal practice and the date
and place of the commission of such practice."

Admittedly no form has been prescribed for the affidavit to conform to.

I agree with the Election Judge that where some of the statements in the
paragraph of the affidavit accompanying the election petition are based on the
knowledge of the deponent and some on information received from others the
affidavit is defective. But I do not agree with the Election Judge that the
petition should be dismissed on that ground of defect in the verification. The
allegation of corrupt practice cannot be ignored merely on the ground that the
source of information, is not disclosed, when the allegation' is` based on
information, as it is not a requirement of law that the source of information
or the ground of the deponent's belief should be set out, since the form of
the mandatory affidavit has not been prescribed. In my view the Election
Judge' was in error in upholding this objection regarding affidavit.

I agree with Samarawickrama, J., that an election petition should not be
dismissed on the ground of defective affidavit, where no form has been
prescribed by law:

Though I do not agree with the Election Judge in his conclusion respecting the
objection regarding the persons to be joined as respondents to the petition
and in respect of the adequacy of the petitioner's affidavit. I agree with the
Election Judge that the security furnished by the petitioner is not sufficient
in terms of Rule 12 (2). I therefore dismiss the appeal, but I do not make any
order regarding costs.

**

COLIN-THOME', J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

**109**

**

WANASUNDERA, J.

**

The two appeals, S.C. 4/84 and 5/84, Were consolidated and heard together
although the petitioners and the respondents in the respective appeals are
different. They deal with the same election and the same electoral seat, and
some of the legal issues argued before us are common to both appeals.

In these election petitions the petitioners have asked for a declaration that
the election of the 1st respondent as a' member of Parliament for Mahara
(Electoral District No. 17) is void. The petitioner in the second petition and
the 1 st respondent were two of the five candidates who contested the
election.

The election; was held on 18th May, 1983, pursuant -to Article 168 (1) (d)'
(iii) of the Constitution, _as amended by the Fifth Constitutional Amendment,
and was. conducted in terms of the provisions of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council 1946.

The petitioner in the first petition (No. 4/84) is a voter. The four
respondents are : the successful candidate (the 1 st respondent),
Sarathchandra Rajakaruna (the 2nd respondent), who is incidentally a member of
Parliament and a Deputy Minister, Ranil Wickremasinghe (the 3rd respondent), -
also a member of Parliament and a Cabinet Minister, and the Returning Officer
for the electoral district (the 4th respondent).

Paragraph 3 A of the petition alleges three charges of corrupt practice of
undue influence against the 1 st respondent, committed by his agent the 2nd
respondent.

Paragraph 3 B of the petition contains two charges of corrupt practice of
undue influence against the 1 st respondent, committed by his agent the 3rd
respondent.

In paragraph 4, the petitioner has stated that by reason of general
intimidation or other misconduct or other circumstances, the majority of
electors may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred. Paragraph 4 A lists 14 such instances. This intimidation has been
done by the 1 st respondent himself and by the supporters of the 1st
respondent, and includes two instances by the

**110**

3rd respondent and three instances by the 2nd respondent as agents of the 1 st
respondent. These allegations are of a very grave nature and one transaction
involved the shooting and the death of a S. L. F. P. supporter standing by the
side of or very close to the unsuccessful candidate Vijaya Kumaranatunga, the
petitioner in the second petition. The other cases disclose assault, thuggery
and intimidation of numerous supporters of the S.L.F.P. at various times and
at various places by individuals and gangs, and in one case by a group of
about 150 persons.

Paragraph 4 S of the petition lists 42 cases of impersonation as .constituting
other misconduct.

Paragraph 4 C states certain other circumstances that prevented a true vote.
It contains a list of 31 names of polling agents of the S. L. F. P. candidate
who had been unlawfully arrested and held in custody for several hours after
the polling commenced and were therefore unable to perform their functions.
Paragraph 4 C. (ii) lists three cases where loud speaker permits had been
wrongly refused to the S. L. F. P. Paragraph 4 C (iii) alleges a number of
wrongful acts on the part of the Police including the arrest of a chief
organiser of the S.L.F.P. in Uruval Peruwa area.

In the second petition (No. 5/84) Mr. Vijaya Kumaranatunga, the unsuccessful
candidate, has sought a declaration that the election is void on the ground
that the 2nd respondent Mr. J. R. Jayewardene (the President of the Republic)
as agent of the 1 st respondent, committed the corrupt practice of making
false statements of fact in relation to the personal character and conduct of
the petitioner. That petition would be dealt with in the latter part of this
judgment.

The election had been hotly contested and the result was very close. The 1st
respondent polled 24,944 votes as against 24,899 polled by Mr.-Kumaranatunga,
the petitioner in the second petition. The majority was a mere 45 votes. There
is reason for anxiety in this case when we consider the serious nature of the
allegations in the petition in the context of the slender majority.

When the election petitions came for hearing before the Election Judge, the
respondents- at the outset raised certain preliminary objections and prayed
for the dismissal of the petitions. The Election Judge has upheld those
objections and dismissed the petitions. The

**111**

present appeals are from that order. The dismissals of the petitions in limine
by the Election Judge did not permit the court to go to trial and inquire into
the several allegations made in the petitions.

The preliminary objections raised in the first petition (No. 4/84) are the
following :

(a) that sufficient security has not been given by the petitioner in respect
of his petition.

(b) that persons who are required to be joined as respondents to the petition
have not been so joined.

(c) that the petition has failed to set out full' particulars of the several
corrupt practices alleged by the petitioner as required by the law.

(d) that the affidavits filed by the petitioner are inadequate, and do not
comply with the legal provisions.

At this stage it would be convenient to set out in extenso the legal
provisions that are relevant for a consideration of this matter. The
applicable legal provisions are contained in the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order-in-Council 1946, as amended by Act No. 9 of 1970. They are as
follows ;

"80 A. (1) A petitioner shall join as respondent to his election petition -

(a) where the petition, in addition to claiming that the election of all or
any of the returned candidates is void or was undue, claims a further
declaration that he himself or any other candidate has been duly elected, all
the contesting candidates, other than the petitioner, and where no such
further declaration is claimed, all the returned candidates ; and

(b) any other candidate or person against whom allegations of any corrupt or
illegal practice are made in the petition.

(2) Any candidate not already a respondent to an election petition shall, upon
application in that behalf made by him to the Election

Judge, be entitled to be joined as a respondent to such petition

**112**

Provided that no candidate shall be entitled to be joined of his own motion as
a respondent to such petition under the preceding provisions of this section
unless he has given such security for costs as the Election Judge may
determine.

80 B. An election petition -

(a) shall state the right of the petitioner to petition within section 79 of
this Order

(b) shall state the holding and result of the election ;

(c) shall contain *a concise statement of the material facts on which the
petitioner relied ;

(d) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice that
the, petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the
names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt or illegal
practice and the date and place of the commission of such practice, and shall
also be accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the
allegation of such corrupt or illegal practice and the date and place of the
commission of such practice ,

(e) shall conclude with a prayer as, for instance, that some specified person
should be declared duly returned or elected, or that the election should be
declared void, or as the case may be, and shall be signed by all the
petitioners ;

Provided, however, that nothing in the preceding provisions of this section
shall be deemed or construed to require evidence to be stated in the petition.

80C. (1) The Election Judge may, upon such terms as to costs or otherwise as
he may deem fit, allow the particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice
specified in an election petition to be amended or amplified in such manner as
may in his opinion be necessary for ensuring a fair or effective trial of the,
petition so, however, that he shall no t. allow such amendment or
amplification if it will result in the introduction of particulars of any
corrupt or illegal practice not previously alleged in the petition.

**113**

(2) Every election petition shall be tried as expeditiously as possible and
every endeavour shall be made' to conclude the trial of such petition within a
period of six months after the date of the presentation of such petition. The
Election Judge shall make his order deciding such petition without undue delay
after the date of the conclusion of the trial of such petition.

81\. At the conclusion of the trial of an election petition the Election Judge
shall determine whether the Member whose return or election is complained of,
or any other and what person, was duly returned or elected, or whether the
election was void, and shall certify such determination in writing under his
hand.

Such certificate shall be kept in the custody of the Registrar of the Supreme
Court to be dealt with as hereinafter provided."

These provisions have to be considered in conjunction with Rule 12 of the
Rules. Rule 12 contained in the Third Schedule is as follows :-

"12\. (1) At the time of the presentation of the petition, or within three
days afterwards, security for the payment of all costs, charges and expenses
that may become payable by the petitioner shall be given on behalf of the
petitioner.

(2) The security shall be an amount of not less than five thousand rupees in
respect of the first charge constituting a distinct ground on which the
petitioner relies, and a further amount of not less than two thousand five
hundred rupees in respect of each additional charge constituting any such
ground. The security required by this rule shall be given by a deposit of
money.

(3) If security as in this rule provided is not given by the petitioner, no
further proceedings shall be had on the petition, and the

respondent may apply to the Judge for an order directing the dismissal of the
petition and for the payment of the respondent's costs. The costs of hearing
and deciding such application shall be paid as ordered by the Judge, and in
default of such order shall form part of the general costs of the petition."

**114**

For the purpose of their submissions, counsel for the respondents have drawn
the attention of the court to certain grounds and charges in the election
petition. According to paragraph 3 of the petition the grounds and charges are
as follows :

3A. Corrupt practices of undue influence committed by the 2nd respondent as
agent of the 1 st respondent. Three charges.

3B. Corrupt practices of undue influence committed by the 3rd respondent as
agent of the 1 st respondent. Two charges.

In paragraph 4, the petitioner has alleged the ground of "general intimidation
or other misconduct or other circumstances" whereby the majority of the
electors may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred. As stated earlier, this ground contains three instances of
intimidation by the 2nd respondent and two such instances by the 3rd
respondent.

The parties were at issue on the question as to what is a ground and what is a
charge of undue intimidation and how many such charges are contained in the
petition. It was the respondents' contention that each of the charges referred
to above is a charge of corrupt practice and carries with it the need to give
security, the need for a covering affidavit and the joinder as a respondent of
the person against whom such an allegation is made. This relates specifically
to the charges under paragraph 4 of the petition which has been a bone of
contention between the parties and all the issues before us arise from
implications flowing from its contents.

I shall first deal with the question of security. The petition has been
drafted on the basis that paragraph 3A (i), (ii) and (iii) contains three
charges with the first charge carrying a security of Rs. 5,000. The total
security due according to the petitioner therefore is Rs. 10,000. Paragraph 3B
contains two charges of undue influence against the 3rd respondent. The
security according to the petitioner is Rs. 5,000. Paragraph 4A contains one
charge of general intimidation on the ground of the prevention of free voting.
This the petitioner states caries a security of Rs. 5,000. Paragraph 4B is a
charge of misconduct on the same ground as 4A and,, according to the
petitioner, attracts a security of Rs. 2,500. Paragraph 4C is another charge
on the same ground and again according to the petitioner attracts a security
of Rs. 2,500. Paragraph 5 dealing with

**115**

non-compliance is a first charge on a distinct ground and attracts a security
of Rs. 5,000. The total security in respect of. all charges, according to the
petitioner, is Rs. 30,000. The petitioner has however deposited a sum of Rs.
50,000 leaving a large margin for error..

Both counsel for the respondents disputed this computation. Mr. Candappa had
contended before the Election Judge that the proper amount of security is Rs.
72,500 , but according to Mr. Mark Fernando it was Rs. 60,000. In the appeal
before us it was Submitted by both the respondents that the proper security is
a sum of Rs. 60,000.

Since the difference between the sum deposited and what is contended to be the
correct amount is only Rs. 10,000, I agree with Mr. Senanayake that it is not
necessary for me to go into a detailed computation of the security in respect
of all and every ground and charge. It was sufficient for us, as Mr.
Senanayake submitted, that we confine ourselves to only paragraphs 4A (v),
(vi) and (vii)` and paragraphs 4A (xi), (xii), (xiii) and (xiv) of the
petition on the object on to the adequacy of security. According to the
respondents', these charges carry a security of Rs. 17,500. Mr. Senanayake has
contended that paragraph 4A contains only one ground and charge and that this
will carry a security of Rs. 5,000 and if this submission is correct, this
preliminary objection would fail.

Paragraph 4A purports to have been formulated under section 77 (a). This
provision requires some comment. Although there has been a divergence of views
expressed by the Judges (including myself) in S.C. Election Petition Nos. 1, 2
and 3 of 1977 regarding:, section 77 (a), all counsel before us agreed that
this provision contains only one ground of avoidance, namely that the majority
of electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom-
they preferred. They also agreed that each circumstance enumerated in section
77 (a) would constitute a charge, e.g the first charge of general intimidation
would attract a security of Rs. 5,000 and charges of general treating or
general bribery etc., would be regarded as additional charges respectively and
would attract a security of Rs. 2,500 each.

Now the respondents have contended that paragraphs 4A (v) to NO and (xi) to
(xiv) constitute in fact charges of corrupt practice,, although they have been
formulated as charges under section 77(a). It was the respondent's contention
that the court was not necessarily bound by

**116**

the formulation found in the petition and it was the duty of the court, having
regard to the legal provisions relating to elections, to inquire into the
circumstances set out in the petition and find out whether or not they
disclose any allegations of corrupt practice against any person.

The respondent's objections on this matter were upheld by the Election Judge.
The reasoning of the Election Judge in regard to this part of the case is as
follows

". . . . The security that is payable does not depend on what a petitioner has
chosen to label as corrupt practices, for, if this were so, it will leave the
door wide open to the petitioner to tuck away in some part of the petition, an
item of general intimidation, which if proved would result in avoiding the
election. Take, for example, items (xi), (xii), (xiii) and (xiv) of paragraph
4A of the petition. They all contain allegations of assault by the 1 st
respondent, who is the successful candidate, or named persons who are SLFP
supporters and it is stated that these acts were done in order to prevent the
free exercise of the franchise by several electors who witnessed the incident
by placing them under duress. The pleadings in these sub-paragraphs are
exactly the same as those in paragraphs 3B (i) and (ii) against the 3rd
respondent. This allegation, if proved at the trial, will not only avoid the 1
st respondent's election, but he becomes also liable to be reported under s.
82 (a) of the Election Order-in-Council with two dire consequences -
forfeiture of his civic rights and a criminal prosecution. I agree with Mr.
Candappa that there are four charges of undue influence against the 1st
respondent."

In regard to charges 4A (v), (vi) and (vii), the Election Judge said

"In paragraphs 3A (i), (ii) and (iii), definite allegations of undue influence
have been made against the 2nd respondent only, who is described as an agent
of the 1 st respondent. The persons whose votes were affected have also been
named. All three incidents occurred near the Buthpitiya polling booth and the
exact times when these incidents took place have also been specified. In each
of the paragraphs 4A (v), (vi) and (vii) the allegations are against the 2nd
respondent and other persons who acted on his behalf and at his instigation.
The acts of the other persons have been brought home to the agent of the 1 st
respondent. All incidents occurred at Buthpitiya polling booth , the times are
not specified. The acts

**117**

complained of are directed against the same persons named in paragraphs 3A
(i), (ii) and (iii), and also against several other electors and in
consequence they also did not vote. The incidents set out in these sub-
paragraphs (v) - (vii) of paragraph 4A cannot be the same as those set out in
paragraph 3A (i) to (iii). Each of the allegations stated in sub-paragraphs
(v) - (vii) of paragraph 4A, if proved at the trial, will avoid the 1 st
respondent's election. The petitioner may fail to prove the allegations in
paragraphs 3A (i) to (iii), and yet succeed in proving the allegations in
paragraphs 4A (v) to (vii). I agree with Mr. George Candappa that there are
three additional charges of undue influence against the 2nd respondent in
paragraph 4A (v), (vi) and (vii)."

Section 82 (b) of the Order-in-Council requires the Election Judge at the
conclusion of the trial of the election petition to make a report setting out
"(a) whether any corrupt or illegal practice has or has not been proved to
have been committed by or with the knowledge and consent of any candidate at
the election, or by his agent, and the nature of such corrupt or illegal
practice, if any ; and (b) the names and descriptions of all persons, if any,
who have been proved at the trial to have been guilty of any corrupt or
illegal practice Provided, however, that before any person, not being a party
to an election petition nor a candidate on behalf of whom the seat is claimed
by an election petition, is reported by an Election Judge under this section,
the Election Judge shall give such person an opportunity of being heard and of
giving and calling evidence to show why he should not be so reported."

This is the peg on which the respondents hang their arguments. To reiterate
their arguments, they submit that there is a duty on the Election Judge to
inquire into any allegation of a corrupt or illegal practice contained in the
petition and to make a report specifying any person found guilty of any such
practice. This they submit is to ensure the purity of the electoral process.
They state that this duty extends beyond the case where a specific charge of a
corrupt or illegal practice is made under section 77 (c), but would apply even
where a corrupt or illegal practice is merely alleged in the petition. It is
their submission that the jurisdiction of the court would be activated even
when there is

**118**

a reference to a corrupt or illegal practice under any other ground as in
section 77 (a). They have sought additional support for this in the difference
in wording of paragraphs (c) and (d) of section 80B, where the terms "alleges"
and "relies on" are, they submit, used in different senses.

On the basis of these provisions they submit that there is a duty on the
Election Judge to identify and furnish a report of all persons proved to have
been guilty of any corrupt or illegal practice. This of course would be
additional to the main duty of court in determining the issue of the avoidance
of the election. Mr. Candappa placed his case as high as to state that an
election court in this country has the same powers exercised by an election
court in the U.K. and would have quasi-inquisitorial powers to investigate and
report on all allegations relating to corrupt and illegal practices. He cited
the following passage from Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edition), Volume
15, paragraph 834, in support of his submission

"Subject to the provisions of that Act and the rules made under it, the
principles, practice and rules on which committees of the House of Commons
used to act in dealing with election petitions are to be observed, so far as
may be, by the High Court and Election Court in the case of a parliamentary
election petition. Where the petition alleges the commission of corrupt or
illegal practices, the election court has quasi-inquisitorial as well as
judicial duties, as the. court must investigate and report whether any corrupt
or illegal practices have been committed by, or with the consent of, the
candidate, or by any other person, or whether they have extensively prevailed.
It follows, therefore, that the election court has jurisdiction to inquire
into any facts which throw light on the possibility of these offences having
been committed even though these facts are not relevant to the issue raised
between the petitioner and the respondent to the petition."

While there may not be a difference in the basic principles that govern an
Election Court in the U.K. and in our country, yet our courts have been''
constrained to give effect to certain statutory provisions enacted here to
meet the local requirements in the development of election taws in this
country.'. Our courts would not have the wide ranging jurisdiction claimed by
Mr. Candappa, but it would be nearer the position advocated' by Mr: Choksy,
who was not prepared to go all' the way with Mr. Candappa.

**119**

An analysis of the relevant provisions which is supported by judicial decision
leaves no room for doubting the respondents' submission that an election court
is vested with dual functions. The dual functions connote in this context the
conducting of two separate proceedings notionally, each involving a different
set of issues and each leading to different consequences and yielding
different results. Even the very quotation from Halsbury cited by Mr. Candappa
in its concluding sentence makes this clear

...... that the election court has jurisdiction to inquire into any facts
which throw light on the possibility of these offences having been committed
even though those facts are not relevant to the issue raised between the
petitioner and the respondent to the petition. "'

The main event or proceeding in an election petition proceeding is the inquiry
into the avoidance of the election. Its result can affect the whole electorate
and the country. The other function, which is subsidiary, operates at an
individual level, both in terms of inquiry and result. Where the main
proceeding is based on the ground of a corrupt or illegal practice, the law by
virtue of our amendment now requires the person against whom such allegations
have been made should be made a respondent. It also requires such guarantees
as security for the charges and the backing of an affidavit.

The main proceeding is also intimately linked with both the grounds for the
avoidance of the election and the charges arising therefrom. These would be
the issues in those proceedings. In the subsidiary proceedings the grounds for
avoidance of the election are irrelevant and even a charge qua charge is not a
matter in issue. The inquiry is directed, if justice Nagalingam is right, not
even to the conduct and culpability of the person against whom the allegation
is made, but whether the material merely indicates the commission of a corrupt
or illegal practice. In re Fred E. de Silva, (7) Nagalingam J. said :

"'. . . A reading of sub-section (a) of section 82 reveals only two classes or
persons who could be reported at best. I say "at best" for the primary concern
of the sub_ section is not so much with persons as with offences. It requires
that a report should be made whether a corrupt or illegal practice has or has
not been proved to have been committed, not that a person or persons should be
reported ;. . . "" For the purpose of resolving the issues before us, it is
equally important that we have a clear understanding of what is a "ground" and
what is a "charge". A fundamental distinction exists between these two
expressions. It is now settled law that a "ground" and a

**120**

"charge" are different concepts and do not mean the same thing. The grounds
for the avoidance of an election are set out in section 77. Clauses (b), (d)
and (e) of section 77 contain one ground each, clause (c) contains two
grounds, and clause (a) contains one ground. Ali these grounds are separate
from one another and different. A charge would be an allegation coming under
any particular ground referred to in section 77, which, if proved, would be
sufficient to avoid an election. A charge under one ground is strictly
confined to that ground and cannot be mixed with a separate ground and
considered under a different head in section 77. The entire foundation of the
respondents" submission is that a charge under one ground should also be
considered as falling under a different ground. This is certainly not the
legal position as I understand it.

The next mistake on the part of the respondents is to ignore the differences
in nature and content between ground 77 (a) and ground 77 (c). I now turn to
these two provisions contrasting ground 77 (a) with ground 77 (c) with
reference to an allegation of a corrupt or illegal practice. Under ground (a),
namely general intimidation, it is possible for a petitioner to give one or
more instances of a corrupt practice. Now, could such an instance be
considered as a charge of a corrupt practice under section 77 (c) for the
purpose of the avoidance of the election ? I do not think so.

First, it should be understood that ground 77 (a) deals with general bribery,
general treating and general intimidation, and the gravamen of the complaint
is that the majority of the electors were or may have been prevented from
electing the candidate they preferred. On the other hand, ground 77 (c) deals
with a corrupt or illegal practice simpliciter. Second ground 77 (c) is
confined to a corrupt or illegal practice committed by the candidate or with
his knowledge and consent or by his agent. There is no such limitation in
regard to a reference to a corrupt practice made under-ground 77 (a). This
shows that the charge under (c) is a direct charge of corrupt practice made
against the successful candidate, while under (a) the so called "charge"
against the successful candidate is not of a corrupt practice, but one of
general intimidation. The reference to an instance of a corrupt practice under
section 77 (a) is an allegation against the individual concerned and not
against the successful candidate, and such an allegation can lead to certain
other proceedings being set in motion against such person. There is another
significant difference between these provisions which Mr. Choksy sought to
bridge by giving us an illustration.

**121**

This difference is that ground (a) contemplates a generality, namely, a number
of individual cases of intimidation or one act of intimidation involving
several persons. Ground (c) deals with an act of intimidation operating at the
individual level. This is borne out by the definition of "corrupt practice" in
section 56, which shows that undue influence has to be exercised "upon or
against any person". Mr. Choksy however strove valiantly to equate these two
grounds." He gave as the example of an agent of the successful candidate
intimidating a whole village containing 50 voters. This Mr. Choksy submitted
was an example that could fall under both grounds (a) and (c).

While I agree with Mr. Choksy that this example can form a charge of general
intimidation, I am however unable to agree that this can constitute a single
charge under ground (c). This example is misconceived, for when it is closely
examined it would be seen that this transaction constitutes both in law and
fact a multiplicity of corrupt practices in terms of ground (c). There would
be in this case as many corrupt practices as the number of voters who had been
intimidated for the purpose of section 77 (a).

It would be clear from the above analysis that the so called "charge" of a
corrupt practice under ground (a) has not the same meaning and legal effect as
one under ground (c).

The disputed charges are 4A (v) to (vii) and 4A (xii) to (xiv). Charges 4A (v)
to NO states that the intimidation was done by the 2nd respondent simpliciter,
while charge 3A is formulated on the basis that the 2nd respondent acted as
the agent of the 1 st respondent. On the other hand, charges 4A (xii) to (xiv)
on which Mr. Choksy relied refer to the acts of the candidate himself. He
submitted that these charges could have been brought as a charge under section
77 (c).

When we look at charges 4A (ii) and (iii) and 4A (v), (vi) and (vii) of the
petition, we find that these are not based on agency or on the direct
responsibility of the candidate himself. As the pleadings stand, such evidence
would not be admissible, so that for the reasons given earlier, these charges
can in no way be equated to a ground under section 77 (c).

Mr. Choksy however, as to be expected, picked on the strongest case the
respondents could present on this issue and pressed the charges 4A (xii) to
(xiv), where the allegation is against the successful candidate himself.
Incidentally if this submission fails a fortiori, the submission in respect of
paragraphs 4A (v) to (vii) must necessarily fail.

**122**

Mr. Choksy submitted that such an allegation involving the successful
candidate has to be considered differently from the other cases because, on
the pleadings and as regards the available evidence, there would be no
difference in his case between a charge under section 77 (c) and an allegation
of a corrupt practice under section 77 (a). While admittedly some difference
does exist between the two types of cases this is a difference brought about
by the very nature of his situation as the main respondent defending the
Election, but it can have no other significance. This fact does not go to
alter the basic principles outlined earlier and such an inquiry even against
the successful candidate would still partake of the nature of a subsidiary
proceeding since the distinction I have drawn in this regard is a fundamental
one and it cannot be blurred by accidental factors.

No doubt, unlike in the case of an alleged agent, there is a possibility . of
an elected candidate while succeeding in the trial still finding himself being
liable to be reported under section 82 with the consequence that he may find
himself disqualified from continuing to hold that seat. This has the
appearance of an anomaly. Though that ultimate result may seem paradoxical,
this is because in such an event the applicable legal provisions operate by
way of two different channels. This provides the clearest proof that an
election petition proceeding is dual in its nature and functions. In this
example the election of the successful candidate would be sustained by virtue
of the certificate issued under section 81. The disqualification on the other
hand operates by virtue of the provisions of section 82 read with 82D and
section 58. Even Mr. Choksy conceded that this position is the outcome of the
operation of the legal provisions and that there would be nothing anomalous
about it.

The above analysis helps also to dispose of another submission relating to
section 82 made by the respondents. They state that if the proviso to section
82 were to be applied only to persons against whom allegations of a corrupt
practice had been made outside section 77 (c), then an invidious distinction
is being drawn among persons belonging to the same category.

I have already shown that a case falling under section 77 (c) is different
from the category falling under section 77 (a), and accordingly these two are
different categories constituted by the law for different sets of
circumstances. The need to join some persons as respondents have been brought
about by the amending law of 1970,

**123**

which has improved the procedural rules so as to give fuller expression to
section 77 (c). A difference in the circumstances has resulted in this slight
difference of procedure, but both procedures contain the same safeguards and
cannot in my view amount to a case of discrimination. Incidentally it may be
mentioned that the proviso to section 82 has been retained not only for cases
such as this, but also for other types of cases, some contemplated by the
legislature, others probably not, that may fall within the ambit of the
proviso.

Although the respondents' cases have been presented on somewhat broader lines
and touches on a number of charges, I have dealt with the strongest case the
respondents could muster. My rulings here will necessarily cover all the other
charges in respect of which the submissions of counsel carry much less
conviction and weight. This finding against the respondents then, that the
preliminary objections are based on a misconception, is adequate to dispose of
the preliminary objections relating to all the charges in petition No. 4/84,
save one.. That is the question of the adequacy of the affidavit in the
general context of the whole petition over and above its requirement under the
impugned charges of corrupt or illegal practices.

Regarding the general adequacy of the affidavit, I find that the judgment of
my brothers contain a useful discussion of this matter. It is not necessary to
add anything more. I agree with them, contrary to what Mr. Senanayake
submitted, that an affidavit is a necessary requirement and must be filed with
the petition in a case such as this. A document purporting to be an affidavit,
however, has been filed with the petition. It has been contended that this
does not constitute a proper affidavit or an adequate one. Although the
legislature undertook to prescribe the required form, it has omitted to do so.
In the result, the petitioner has been left guessing as to what form he should
follow. In this situation the drastic step of dismissing the petition for this
lapse, if lapse it be, seems excessive. I would consider this lapse as an
irregularity that does not affect the validity of the petition before court.

In the result I overrule all the preliminary objections. I would therefore
allow the appeal with costs and direct the Election Judge to proceed with the
hearing and trial of this petition.

_Appeal dismissed_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/18.html_  

