##  Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. v. Jayasinghe - SLR - 595, Vol 2 of
1982 [1982] LKSC 18; (1982) 2 Sri LR 595 (3 September 1982)

# 595

**THE ASSOCIATED NEWSPAPERS OF CEYLON LTD.**

**v.**

**JAYASINGHE**

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J., AND SOZA, J.

S.C. APPEALS 10/81 AND 13/81.

C.A. 183 AND 185 OF 1978.

L.T. 12/6759/77 AND 13/6772/77

JUNE 22, 1982.



_     Industrial Dispute ‑ Industrial Disputes Act, section 31B ‑ Regulations
15 and 57 ‑ Constitution of 1972, Article 11 Language of Courts (Special
Provision) Law No. 14 of 1973._



The petitioners were employees of the respondent who terminated their
services. The Labour Tribunal held that their termination was unjustified and
awarded them back wages in lieu of reinstatement and compensation to both.



On appeal to the Court of Appeal the following findings were affirmed ‑



1\. unjust termination  


2\. compensation in lieu of reinstatement



and the order relating to back wages was deleted.



Both parties appealed against these orders to the Supreme Court.



It was contended on behalf of the employees that the application should be
dismissed in limine as the language of the application was not Sinhala.



# Held ‑



(1)        The word 'pleadings' in Article 11(1) of Constitution of 1972 does
not include an application for relief or redress under section 31(B) of
Industrial



# 596



Disputes Act. Nor does Article 11(1) preclude an application being made to the
Labour Tribunal in English.

(2)        No prejudice was caused to the other party by having the
proceedings in English.

(3)        When a tribunal is called upon to determine compensation it should
take into account back wage's lost but it is not entitled to make a separate
award of back pay in addition to compensation.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Dixon v. Calcraft (1892) 1. Q.B. 458, 462, 463_



(2) _Nelungaloo Pty Ltd .v. The Commonwealth (1947 ‑1948) 75 C.L.R.
495,569,571._



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_  _

_H.L. de Silva_ with _Mark Fernando_ for appellant in 10/81 and 11/81 and for
respondent in 12/81 and 13/81.



_R. Weerakoon_ for respondent in 10/81 and 11/81 and for appellant in 12/81
and 13/81.



_Cur. adv. vult._



September 3, 1982



**SOZA, J.**



These appeals arise out of applications for relief founded on unjust
termination of their services made by two employees (M.B. Jayasinghe and Upali
Ariyachandra) against their employer The Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.
In both cases the President of the Labour Tribunal held that the termination
was unjustified and by way of relief ordered the payment of Rs. 19,000/‑ as
back wages and Rs. 68,400/‑ as compensation in lieu of reinstatement to M.B.
Jaya­singhe (LT 12/6759/77) and Rs. 12,900/‑ as back wages and Rs. 46,440/‑ as
compensation in lieu of reinstatement to Upali Ariyachandra (L.T. 13/6772/77).
On appeals being preferred against these orders the Court of Appeal affirmed
the finding of unjust termination of services and the payment of compensation
in lieu of reinstatement ordered by the Labour Tribunal but deleted the order
relating to the payment of back wages in both cases. In both these cases the
newspaper company has appealed to this Court from the orders of the Court of
Appeal in respect of termination of services and the award of compensation.
These are appeals 10 and 11 of 1981. M.B. Jayasinghe and Upali Ariyachandra
have also appealed', to this Court in respect of the deletion of the orders
for the payment of back wages. These are appeals 12 and 13 respectively of
1981. The appeals were considered together as the same points were involved.



**597**



In the two appeals by the newspaper Company we are called upon to decide
whether an application for relief in the Labour Tribunal made under section
31B of the Industrial Disputes Act during the period when the Constitution of
Sri Lanka of 1972 was in operation (from 22nd May 1972 until its replacement
by the Constitution of 1978) is null and void if made in English. Article  11
(1) of the Constitution for 1972 stipulated inter alia that the language of
tribunals established under the Industrial Disputes Act should be Sinhala and
accordingly their records including pleadings, proceedings, judgment s, orders
and records of all judicial and ministerial acts should be in Sinhala. In the
Northern and Eastern provinces however parties and applicants were. permitted
to submit their pleadings, applications motions and petitions in Tamil but
even then the Tribunal was under a duty to cause a Sinhala translation to be
made for the purposes of the record (Article 11 (3) of the Constitution of
1972, and the Language of the Courts (Special Provisions) Law No. 14 of 1973).
Article 11 (6) of the Constitution of 1972 empowered the Minister of Justice
to authorise Presidents of Labour Tribunals and pleaders to use a language
other than Sinhala or Tamil but this of course did not apply to the parties
themselves.



Learned Senior Counsel for the appellant submitted that the applications for
relief made by the respondents to the Labour Tribunal upon which the
proceedings we are called upon to review were taken are pleadings and
therefore had to be in Sinhala. The applications in the instant case had been
made in English and should not have been taken cognizance of. They should have
been rejected in limine as they contravened an imperative provision of the
Constitution.



The validity of the contention that the applications for relief are bad in law
and nullity must be examined with reference to the provisions of the
Industrial Disputes Act relating to the making of application for relief or
redress to the Labour Tribunal. Section 31B (1) of this Act stiputates that a
workman or trade union on behalf of a workman who is a member of that union
may make an application in writing to a Labour Tribunal for relief or redress.
The procedure is laid down in Regulation 15 of the Industrial Disputes
Regulations, 1958 made by the Minister and approved by the Senate and the
House of Representatives and published in Government Gazette No.­11688 of
2.3.1959. It must be observed that these Regulations have been made in
compliance with the provisions of section 39 of the Industrial Disputes Act
and are therefore as valid and effectual as if they were enacted in the main
Industrial Disputes Act. Regulation



# 598



15 reads as follows:



"Every application under section 31B of the Act shall be substantially in Form
D set out in the First Schedule hereto and shall be sent to the Secretary in
duplicate".



Form D provides inter alia for the application to be made under the signature
of the applicant. Where the Union to which the workman belongs makes the
application, it must be signed by the President or Secretary see Regulation
17.



The combined effect of all these provisions is to make it imperative that an
application for relief or redress by a workman should be in writing and be
signed by him. The expression " pleading" is generally understood as including
the statements in writing of the petition, application, claim or demand of any
plaintiff, petitioner or applicant and of the defence thereto and counterclaim
if any of the defendant or respondent and the reply to the counterclaim and
therefore it would be imperative that these should be in Sinhala where Tamil
is not permitted. But where the petition, application, claim or demand is
expected by law to be made in writing by the applicant himself rather than by
his pleader then the language requirement cannot be insisted upon for the
applicant himself cannot be expected to take personal responsibility for the
contents of his petition, application, claim or demand if he is required to
make it in a language with, which he is not sufficiently conversant.



In the election petition Appeals No. 2 of 1977 (Medawachchiya), No. 3 of 1977
(Kotmale) and No. 2 of 1978 (Anamaduwa) Consolidated as one appeal ‑ (S.C.
Minutes of 7.8.1978) a Divisional Bench of five judges of the former Supreme
Court had occasion to consider the legal provisions relating to language in
the Constitution of 1972 in cases where the election petition had been filed
in English. Referring particularly to the stipulations in paragraphs (c) and
(d) of section 80B of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in, Council,
1946, that an election petition should contain a concise statement of the
material facts on which the petitioner relies and be signed by him vis‑a‑vis
the provision in Article 11 (1) of the' Constitution of 1972, that pleadings
should be in Sinhala,, Samarawickrema, J. (with whom the other Judges agreed)
stated as follows:



Having regard to the provision in section 80B (e) and (d), it, would appear
that the requirement that the petition should bell, signed by all the
petitioners is made for the reason that they are required to take
responsibility for the statements contained



**599**

**  **

in the petition. In view of this, it would appear that if the provision of
section 80B alone applied, a petition should be in a language which is
understood by the petitioners. Article 11(1) of the Constitution, however,
provides that pleadings should be in Sinhala. The word 'pleadings' is one of
wide connotation and it is a canon of interpretation that words which are
general and not precise are to be restricted to the fitness of the matter. I
am, therefore, of the view that the word "pleadings" in Article 11(1) would
not include an election petition which is required to be signed by the
petitioners, obviously as an indication that they take responsibility for the
statements contained therein, should be in a language understood by the
petitioners."



With great respect I would adopt the reasoning of Samarawick­rema, J. It is a
legal requirement that an application for relief or redress under section 31B
of the Industrial Disputes Act must be signed by the applicant. The law
expects the applicant to take responsibility for the material stated in his
application upon which he claims relief or redress. Therefore he must be
permitted to make it in the language he prefers. The word "pleadings" in
Articles 11(1) of the Constitution of 1972 does not include an application for
relief or redress under section 31B of the Industrial Disputes Act. Nor does
the requirement of Article 11(1) of the Constitution of 1972 that the language
of the Tribunal should be Sinhala and its records kept in that language
preclude an application being made to it in English. The responsibility is on
the Tribunal to cause a Sinhala translation to be made for the record. If this
was not done the applicant cannot be faulted or prejudiced. In fact
Samarawickrema, J. pointed‑out that Article 11 of the Constitution of 1972,
carries no provision as to the effect of non‑compliance with it and
accordingly where no prejudice has been caused the failure of the Tribunal to
comply with the language requirements of Article 11(1) of the Constitution
will result only in an irregularity and will not be fatal. With t his
conclusion of Samarawickrema, J., I am again in respectful agreement. In the
instant case the respondent too filed his objections in English and obviously
the proceedings were better understood by everybody for being in that
language. No prejudice was caused to the parties least of all to the Newspaper
Company.



I will now turn to the question whether back wages could be awarded along with
compensation as an alternative relief to reinsta­tement. The relief of
reinstatement is granted where the contract of



# 600



employment has been unjustifiably breached by the employer. Back wages can
then be awarded on the basis of an unbroken contract of employment. Of course
the quantum of back wages and the period for which they will be awarded will
depend on the circumstances of each particular case. For instance if the
employee had obtained other employment after the date of termination that will
be a relevant circumstance. But when the Tribunal orders compensation can it
also order back wages? The purpose of compensation is to place in the hands of
the victim what he has lost so far as money can do it. It connotes money
equivalence. It is a recompense or indemnity for loss. It must be remembered
that there is a distinction between compensation and damages though there are
occasions when the two words are synonymous. As a concept compensation is
remedial but damages can be enhanced and punitive or be diminished and even
nominal. Damages are not always related to the actual money equivalent of the
loss ‑ (see the discussion by Lord Esher, M.R. in _Dixon v Calcraft_ (1) and
by Dixon, J. (later C.J.) in _Nelungaloo, Pty. Ltd. v The Commonwealth._ (2)
What the Industrial Disputes Act speaks of is compensation as an alternative
to reinstatement (ss. 31B(b)(c)). To order back wages and compensation as an
alternative to reinstatement would be to duplicate one factor which should
enter into the computation of compensation. One among the several facto which
should enter into the computation of compensation in the type of case we are
considering is the period of unemployment and that would include back wages.
The object of the exercise should be to as ascertain as far as possible the
money equivalent of the loss employment from the date of unjust dismissal. The
calculation must depend on the particular circumstances of each case. Wages ca
provide a useful unit for the calculation but it is neither possible nor
desirable to lay down a formula for application in all cases, When a Tribunal
is called upon to determine compensation it should take into account the back
wages lost but it is not entitled to ma a separate award of back pay in
addition to compensation. Hen the back wages awarded by the Tribunal were
rightly struck off b the Court of Appeal.



I am therefore of the view that the judgment of the Court. Appeal should be
affirmed. The appeals of the appellants as well of the respondent are
dismissed. There will be no costs as no party has been completely successful.



**Page 601**

**  **

**SAMARAKOON, C.J.** ‑ I agree.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/18.html_  

