##  Kanagaratna v. Rajasunderam - SLR - 492, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 18;
(1981) 1 Sri LR 492 (23 October 1981)

**492**

**KANAGARATNA  
 v.  
 RAJASUNDERAM**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAKOON C. J.,  
SHARVANANDA J. AND  
WANASUNDERA J.  
S.C. APPEAL 23/79  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 133 OF 1976  
D.C. MALLAKAM NO. 1097  
LA/CA 21/78 SEPTEMBER 22, 1981.  
  
**_Writs of Certiorari and Prohibition -Interdiction of branch manager as
newly appointed Director-Suit by interdicted Director for declaration that
interdiction was illegal - Interim injunction -Writ to quash order issuing
interim injunction - Co-operative Societies Law No. 5 of 1972 S. 58(1)(c)
-Touching the business.  
_  
The branch manager of a Multipurpose Co-operative Society was appointed
Director by the Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development. The other
Directors (save one) interdicted the newly appointed Director for bringing
discredit to the Society, divulging its secrets and spreading false
propaganda. The interdicted Director sued the Society challenging the
interdiction and obtained an interim injunction on the ground of absence of
jurisdiction.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The availability of an alternative remedy does not prevent a Court from
issuing a Writ of Prohibition in cases of excess or absence of jurisdiction.
The issue of a Writ of Prohibition makes a writ of certiorari superfluous. The
appellate Court could, no doubt, decide the question of jurisdiction but it by
no means follows that because there is an appeal, the power of the Court to
issue a prohibition is taken away. There is no technical obstacle to the co-
existence of a right of appeal and to a writ of prohibition.  
  
The dispute was between the Society and its employee. Activities which are
necessarily done to make the trade flourish and bring profits, hiring of
labour and staff, their disciplinary control, their conduct in and of the
business are all matters that are part and parcel of running the business and
therefore touch the business. Suspension of an employee for conduct alleged to
have been improper and harmful to the business and a dispute arising therefrom
as to the employer's right to do so is a dispute touching the business within
the meaning of section 580)(c) of the Co-operative Societies Law No. 5 of
1972.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_(1) Sirisena v. Kotawera - Udagama Co-operative Stores Ltd_., 51 NL R 262  
  
_(2) Channel Coaling Company v. Ross_ (1907) 1 KB 145, 146  
  
_(3) R. v. Comptroller-General of Patents_ (1953) 1 All ER 862,863  
  
_(4) The Multipurpose Co-operative Society Ltd., v. Gunatilleke_ 74 NLR 151  
  
_(5) Harris v. Amery_ (1866-66) 1 LRCP 148, 154

**493**

_(6) G. I. Railway Employees Co-op Bank v. Bhikhaji_ AIR 1943 Bombay 341  
  
_(7) Madhave Rao v. Surya Rao_ AIR 1954 Madras 103  
  
**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_S. Mahenthiran_ for appellant.  
  
Respondent absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 23, 1981  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.  
**  
The 3rd Respondent was at all times relevant to this appeal employed by the
Chankanai Multi Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd, (hereinafter referred to as
the Society) as Manager of its Branch business. On 25.09.1975 the Assistant
Commissioner of Co-operative Development for Jaffna acting under powers vested
in him by By-Law 52(C) nominated the 3rd Respondent as an employee Director of
the Society. (Vide 3811: The 3rd Respondent alleges that this appointment did
not meet with the approval of the other Directors of the Society. He further
alleges that he was cold shouldered and not summoned for meetings of the Board
of Directors. He states that he instituted action No. 1050/Misc. in the
District Court of Mallakam to establish his rights. The Defendant in the case
then filed answer disputing inter alia the jurisdiction of the Court to
entertain the action and stating further that the dispute was one referable to
arbitration. That action is pending in the District Court.  
  
By letter dated 24.02.1976 (3132) the Society interdicted the 3rd Respondent
with effect from 27.02.1976 citing the following reasons.  
  
"1\. Conducting to bring discredit to the position of this Society."  
  
"2\. Divulging secrets of the Society to those who are not connected with the
Society."  
  
"3\. Spreading false propaganda and unnecessary rumours about the Society."  
  
All the Directors except the 4th Respondent approved of this interdiction. The
3rd Respondent then instituted this action praying inter alia for a
declaration that the order of interdiction was illegal and also for an interim
and permanent injunction restraining. the Board of Directors from acting on
the letter (3132). The District Court granted the interim injunction prayed
for in the plaint.

**494**

 The Society and the 1st to 13th Petitioner-Respondents then filed application
dated 25th March, 1976, in the then Supreme Court praying for a Writ of
Certiorari quashing the order upon which the interim injunction issued and
also for a Mandate in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition on the 1st
Respondent. (Acting District Judge of District Court Mallakam who made the
Order) on the 2nd Respondent (the permanent District Judge of the Court) " or
any other Judge of the said Court from proceeding with the said action." This
application was heard by the Court of Appeal which ordered both writs to issue
for the reason that the District Court was not possessed of jurisdiction to
entertain this action.  
  
We are not here concerned with the dispute between the Society and the 3rd
Respondent qua employee Director. This action is one that concerns the
relationship of employer and employee upon a contract of service. The Court of
Appeal was of the view that the provisions of section 58(1)(c) of the Co-
operative Societies Law No. 5 of 1972 were applicable to this case. Before I
deal with this provision I desire to deal with another submission. It was
contended that the Society had an alternative remedy available, and therefore
relief by way of Writ was not available. It is said that the Society and its
Directors could have, and should have, gone before the District Court and
obtained a dissolution of the interim injunction and also pleaded the total
lack of jurisdiction. Counsel submitted that the provisions of section 666 of
the Civil Procedure Code should have been resorted to and that Writs of
Certiorari and Prohibition were therefore not available. Ranasinghe, J. has
cited the case of Sirisena v. Kotawera Udagama Co-operative Stores Ltd. (1).
There Gratiaen J. pointed out that there is "no doubt a well recognised
principle of law that the Supreme Court will not as a rule make an order of
Mandamus or Certiorari where there is an alternative and equally convenient
remedy available to the aggrieved party. But the rule is not a rigid one".
Here we are also concerned with a Writ of Prohibition. It has been prayed for
and granted on the basis of a total absence of jurisdiction. The issue of a
Writ of Prohibition makes the Writ of Certiorari superfluous. The availability
of an alternative remedy does not prevent a Court from issuing a Writ of
Prohibition in cases of excess or absence of jurisdiction. "On the broad
principle that it is established that the Court is acting beyond its
jurisdiction, I am of opinion that the case is one in which the Court ought
not to refuse to issue a Writ of Prohibition, "per Lord Alverstone, C.J. in
Channel Coaling Company v. Ross (2) "Objection to jurisdiction can always be
taken' by plea, and, if an appeallies from the Court or Tribunal -in which
such a plea is raised, the Appellate Court could, no doubt, decide the
question of jurisdiction, but it by no

**495**

means follows, that, because there is an appeal, the power of this Court to
issue a prohibition is taken away. There is no technical obstacle to the co-
existence of a right to appeal and to a prohibition." per Lord Goddard, C.J.
in R. v. Comptroller-General of Patents (3) I therefore reject the argument
that these applications for Writ of Certiorari and Writ of Prohibition could
not be maintained and therefore should not have been entertained by the Court
of Appeal.  
  
The Court of Appeal has sought to follow the principles laid down in the case
of The Multipurpose Co-operative Society Ltd. v. Gunatileke (4). That was a
case in which the Plaintiff sued for damages for injuria in that the Defendant
Society "wrongfully and maliciously and without any manner of reason"
terminated his membership. Fernando, C.J. held that the words "touching the
business of the Society" embraced "matters peculiar to association of
persons". He therefore held that the dispute was referable to arbitration in
terms of section 53(1)(b) of the Co-operative Societies Ordinance (Chapter
124). We are not here concerned with membership but with the status of a
servant employed in the business. Chapter 124 was repealed by the Co-operative
Societies Law No. 5 of 1972 (Vide Section 73(1)). Section 58(1)(c) of the Law
reads thus  
  
"58(1) If any dispute touching the business of registered society arises -  
  
(c) between the Society or its Committee and any Officer or employee of the
Society, whether past or present, or any heir or legal representative of any
deceased officer or employee such dispute shall be referred to the Registrar
for a decision.  
  
We have in this case a dispute of a kind between the Society and its employee.
But is it one touching the business of the Society ? Business is synonymous
with trade. But the word business "has a more extensive significance than
trade" per Willes J. in Harris v. Amery (5)It comprises all those activities
which are necessarily done to make the trade flourish and bring profits Hiring
of labour and staff, their disciplinary control, their conduct in and of the
business, are all matters that are part and parcel of running the business and
therefore touch the business. I have no hesitation in holding that suspension
of an employee for conduct alleged to have been improper and harmful to the
business and a dispute arising there from as to the employer's right to do so
is a dispute touching the business within the meaning of section 58(1)(c) of

**496**

Law No. 5 of 1972. Vide G. /. P. Railway Employees Co-op. Bank v. Bhikhaji (6)
(A. I. R. 1943 Bombay 341) and Madhava Rao v. Surya Rao (7). The District
Court therefore had no jurisdiction to entertain the action and the Court of
Appeal correctly issued the Writ of Certiorari and the Writ of Prohibition.
The appeal is therefore dismissed.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J. I** agree.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  I **agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed**_  

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/18.html_  

