##  Dayasena V Bindusara, Director National Blood Transfusion Service and
Other - SLR - 222, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 18; (2003) 1 Sri LR 222 (29
November 2002)

**222**

**DAYASENA** ****

**v.** ****

**BINDUSARA, DIRECTOR, NATIONAL BLOOD TRANSFUSION** ****

**SERVICE AND OTHERS** ** **

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

GUNASEKERA, J. AND

YAPA, J.

SC (FR) 583/2001

29th NOVEMBER 2002

_Fundamental Rights_ \- _Transfer order_ \- _Failure to produce the order_ \-
_Failure to notify the transferee the reasons for the order or to provide an
opportunity of meeting allegations made_ \- _Article 12(1) of the
Constitution._

The 1st respondent was the Director, Central Blood Bank, Colombo; the 2nd
respondent was the Director-General Department of Health Services, and the 3rd
respondent was the Secretary, Ministry of Health.

The petitioner was a book-keeper in the public service attached to the Central
Blood Bank, Colombo. His duties included processing of loan applications and
submission to the 2nd respondent for approval of the 3rd respondent.

In February, 2001 the petitioner evaluated a loan application of the 1st
respon­dent and forwarded it with a recommendation that the 1st respondent was
not entitled to the sum applied for in view of an outstanding balance on a
previous vehicle loan. However, in July 2001 the 1st respondent acting
independently of the petitioner was able to obtain approval for a lesser
amount as a loan and collected it on a voucher authorized by herself, even
though that loan was also not in accordance with the relevant conditions.

The petitioner next received the 1st respondent's letter dated 4.10.2001
informing him that by order dated 4.10.2001 the 2nd respondent has
trans­ferred the petitioner to the Mental Hospital, Angoda. Neither the
original nor a copy of the transfer order was produced. It was not suggested
that the peti­tioner was served with a copy.

On appeal, the 3rd respondent replied that due to "administrative reasons" the
transfer could not be varied. The 2nd respondent did not file affidavit.

**223**

The 1st respondent in her affidavit did not state whether the transfer order
gave reasons. However, the 1st respondent alleged misappropriation of funds
and dereliction of duty against the petitioner.

**Held :**

1.                     There was no proof that the 2nd respondent did actually make a trans­fer order.  


2.                     There was no transfer on the advice of the relevant Transfer Board as required by Chapter III, Section 3 of the Establishment Code (which permitted an _ad hoc_ transfer - _inter alia_ on disciplinary grounds)  


3.                     In any event the petitioner was not informed of the allegations against him and given an opportunity to explain matters.  


4.                     As such the transfer was wrongful and arbitrary and violative of the petitioner's rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

_Per_ Fernando, J.



'The contention of the counsel for the petitioner that the real reason for the
transfer was the 1st respondent's displeasure about her vehicle loan is much
more probable".

**APPLICATION** for relief for violation fundamental rights.

**Case referred to :**

(1) _Manage_ v. _Kotakadeniya_ (1997) 1 Sri LR 204.

_Elmore Perera_ for petitioner

_M. Gopallawa,_ State Counsel for respondent.

_ _

#  

# Cur. adv. vult



January 29, 2003

**FERNANDO, J.**

The petitioner is a book-keeper in the public service. He was transferred to
the Central Blood Bank on 30.5.2000. By letter dated 4.10.2001 the 1st
Respondent, the Director of the National Blood Transfusion Service, informed
him that he had been transferred to the Mental Hospital, Angoda, with
immediate effect. He complains

224

 that the transfer was in violation of his fundamental right under Article
12(1).



In February 2001 the Petitioner was given a revised list of duties which
included the receipt and processing of loan applica­tions, and their
submission to the 2nd Respondent (the Director-General of Health Services) for
the approval of the 3rd Respondent (the Secretary to the Ministry). A number
of loan applications, which had been submitted previously but returned
unapproved due to var­ious shortcomings, were sent to him for attention. One
of these was a vehicle loan application by the 1st Respondent. The petitioner
pointed out to the 1st Respondent how the shortcomings should be corrected.
According to her that was done. The Petitioner maintains that one prerequisite
was that the outstanding balance on a previ­ous vehicle loan application
should have been settled, and that the 1st Respondent refused to do so.
However, there is no doubt that the Petitioner did forward that application on
20.2.2001 together with his evaluation, which showed her maximum loan
entitlement to be Rs. 783,360 and the balances due from her on two outstanding
loans to be Rs. 53,695 on a vehicle loan, and Rs. 104,640 on a dis­tress loan.
Accordingly, after deducting the balances outstanding, the maximum loan then
obtainable was Rs 625,025.



The Petitioner alleged that thereafter, in May 2001, the 1st Respondent -
without the Petitioner's knowledge - obtained another distress loan of Rs
121,960, having approved it herself. Admittedly, it was only on 12.7.2001 that
she repaid the balance of the vehicle loan. The Petitioner's position is that
thereupon the 1st Respondent would have been entitled to a further loan of not
more than Rs 560,000 (i.e.after deducting the total of the then outstanding
loans), and that she did not disclose to the 2nd and 3rd Respondents the fact
that she had obtained the second distress loan.



By letter dated 12.7.2001 the Additional Secretary to the Ministry approved a
loan of Rs 633,720. On the same day the 1st Respondent obtained a special imp
rest from the Ministry of a sum sufficient to cover her loan. The Accountant
by a memorandum dated 13.7.2001 informed her of ten earlier loan applications
by other officers, for a total of Rs 3.8 million, which had all been approved
by the Ministry before her application, and asked her to obtain an imprest to
cover those loans too. That was not done.

225

When the file was forwarded to the Petitioner for payment, he submitted a
memorandum to the Accountant stating, first, that after her loan application
had been submitted to the Ministry the 1st Respondent had obtained a further
distress loan on 15.5.2001, and second, that when the then outstanding loans
were taken into account the loan instalments to be deducted from her monthly
salary would exceed the limit of 40% prescribed by the Establishments Code.
The Accountant submitted that memoran­dum to the 1st Respondent, pointing out
that the 40% limit would be Rs. 8,704 p.m. while the loan instalments
including interest would amount of Rs. 11,732 p.m. The 1st Respondent merely
min­uted "Noted and approved", without disputing the Petitioner's alle­gation
as to her second distress loan. A sum of Rs. 633,720 was thereupon paid to her
the same day, upon a voucher authorized by herself.

The Petitioner then received the 1st Respondent's letter dated 4.10.2001 which
stated that by the 2nd Respondent's trans­fer order dated 4.10.2001 he had
ordered the Petitioner's transfer to the Mental Hospital, Angoda, with
immeditate effect. The original of the 2nd Responder's transfer order would
have been in the 1st Respondent's possession, but she produced neither the
original nor a copy. It was not suggested that a copy had been sent to the
Petitioner. Both the Petitioner and his Trade Union submitted appeals, but the
3rd Respondent's reply merely stated that for then prevailing administrative
reasons the transfer could not be varied. Thus the Petitioner had to file this
application without knowing why he had been transferred, and without even
being certain that it was the 2nd Respondent who had actually ordered his
transfer.



The 1st Respondent did not state in her affidavit what reason had been given
in the 2nd Respondent's letter, nor did the 2nd Respondent file an affidavit.
In her affidavit the 1st Respondent referred to certain complaints which she
had received about the Petitioner and claimed that his transfer "was
recommended and ordered in order to facilitate an inquiry into such complaints
and in order to avoid further disruption being caused to the smooth
func­tioning of the administrative affairs at the Central Blood Bank", and
again that it had been ordered "on disciplinary grounds and for administrative
reasons". However, she did not state _who_ had made

226

that recommendation, and failed to produce the recommendation.

The resulting position is that the Respondents have failed to produce the
alleged recommendation for the transfer and the trans­fer order, and there is
no evidence that the 2nd Respondent did order the transfer, and as to the
grounds of transfer - all of which should have been matters of record in the
official files.

In her affidavit the 1st Respondent referred to the following allegations
against the Petitioner:

1.                     The Commissioner-General of Samurdhi, by letter dated 1.6.2001 had informed her that the Petitioner had been involved in misappropriation of funds and frauds in the year 2000 and had failed to hand over certain documents, and had requested the 1st Respondent to hand over such doc­uments to a named officer; and that although she instructed the Petitioner in writing to comply with that request, he refused to do so;  


2.                     On 9.7.2001 the Petitioner refused to accept a revised duty list:  


3.                     By letter dated 28.7.2001 the Accountant had complained the Petitioner was reporting for duty late very frequently; that being the Secretary of his Trade Union, he was attending to Trade Union matters and entertaining outsiders at the office during duty hours; and that he was reluctant to carry out instructions from other officers; and  


4.                     By letter dated 20.9.2001 a doctor had complained that the Petitioner had not paid a vehicle loan even three days after it had been approved by the Accountant.



Both Counsel agreed that it was the 2nd Respondent, as Head of the Department,
who had the authority to transfer the Petitioner within the Department, from
the Central Blood Bank to the Mental Hospital, that the impugned transfer had
been effected without obtaining the advice of the relevant Transfer Board as
required by the Establishments Code, and that under Chapter III section 3 of
the Code a transfer without such advice was authorized only in four
situations: a transfer not involving a change of station, a transfer on
disciplinary grounds, a transfer necessitated by the exigencies of service,
and a transfer in a Department having less that 25 transferable officers.

227

While the 2nd Respondent had authority to transfer the Petitioner on one or
more of the grounds stated above, there is no proof that he did actually make
a transfer order. Even assuming that he did make a transfer order, there is no
evidence as to the basis on which he acted, and it cannot be assumed that it
was on one of the four permitted grounds. But even if I were to assume that he
did act on one of those grounds, yet that ground and the sup­porting reasons
were not disclosed to the Petitioner when the trans­fer order was made, and
even when his appeals were refused -and that was a fatal flaw. In _Manage v
Kotakadeniya,_ an exten­sion had been refused on the basis of findings that he
had com­mitted several offences. It was held that the refusal of the extension
was flawed because _inter alia_ no reasons had been given for the findings in
respect of two of the offences alleged against him. In the present case, not
only the reasons but even the ground had not been disclosed. I therefore hold
that the Petitioner's transfer was wrongful and arbitrary.

I have now to consider the complaints referred to by the 1st Respondent. There
is nothing to show that those matters were brought to the notice of the 2nd
Respondent, and it cannot be assumed that he acted on those matters. Further,
the Petitioner was not given an opportunity of submitting an explanation in
regard to those matters. Quite apart from any explanation which the Petitioner
might have given, certain comments are unavoidable. Allegations of fraud and
misappropriation of Samurdhi funds were undoubtedly serious - but if they
rendered him unfit to serve as book-keeper at the Central Blood Bank how could
he have been allowed to serve elsewhere? As for the refusal to accept the
revised duty list, the Petitioner averred in his counter-affidavit that the
Accountant had accepted his position - and that may well be true because the
Accountant's letter dated 28.7.2001 made no com­plaint on that score. If the
Accountant's complaints about frequent lateness and attending to Trade Union
matters during working hours were true, one would have expected supporting
evidence in the form of previous warnings to the Petitioner and reports to the
1st Respondent. The contention of learned Counsel for the Petitioner that the
real reason for the transfer was the 1st Respondent's displeasure about her
vehicle loan is much more probable.

228

I hold that the Petitioner's fundamental right under Article 12(1) has been
infringed by the 1st Respondent, quash the Petitioner's transfer to the Mental
Hospital, Angoda and award him a sum of Rs 50,000 as compensation payable by
the State, and a sum of Rs 10,000 as costs payable by the 1st Respondent
person­ally, on or before 31.3.2003. The Auditor-General is directed to
sub­mit a report to this Court, on or before 30.4.2003, on the Petitioner's
complaint to the Auditor-General dated 4.10.2001.

**GUNASEKARA, J.** **** \- I agree.

**YAPA, J.** **** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._



* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/18.html_  

