##  Pamkayu(M)Snd Bhd(Appearing By Its Attorney, Hemachandra) and Another v.
Liyanaarachchi, P., Secretary, Ministry of Transport and Highways and Others -
SLR - 118, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 18; (2001) 1 Sri LR 118 (10 May 2001)

**118**

**PAMKAYU (M) SND BHD (APPEARING BY ITS ATTORNEY,  
HEMACHANDRA) AND ANOTHER  
v.  
P. LIYANAARACHCHI, SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT  
AND HIGHWAYS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
WIGNESWARAN, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 658/2000  
30TH MARCH, 2001  
  
_Fundamental rights - Conditions of tender - Non-compliance with conditions
which makes a bid void - Duty to notify the determination on tenders to all
tenderers - Equal opportunity and transparency - Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.  
  
_On 27.01.2000 the 4th respondent (the Secretary of the Ministry of Transport
and Highways) on behalf of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board, by an
advertisement in the "Daily News" called for tenders from suppliers or their
accredited agents for the supply of 100,000 Nos. Hardwood Sleepers. Tenders
closed on 16.03.2000.  
  
The Technical Evaluation Committee found that there were only three responsive
offers and recommended that the order for the supply of sleepers be awarded to
the 1st petitioner, a Malaysian Company who tendered through the 2nd
petitioner, a company registered in Sri Lanka and further registered on
15.3.2000 as the agent of the 1st petitioner in terms of the Public Contracts
Act, No. 3 of 1987 for the purpose of the 1st petitioner's tender. The
Committee rejected the offer of the 5th respondent (an Australian Company) on
four grounds. However, the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board decided to accept
the offer of the 5th respondent having overruled all those grounds. Two of the
said grounds were rightly overruled. The remaining two grounds of rejection
were :  
  
(i) The registration of Local Agent had not been submitted.  
  
(ii) The validity of the Bid Bond submitted was for 120 days instead of 150
days as required by Clause 13 of the Instructions to Bidders.  
  
**Held :  
  
**(1) The failure to submit the registration of the 5th respondent's local
agent was a breach of Clause 29 of the Instructions to Bidders which requires
registration of an agent in terms of the Public Contracts Act,

**119**

No. 3 of 1987 before submission of bids. Clause 29 also provides that the
Certificate of Registration should be submitted with the bid; and that bids
which fail to submit such certificate shall be rejected. Hence the Committee
was right in its decision although it invoked a wrong clause in the
Instructions to Bidders, namely Clause 4; and the Cabinet Appointed Tender
Board erred in rejecting the decision of the Technical Evaluation Committee.  
  
(11) The acceptance of the 5th respondents bid which was not accompanied by a
bid bond-for 150 days was also bad. Clause 13 of the Instructions to Bidders
provides that a bid which is not accompanied by an acceptable bid security
shall be rejected as non-responsive.  
  
_Per_ Amerasinghe, J.  
  
" The award of a tender must be based on compliance with the terms and
conditions of the tender documents on the date and at the time specified for
the closing of the tender.  
  
An offer that does not comply with the terms, conditions and specifications at
that date and time must be rejected in the same way as a late offer."  
  
(iii) The 1st respondent failed to notify all Tenderers in writing the
determination to award the Tender to the 5th respondent and to call for
representations, if any, against the determination. This was a breach of
Guideline No. 136 of Government Tender Procedure, the object of which is to
provide equal opportunity and transparency )n the tender process.  
  
(iv) In the circumstances, the fundamental rights of the petitioners under
Article 12(1) have been violated; and the award of the tender to the 5th
respondent was unconstitutional and therefore void and of no force or avail in
law.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Smithkline Beecham Biologicals S.A_. and _Another v. State
Pharmaceutical Corporation of Sri Lanka_ and _Others_ (1997) 3 Sri LR 20 at
50.  
  
2\. _Roman Dayaran Shetty v The International Airport Authority of India_ and
_Others_ AIR (1979) SC 1628 at 1633 - 1634

**120**

3\. _Vitarelli v. Seaton_ 359 US 535, 79 S. Ct 968, 3L. Ed. 2d 1012 (1959)  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Ranjith Mendis_ with _Anil Silva_ and _Bernard S. Peterson_ for the
petitioners.  
  
_M.A. Sumanthiran_ with _Ms. v. Arulananthan_ for 5th and 6th respondents.  
  
_Ms. Demuni de Silva_ , Senior State Counsel for Attorney - General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 10, 2001.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
  
**On 27 January 2000, an advertisement was published in the Daily News in
which it was stated that the Secretary, Ministry of Transport and Highways on
behalf of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board will receive sealed tenders from
suppliers or their accredited agents for the supply of 100,000 Nos. Heavy
Hardwood Sleepers. Tenders were to be closed at 2 p.m. on 16 March 2000.  
  
The first Petitioner, Pamkayu (M) SDN BHD, is a Private Limited Company
established under the laws applicable to Companies in Malayasia. The second
Petitioner is a Company registered under the laws applicable to Companies in
Sri Lanka, and was registered on 15 March 2000 as the agent, sub-agent,
representative or nominee of the 1st Petitioner in terms of the Public
Contracts Act, No. 3 of 1987 for the purposes of Tender No. SR/F 5922 for the
supply of 100,000 Nos. Wooden Sleepers.  
  
On 16 March 2000, the first Petitioner tendered for the supply of the
Sleepers. According to the letter of the Technical Evaluation Committee dated
8 May 2000 addressed to the Secretary, Ministry of Transport and Highways, the
first Petitioner was one of seventeen tenderers, but since one of them had
submitted a blank offer, the tenders of sixteen were considered. The Committee
reported that, for stated reasons,

**121**

13 of the offers were 'non-responsive.' Of the three 'substantially
responsive' offers, after evaluation and for stated reasons, the Committee
recommended that the order for the supply of Sleepers from 'Shorea cilata,
Shorea robusta, Shorea barbata, and Shorea guiso which complies with the
tender specifications', should be awarded to the first petitioner which had
'complied with the technical and commercial requirements of the tender'.  
  
On 27 June 2000, the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board decided to recommend the
acceptance of 'Offer No. 10', i.e., the offer of General & Railway Supplies
(Pvt.) Ltd, the fifth respondent in these proceedings, while rejecting the
recommendations of the Technical Evaluation Committee. The Technical
Evaluation Committee had rejected the bid of General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.)
Ltd. as not being a responsive offer for the following reasons:  
  
"(a) As per clause 4 (b) and (c) of the tender under instructions to bidders
the year of registration of business of the Local Agent has not been
furnished.  
  
(b) In terms of the same clause audited accounts of the Local Agent for one
out of the years 1998 and 1999 are also not furnished.  
  
(c) Also under the same clause the registration of the Local Agent is not
submitted.  
  
(d) The validity of the Bid Bond submitted is for 120 days instead of 150 days
as required in the tender which does not comply with clause 13 of the tender
under instructions to bidders."  
  
The Cabinet Appointed Tender Board stated that the "first three reasons given
in the TEC report for rejection of offer No. 10 were found to be invalid as
those conditions do not apply to offers not exceeding Rs. 250 m. [The]
[f]ourth reason was considered as a minor deviation as the validity of the bid
security is still in force and tenderer has time to extend the validity."

**122**

Clause 4 of the 'Instructions to Bidders' stated that All bidders for tenders,
the value of which exceeds Rs.250 million shall furnish' certain specified
information 'along with the bid', if the bidder uses a local agent. It is
stated that 'in the case where a bidder uses a local agent, the bid will be
rejected,' inter alia, if 'the bidder fails to furnish any of the' specified
information. In my view, the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board was right in
rejecting the views of the Technical Evaluation Committee with regard to the
first two reasons given by the Committee, for the tender sum of General &
Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. Was Rs.1,607,373 and not being in excess of
Rs.250 million, the tenderer was not obliged to furnish the information
specified in Clause 4.  
  
However, the third reason, namely the failure to submit the Certificate of
Registration of the local agent, was, in my view, a valid ground for the
rejection of the bid of General & Railway Supplies (Pvt) Ltd., albeit not, as
stated by the Committee under clause 4, but in terms of Clause 29 of the
`Instructions to Bidders.' Clause 29 states as follows:  
  
All persons who act as an agent or sub-agent, representative or nominee for or
on behalf of any bidder are required to Register themselves before submission
of bids with Registrar of Contracts, Sri Lanka as required by the Public
Contracts Act, No. 3 of 1987. The Certificate of Registration should be
submitted with the bid. The bid/s of bidders who fail to submit this
certificate shall be rejected." (The emphasis is mine.)  
  
It is not difficult to understand why, although the furnishing of certain
information with regard to local agents under clause 4 might have been
legitimately restricted to transactions in excess of a certain value, there
should nevertheless have been insistence that in all cases the Certificate of
Registration should have been submitted with a bid: No one could have lawfully
dealt with the tender of General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd: For section 12
of the Public Contracts Act prohibits Any member of a public body, a technical
committee, tender board or

**123**

evaluation board of such body or any officer or employee thereof or any State
officer, or the Registrar, except for the purposes of registration," dealing
with an agent, sub-agent, representative or nominee of any tenderer sunless
such a person 'first produce[s] a valid certificate of registration issued
under [the Public Contracts] Act.' Any person who contravened that provision
would have been guilty of an offence.  
  
I am not concerned here with the question whether the sixth Respondent or any
person who dealt with the matter of the tender of General & Railway Supplies
(Pvt.) Ltd. was guilty of an offence. That is a matter for a court having
jurisdiction in that regard. I am concerned here with the question whether the
Technical Evaluation Committee was right in rejecting the bid of General &
Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. for not producing a valid certification of
registration of its agent, sub-agent, representative or nominee at the time of
making its bid. I am of the view, for the reasons I have stated, that the
Committee was right in its decision, although it invoked the wrong provision
of the 'Instructions to Bidders' in support of the decision. Consequently, the
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board erred in rejecting the third reason adduced by
the Technical Evaluation Committee for treating the bid of General & Railway
Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. as unresponsive.  
  
I turn now to the matter of the bid security. It was the fourth matter
considered by the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board in deciding upon the
correctness of the decision of the Technical Evaluation Committee. Clause 13
of the 'Instructions to Bidders' states, inter alia, as follows:  
  
" **. . .** Bid security shall remain valid for a period of 150 days. However
the bidder should agree to extend this period of validity if requested by the
purchaser. Any bid not accompanied by an acceptable bid security shall be
rejected by the purchaser as non-responsive. **. . .** " (The emphasis is
mine).  
  
It is not in dispute that the bid bond submitted by the fifth Respondent was
valid only for a period of 120 days, whereas

**124**

clause 13 of the 'Instructions to Bidders' plainly requires that "Bid security
shall be valid for a period of 150 days". In terms of clause 13, the Technical
Evaluation Committee therefore rejected the bid as being non-responsive. The
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board, however, regarded the failure of the bidder to
be a 'minor deviation.' The reason given for that view was that the bid
security was still in force and that the 'tenderer had time to extend the
validity.' There was no doubt that there had been a 'deviation' from what was
'an acceptable bid security' as described in clause 13. There was in fact, no
'acceptable bid security' for the period in the first instance was expressly
fixed at 150 days. Extensions of that period were provided for. However, there
was no provision enabling the extension of a period that fell short of the
stipulated 150 days. In terms of section 113 of Guidelines on Government
Tender Procedure a deviation might have been considered 'minor', inter alia,
if it had not been specified in the bid documents as a ground for rejection of
the bid. In the matter before us, the failure to submit an 'acceptable bid
security' was specified as a ground for mandatory rejection of a bid.
Therefore, it was not open to the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board to regard the
failure of General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. to comply with the
provisions of clause 13 as 'minor.' Bidders were required to furnish bid
security. Such security had to be furnished in accordance with the directions
given on matters of importance. The noncompliance related to a matter of
substance and not of mere form. The failure to comply with the directions on
so important a matter as the period required to be covered, in my view, made
it an unacceptable bid security. A bidder who submits an unacceptable bid
security is in no better position than a person who fails to furnish bid
security. Section 112\. 6 of the Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure
states that where bid security is required the failure to furnish a bid
security with a bid should be considered 'a major deviation' and be a ground
for the rejection of the bid.  
  
Moreover, there was no acceptable bid security, for the letter of guarantee
was issued on behalf of World Wide General Trade

**125**

Agencies (Pvt.) Ltd., the sixth Respondent, and not on behalf of General &
Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. the fifth Respondent bidder. The sixth Respondent
was not a Registered Local Agent of the fifth Respondent at the time of the
bid. Thus the bid security, having been issued neither in favour of the bidder
nor a duly registered local agent, sub-agent, representative or nominee of the
bidder under and in terms of the Public Contracts Act, was of little or no
use, for the guarantee afforded the purchaser no protection in the event of
the default of the bidder.  
  
The sixth Respondent was registered under and in terms of the Public Contracts
Act and obtained an extension of the bank guarantee on the 10th of July 2000,
whereas the tenders were closed on 16 March 2000. The award of a tender must
be based on compliance with the terms and conditions of the tender, documents
on the date and at the time specified for the closing of the tender. An offer
that does not comply with the terms, conditions and specifications at that
date and time must be rejected in the same way as a late offer. _SmithKline
Beecham Biologicals S.A._ and _Another v. State Pharmaceutical Corporation of
Sri Lanka_ and _others_ ,(1) _Roman Dayaran Shetty v. The International
Airport Authority of India_ and _others_.(2) The terms and conditions of a
tender cannot be arbitrarily dispensed with or varied by an evaluation
committee or tender board to accommodate a particular tenderer. If there are
to be negotiations in regard to variations in conditions or specifications or
in regard to any other matter pertinent to the final adjudication other than
clarifications, all the tenderers should have due notice of such negotiations
and permitted to make their submissions. It is in that way that a 'level
playing field' on which there is equal opportunity for persons to participate
and compete on identical terms, and transparency and uniformity of the
evaluation procedure of the tender process which the Guidelines on Government
Tender Procedure aim to achieve, can be achieved. Equality before the law is
more than an administrative requirement: It is a fundamental right recognized
and guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

**126**

The Petitioner's complaint is that equal treatment has been denied to the
Petitioner by the arbitrary variation of the published terms and conditions of
the invitation to tender for the supply of Sleepers in order to accommodate a
tenderer who failed to make a responsive bid. For the reasons stated above, I
am of the view that the Petitioner's claim is well-founded.  
  
The Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure provides a procedure with regard
to appeals against a determination by a Cabinet Appointed Tender Board. It is
as follows:  
  
"136\. In the case of a CATB, the Secretary to the Ministry concerned will,
within one week of the determination inform in writing, all Tenderers who
responded to the Tender Call, the intention to award the Tender to the
successful Tenderer and request that if there are any representations to be
made against the determination, such appeals should be submitted in writing to
the Tender Appeal Board with a copy to the Secretary of the Ministry
concerned. Simultaneously, a Cabinet Memorandum should be submitted under the
hand of the Minister, forwarding the Reports of the Tender Board and the TEC,
with the recommendation of the Minister.  
  
137\. An appeal against an award should be lodged with the Appeal Board within
one week of the intimation of the determination. The appeal should contain all
material required to support the averments and should be self-contained for
the Board to arrive at a conclusion. Oral submissions will be entertained only
at the discretion of the Board.  
  
138.1 The Appeal Board shall report to the Cabinet, through the Secretary to
the Cabinet with a copy to the Secretary of the relevant Ministry within two
weeks of an appeal being lodged. The Appeal Board will determine its own
procedures for expeditious inquiry and disposal of representations."  
  
It was not in dispute that not all the tenderers were informed of the
intention to award the tender to General & Railway

**127**

Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd, although in terms of section 136 of the Guidelines all of
them were entitled to be informed. The first Petitioner had in Fax messages
dated 03 July and 06 July 2000 to the Chairman of the Cabinet Tender Board
(which were copied to the Minister of Transport and Highways) alleged that,
for the reasons stated, General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. were not
qualified in terms of the tender documents. When there was no response to the
Fax messages and there was no communication in terms of section 136 of the
Guidelines, the Chairman of the first Petitioner on 12 July 2000 wrote to the
Minister of Transport & Highways, with copies to the Chairman of the Cabinet
Appointed Tender Board, the Chairman of the Technical Evaluation Committee and
the General Manager of Railways, for stated reasons, objecting to the offer of
General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. On 26 September 2000 the Chairman of
the second Petitioner wrote to the Chairman of the Cabinet Appointed Tender
Board inquiring about 'the present status' of the tenders opened on the 6th of
March 2000. No reply was received to any of the communications of the first
and second Petitioners. There was not so much as an acknowledgment of their
receipt. On 31 October 2000 the Chairman of the first Petitioner wrote to the
President of the Republic, for stated reasons, alleging that the award of the
tender to General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd was 'irregular.' The receipt
of the letter was acknowledged by the Presidential Secretariat.  
  
Neither the first Petitioner, who was a tenderer, nor his local agent, the
second Petitioner, were informed by the Secretary of the Ministry concerned of
the intention to award the tender to General.& Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd.
within a week of the determination of the Cabinet Appointed Tender Board. That
was a violation of section 136 of the Guidelines, for the decision of the
Cabinet Appointed Tender Board. was on 27 June 2000 whereas the first and
second Petitioners received their first formal intimation of the award of the
tender through a newspaper notice issued by the General Manager, Sri Lanka
Railways published on 02 November 2000 in the Daily News

**128**

announcing, inter alia, that the successful tenderer was M/s. General &
Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. of Australia, and that the Local Agent was M/s.
World Wide General Trade Agencies (Pvt.) Limited.  
  
The President of the Republic and Minister of Finance & Planning states in the
Preface to the Guidelines on Government Tender Procedure that they were
designed, inter alia, 'To keep the process fully transparent and honest.'
Section 136 was also violated in that the Secretary of the Ministry did not
request tenderers who wished to make representations against the determination
to make their appeals to the Tender Appeal Board. Notwithstanding that
failure, the first Petitioner, as we have seen, made several protests. The
protests, however, were not submitted to the Appeal Board, for Appeals to the
Appeal Board must follow from a request by the Secretary of the Ministry to
tenderers to make their representations against the determination. In the
matter before us, no such request had been made by the Secretary: and so there
was no report from the Appeal Board before the Cabinet when the Cabinet
considered the Memorandum of the Minister of Transport and Highways dated 29
August 2000 recommending the award of the tender to General & Railways
Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. of Australia, and at its meeting on 21 September 2000
accepted the Minister's recommendation.  
  
The State and its agencies are bound by and must rigorously and scrupulously
observe the procedures laid down by the Executive on pain of invalidation of
an act or omission in violation of them. An executive agency must be
rigorously held to the standards by which it professes its conduct is to be
judged: Accordingly, if an action is based on a defined procedure, that
procedure must be scrupulously observed. As Justice Frankfurter said in
Vitarelli u Seaton, (3) (and followed with approval in SmithKline Beecham
Biologicals S.A. and Another v State Pharmaceutical Corporation of Sri Lanka
and others (supra) at p. 44.) 'He that takes the procedural sword shall perish
with the sword.' There was, perhaps, a failure with regard

**129**

to all the tenderers to notify the decision of the Cabinet Tender Board within
one week of its decision. However, the first Petitioner was, in my view, well
within its rights to complain that in terms of the sections in the Guidelines
on Government Tender Procedure there was an invidious discrimination between
itself and General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. for although officially
General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.) Ltd. had been informed by the General
Manager, Sri Lanka Railways by his letter on 19 October 2000 that the tender
had been awarded to it, other tenderers had not been informed of the award
until the newspaper notification on 02 November 2000.  
  
In the Preface to the 1996 version of the Guidelines on Government Tender
Procedure, the President and Minister of Finance & Planning stated: 'I
sincerely hope that this document will streamline the purchasing and selling
procedures of Government, in order to achieve speed, efficiency and
transparency and to provide a level playing-field for all citizens who
participate in the economic process of the country.' It would appear from
three documents submitted by the first Respondent and filed of record marked
as IR6, IR7 and IR8 that the tenderer selected by the Cabinet Appointed Tender
Board had been given the opportunity of clearing up doubts, quoting from
Australian and Indian sources, on the suitability of Eucalyptus camaldulensis
for Railway Sleepers, and casting doubts on the Malaysian species, offered by
the first Petitioner, although not forming a part of the tender documents and
with no notice to the other tenderers.  
  
It would appear from the affidavit of the Managing Director of the sixth
Respondent and the documents submitted by him and filed of record in these
proceedings that:  
  
(1) on 16 March 2000, i.e. the day the tenders closed, the Deputy High
Commissioner for Australia had stated as follows in a letter to the General
Manager, Sri Lanka Railways (X5):

**130**

"I understand that Sri Lankan Railways has opened a tender for the supply of
wooden sleepers for maintenance and development of the rail system in the
island.  
  
An Australian company, General and Railway Supplies Pty. Ltd. is submitting a
bid to supply this material to Sri Lanka Railways. You will recall that I have
written to you on occasion in the past regarding possibilities for this
company in the Sri Lankan market.  
  
With respect to this particular tender, subject to assessment, support for
this contract may be available from the Australian Government's Export Finance
Insurance Corporation (EFIC).  
  
Under Its Direct Loan facilities, EFIC Is able to lend money to foreign buyers
who purchase capital goods and services from Australian exporters.";  
  
(2) on 6 June 2000 the Managing Director of General & Railway Supplies (Pvt.)
Ltd. of Australia wrote a letter to the General Manager, Sri Lanka Railways,
further to a Fax of 5 June 2000 on the subject of the supply of 100,000
Sleepers, adducing evidence of the suitability of the Sleepers offered by
General & Suppliers (Pvt.) Ltd. (X 6).  
  
(3) information had been obtained from the Director Track Modernisation
Railway Board of the Government of India with regard to a comparative
evaluation of Malaysian and Australian timber where the Malaysian timber was
shown in poor light. (X7 dated 16 October 2000).  
  
Although doubts were raised about the suitability of the timber offered by the
first Petitioner, (vide X7) the objection was not communicated to the first
Petitioner who therefore had no opportunity of clearing away such doubts.
Moreover, there were incentives offered to make the offer of the fifth
Respondent more attractive than it was on the basis of the bid documents.
(Vide X5 quoted above). In the circumstances, one could hardly say

**131**

that Pamkayu (M) SDN BHD, the first Petitioner, and General & Railway Supplies
(Pvt.) Ltd, the fifth Respondent, were playing on a 'level field.'  
  
For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that the fundamental rights
of the first and second Petitioners declared and recognized by Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution have been violated. In the circumstances, the award of the
tender to the fifth Respondent was unconstitutional and therefore void and of
no force or avail in law.  
  
I make order that the State shall pay the first and second Petitioners a sum
of Rs. 25,000 each as costs.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WIGNESWARAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/18.html_  

