##  Beebi Johara v. Warusavithana - SLR - 227, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 18;
(1998) 3 Sri LR 227 (14 July 1998)

**227**

**BEEBI JOHARA  
v.  
WARUSAVITHANA**

SUPREME COURT

G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,

WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND

GUNASEKERA, J.

SC. APPEAL NO. 70/97

C.A. NO. 45/88 (F)

D.C. ANURADHAPURA NO. 11811/L

24TH JUNE, 1998

_Vindicatory suit - Claim of tenancy-Burden of establishing lawful possession
-Duty of the court where defendants claim is defective \- S. 165 of the
Evidence Ordinance - S. 134 of the Civil Procedure Code._

The plaintiff had leased the premises owned by her to the defendant for 4
years. She alleged that the defendant failed to hand over possession of the
premises after the expiry of the lease. The defendant admitted the lease but
pleaded that the premises were governed by the Rent Act and claimed to
continue in occupation of the premises as a statutory tenant But the document
which the defendant produced in support of his claim was inadequate.

**228**

**Held:**

1\. The burden of proof is on the defendant to show that he is in lawful
possession of the premises. The defendant failed to discharge the burden;
hence the plaintiff was entitled to judgment.

2\. Where the evidence is inadequate, the District Court is not required to
ensure the production of relevant evidence before giving judgment

Per G. P. S. de Silva, CJ.

'Neither section 134 of the Civil Procedure Code nor section 165 of the
Evidence Ordinance was meant to fill in the gaps in the presentation of its
case by a party to the action. While these sections confer a power upon the
court, they do not place a burden upon the court.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Theivandran v. Ramanathan Chettiyar_ (1986) 2 Sri L.R 219 at 222.

_2\. Rewata Them v. Haratala_ 14 CLW 155.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Faisz Musthapha PC with N. M. Shaheed, R. Ameen and Ms. F. M. Sulaiman_ for
the plaintiff-appellant

_F. C. Perera with Upali Ponnamperuma_ for the defendant-respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

July 14, 1998

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

The plaintiff instituted these proceedings in July, 1986, seeking a
declaration of title to premises No. 60, Market Place, New Town. Anuradhapura,
ejectment of the defendant and damages for unlawful possession of the
premises. In her plaint she averred (a) that she is the owner of the premises,
(6) that by agreement dated 20.2.82 (marked Pi at the trial) she leased the
premises to the defendant for a period of 4 years from 1.3.82 on a monthly
rental of Rs. 600, (c) that the period of the lease expired on 28.2.86 but the
defendant

**229**

has failed to hand over possession of the premises to the plaintiff and
remains in unlawful possession from 1.3.86, (d) that the defendant has failed
to pay rent from September, 1985.

The defendant in his answer admitted the lease (P1) but pleaded that the
premises were governed by the Rent Act and that as a statutory tenant he was
entitled to continue in occupation of the premises. On this basis the
defendant raised the issues Nos. 6 and 7. Having admitted the lease P1, the
burden was on the defendant to establish his plea that he was the statutory
tenant of the premises in suit. After trial, the District Court held with the
defendant and dismissed the plaintiffs action. The plaintiff preferred an
appeal against the judgment of the District Court to the Court of Appeal. The
Court of Appeal while setting aside the judgment of the District Court
proceeded to order a trial de novo. In the appeal before us, the plaintiffs
complaint is against the order for a trial de novo.

Special leave to appeal to this court was granted on the following matters;

(a) Did the Court of Appeal err in directing a re-trial in the circumstances
of the case:

(b) Did the Court of Appeal err in holding that the District Court was obliged
to ensure that inadequate information is not placed before it to come to its
conclusions and consequently misdirected itself in ordering a re-trial.

The main issue in the case was whether the premises were subject to the
provisions of the Rent Act, and whether the defendant was in the position of a
statutory tenant upon the expiry of the period of 4 years set out in the lease
P1. As stated earlier, the burden of proof was on the defendant in as much as
he had admitted the execution of the lease P1 and the ownership of the
plaintiff. . . . when the legal title to the premises is admitted or proved to
be in the plaintiff, the burden of proof is on the defendant to show that he
is in lawful possession. per Sharvananda CJ, in Theivandran v. Ramanathan
Chettia(1) at 222.

230

To prove lawful possession the defendant relied on V2 and V1 V2 is the Gazette
notification whereby the Urban Council limits of Anuradhapura were brought
within the provisions of the Rent Act. The document which was challenged by
the plaintiff and strongly relied on by the defendant both before the District
Court and the Court of Appeal was V1. This document V1 purported to be an
extract from the assessment register for the year 1968 issued by the Chairman
of the Urban Council, Anuradhapura. However, as pointed out by Mr. Mustapha
for the plaintiff-appellant, the Urban Council-Anuradhapura was not in
existence in 1968. The reason is that by the Anuradhapura Preservation Board
Act, No. 32 of 1961, the Anuradhapura Preservation Board was set up with
effect from 13.6.61 to administer the town of Anuradhapura. A new Urban
Council was constituted after the enactment of the Transfer of Powers
(Anuradhapura Preservation Board) Law No. 25 of 1974. Thus "V1" could not have
been issued by the Chairman of the Urban Council, Anuradhapura. In fact the
District Judge himself expressed the view that it is unclear as to which
authority made the assessment shown in V1 for the year 1968. Nevertheless the
District Judge, relying on V1, which specified the annual value for 1968 as
Rs. 1,304 held that the premises in suit were not excepted premises within the
meaning of Regulation 3 of the schedule to the Rent Act.

Commenting on the above finding of the District Judge the Court of Appeal
stated: The trial Judge came to his finding without ensuring that all extracts
from the Assessment Register from the year of first assessment were produced.
He also did not ascertain as to which was the local authority in charge of
such assessment . . . After all when a Judge has to come to a conclusion based
on the assessments made by the local authorities with regard to any premises
in suit, the court must ensure the filing of all relevant extracts from the
Assessment Registers. The court should not sit back and say that it would give
its determination only on what is placed before it. The court has a duty to
make sure that inadequate information is not placed before it to come to its
conclusion . . .(emphasis added).

It must be noted that the proceedings before the District Court were
adversarial in character. The Court of Appeal was in error when it

**231**

placed a burden on the District Court to make sure that inadequate information
is not placed before it. ... As a general proposition, it is no part of a
Judge's duty in a civil action to fill in the deficiencies in a case of one of
the disputants by calling evidence on his own. per Nihill, J. in Rewata Thero
v. Horatala(2) Sections 150, 151 and 163 of the Civil Procedure Code indicate
that the burden is on each party to lead such evidence as is necessary to
establish his case or his defence, having regard to the issues upon which the
case proceeds to trial.

In the present case, the burden was clearly on the defendant to establish that
his possession of the premises was lawful. For this purpose the defendant
relied largely on V1. The Court of Appeal correctly held that V1 was
inadequate to establish the case for the defendant. The necessary consequence,
is that the defence set up at the trial has failed. The plaintiff having
discharged the burden that lay upon her, was entitled to judgment. In this
view of the matter, the Court of Appeal was in error in making an order for a
trial de novo with all the attendant delay and expense. Already 10 years have
passed since the institution of the action and, what is more, the defendant
has failed to pay rent to the plaintiff since September, 1985.

Finally, I wish to refer to section 134 of the Civil Procedure Code and
section 165 of the Evidence Ordinance. Mr. F. C. Perera for the defendant-
respondent relied on section 134 of the Civil Procedure Code in support of the
view taken by the Court of Appeal. Section 134 of the Civil Procedure Code no
doubt confers on the District Court the power of its own motion to summon any
person as a witness to give evidence or to produce any document in his
possession. Section 165 of the Evidence Ordinance confers inter alia the power
on the Judge to order the production of any document or thing. These are
enabling provisions intended to be cautiously and sparingly used in the
interests of justice. Neither section 134 of the Civil Procedure Code nor
section 165 of the Evidence Ordinance was meant to fill in the gaps in the
presentation of its case by a party to the action. While these provisions
confer a power upon the court, they do not place a burden upon the court; they
do not detract from the adversarial nature of the proceedings before the
court.

232

For these reasons, I vary the judgment of the Court of Appeal by deleting that
part of the judgment ordering a trial de novo and I direct the District Court
to enter judgment for the plaintiff as prayed for in the plaint. The defendant
must pay the plaintiff a sum of Rs. 2,500 as costs of appeal.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

Judgment of the Court of Appeal varied.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/18.html_  

