##  Eassuwaran And Others v. Bank Of Ceylon - SLR - 365, Vol 1 of 2006 [2005]
LKSC 18; (2006) 1 Sri LR 365 (6 October 2005)

**365**

**  EASSUWARAN AND OTHERS  
  
VS  
  
BANK OF CEYLON**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ  
TILAKAWARDENA, J AND  
RAJA FERNANDO, J  
SC APPEAL NO. 25/2004  
CA (LA) NO. 146/2003  
D.C. COLOMBO CASE NO. 917/DR  
17TH JANUARY, 2005

_Debt Recovery - Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, No.2 of
1990Jurisdicion of the District Court and jurisdiction of the Commercial High
Court High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 10 of 1996
Â­Transaction in respect of which the District Court has jurisdiction - Whether
a loan facility may be sued in the District Court or whether only a fixed loan
can be sued in the District Court._

Plaintiff respondent (Bank) gave Eassuwaran Brothers Food (pvt) Ltd. a loan
facility of 100 million rupees, on the guarantee provided by the defendant
appellant (petitioners) and sued the defendants thereon for Rs. 114.1 million
and interest in the District Court under the Debt Recovery (Special
Provisions) Act, No.2 of 1990 ..

The defendants applied under section 6(2)C of the Debt Recovery Act for
unconditional leave to defend. The District Judge ordered them to deposit Rs.
38 million as a pre-condition for filing answer. The defendants then applied
to the Court of Appeal with leave against that order on the basis that the
District Court had no jurisdiction over the claim as it was not in relation to
a fixed term loan but related to a credit or overdraft facility. The
defendants argued that the jurisdiction over that claim was in the Commercial
High Court under the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No.
10 of 1996. The Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal.

**HELD:  
**  
(1) The claim was a debt within the meaning of section 21(2) of the Debt
Recovery (Special Provisions) Act, No.2 of 1992 and such debt was excluded
from the jurisdiction of the High Court of the Provinces (Commercial High
Court) by the First Schedule to the High Court of the Provisions (Special
Provisions) Act, No.1 0 of 1996.

(2) In the circumstances, the District Court had jurisdiction over the claim
of the plaintiff respondent.

**366**

  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_M. A. Sumanthiran with Prasansani Bandaranayake_ for defendants petitioner
(appellants).  
  
_M. K. Muthukumar with Kumara Seneviratne_ for the plaintiff respondent.  


Cur.adv. vult.

October 06, 2005  
**RAJA FERNANDO, J.**

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent Bank (hereinafter referred to as the
Plaintiff Bank) filed action in the District Court of Colombo under the Debt
Recovery (Special Provision) Act No.2 of 1990 to recover a sum of Rs. 114.1
million from the Defendant-Petitioners-Petitioners (hereinafter referred to as
the Defendant-Petitioner).

The Plaintiff-Bank's case was that Eswaran Brothers Food (Pvt.) Ltd. a limited
liability company obtained a loan facility of Rs. 100,000,000 (Hundred
million) from the Plaintiff-Bank on the guarantees provided by the Defendant-
Petitioners and that Eswaran Bros. Food (Pvt.) Ltd., defaulted in the
repayment of the loan facilities granted to them and the sum of Rs.
114,111,103.46 as at 02.09.2001 and a further interest at 21.5% on Rs.
97,172,734 from 03.09.2001 plus B.T.T. and defence levy thereon is due to the
Plaintiff-Bank.

Upon action being instituted together with an affidavit from an authorized
officer of the Plaintiff Bank and the other documents supporting this claim
the Court entered decree nisi which was served on the Defendant Petitioners.

The defendant-petitioners filed papers seeking unconditional leave to appear
and defend the action under Section 6(2)C of the Debt Recovery (Special
Provisions) Act.

The learned Addl. District Judge by his order dated 24.4.2003 ordered the
defendant-petitioners to deposit Rs. 38 million (1/3rd of Rs. 114.1 million
the amount claimed in the plaint) by way of security within 90 days of the
Order to be permitted to file answer.

**367**

Being aggrieved by the said order the defendants-petitioners sought leave to
appeal from the Court of Appeal on the ground that the learned Add District
Judge erred in not addressing his mind to the fact that the subject matter of
the purported action is a series of commercial transactions coming under the
exclusive jurisdiction of the High Court of the Western Province exercising
civil jurisdiction (Commercial High Court) under Act NO.10 of 1996 and that
action in respect of such commercial transactions cannot be instituted under
the Debt Recovery (Special Provision) Act No. 2 of 1990 in the District Court.

The Court of Appeal refused the application for special leave and the
defendant petitioners filed special leave to appeal application No. SC Special
Leave to Appeal No. 62/2004 in this court and obtained special leave from the
court on 25.03.2004 on the following questions.

(1) Was the Court of Appeal wrong in holding that the District Court had
jurisdiction in respect of this matter?

(2) Does the definition of "debf" in terms of the Debt Recovery (Special
Provisions) Act include the transaction which is the subject matter of this
action? -

It is the submission on the Defendant-Petitioners that Debt Recovery (Special
Provision) Act is not applicable to claims based on recovery on credit
facilities or on overdraft facilities and that Debt Recovery (Special
Provision) Act is applicable only to fixed/term loans where the amount due is
clearly ascertainable.

  
The position of the Plaintiff-Bank is that the claim falls well within
provisions of the Debt Recovery (Special Provision) Act and therefore the
District Court has jurisdiction.  
  
 The High Court of the Provisions (Special Provision) Act No.1 0 of 1996 in
Section 2 states:  
  
"Every High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution for a
Province shall, with effect from such date as the Minister may, by Order
published in the Gazette appoint, in respect of such High Court have
**exclusive jurisdiction** and shall have cognizance of and full power to hear
and determine, in the manner provided for by written law, **all actions,
applications and proceedings specified in the First Schedule** to this Act, if
the party or parties defendant to such action resides or reside, or the cause
of action has arisen, or the contract sought to be enforced was made, or in
the case of applications or proceedings under the Companies Act, No. 17 of
1982 the registered office of the Company is situated, within the Province for
which such High Court is established".

**368**

According to the above provision High Court shall have **exclusive
jurisdiction** in respect of all matters specified in the **First Schedule.**

The First Schedule to this Act reads:  
  
"(1) All actions where the cause of action has arisen out of commercial
transactions (including causes of action relating to banking, the export or
import of merchandise, services affreightment, insurance, mercantile agency,
mercantile usage, and the construction of any mercantile document) in which
the debt, damage or demand is for a sum exceeding three million rupees or such
other amount as may be fixed by the Minister from time to time, by
Notification published in the Gazette, **other than actions instituted under
the Debt Recovery (Special Provisions) Act No.2 of 1990. "**

Thus it is clear from the wording of the First Schedule that if the claim in
the plaint is one that comes within a "debt" under the Debt Recovery (Special
Provision) Act NO.2 of 1990 as amended by Act No.9 of 1994 the District Court
will have jurisdiction.

In Section 21 (2) of Act No.9 of 1994, "debt" is defined as **a sum of money**
which is ascertained or capable or being ascertained at the time of the
institution of the action, and **which is in default,** whether the same be
secured or not, or owed by any person or persons, jointly or severally or a
**s principal borrower or guarantor or in any other capacity, and alleged by a
lending institution to have arisen from a transaction in the course of
banking, lending, financial or other allied business activity of that
institution,** but does not include a sum of money owed under a promise or
agreement which is not in writing ;'

The matter to be ascertained in this appeal is : Does the sum claimed in the
plaint come within the definition of a debt as stated in the Debt Recovery'
(Special Provision) Act?

The Plaintiff Bank is a Lending Institution in terms of Section 30(a) of the
Debt Recovery (Special Provision) Act (vide P1 attached to the Plaint).

The Defendant-Petitioners are guarantors for the loan facility granted to
Eassuwaran Brothers (Pvt.) Ltd. by the Plaintiff-Bank (vide P4 attached to the
plaint).

In paragraphs 79 and 81 of the plaint of the Plaintiff-Bank the sum claimed
has been set out and the details of the computation is also specified.

This sum is alleged by the Plaintiff-Bank as having arisen from a transaction
in the course of Banking, lending, financial or other allied business
activity.

**369**

The original loan application, the Guarantee Bond together with the specific
requests by the Principal borrower for sub loans under the above loan
agreement have been produced together with the Plaint marked P4 to P 72(a).

 On the material before Court there was sufficient evidence to show that the
transactions which were referred to in the Plaint of the Plaintiff-Bank fell
well within the definition of "debt" in terms of the Debt Recovery (Special
Provisions) Act NO.2 of 1990 as amended by Act No.9 of 1994 and that the
Defendant-Petitioners are the guarantors of the loan.

In the circumstances it is clear that the District Court had the jurisdiction
to hear and determine this matter under the Debt Recovery (Special Provision)
Act No.2 of 1990 as amended by Act No.9 of 1994.

The appeal of the Defendant-Petitioner-Petitioner is accordingly dismissed
with costs.

**S. N. SILVA, C. J.** \- I agree.  
  
**TILAKAWARDANE, J.** -I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/18.html_  

