##  Upali Management Services Ltd. v. Ponnampalam - SLR - 331, Vol 1 of 2004
[2004] LKSC 19; (2004) 1 Sri LR 331 (29 January 2004)

**331**

**UPALI MANAGEMENT SERVICES LTD.  
v  
PONNAMPALAM**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
EDUSSURIYA, J.AND  
JAYASINGHE, J.  
SC APPEAL No. 63/2002  
HIGH COURT No. HCA LT 51/2000  
LT CASE No./ADDI/815/96  
MAY 9, JULY 29 AND SEPTEMBER 12, 2003  
  
_Industrial Dispute - Constructive termination or voluntary resignation -
Perverse order for payment of compensation - Duty of Labour Tribunal to make
an equi­table order._  
  
The respondent (the workman) was employed by the appellant (the employ­er) for
31 years. In 1972 he had accepted in writing (Rl) that his employment was on
the basis that the age of retirement was 55 years. On 11.8.1995 he was
informed that he would reach the age of retirement on 26.10.1995. He was
offered gratuity for 31 years treating that his employment was unbroken though
he had resigned in 1988\. He was offered Rs. 978.520 for 31 years after
deduct­ing a loan of Rs. 290.000/= paid to him in 1984. The workman showed
surprise on his retirement and tendered a letter of resignation on 22.08.1995
to be effec­tive from 31.8.1995 as he was entitled to leave until 26.10.1995.  
  
Thereafter the workman complained to the Labour Tribunal that he was
com­pelled to resign and that his services were in fact wrongfully terminated.  
  
Notwithstanding RI (his consent in writing that he would retire at 55) and his
letter of resignation, the Labour Tribunal held that the termination of the
work­man's services was unlawful and forced and sought to give him
compensation and gratuity etc., up to the year 2000 on the basis the he was
entitled to relief until October 2000 viz., up to the age of 60 years. The
amount ordered by the Tribunal was Rs. 6.085.378/=.  
  
The High Court upheld the order of the Tribunal disallowing only the petrol
allowance and entertainment allowance. The High Court reduced the
compensa­tion to Rs. 4,243,378.00.

**332**

**Held:  
**  
(1) In terms of section 31 B(4) of the Industrial Dispute Act ('The Act") the
Labour Tribunal had the power to grant equitable relief against harsh terms
imposed by the employer and that the Labour Tribunal had the power to make
just and equitable orders. It does not have 'the freedom of the wild ass"  
  
(2) The order of the Tribunal regarding compensation was perverse.  
  
(3) There was no constructive termination of the workman's services by the
employer.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
  
**1\. _Walker Sons and Company Ltd v Fry_ \- (1996) 68 NLR 73  
  
2\. _National Union of Workers v Scottish Ceylon Tea Comp. Ltd_ , - (1975) 78
NLR 133  
  
3\. _Brook Bond Ceylon Ltd v Tea, Rubber, Coconut and General Produce Workers'
Union_ \- (1975) 77 NLR 6  
  
4\. _Jayasuriya v Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation_ \- (1995) 2 SRI LR
379  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court  
  
_Gamini Marapana, P.C._ with _Nandapala Wickramasooriya_ and _Naveen Marapana_
for appellant.  
  
_R.K.S. Suresh Chandra_ with _V.Wimalarajah_ for respondent.

_Cur.adv. vult_

JANUARY 29, 2004  
  
**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the High Court of the Western Province
dated 08.05.2002. By that judgment the findings of the learned President of
the Labour Tribunal, Colombo, that there was an unjustifiable termination of
the employment of the applicant-respondent-respondent (hereinafter referred to
as the respondent) was affirmed. The respondent-appellant-appellant
(hereinafter referred to as the appellant) appealed and this Court granted
special leave to appeal.  
  
The only question that has to be considered is, whether the respondent
voluntarily resigned from the appellant company or

**333**

whether his services were constructively terminated by the appellant. The
facts in this appeal, albeit brief, are as follows:  
  
The respondent made an application to the Labour Tribunal on 30.01.1996
alleging constructive termination of employment and seeking inter alia,
adequate compensation up to his 60th year for loss of his career in lieu of
reinstatement. The appellant while denying any termination of employment,
constructive or otherwise stated that,  
  
(a) the respondent had accepted that he would have to retire at the age of 55
which fell on 26.10.1995;  
  
(b) by letter dated 22.08.1995, the respondent tendered his resignation with
effect from 31.08.1995;  
  
(c) the appellant by letter dated 22.08.1995 accepted such resignation with
effect from 31.08.1995; and  
  
(d) the respondent on 22.08.1995 accepted a net sum of Rs. 858,845/- after
deductions from the appellant Company.  
  
After the inquiry learned President of the Labour Tribunal granted the relief
prayed for by the respondent stating that there is no retire­ment rule in the
appellant Company and that the said Company was in error when it asked the
respondent to leave employment on reach­ing his 55th year. The Labour Tribunal
also granted the respondent a sum of Rupees Six Million Eighty Five Thousand
and Three Hundred Seventy Eight (Rs.6,085,378) as just and equitable relief.
On appeal, learned Judge of the High Court while affirming the order of the
Labour Tribunal set aside the award of Rs.6,085,378/- and made order directing
the appellant to pay the respondent a sum of Rs. 4,243,378/- as compensation.  
  
The main contention of the appellant was that, both the Labour Tribunal and
the High Court had failed to consider the legal effect of document marked R1
dated 31.03.1972 issued by the appellant to the respondent. Learned
President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that in the light of the said
letter, it is abundantly clear that there was no such termination of service
of the respondent by the appellant, but the appellant on his own volition
resigned from his position.  
  
The respondent had commenced his employment with the appel­lant Company as a
clerk on 01.04.1964. At the time of his departure

**334**

from the said Company he was holding the position of a Director attached to
Upali Management Services Ltd. and Upali Confectionary Products Ltd., being
appointed to such positions on 01.05.1990 and 12.01.1993, respectively. The
respondent contended that on 11.08.1995(A2) he received a memo from the Group
Finance Director of the appellant Company which came to him 'as a bolt from
the blues' as that was the first time he was told that there was an age limit
for retirement.  
  
However, it appears that the appellant had issued the letter marked R1 in
March 1972 to the respondent. The contents of the letter  refers to the
existing contract of employment between the appel­lant Company and the
respondent and states that, "Your placement on an improved scale of salary and
the salary increment now granted do not alter the existing contract of
employ­ment between you and the Company including the retirement rule
applicable to all employees in the Company that they retire from ser­vice on
completion of 55 years of age.  
  
The Company however permits retirement at the request of an employee after
completion of 10 years continuous service. Likewise the Company reserves the
right to exercise the option to retire employees if such necessity does
arise."  
  
When this letter was sent in March/April 1972, it was necessary for the
recipient to acknowledge the receipt of it and to accept the pro­nounced
terms. In fact the respondent has signed in acknowledgment of the receipt of
this letter and even had stated thereon that 1 accept same'. Therefore, the
respondent cannot be heard to say that he was not aware of the applicable
rules for the employees of the appellant Company as the aforementioned letter
had very clearly stated that they have to retire from service on completion of
55 years of age.  
  
It is not disputed that the respondent had reached the age of retire­ment on
26.10.1995.  
  
It appears that the Group Finance Director of the appellant Company had a
discussion with the respondent on the retirement of the latter in or around
August 1995. This is confirmed by the letter, dated 11.08.1995 where the Group
Finance Director in his memorandum to the respondent (A2) had stated that,

**335**

"I refer to the discussion I had with you and write to confirm that you will
be reaching the date of normal retirement on 26th October 1995.  
  
As per the Group Chairman's memo to you of 20th October 1993, your service is
considered unbroken despite the fact that you resigned in 1988 and was paid
your retiring gratuity amounting to Rs. 290,000/. On this basis the current
gross retirement gratuity entitlement is as follows:

31 months and Rs. 40,920  | - | Rs. 1,268,520.00 90  
---|---|---  
less: Advance paid in 1984  | - | Rs. 290,000.00  
Balance due  | - | Rs. 978,520.00  
  
Please note that the above would be subject to the normal tax retention.  
  
Since you are entitled to 42 days leave, this would have to be utilized prior
to 26th October and the latest date on which you could pro­ceed on leave would
be 26th August 1995..."  
  
The respondent had shown complete surprise in response to the aforementioned
letter and tendered his letter of resignation on 22.08.1995, to be effective
from 31.08.1995 as he had unutilized leave covering the period up to 26th
October 1995 (A3 and A6). This was accepted by the appellant Company (A7).  
  
In his application to the Labour Tribunal, the respondent had how­ever made no
mention of the fact that he had decided to resign from his position rather
than retiring from the appellant Company. The respondent at the Labour
Tribunal has categorically stated that his services has been constructively
terminated by the appellant, as he was compelled to resign which fact has been
accepted by the Labour Tribunal.  
  
However, it is abundantly clear that the respondent was a Director of the
Company Who had a total amount of 31 years of service. Would it be possible
for a person of such stature and standing in the appel­lant Company to be
compelled to tender his resignation? If for a moment, it is to be considered
that a Group Director had compelled the respondent to tender his resignation,
what are the steps he should have taken as a prudent man? There is no evidence
to indicate that

**336**

he had taken any steps to lodge a complaint with the Chairman or with the
Board of Directors of the appellant Company. The only step he took was to make
an application to the Labour Tribunal 5 months after his resignation
indicating that this too was made as an afterthought.  
  
The respondent had admitted not only that he had received the document marked
R1, but also that he had signed the acknowledg­ment slip. On a consideration
of the correspondence between the respondent and the appellant company it
appears that the respondent did not desire to wait until 26.10.1995 so that he
could retire from the Company, but wished to resign with effect from
31.08.1995(A6).  
  
The Labour Tribunal has not taken notice of the fact, which was abundantly
clear that, the respondent had signed the document marked R1, accepting the
terms and conditions of R1 which included the age of retirement to be 55 years
of age. Ignoring this vital piece of evidence, President of the Labour
Tribunal had come to the conclu­sion that,  
  
"On an overall analysis of the evidence, I am constrained to think that the
applicant's employment came to an end, not by a voluntary act of his."  
  
It is also of considerable importance to note that the manner in which the
Labour Tribunal had thought it fit to grant compensation to the respondent.  
  
As stated in his evidence, the respondent had asked for 2 months salary for
each year of service as gratuity and compensation up to his 60th year.  
  
According to the Resolution passed by the Board of Directors on 05.06.1986,'
only the Directors having continuous service for over ten years was to be paid
two months gross salary for each year of ser­vice. The respondent admittedly
had been a Director of the appellant Company only for about 5 years. Further,
learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that, the Company
Directors are appoint­ed annually by the shareholders, and even assuming that
the respon­dent was allowed to continue in service up to his 60th year, there
was no guarantee that the shareholders would have re-elected him to hold
office as a Director until 60 years of age.

**337**

Irrespective of all these considerations, the Labour Tribunal had sought to
award compensation on the following basis.  
  
(i) Compensation for 5 years up to 60 years reckoning 10% increment. His
salary according to A9 was Rs.40,920/-.  
  
From October 1995 to October 1996 at the rate of Rs. 40,920/- x 12 - Rs.
491,040.00  
From October 1996 to October 1997 at the rate of Rs. 45,012/- x12 -  Rs.
540,144.00  
From October 1997 to October 1998 at the  rate of Rs.49,513/-x12 -   Rs.
594,156.00  
From October 1998 to October 1999 at the  rate of Rs.54.464/-x12 -   Rs.
653,568.00  
From October 1999 to October 2000 at the  rate of Rs. 59,910/- x 12 - _Rs.
718.920.00_  
Total compensation -
Rs.2,997,828.00 _  
_
============  
  _  
_ (ii) Gratuity at the rate of 2 months salary for each year of service  
  
      (a) He was paid at the rate of one month's salary for each year of service for 31 years (31 months).  
  
     (b) Gratuity at the rate of 2 months salary for each year of service 170 for the 5 year denied service at the last salary in reaching 60 years (10 months).  
  
                  Total gratuity payment              -      (a) + (b)  
                                                                -      (31 + 10) x Rs. 59,910.00  
                                                                -      41xRs.59.910.00  
                                                                -       Rs. 2,456,310.00  
  
(iii) Petrol allowance for 5 years (60 months)  
  
                Total petrol expenses                 -      Rs. 12,000x60    
                                                                -      Rs. 720,000.00  
  
(iv) Entertainment allowance for 5 years (60 months)  
  
Total entertainment expenses                      -       Rs. 18,700 x 60  
                                                                 -       Rs. 1,122,000.00   
                  Grand total                               -       Rs. 2,997,828.00   
                                                                         Rs. 2,456,310.00  
                                                                         Rs.    720,000.00   
                                                                         Rs. 1,122,000.00  
                                                                      ___________________  
  
                                                                        Rs. 7,296,138.00  
                                                                        ===============

**338**

 less -  
  
     (1) payment already received at the time of cessation of employment         -     Rs. 978,520.00   
  
     (2) ex-gratia payment already received by the applicant                              -  _    Rs. 232,240.00_  
  
Total of (1)+(2)
-     Rs. 1,210,760.00  
                                                                                                                       =============    
Total balance due                         \- Rs. 7,296,138.00 - Rs.
1,210,760.00  
  
                                                                                     Rs. 6,085,378.00  
Although the Labour Tribunal had granted the aforementioned amounts exceeding
Rupees Six Million as compensation, no reasons or basis had been adduced for
the said decision.  
  
Learned Judge of the High Court had only decided to reduce the payment of
petrol allowance and the entertainment allowance and  ordered that a sum of
Rs. 4,243,378.00 be paid as compensation.  
  
While the learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that the
manner in which the Labour Tribunal has sought to award compensation is
totally perverse, learned Counsel for the respondent contended that in terms
of section 31(B)(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act, the Labour Tribunal has
wide powers to grant relief notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the
contract of employment. He relied on the decision in Walker Sons & Co. Ltd. v
Fry(1) and submitted that Sansoni, CJ., had interpreted section 31(B)(4) to
empower the Labour Tribunal to give relief against any harsh terms the
employer may have  imposed in the contract. He also cited the decision in
National Union of Workers v Scottish Ceylon Tea Co. Ltd (2) where it was held
that the power conferred on Labour Tribunals by section 31 (B)(4) enabled a
Tribunal to disregard contractual terms relating to the assessment of gratuity
where it is found legally due under a contract or under a settled scheme.  
  
In terms of the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, where section 31
(C) provides the Tribunal to make "such order as may appear to the Tribunal to
be just and equitable' admittedly a Labour Tribunal has very wide powers.
However it is to be noted that the Tribunal does  not possess an unfettered
authority. As observed by H. N. G. Fernando, J. (as he then was) in Walker
Sons & Co. Ltd. v Fry (Supra), a Labour Tribunal does not have the "freedom of
the wild ass'.

**339**

Although there is no doubt that the Labour Tribunal has wide powers it cannot
be taken that such powers are beyond any kind of control. As has been pointed
out in Brook Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v Tea, Rubber, Coconut and General Produce
Workers' Union (3) 'considerations of justice and equity must necessarily
control and limit the powers of Labour Tribunals.'  
  
Discussing the concept of what is termed as 'perverse' Amerasinghe, J. in
Jayasuriya v Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation (4) stated that,  
  
"Perverse' is an unfortunate term, for one may suppose obstinacy in what is
wrong, and one thinks of Milton and how Satan in the. Serpent had corrupted
Eve, and of diversions to improper use and even of subversion and ruinously of
wickedness. Yet, in my view in the context of the principle that the Court of
Appeal will not interfere with a decision of a Labour Tribunal unless it is
'perverse', it means no more than that the Court may intervene if it is of the
view that, having regard to the weight of evidence in relation to the matters
in issue, the Tribunal has turned away arbitrarily or capriciously from what
is true and right and fair in dealing even handedly with the rights and
interests of the workman, employer and in certain circumstances, the public.
The Tribunal must make an order in equity and good conscience, acting
judicially, based on legal evidence rather than on beliefs that are fanciful
or irrationally imagined notions or whims. Due account must be taken of the
evidence in relation to the issues in the matter before the Tribunal.
Otherwise, the order of the Tribunal must be set aside as being perverse
(emphasis added)."  
  
On the respondent's own admission, at the time he resigned, he was paid a sum
of Rs.2,189,7607- which included a sum of Rs.1,268,5207- as gratuity and a sum
of Rs. 232,2407- as an exgratia payment. He was permitted to purchase a car
worth of Rs. 500,0007-for Rs.200,0007- which gave him a further monetary
benefit of Rs. 300,0007-. From the compensation computed by the Labour
Tribunal, only a sum of Rs.1,210,7207- has been taken into consideration,
whereas the said amount should be Rs. 2,189,7607-.  
  
On a consideration of the totality of the material placed before this Court, I
am of the view that there was no constructive termination of services of the
respondent by the appellant Company. I am also of the

**340**

view that the order of the Labour Tribunal regarding the payment of
compensation is perverse.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons this appeal is allowed. The order of the Labour
Tribunal dated 12.07.2000 and the judgment of the High Court dated 08.05.2002
are accordingly set aside. The appellant is entitled to costs in appeal in a
sum of Rs.5000/- (Rupees Five Thousand).  
**  
EDUSSURIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**JAYASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/19.html_  

