##  Mohottige and Others v. Gunatilleke and Others - SLR - 246, Vol 2 of 1992
[1992] LKSC 19; (1992) 2 Sri LR 246 (13 November 1992)

246

**MOHOTTIGE AND OTHERS** **  
v.** **  
GUNATILLEKE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
FERNANDO, J. AND  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATIONS  
NOS. 23/92, 24/92 AND 25/92.

_     Fundamental Rights - Freedom of Speech and Expression - Use of
Loudspeaker - Right to Criticise Government - Article 14(1) (a) of the
Constitution - Sections 56 and 80 of the Police Ordinance._

The office-bearers of the newly formed Homagama Branch of the Democratic
People's Organization, namely Dharmadasa Mohottige (Secretary) and D. L. W.

247

Abeygunaratne (President) sought permission from the 1st respondent
Gunatilleke who was the officer-in-charge of the Kahatuduwa Police Station to
use a loudspeaker at a meeting (seminar) to be held on 04.01.1992. A permit
was issued by the 2nd respondent (Assistant Superintendent of Police M. S.
Ranasinghe) allowing the use of a loudspeaker subject to a condition: that the
speakers should refrain from criticising the Government, any Organization or
any individual. The 1st respondent imposed the further condition that speakers
be restricted only to those he named in the permit, namely Lalith
Athulathmudali, M. D. Premachandra and Premaratne Gunasekera. A further
endorsement on this permit announced that the speeches would be tape-recorded.

**Held:**

(1) Section 56 of the Police Ordinance dealt with the duty of police officers
to use their best endeavours and ability to prevent all crisis, offences and
public nuisances, to preserve the peace and to collect and communicate
intelligence affecting the public peace. Section 80 of the Police Ordinance
empowers a Police Officer of rank not below Assistant Superintendent of Police
to authorise the use of a loudspeaker in a public place. The imposition of
conditions for such use is permissible. The imposition of conditions whereby
the permit is limited to named speakers violates the law. The demand to know
the names of speakers beforehand and naming them in the permit as the persons
authorised to use the loudspeaker may constitute a violation of the right to
free speech guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution of persons who
may otherwise have wished to speak.

D. Mohottige wished to speak but his name was not in the list of speakers. So
he regarded himself as not permitted to use the loudspeaker and so he
refrained from speaking. This amounted to an infringement of Mohottige's
fundamental right to free speech and expression constituting a violation of
Article 14(1) (a).

Gunasekera did use the loudspeaker to make a speech. Premachandra was not
named in the permit because his correct name had inadvertently not been
provided to the police. There was therefore no violation of their rights of
free expression.

(2) On the endorsement prohibiting criticism of the Government -

Per Bandaranayake, J : "Freedom of speech and expression includes the right to
fairly and within reasonable limits criticise a Government. This has been
widely recognised in civilized jurisdictions as a natural right inherent in
the status of a

248

free citizen. The people have a right to be informed of public issues through
sources outside and independent of the Government. This freedom however can be
restrained where its exercise is intended to or has a tendency to undermine
the security of the state or public order, or incite feelings of disaffection
or illwill against the State or bring the Government into hatred or ridicule
etc".

Where the effect of the conditions endorsed in the permit is in the nature of
a blanket prohibition against saying anything against the Government or its
activities, it tends to nullify democratic Government as is understood in this
country. Such a condition would necessarily evoke feelings of fear and
confusion in the public mind and of those wishing to participate at the
seminar though upon the evidence speakers did defy the ban.

The speakers were in fact critical of the Government and that the Police did
not stop them or interfere with the proceedings is at best an entreaty made in
mitigation of the mischief done. The endorsement made by the 2nd respondent
has restrained the 1st petitioner D. Mohottige unlawfully resulting in an
infringement of his fundamental right to free speech.

Application for relief for the infringement of the fundamental right of
freedom of speech and expression.

_Lalith Athulathmudali, P.C., with Ranian Gooneratne, Dr. Ranjit Fernando,
Mahendra Amerasekera, Ranjith Moraweke, T. M. S. Nanayakkara, Nalin
Dissanayake, Kalinga Indatissa, D. N. Pathmaperuma, instructed by Madduma
Banda Hondakumbura for the Petitioners.  
_  
_Upawansa Yapa, Deputy Solicitor General with D. Weerasuriya State Counsel,
instructed by Sujatha Peiris, Asst. State Attorney for the Respondents._

_Cur. adv. volt._

13th November, 1992.  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The above applications complaining of violation of Fundamental Rights were
taken up together with consent of parties as they relate to the same set of
facts and incidents and give rise to similar claims for relief. According to
the Petitioners after expulsion of Messrs. Lalith Athulathmudali former member
of Parliament and Minister and others from the United National Party in 1991
but before formal recognition of the Democratic United National Front as a
Political party by the

249

Commissioner of Elections, certain voluntary Organisations in support of the
new party were formed under the name ."Democratic People's Organisation". A
branch office was formed in Homagama. The Petitioner Dharmadasa Mohottige was
appointed the Secretary of this branch whilst D. L. W. Abeygunaratne was
appointed President of this branch, Messrs. Athulathmudali and Premaratne
Gunasekera were "Advisors" to the organisation.

The said branch organisation at Homagama decided to conduct a Seminar with
public participation at Wetara, Piliyandala on 04.01.92 under the topic
"Present Political Situation". By letter dated 13.12.91 - annexure P2 - the
organisers Messrs. Abeygunaratne and Mohottige sought permission from the
officer-in-charge, Kahatuduwa police, the 1st Respondent, to use a loudspeaker
at the meeting (seminar) to be held on 04.01.92. A handbill distributed by the
organisation for publicity purposes is annexure P1. In his affidavit P4 D. L.
W. Abeygunaratne has stated that on 24.12.91. the 1st respondent telephoned
him and wanted him to come to the police station regarding the issue of a
loudspeaker permit. At the police Station 1st respondent asked for the names
of the speakers at the meeting without which information he said he was not
ready to recommend the issue of a permit. Therefore it was that he forwarded
letter 1R2 dated 25.12.91 giving the names of persons who would speak at the
meeting, to wit : (1) Lalith Athulathmudali (2) M. D. Premachandra and (3)
Premaratne Gunasekera. A permit dated 02.01.92 was issued by the 2nd
respondent Assistant Superintendent of Police for the use of a loudspeaker; it
contained the following handwritten conditions which appeared in the body of
the permit signed by the 2nd respondent, to

wit : Â - **Sinhala Language**

**250**

Which translates as: "that the speakers should refrain from criticising the
Government, any organisation or any individual. On the reverse of permit P3
were printed conditions (a) to (h) in Sinhala, Tamil and English. Printed
condition (f) was as follows : "The Officer-in-charge of the police station of
the area has every right to impose further conditions considered necessary to
preserve the public peace". Further, a handwritten endorsement imposed by the
1st respondent also appeared on the reverse of the permit authorising three
named persons to speak, to

wit : Â -Sinhala language

A further endorsement made by the 1st respondent stated that the speeches made
at the meeting will be tape-recorded.

Petitioner D. Mohottige complains that although he expected to address the
public meeting held on 04.01.92 he did not speak as his name was not among the
speakers named in the endorsement made by the 1st respondent. This endorsement
effectively prevented his participation at the meeting. Consequently his right
of free speech and expression guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) of the
Constitution has been violated.

Petitioner G. M. Premachandra's name does not appear among the names of
authorised speakers. But the name "M. D. Premachandra" has been included in
the list. Petitioner Premachandra has stated in his affidavit that there is no
person named "M. D. Premachandra. It is observed that letter 1R2 bears the
initials "M" and "D" as against the name 'Premachandra'. The insertion of
wrong initials in the permit is therefore not the fault of the police. Counsel
confined his submission to saying that the fact of limiting the number of
speakers is itself violative of the right of free speech.

Although petitioner G. D. P. Gunasekera had spoken at the meeting he protests
he was unable to exercise his right of free speech and expression fully, due
he says to the said illegal restriction imposed by the 2nd respondent in the
body of permit P3.

By letter dated 13.1.92 Mr. Athulathmudali complained to the Inspector General
of Police that restrictions imposed as contained in the permit were in direct
violation of the freedom of speech and expression embodied in Article 14 of
the Constitution. He requested that the police be instructed to desist from
imposing such conditions which affect fundamental rights of citizens.

251

By letter dated 14.1.92 Ranjani Morawaka, Attorney-at-law has written to the
2nd respondent informing that the conditions set down in P3 violated the
fundamental rights of her clients.

By letter dated 27.1.92 the IGP has replied informing that disciplinary action
was being taken against the 2nd respondent.

The 2nd respondent by his affidavit dated 11.3.92 has stated that he was aware
that permission had been sought to use a loudspeaker in application similar to
P2 submitted to the 1st respondent and that the 1st respondent had submitted
his report and recommendation 1R3. Being satisfied with the preliminary police
investigations done in this regard the 2nd respondent granted permission to
use a loudspeaker. The permit was issued in terms of Section 80 of the Police
Ordinance which regulated the use of instruments producing sound. (He admits
imposing the condition prohibiting criticism of the Government, any
organisation or any individual but states that the words "" should have
appeared after the words "" in P3 and have been inadvertently omitted. If
those had been included the condition would have read that the speakers should
refrain from criticising the Government, any organisation or any individual in
an unlawful manner which condition would have been proper and lawful).

The 1st respondent by his affidavit of 11.3.92 takes a different position. He
states that no restrictions were placed on the petitioners right of free
speech. Persons whose names were included in the permit used the loudspeaker
at the meeting and others whose names were not included in the permit also
spoke. Messrs Athulathmudali, Gunasekera and Abeygunaratne who all spoke,
criticised the Government. The Inspector's notes of the meeting are produced 1
R5. Hence, there was no infringement in fact of the rights of the petitioners.

Counsel for the petitioners submitted that,

(1) the imposition of the condition against criticism of the Government etc:
on the permit was per se a restriction placed on the freedom of speech and
expression and consequently an infringement of Art: 14 (1) (a).

252

(2) that upon the evidence, the 1st respondent had refused to consider issuing
a permit if the names of speakers were not given.

(The 1st respondent has not denied this averment.) It was submitted that this
requirement of insisting on knowing who was to speak placed a restriction on
the freedom of speech as at that time (ie) 24.12.91, it was not possible to
say with any certainty the persons, who would speak. Once you are committed to
certain persons, other would-be speakers are deprived of the opportunity to
address a public meeting.

(3) The Democratic Peoples Organisation which was sponsoring the seminar had
put up banners tied to telephone posts across the roads announcing the
meeting. Those banners also carried slogans. The 1st respondent had taken down
the banners at 5.30 A.M. that day - vide his notes - 1 R4. When the
petitioners sent him a letter of demand he returned the banners. It was
submitted, the 1st respondent's conduct was indicative of his desire to
obstruct the meeting and prevent the organisers from having a successful
meeting.

On behalf of the respondents it was argued that there was in fact no violation
or an attempt at violation of a fundamental right. The respondents' position
was that upon an application by the President of the branch association, for
the use of a loudspeaker at a public meeting by three named speakers, the 1st
respondent after due enquiry recommended the issue of a permit to the 2nd
respondent who directed the issue of a permit acting under section 80 of the
Police Ordinance. It was further submitted, endorsements on a permit do not
amount to violation of a right. Some more meaningful action taken must be
evident restricting freedom of speech or equality etc. No positive action was
taken in any way to interfere with speeches made although the police were
present throughout the proceedings. The speakers did in fact criticise the
Government - vide police notes 1R5. Furthermore Lakshman Abeygunaratne who was
not listed as a speaker in P3 made an introductory speech as the person
convening the meeting. The conditions in the permit were in any case not
implemented. Thus there had been no restraint and as the petitioners had
exercised their rights there had in fact been no violation of their
fundamental rights.

253

The 1st respondent has not by his affidavit specifically denied that he
telephoned Abeygunaratne and got him down to the police station and demanded
to know the names of speakers without which he was not going to recommend the
issue of a permit to use a loudspeaker. But the facts are that Abeygunaratne
had made two communications to the 1st respondent - the first by letter P2
dated 18.12.91, seeking permission to use a loudspeaker and by letter 1R2
dated 25.12.91. The assertions in the said affidavit P4 taken together with
the fact that it was only in the second letter that names of speakers were
mentioned and which letter contained nothing else and the nondenial that the
1st respondent made such a demand impels me to the belief that what
Abeygunaratne says is true and that the 1st respondent has not made a full and
frank disclosure of events that led to names of speakers being submitted to
the police. I accordingly hold that the 1st respondent demanded this
information before he took any further steps regarding the application for a
permit to use a loudspeaker, and that after the issue of the permit he
inserted the names of speakers in the permit.

Section 56 of the Police Ordinance Cap. 65 deals with duties of police
officers. It would be his duty to use his best endeavours and ability to
prevent all crimes, offences and public nuisances to preserve the peace and to
collect and communicate intelligence affecting the public peace. Section 80 of
the Ordinance provides for a permit to be issued (by any Officer not below the
rank of an Assistant Superintendent of Police) authorising the use of a
loudspeaker in a public place etc.; it also provides for conditions to be
imposed regarding its use. The reverse of P3 carries printed conditions
(supra). Printed condition (f) permits an officer-in-charge of a police
station to impose any conditions necessary to preserve the public peace. The
meeting was in fact to be held in a public place.

It would appear to me that the said printed condition (f) is nothing more than
a repetition of the powers vested in a police officer in terms of the
substantive law as found in S56 (a), (b) and (e). I accordingly hold that the
1st respondent had a legal right to impose condition (f) aforesaid. However
whether the 1st respondent could have made the endorsements he has made is
another question. There is no challenge to his endorsements that speeches made
will

254

be tape-recorded. But the petitioners challenge his right to list and name
speakers. The petitioners complain that this amounts to the imposition of a
restriction as to who may use the loudspeaker. The 1st respondent seeks to
explain this away by stating it was for the applicants to note that in
accordance with the permission sought, the named persons have been permitted
to use a loudspeaker at the meeting. Here the 1st respondent is persisting in
saying that names were signified only because the applicant indicated that
those persons were to be the speakers. In fact the endorsement is couched in
language suggesting that the police are merely responding to specific request.
I have earlier in this judgment held that was not so but that names were
submitted in response to a specific police request.

The nature of the document on which names appear in this case is also highly
relevant to the question whether a condition was imposed by the insertion of
particular names. The document under review is a permit for the use of a
loudspeaker in that speeches may be broadcast to be heard by all attending the
meeting. When a particular name is inserted in such a permit, then taken in
its ordinary natural sense it means that permission is limited to those
persons named. And this is being done with an eye on the preservation of
public order. In my view this amounts to nothing more or less than the
imposition of a condition as to the use of a loudspeaker. In the instant case
it has been done by an Inspector of Police required by law to safeguard the
public peace and with an awareness of his powers and duties both under Section
56 aforesaid and the printed conditions on the permit which I presume he knew
both as a policeman and by his conduct enumerated above. In the circumstances
I hold that the endorsement made by the 1st respondent on the reverse of P3
permitting three named speakers the use of a loudspeaker was a deliberate
imposition of a condition restricting the speakers at the meeting to those
whose names appeared on P3 and none other. Such a restriction does not have
the sanction of law. Specific names inserted by the police on a permit would
naturally convey the message that those whose names are not included are
excluded from using a loudspeaker. This in my view is an unfair condition
besides being without lawful authority. No convenor of a public meeting can
say weeks in advance all who may

255

speak. Demanding disclosure of names beforehand can have the effect of
silencing people who may otherwise wish to contribute to proceedings by
participating. Both the demand to know the names of speakers and naming them
in a permit may thus constitute a violation of the right to free speech
guaranteed by Article 14 (1) (a) of the Constitution of persons who may
otherwise have wished to speak.

We find that petitioner D. Mohottige says he intended to address the seminar
but regarded himself as not permitted to use the loudspeaker and so he
refrained from speaking. The endorsement made by the 1st respondent thus
assumes an unwarranted intrusion on Mohottige's freedom of speech and
expression. The conduct of the 1st respondent in this regard was obviously.
deliberate and has interfered with Mohottige's fundamental right to free
speech and expression constituting a violation of Article 14 (1) (a)
aforesaid.

As far as the other two petitioners Premachandra and Gunasekera are concerned,
I am unable to hold there has been an infringement of the freedom of speech
and expression by reason of the endorsement made by the 1st respondent on the
reverse of P3. Gunasekera in fact spoke and Premachandra was faulted by a
mistake of the convenors.

I now turn to the endorsement made by the 2nd respondent prohibiting criticism
of the Government. Freedom of speech and expression includes the right to
fairly and within reasonable limits criticise a Government. This has been
widely recognised in civilized jurisdictions as a natural right inherent in
the status of a free citizen. The people have a right to be informed of public
issues through sources outside and independent of the Government. This freedom
however can be restrained where its exercise is intended to or has a tendency
to undermine the security of the state or public order, or. incite feelings of
disaffection or illwill against the State, or bring the Government into hatred
or ridicule etc. But the effect of the condition contained in P3 against
criticism of the Government is in the nature of a blanket prohibition against
saying anything against the Government or its activities. It tends to nullify
democratic Government as is understood in this country. This the 2nd
respondent could not have done. Learned Counsel for the State acknowledges
that the imposition of this condition cannot be supported. The IGP's letter
dated 27.1.92 to Athulathmudali stating that disciplinary action was being
taken against the 2nd respondent in this regard also suggests

256

that the head of the police department acknowledges that the aforesaid
endorsement made by the 2nd respondent was unwarranted and unlawful. To my
mind such a condition would necessarily evoke feelings of fear and confusion
in the public mind and of those wishing to speak at the seminar though upon
the evidence speakers did defy the ban. It is now too late to say that the
endorsement made by the 2nd Respondent was due to carelessness and not
intended as was submitted on his behalf but that all that was intended was to
prevent unlawful criticism. Such could be easier said with hindsight. It is
more probable upon, the evidence that the 2nd respondent was aware of the
import of his endorsement which was deliberately done for some reason which is
not clear. That speakers were in fact critical of the Government and that the
police did not stop them or interfere with the proceedings is at best an
entreaty made in mitigation of the mischief done.

Upon the evidence this endorsement made by the 2nd respondent has restrained
the 1st Petitioner D. Mohottige unlawfully. There has therefore been an
infringement of his fundamental right to free speech; the 2nd petitioner
cannot be heard to complain for reasons already given; the 3rd petitioner has
exercised his rights as evidenced by notes 1R5 which have not been challenged.

There is insufficient evidence placed before the Court of violation of the
equality rights of the petitioners who are therefore not entitled to a
declaration upon such allegation.

As compensation for the infringement of Fundamental Rights guaranteed by
Article 14(1) (a) the State will pay a sum of Rs. 7500% to petitioner
Dharmadasa Mohottige for violation of his freedom of speech consequent to the
unlawful endorsement made by the 1st respondent on P3 and the unlawful
endorsement made by the 2nd respondent also on P3. The State will pay Rs.
2000/- as costs to the 1st petitioner D. Mohottige. No costs in respect of
applications of 2nd and 3rd petitioners.

**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

257

**Cases considered:**

_        1._ _Joseph Perera v. Attorney General. SC. 107-109/86; SC Minutes of
25.5.87.  
_  
_2\. Ratnasara Thero v. Udagampola 1983 1 SLR 461.  
_  
_3\. VIsvalingam v. Liyanage 1984 2 SLR.  
_  
_4\. Austin v. Keele (1971) 402 US 415.  
_  
_5\. Terminello v. Chicago (1949) 337. US 1.  
_  
_6\. Palco v Connecticut (1937) 302. US 319.  
_  
_7\. Francis v Chief of Police (1973) 2 AER 251. (PC).  
_  
_8\. Grisswold v Connecticut (1965) 381. US 479.  
_  
_9\. Thornehill v. State of Alabama 310 US 88.  
_  
_10\. West Virginia State Board v. Barnette (1943) 319 US 624._  
  
_Application allowed._  
  
_Compensation ordered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/19.html_  

