##  Mohamed v. Seneviratne - SLR - 389, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 19; (1989) 2
Sri LR 389 (16 June 1989)

**

389

MOHAMED  
v.  
SENEVIRATNE

**

SUPREME COURT  
RANASINGHE, C.J., JAMEEL, J. AND AMERASINGHE, J.  
S.C. NO. 45/88  
C.A. LA. APPLICATION NO. 14/88  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 4459/RE  
MAY 30, 1989

_

Landlord and tenant _\- _Execution of decree - Stay pending appeal_ \-
_Judicature Act (amended by Act, No. 37 of 1979) S.23_ \- _Civil Procedure
Code (amended by Act, No. 53 of 1980) Section 763(2)_ \- _Substantial loss.

_

The plaintiff obtained judgment and decree for ejectment on the ground of
reasonable requirement of the premises against his tenant the defendant who
however appealed against this decree. The plaintiff however obtained writ of
ejectment pending appeal. The defendant appealed against this order and his
appeal was dismissed. The defendant then sought special leave to appeal from
this order

**

Held:

**

(1) The lodging of an appeal from the judgment of the District Court by an
aggrieved party does not, To so facto, have the effect of staying the
execution of such judgment or decree during the pending of the appeal. The
District Judge, however, has the power to stay the execution of a decree
pending appeal if he 'shall see fit" (Sec. 23 of the Judicature Act), as where
the judgment debtor "satisfies" the District Judge that "substantial loss may
result to the judgment -debtor, unless an order for stay of execution is made
(Sec. 763(2) C.P.C.)

(2) The facts were that the plaintiff occupied premises belonging to her; the
defendant had shifted to the present premises in suit to accommodate the
plaintiffs request, from another premises No 8/2, Ascot Avenue belonging to
the plaintiff; the defendant had offered to go back to the old premises;
plaintiff wanted really to sell the premises in suit; defendant had four
school going children. Eviction in the circumstances would result in
considerable loss and damage to the defendant.

**

Cases referred to:-

**_

(1) Charlotte Perera_ v. _Thambiah_ [1983] 1 Sri LR 352

_  


(2) Saleem _v. _Balakumar_ [19811 2 Sri LR 74.

**

APPEAL** from order Appeal Court

_

P.A.D. Samarasekera, P.C. _with _J. de A. Gunaratne_ and _Parakrama
Agalawatta_ for defendant petitioner-appellant

_

A.K Premadasa. PC. _with Ms. S. _Abeyratno_ for plaintiff-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult

_

**390**

June 16, 1989.

**

RANASINGHE, C.J.,

**

The Plaintiff-Appellant instituted these proceedings, on the 28th of November
1980, for ejectment of her tenant, the Defendant-Appellant, from premises
bearing No. 24 Boteju Road, Thimbirigasyaya, on the ground that the said
premises are reasonably required by her and the members of her family for
their occupation.

The Defendant-Appellant filed answer praying for a dismissal of the Plaintiff-
Respondent's action.

After trial, judgment was entered on 25.7.1986 for the Plaintiff-Respondent.
The Defendant-Appellant appealed from the said judgment and decree to the
Court of Appeal; and the said appeal is still pending before the Court of
Appeal.

Plaintiff-Respondent has, in the meantime, filed this application for the
execution of the decree of the District Court pending such appeal. The
Defendant-Appellant resisted the said application. After inquiry, the District
Court, on 9.2.89, allowed the said application; and directed that writ to
issue as moved for by the Plaintiff-Respondent.

An appeal filed by the Defendant-Appellant, against the said Order, dated
9.2.88, was dismissed by the Court of Appeal on 23.9.88. The Defendant-
Appellant has thereafter obtained special leave to appeal to this Court from
the said Order of the Court of Appeal.

The provisions relating to the execution of a decree of the District Court
pending an appeal are now embodied in Section 23 of the Judicature Act No. 2
of 1978, as amended by Act No. 37 of 1979, and in section 763(2) of the Civil
Procedure Code, as amended by Act No. 53 of 1980.

The lodging of an appeal from a judgment of the District Court by an aggrieved
party does not, ipso facto, have the effect of staying the execution of such
judgment or decree during the pendency of the appeal. The District Judge,
however, has the power to stay the execution of a decree pending appeal if he
"shall see fit" to make an order to that effect (Section 23 of the Judicature
Act), or where the judgment-debtor "satisfies" the District Judge that
"substantial loss may result to the judgment-debtor, unless an order for stay
of execution is made" (Section 763(2) of the Civil Procedure Code).

__

**391**

These provisions have been considered by this Court in the case of _Charlotte
Perera vs. Tambiah (1);_ and by the Court of Appeal in the case of _Saieem vs.
Balakumar (2)._ It is clear that these two provisions are not "linked" and
that an order for stay of execution pending appeal could be made by the
District Court under either of these two sections.

The learned Additional District Judge, who made order refusing the application
for stay of execution of the writ, has done so on the grounds: that no
"substantial loss" has been proved: and that "no substantial question of law"
has been shown to arise.

The Defendant-Appellant has, in the petition of appeal, averred that the
learned trial judge has misdirected himself on the question of the
reasonableness of the Plaintiff-Respondent's requirement of the premises in
suit.

Learned Counsel for the Defendant-Appellant has submitted that, in considering
this all important question, several facts and circumstances which were led in
evidence at the trial, namely: that the Plaintiff-Respondent is at present in
occupation of premises which too belong to her: that the Defendant-Appellant
had at first been a tenant of the Plaintiff-Respondent in respect of premises
bearing No.8/2 Ascot Avenue - which are the premises occupied at present by
the Plaintiff-Respondent and are said to be unfit for occupation any further
by any one - and had, at the request of the Plaintiff-Respondent, handed them
back to the Plaintiff-Respondent and moved into the premises in suit: that the
Defendant-Appellant has offered to go into occupation of the said premises
bearing No. 8/2, Ascot Avenue; that the Defendant-Appellant maintained that
the Plaintiff-Respondent's demand for the premises in suit is really motivated
by her desire to sell the said premises bearing No. 8/2, Ascot Avenue, were
all very material factors to be considered in deciding the question of the
reasonableness of the Plaintiff-Respondent's demand, and that, the learned
trial Judge has misdirected himself on this question.

The learned Additional District Judge has placed an interpretation upon the
document 'D1' the contents of which are strongly relied on by the Defendant-
Appellant to challenge the bona fides of the Plaintiff-Respondent's assertion
that the premises in suit are reasonably required as a residence for herself
and the members of her family.

**392**

The learned Additional District Judge seems also to have been influenced by
the direction given by the trial Judge to the Plaintiff-Respondent to pay a
sum of money equivalent to five years' rent to the Defendant-Appellant, to
enable the Defendant-Appellant to find alternative accommodation.

The ground so urged on behalf of the Defendant-Appellant, though it may not
strictly constitute a "substantial" question of law, is nevertheless a serious
question of law which arises and which must be considered in the determination
of the appeal filed by the Defendant-Appellant.

Furthermore, the learned Additional District Judge has, in his order stated
that "no substantial loss of any sort has been urged by the Defendant" and
that "by substantial loss is not meant the obvious and ordinary discomfort
which any tenant may undergo having to leave the premises which he had
occupied for sometime and having to find alternative accommodation." The
Defendant-Appellant has stated in evidence that he has four school-going
children. Even if the Defendant-Appellant has not proved by express evidence
the nature and the extent of the loss he would suffer as a result of being
ejected from the premises in suit which he had been in occupation of from the
year 1976, and into which, he had, as already stated, voluntarily moved in
order to accommodate the Plaintiff-Respondent, yet, the dispossession of the
Defendant-Appellant, with his school-going children, from the said premises
without the prospect of a roof over their heads, even though it may not be for
a long period of time, must inevitably result in considerable loss and damage
being caused to him.

Having regard to the foregoing, it seems to me that, had the Additional
District Judge considered the matters set out above in their proper
perspective, he would undoubtedly have seen it "fit" to let the status quo
remain until the issues between the parties are finally determined by the
appellate courts.

I, therefore, make order allowing the appeal of the Defendant-Appellant. The
orders made both by the Additional District Judge, dated 9.2.88, and by the
Court of Appeal dated 23.9.88, are set aside. The execution of the decree of
the District Court, which has been appealed from, is directed to be stayed
pending the final determination of the said appeal. Upon the receipt of the
record of this case in the District Court the Defendant-Appellant is directed
to

**393**

enter into the bond which would be considered necessary by the learned
Additional District Judge, in terms of the provisions of the aforesaid Section
23 of the Judicature Act.

The costs of the inquiry before the District Court into the Defendant-
Appellant's application for execution of the decree pending appeal, and also
the costs of the appeal, against the Order of the District Court dated 9.2.89,
to the Court of Appeal and to this Court shall be costs in the cause,

**

JAMEEL, J., **\- I agree.

**

AMERASINGHE, J., -** I agree.

_

_

**_Appeal allowed._** _  
**Execution stayed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/19.html_  

