##  Jayasekera v. Wipulasena and Others - SLR - 237, Vol 2 of 1988 [1988] LKSC
19; (1988) 2 Sri LR 237 (21 July 1988)

**237**

**

JAYASEKERA  
v.  
WIPULASENA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
H. A. G. DE SILVA J, G. P. S. DE SILVA, J. AND JAMEEL, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 157/87  
JUNE 30, 1988

_

Fundamental Rights - Article 12(1) of the Constitution - Unequal treatment
-Bus pass - Validity of bus pass.

_

The petitioner a Police Officer complained he was not allowed to travel on a
bus despite his having a pass P1 while a colleague of his with a similar pass
was allowed to do so. According to the rules "a travel pass (on a bus) is
valid for a calendar year and expires on 31st December of each year. Requests
for extensions should be sent through the employer to the Operations
Controller, Sri Lanka Central Transport Board before 31st December each year".
The bus pass on which petitioner travelled bore no expiry date. Having regard
to the condition stipulated in the above rule, P1 was not a valid pass.
Although the petitioner's colleague was allowed to travel no complaint of
discrimination would be justified. Article 12(1) cannot confer on the
petitioner a right to which he is not entitled in terms of the very contract
upon which he founds his complaint of "unequal treatment". An authority cannot
be required to act illegally in one case because it has acted illegally in
other cases.

**

Cases referred to:

**

1\.  _Setty v Commissioner, Corporation of the City of Bangalore_ AIR 1968
Mysore 251

2\.  _Roberts v. Ratnayake_ (1986) 2 Sri LR 36

**

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.

_

R. K. W. Goonasekera_ with _Anton Fernando_ and _G. D. Piyasiri_ for
petitioner.

_

Jaufer Hassan_ with _Padmini Gunasinghe_ for 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

July 21, 1988 **  
G. P. S. de Silva, J.

**

This is an application under Article 126 of the Constitution complaining of
"unequal treatment" in violation of. Article 12(1). __ The petitioner is a
Police Sergeant attached to the Bribery

**238**

Commissioner's Department. The 1st respondent is a bus conductor attached to
the North Central Transport Board, while the 2nd and 3rd respondents are the
Transport Manager and the Chairman, respectively, of the Colombo North
Regional Transport Board. According to the petitioner, he was issued with a
valid bus pass by the Police Department which entitled him to travel without
payment from Kurunegala, his place of residence, to London Place, Colombo, his
place of work, and back home after the days work was over. On the day in
question, namely 08.10.87, the petitioner, along with his colleague, Police
Sergeant Abeysinghe, had left their place of work at about 4.05 p.m. and had
arrived at the Colombo central bus stand at Pettah at about 4.45 p.m. in order
to travel back to his residence at Kurunegala. In his petition he avers that
there was bus No. 30 Sri 7418 bound for Polonnaruwa via Kurunegala. The 1st
respondent was the conductor of this bus. According to the petitioner, there
was no queue but some passengers were already in the bus- and he along with
his colleague Police Sergeant Abeysinghe and one Fernando who was an Army
Corporal boarded the bus, having informed the 1st respondent that they were
all travelling on bus passes. The petitioner's case is that while the 1st
respondent objected to his using the bus pass to travel on this bus to
Kurunegala, the 1st respondent did not object to either Police Sergeant
Abeysinghe or Corporal Fernando travelling on their bus passes. He contends
that the aforesaid conduct of the 1st respondent amounts to hostile
discrimination in violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. In his
petition he further avers that an officer attached to the **** Central
Transport Board demanded his bus pass and took it away and he was not allowed
to travel on the bus. He has produced along with his petition and affidavit a
photocopy of his bus pass marked P1 and photocopies of the bus passes of
Police Sergeant **** Abeysinghe and of Corporal Fernando, marked P2 and P3
respectively.

The 1st respondent (the bus conductor) in his affidavit takes **** up the
position that the petitioner had, without waiting in the queue, boarded the
bus out of turn while a large number of passengers were yet standing in the
queue. He had then **** examined the petitioner's bus pass and he formed the
view that

**239**

the petitioner was not entitled to travel in this bus as this was a bus bound
to Polonnaruwa and he was required to give priority to passengers travelling
beyond Kurunegala.. It was his position that there was a large number of
passengers who were travelling beyond Kurunegala. Since the petitioner had
insisted on travelling in this bus, he had reported the matter to
Samaranayake, the Assistant Manager (Traffic) who in turn had instructed one
Tilakaratne to look into the complaint of the 1st respondent. Tilakaratne had
thereupon boarded the bus and questioned the petitioner. The petitioner had
insisted on travelling in this bus and when Tilakaratne had asked him to come
and meet Samaranayake, the petitioner had refused to do so and wanted
Samaranayake to come to the bus and speak to him. Tilakaratna had taken the
petitioner's bus pass and handed it over to Samaranayake.

On examination of the petitioner's bus pass P1, it was discovered on that day
itself, that it did not have the expiry date stamped on it. The fact that P1
did not bear the date of expiry is not disputed by the petitioner. The
petitioner's position is that it is not at all necessary to have the date of
expiry stamped on P1 because a bus pass issued to a Police Officer is valid
"until the holder changes his station and/or his place of residence or dies,
resigns, retires, is interdicted, or has his enlistment cancelled" (paragraph
21 of the petition). On the other hand, it was the position of the respondents
that P1 was invalid as it did not have the date of expiry stamped on it. In
fact W. H. Gunatilake, the Traffic Manager who was on duty that day has in his
affidavit averred that he had informed the petitioner that his "pass was
mutilated and was invalid and did not contain an expiry date".

The first question that arises for decision was whether P1 was valid or not.
On this issue, the document 2R1 which sets out the "conditions applicable to
travel passes" has a direct bearing. It provides, inter alia, as follows: "The
travel pass is valid for a calendar year and expires on 31st December of each
year. Requests for extensions should be sent through the employer to the
Operations Controller, Sri Lanka Central Transport Board before 31st December
each year." Having regard to the above condition stipulated in 2R1, I hold
that P1 was not a valid bus pass.

**240**

Mr. Gunasekera, Counsel for the petitioner next contended that even if P1 was
invalid, there was "discrimination" within the meaning of Article 12(1) for
the reason that Police Sergeant Abeysinghe whose bus pass (P2) admittedly did
not bear the date of expiry was allowed to travel that day. Mr. Gunasekera's
submission in short was that on the admitted facts there was a clear
infringement of Article 12(1).

In regard to Police Sergeant Abeysinghe's use of the bus pass (P2) which also
did not bear the date of expiry, there is one important fact which emerges
from a careful reading of the affidavits filed of record. The officers of the
Transport Board did not at any stage call for or examine the bus pass of
Police Sergeant Abeysinghe. There is no material on record which even suggests
that the respondents were aware at anytime on that day that Police Sergeant
Abeysinghe who had already boarded the bus was using an invalid bus pass. In
so far as Abeysinghe was concerned, the position appears to be that he was
permitted to travel on his bus pass owing to an inadvertent omission on the
part of the 1st respondent to check on it.

I have already held that P1 is not a valid bus pass. The petitioner not having
a valid bus pass was rightly not allowed to travel in the bus. The fact that
Abeysinghe also did not have a valid bus pass was not a matter which the
respondents were aware of on that day. In these circumstances, could the
challenge based on Article 12(1) succeed? I think not. It was not disputed
that the-bus pass issued to the petitioner was pursuant to a contract entered
into between the Police Department (of which the petitioner was a member) and
the Transport Board. In my opinion, Article 12(1) cannot confer on the
petitioner a right to which he is not entitled in terms of the very contract
upon which he found his complaint of "unequal treatment"

The view I have taken gains some support from the case of _T. V. Setty v.
Commissioner, Corporation of the City of Bangalore_ (1). That was a case where
the petitioner made an application under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India challenging the orders of the Bangalore City Municipal Corporation
refusing him a licence to carry on manufacture of soaps in the premises in

**241**

which he has been so doing. It was contended for the petitioner, inter alia,
that a number of soap manufacturers carrying on manufacture in similar
circumstances as the petitioner, were granted licences while the petitioner
was denied a licence, thus infringing Article 14 of the Constitution of India
which corresponds to Article 12 of our Constitution). Dealing with this
submission Chandrashekhar J. expressed himself thus: "Assuming that the
Corporation has issued to those persons licences improperly and against the
provisions of the Corporation Act and by laws thereunder, Article 14 of the
Constitution cannot be understood as requiring the authorities to act
illegally in one case because they have acted illegally in other cases".

Before I conclude, it is right to add that the main ground on which the
respondents sought to resist the petitioner's application was that the
petitioner's right to travel on a bus pass arises from a non-statutory
contract between the Police Department and the Transport Board; that the
rights and liabilities of parties being purely contractual in character, the
provisions of Article 12(1) have no application. In support of this contention
Counsel for the respondents relied very strongly on the majority judgment in
_Roberts v. Ratnayake_ (2) which took the view that in a purely contractual
situation the provisions of Article 12(1) have no application and cannot be
invoked. Having regard to the view I have expressed above, it is not necessary
to consider the submissions based on _Roberts v. Ratnayake_ (supra) made by
Counsel for the petitioner as well as Counsel for the respondents.

In the result, the application fails and is dismissed, but without costs.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

**

JAMEEL, J.** \- I agree.

_

Application dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/19.html_  

