##  Chandra Jayasinghe v. Mahendran and Others - SLR - 206, Vol 1 of 1987
[1987] LKSC 19; (1987) 1 Sri LR 206 (1 January 1987)

**

206

CHANDRA JAYASINGHE  
v.  
MAHENDRAN AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 86/86.  
OCTOBER 22. 1986.

_

Fundamental rights-Detention under Vagrants Ordinance for loitering-Validity
of order-Warrant of detention-Vagrants Ordinance, s. 3, 4, 8-House of
Detention Ordinance s. 4-Judicial Order.

_

The petitioner had been convicted for the second time for loitering at night
on a highway without being able to give an account of herself when questioned
by the Police (s. 3 (1) (c) of the Vagrants Ordinance) and on a report from
the Probation Officer ordered to be detained at a State House of detention on
a Warrant of Detention (s. 8 of the Vagrants Ordinance). Although the warrant
of detention did not specify the period this omission was only an
irregularity. The irregularity does not invalidate the Warrant of Detention.

**

Per H. A. G. De Silva. J.:

**

"I must observe that Magistrates who issue such warrants of detention should
be careful to see that the provisions of the law are complied with and the
warrants are complete in every necessary detail".

**

APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P. C._ with _Miss S. M. Senaratne_ and _Mrs. A. B.
Dissanayake_ for the petitioner. _  
  
Sarath Silva. D.S. G. _with _Mrs. Anusha Navaratne, S. C._ for 1st and 2nd
respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**207**

November 27. 1986.  
**  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.

**

The petitioner has filed this application under Article 126 of the
Constitution alleging violation of her fundamental rights guranteed by
Articles 10, 11, 12(1), 12(2), 13(2), 13(3), 13{5), 14(a), 14(b) and 14(h) by
the executive or administrative action of the respondents. She has inter alia
prayed for

(a) an order releasing the petitioner from detention, and (b) for compensation
in a sum of Rs. 100,000 for violation of her fundamental rights.

The petitioner was apprehended by the Police at Bambalapitiya on 24.1.1986 and
charged in M.C. Mount Lavinia Case No. 32646 with an offence under section 3
(1) of the Vagrants Ordinance (Cap. 32) in that she was found loitering at
night on a highway and failed to give an account of herself when questioned by
the Police.

On 5.02.86 she pleaded guilty to the said charge (vide J. E. of 5.2.86 in 1R
2) and the learned Magistrate remanded her till 19.03.86 and called for a
Probation Report. She was further remanded on 19.02.86 till 4.03.86 and on
receipt of the Probation Report the learned Magistrate ordered that the
petitioner be detained at the State House of Detention at Gangodawila and
issued Warrant of Detention 2R1 to that effect. At the conclusion of the
hearing of this application this Court made order directing the Magistrate of
Mt. Lavinia to discharge the petitioner from the proceedings in M.C., Mt.
Lavinia 32646 and hence the petitioner is no longer in detention.

The Probation Report revealed inter alia that she had on a previous occasion
pleaded guilty to a charge for a similar offence and had been fined Rs. 5. The
1st respondent has in his Probation Report recommended that the petitioner be
detained at the State House of Detention, Gangodawila as she could not be
rehabilitated in the surroundings in which she was living. (vide 1R2). The 1st
respondent also states that he made his recommendations bona fide and in the
best interests of the petitioner and the Court was not bound to accept this
report.

Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the detention of the
petitioner by the 2nd respondent, who is the Officer-in-Charge of the said
House of Detention was illegal in that he was unable to produce a valid order
of detention. It was his contention that 2 R 1 was not a valid order of
detention.

**208**

Section 4(1) of the Houses of Detention Ordinance (Cap. 33) empowers a
Magistrate to order a person convicted of an offence under its summary
jurisdiction, who in his opinion is a vagrant within the meaning of the
Ordinance to be detained in a House of Detention until, as provided for in
sub-section (2) thereof, she avails herself of suitable employment found for
her or until she is removed or discharged as provided for in the Ordinance.
Section 2 defines a vagrant for the purposes of this Ordinance but it is quite
evident that the petitioner does not fall within this definition.

Section 3(1)(c) of the Vagrants Ordinance however enacts that

"Every person wandering abroad.... and not having any visible means of
subsistence, and not giving a good account of himself , shall deemed an idle
and disorderly person within the true intent and meaning of this Ordinance,
and shall be liable upon the first conviction to be imprisoned with or without
hard labour, for any term not exceeding fourteen days, or to a fine not
exceeding ten rupees".

Section 4(a) states that

"Every person convicted a second time of being idle and disorderly .....shall
be deemed a rogue and vagabond within the true intent and meaning of this
Ordinance, and shall be liable to be imprisoned with or without hard labour
for any period not exceeding one month, or to a fine of exceeding twenty
rupees".

Section 8 states that

"In any case in which the offender against any of the provisions, whether of
the last preceding section or any other preceding section of this Ordinance,
is a female, the Court may in its discretion direct, both in respect of any
imprisonment to which she may be sentenced in the first instance and in
respect of any imprisonment to which she may be sentenced in default of a
fine, that, instead of being imprisoned in one of the regular prisons of
Ceylon, she shall be committed to any house of detention established under the
Houses of Detention Ordinance, and there detained until the expiration of her
sentence, and sections 5 and 6 of the said Ordinance shall apply to every such
person so detained'.

**209**

Since the petitioner has been convicted of an offence under this Ordinance for
the second time she is liable to the enhanced punishment under section 4(a),
i.e. one month's simple or rigorous imprisonment or a fine not exceeding
twenty rupees. The Magistrate can under section 8, commit her to any House of
Detention established under the Houses of Detention Ordinance until the
expiration of her sentence, i.e. up to one month only. Learned counsel
complains that since the Warrant of Detention 2 R 1 does not specify the
period for which she is to be detained, the warrant is invalid. There appears
to be certainly an. irregularity but this irregularity does not however
invalidate the warrant and hence the 2nd respondent acted lawfully in
detaining the petitioner in terms of the warrant. I must observe that
Magistrates who issue such warrants of detention should be careful to see that
the provisions of the law are complied with and the warrants are complete in
every necessary detail. It behoves the authority to whom the warrants are
addressed, to bring it to the notice of the Magistrates when such are wanting
and incomplete in any way, so that any errors due to inadvertence or otherwise
may be promptly rectified.

The present application is one for the alleged infringement of the
petitioner's fundamental rights. As stated by the 2nd respondent in his
affidavit, the petitioner was detained at the State House of Detention in
compliance with and under the authority of the Warrant of Detention 2 R 1
issued by the Magistrate of Mt. Lavinia. This is a judicial order and could
have been canvassed in appropriate proceedings. I do not think that in the
circumstances of this case the petitioner is entitled to relief under Article
126 of the Constitution. I therefore dismiss this application. There will be
no costs.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J. -** I agree.

**WANASUNDERA, J. -** I agree.

_Application dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/19.html_  

