##  Anuruddha Rat Watte and Others v. The Attorney General - SLR - 39, Vol 2
of 2003 [2003] LKSC 19; (2003) 2 Sri LR 39 (11 July 2003)

39

ANURUDDHA RATWATTE AND OTHERS  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

SUPREME COURT

S. N. SILVA, CJ.

EDUSSURIYA, J.

YAPA, J.

J.A.N. DE SILVA, J., AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC APPEALS NOS. 2/2003 TO 16/2003 (TAB)

5TH AND 19TH JUNE, 2003

_Trial at bar - Bail_ \- _Code of Criminal Procedure Act, sections 403(1),
450,_ _450(6) and 451(3)_ \- _Bail Act, sections 2, 14 and 15 - Arbitrary
order refusing bail - Duty to give reasons as per section 15 of Bail Act._  


Fourteen appellants were under trial before a High Court at Bar in terms of
section 450 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act ("the Code"). Prior to the
commencement of the trial, they were on bail except the 12th accused. At no
stage did the Deputy Solicitor-General conducting the prosecutions object to
bail for any accused. In fact when the trial commenced also, he said he had no
objection to releasing the accused appellants on bail. But the High Court
remanded the appellants initially and made a final order dated 23.4.2003
remanding all of them to custody on the sole ground that the trial was being
held on four days of the week. When the appellants lodged an appeal against
that order under section 451(3) of the Code, the High Court rejected it on the
ground that the order was an "interim order" against which there is no right
of appeal.

40

**Held :** ****

1.                          The impugned order was a final order (in respect of bail) appealable under section 451(3) of the Code.

2.                          The power of the High Court to grant bail is contained in sections 403(1) and 450(6). However, the Code is silent as to the grounds on which an order could be made.

3.                          (Of consent) The applicable law regarding the basis of an order for bail is as contained in the Bail Act, No.30 of 1997 ("the Act"). In terms of sec­tion 2 of the Act, granting bail is the rule and refusal is the exception. The grounds of refusal are contained in section 14 and the court is required by section 15 to state the reasons for refusal in writing.

4.            The High Court had in refusing bail acted arbitrarily in violation of the fundamental rights of the appellants under Article 13 of the Constitution and failed to adduce reasons set out in section 14 of the Act or to give reasons under section 15. The Attorney-General has not adduced any material that would warrant a refusal of bail as per section 14 of the Act.

**APPEAL** from a judgment of the High Court

_D.S. Wijesinghe,_ P.C. with _Gaston Jayakody_ for appellants.

_Shavindra Fernando,_ Senior State Counsel with _A. Vengappuli,_ State Counsel
for Attorney-General

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 11,2003.

**SARATH N SILVA, CJ.**

These appeals have been filed by the accused facing trial before the High
Court at Bar held in terms of section 450 of the Criminal Procedure Code Act,
No. 15 of 1979, as amended by Act, No. 21 of 1988. The appeals are from the
order dated 3.4.2003, refusing applications for bail made on their behalf.

41

The said order has been made by a majority of judges in respect of the 1st
accused with one judge dissenting and, 'by all the judges in respect of the
other accused-appellants. The only reason given in order dated 3.4.2003 for
refusing the applications for bail is that the trial is being held on 4 days
of the week. In the dissenting order the 1st accused-appellant is allowed bail
on the basis of the medical grounds that had been urged.

The accused-appellants filed appeals to this Court from the said order and the
High Court on 23.4.2003, purported to reject the appeals on the basis that the
order appealed from is an interim order and that there is no right of appeal
in terms of section 451 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. The accused
then moved this Court to exercise jurisdiction in terms of section 451(3) in
respect of the appeals that have been filed. They also moved for an order from
this Court directing the High Court to forward the petitions of appeal that
have been filed.



The motion of the accused-appellants was considered by this Court on
19.05.2003. Senior State Counsel had no objection to an order being made
directing the High Court to forward the appeals for consideration by this
Court, but submitted that the trial should proceed in the High Court.
Accordingly, the Court made a direction to forward the appeals and the
relevant proceedings but to contin­ue the trial.



When the appeals came up for hearing on 5.6.2003, all coun­sel agreed that the
question of releasing the accused on bail should be considered in terms of the
Bail Act, No.30 of 1997, to which no reference whatsoever had been made by the
High Court. In these circumstances with the agreement of Counsel and as an
interim measure, the High Court was directed to consider the release on bail
of the accused in terms of Section 14 of the Bail Act on the basis of the
relevant material and to make on order giving reasons as required by Section
15 of the Act, if necessary.



Pursuant to the said direction only written submissions had been tendered by
counsel. No material was adduced in terms of Section 14(1) of the Bail Act to
support a refusal of bail. In so far as 40 the stance of the Attorney-General
is concerned, the only difference appears to be that whereas throughout the
proceedings Deputy

42

  
Solicitor-General had no objection to the release of the accused on bail, he
had raised a formal objection without any supporting material in his written
submissions. The majority of judges of the High Court have referred to this as
a "belated objection to the accused being released on bail."



The judges of the High Court at Bar appear to have under­stood the interim
order made by this Court differently. Two judges constituting the majority
have sought to give reasons for the earlier so order from which the appeals
have been filed. The other judge has considered the provisions of Section
14(1)(a) of the Bail Act and has held that no ground is made out to refuse the
application for bail. He has made an order that all accused should stand out
on bail.



Learned Senior State Counsel submitted that the order made pursuant to the
interim direction by this court should be considered, as the final order and
the accused-appellants should present fresh appeals if they are dissatisfied
with that order. I cannot possibly agree with such a submission. The appeals
have been filed from the order dated 3.4.2003 refusing the applications for
bail. It is only 60 when this Court found that the applications for bail had
not been considered with reference to the applicable law, that a direction was
made to enable the matter to be considered on the basis of rele­vant material.
No material has been adduced before the High Court as required by Section
14(1) and the majority of judges have sought to give reasons for the earlier
order refusing bail. At the time the interim direction was made no final
judgment had been given by this Court in respect of the appeals and it was
specifically stated in the proceedings of 5.6.2003 that the Court would
continue the pro­ceedings in order to give a final judgment in the matter. In
the circumstances the accused are now entitled to have the appeals that have
been filed considered by this Court.



I have to now consider the order dated 23.4.2003 of the High Court purporting
to reject the appeals that have been filed. Section 451 (3) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, as amended by Act, No.21 of 1988 states as follows :



"Any thing to the contrary in this Code or any other law notwithstanding an
appeal shall lie from any judgment, sentence or order pronounced at a trial
under section 450. Such appeal shall be

43



to the Supreme Court and shall be heard by a Bench of not less 80 than five
judges of that Court nominated by the Chief Justice. It shall be lawful for
the Chief Justice to nominate himself to such Bench".

In is seen from this provision that an appeal lies from any judgment, sentence
or order pronounced at a trial held in terms of section 450\. The judges of
the High Court have noted that the order appealed from is an interim order and
that the provisions of Section 451(3) would not apply. The term "order" is not
defined in the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. In the circumstances it should
in its ordi­nary sense be taken to mean a formal expression of a decision 90
made by Court in respect of any matter together with the reasons for such
decision. An interim order is one made pending a final order being made in the
same matter. Whether a decision is to be considered as an order operating as
an interim order or not has to be considered from the perspective of the
effect that the order has, in respect of the matter pending before Court and
the parties to whom it relates.



In this instance the order of the High Court refusing the appli­cation for
bail has the effect of the accused being incarcerated and thereby deprived of
their personal liberty. Every day spent in incarceration constitutes
deprivation of personal liberty. Looking at the matter, from this perspective
it is clearly seen that the order is final in its effect. It is a formal
expression of a decision by the High Court which directly affects the accused
who are thereby deprived of their personal liberty and I am of the view that
an appeal lies to this Court from the order made on 3.4.2003 in terms of
Section 451(3). The High Court has not to referred any provision of law in
rejecting the appeals that have been addressed to this Court. An appeal
addressed to a superior court should as a rule be submitted to that Court
except where specific provision is made empowering the 110 original court to
reject such appeal. Section 451 (4) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
states that the provisions of the Code gov­erning appeals to the Court of
Appeal from a judgment, sentence and orders of the High Court shall _mutatis
mutandis,_ apply to appeals to the Supreme Court. The procedure for lodging of
appeals to the Court of Appeal from the High Court is provided for in Section
331 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. Section 332

44

  
provides that if the appeal is not given in the manner prescribed in the Act
it may be returned to the appellant for the purpose of it being amended within
time to be fixed by the Court or immediately. It further provides that if it
is not amended as directed, the Court may, for reasons to be recorded by it
reject it. This is the only pro vision which empowers the original Court to
reject an appeal. In this instance there is no question of any non compliance
of the pro visions of Section 331. In the circumstances the order of the High
Court made on 23.4.2003, rejecting the petitions of appeal is set aside and
the appeals are considered on the basis that they have been lawfully presented
in the exercise of the right of appeal given to the accused in terms of
Section 451 (3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.



In considering the appeals I would first advert to the facts relating to the
remanding and release on bail of the accused-appel­lants. The accused-
appellants have appeared before the Magistrate of Teldeniya and remanded by
orders made by that Court on different dates that range from the month of
December 2001 to the month of March 2002. The first accused appellant was
released on bail by the Court of Appeal on 29.05.2002 on the basis of an order
which contains comprehensive reasons. The 2nd to 9th accused-appellants were
similarly released on bail by the Court of Appeal for reasons given on
4.10.2002. The 10th and 11th accused-appellants were also released by the
Court of Appeal on 14.10.2002. The 12th accused-appellant continued to be in
remand. The other accused-appellants have been released on bail by the
Magistrate's Court. Thus except for the 12th accused all the accused were on
bail at the time the proceedings of the Trial at Bar commenced. They appeared
before the High Court on 15.11.2002 and were served with the indictment
presented by the Attorney-General. On that day an application for bail was
made on behalf of the 12th accused appellant to the High Court. The Deputy
Solicitor-General objected to this application which was refused by the High
150 Court. The High Court made order on that day enhancing the secu­rity
ordered in respect of the accused-appellants and ordered that in addition to
bail that had been furnished there should be further personal security in a
sum of Rs.250,000/- with two sureties, each. The trial was then fixed for
20.1.2003.

**45**

When the trial was to commence the accused-appellants took certain objections
to the indictment and the jurisdiction of the High Court. Submissions were
made in respect of these objections on the 20th and the High Court gave its
order on 21st rejecting the objections and thereafter pleas of not guilty were
recorded. At the end of the day's proceedings on 21.1.2003, an application for
bail was made on behalf of the 12th accused. In response to this the Deputy
Solicitor-General made a clear submission that he has no objection to the
release of the 12th accused and for that matter in respect of any other
accused. At that stage the High Court made an order remanding the accused-
appellants till the next date, being 22.1.2003. On that day too the Deputy
Solicitor-General had no objection to releasing the accused-appellants on
bail. But, the High Court refused the application for bail and committed the
accused-appellants to custody. Thereafter several applications have been 170
made in particular with regard to the 1st accused-appellant for bail,
supported by medical evidence and other material. The Deputy Solictior-General
had no objection to these applications, but they have been refused by the High
Court without any reasons being given therefor. These appeals relate to the
final application for bail which was made on the last date of the court
sittings in the previ­ous term immediately preceding the court vacation that
ensued. As noted above the only reason given by the majority of judges is that
the trial is being heard on 4 days of the week.



President's Counsel for the accused-appellants urged the following grounds in
respect of that order-

1.                                      that the order has been made contrary to the provi­sions of the Bail Act and in particular the provisions of Section 14(1) which specify the grounds on which bail may be refused.

2.                                      that the High Court has failed to give reasons for the refusal of bail as required by Section 15 of the Bail Act;

3.                                      that in any event none of the grounds on which bail could be refused, in terms of Section 14(1) have been made out in this instance, to justify the refusal of bail;

4.                                      that Deputy Solicitor-General representing the 190 Attorney-General has at every stage submitted that he has no objection to the accused-appellants being released on bail.

46

The grounds urged by President's Counsel pertain mainly to the provisions of
the law that would apply in respect of the refusal to release the appellants
on bail. The High Court, as noted above has not in the order appealed from
referred to any provision of law in terms of which bail was refused and the
accused committed to remand custody. The proceeding narrative of the facts
reveals that at the end of the day's proceedings on 21.1.2003, when Deputy
Solicitor-General had made a categorical submission that he had 200 no
objection to the release of the 12th accused (who was the only person in
custody at that stage) or any other accused, the High Court without hearing
the accused made an order remanding them to custody. On the subsequent
occasions too, the High Court, in the face of submissions by Deputy Solicitor-
General that there was no objection refused the applications for bail made on
behalf of the accused-appellants. It appears from the tenor of these orders
that the High Court acted on the basis that it had an absolute discretion in
the matter of committing the accused to remand custody. The orders made
without any application by the prosecutor, without 210 hearing the accused and
without giving reasons, cannot be explained on any other basis. In this
context it is incumbent on this Court to deal with the basic premise of our
law with regard to deten­tion in custody and deprivation of personal liberty.  


The right to liberty and security of person is a basic tenet of our public law
and is universally recognized as a human right guar­anteed to every person
(vide Article 9 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Article 9 of
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights). Based on this right
to liberty and security of person, Article 13 of the Constitution guarantees
as a fundamental 220 right to every person, the freedom from arbitrary arrest,
detention and punishment. This Article covers all 3 stages at which a person's
liberty is deprived. They are-  


(i) at the stage of arrest of a person (Article 13(1));  


(ii) at the stage a person is held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived
of his personal liberty (Article 13(2));  


(iii) at the stage a person is convicted and punished with death or
imprisonment (Article 13(4));

47

In respect of all 3 stages the respective Sub-Articles specifi­cally provide
that the deprivation of personal liberty cannot take 230 place except
according "to procedure established by law". In the 2nd and 3rd stages
referred to above, being, continued custody detention or deprivation of
personal liberty beyond the period the arresting authority could validly
detain and at the stage of punish­ment, it is further provided that such
deprivation of liberty could only be effected by an order of a competent
court. Therefore in respect of the 2nd and 3rd stages referred to above, two
requirements have to be satisfied for a person to be lawfully deprived of
personal lib­erty, they are-

i. that it is on an order of a competent court;

ii. that such order is made in accordance with the pro­cedure established by
law;



A competent court is the court having jurisdiction in the mat­ter and in the
case we are dealing with it is the High Court at Bar. Section 450(6)
specifically provides that in any trial before the High Court at Bar "the
court or the presiding judge thereof, may give directions for the summoning,
arrest, custody or bail of all persons charged before the Court on indictment
or by information exhibited under this section." It is seen that the sub-
section does not contain any provision as to the procedure that would apply in
this regard. In 250 the circumstances ordinarily the provisions of Section
403(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act which gives discretion to the
High Court to release on bail any person accused of any non-bail able offence
would apply. The Code of Criminal Procedure Act is silent as to the grounds on
which such an order could be made.

It is in this context of a discretion lying on the court that there have been
several judgments which deal with the grounds that should be considered by
court in such circumstances. The majori­ty judges at the Trial-at-Bar have
referred to these judgments where the matter of granting or refusing bail has
been considered 260 on the basis of a wide discretion vested in the court.



The Bail Act, No.30 of 1997 was passed by Parliament as stated in the long
title to "provide for release on bail of persons suspected or accused of being
concerned in committing or of having committed an offence.,.." A person is
considered as being suspected

48

of having committed an offence at the stage of investigation and he would be
considered as an accused after he is brought before a court on the basis of a
specific charge that he committed a particular offence. He would remain an
accused until the trial is concluded and a verdict of guilty or not guilty is
entered or he is discharged 270 from the proceedings. Thus the provisions of
the Bail Act would apply in respect of all stages of the criminal
investigation and the trial.  


Section 2 of the Act gives the guiding principle in respect of the
implementation of the provisions of the Act. It is specifically stat­ed that
"the grant of bail shall be regarded as the rule and the refusal to grant bail
as the exception."



Section 14(1) being the provision which would apply in respect of this case
reads as follows :



"Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the preceding 280 provisions of
this Act, whenever a person suspected or accused of being concerned in
committing or having committed a bailable or non-bailable offence, appears, is
brought before or surrenders to the court having jurisdiction, the court may
refuse to release such person on bail or upon application being made in that
behalf by a police officer, and after issuing notice on the person concerned
and hearing him personally or through his attorney-at-law, cancel a
sub­sisting order releasing such person on bail if the court has reason to
believe :-

(a) that such person would -  
(i) not appear to stand his inquiry or trial;

(ii) interfere with the witnesses or the evidence against him or otherwise
obstruct the course of justice; or

(iii) commit an offence while on bail; or

(b) that the particular gravity of, and public reaction to, the alleged
offence may give rise to public disquiet.

It is seen that Section 14(1) would apply notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in the other provisions of the Act, in respect of persons suspected
or accused of being concerned in or having

49

 committed a bailable or non-bailable offence. It covers two situations

(i) when such person appears or is brought before or surrenders to, the court
having jurisdiction;

(ii) when an application is made to cancel a subsisting order releasing such
person on bail.



In both situations the court may refuse to release the suspect or accused on
bail or cancel a subsisting order of bail only if the court has reason to
believe that such person would act in the man­ner specified in paragraph (a),
(i) to (iii) referred to above or the court has reason to believe that the
gravity and public reaction to 310 the offence may give rise to public
disquiet.



In either situation where the court refuses to release such per­son on bail or
cancels or varies a subsisting order of bail, Section 15 requires the court to
"state in writing the reasons for such refusal, cancellation, recession or
variation as the case may be."

Thus the court should have reasons to believe that such per son would act in
the manner specified in Section 14(1) (a), (i), (ii) or (iii) or that there
would be public disquiet as provided in (b) and follow up by stating in
writing the reasons for the refusal or cancellation of bail.



In this case the accused-appellants appeared before the High Court on notice
being issued for the service of indictments. Except for the 12th accused the
others had been released on bail. The High Court enhanced the bail that had
been ordered and those accused appellants continued to be on bail. On
21.01.2003 when the High Court committed the accused appellants to remand
cus­tody the court in effect cancelled the previous order for enhanced bail
made by the court itself on 15.11.2002. However it is seen that the order
placing the accused in remand custody, which is con­tained in a single line
does not even state that the previous order 330 made by that very court is
cancelled. I have to note that the order placing the accused-appellants in
remand custody has been per­functorily made without there being any
application, without a hear­ing, without grounds being adduced and without any
reasons stat­ed in writing.

**50**

In terms of the mandatory requirements of Section 14(1) such a cancellation
could have been done only on :-

(i) an application being made by a police officer;

(ii) hearing the accused appellant personally or through his attorney-at-law:

(iii) if the court had reasons to believe that any one of the grounds as
specified in paragraph (a) (i) to (iii) or paragraph (b) have been made out.



The accused appellants have been commited to remand custody without there
being any compliance with any of the requirements set out above. However, the
accused did not appeal from that order to this Court and continued to remain
in custody. In respect of the particular order appealed from, I note that it
would come in the first situation referred to above, namely, a refusal to
release the accused on bail.

In this situation as well the court could refuse the release on bail only if
it has reason to believe that any of the grounds as pro­vided in paragraph (a)
(i) to (iii) or paragraph (b) have been satis­fied.

The order appealed from does not refer to any such ground and the Attorney-
General has not adduced any material to estab­lish any of these grounds.
Furthermore no reasons have been given for the refusal to release on bail as
required by Section 15. The only reason given is that the trial is being held
on 4 days of the week. This reason is far removed from the grounds that may
war- 360 rant a refusal of bail as stated in Section 14(1) (a) (i) to (iii)
and (b). These grounds relate to the conduct of the accused and the public
reaction to the commission of the offence and not the number of days the trial
is being held. In any event the reason stated is irrele­vant immediately prior
to the court vacation.



Furthermore Section 15 specifically provides that where the court refuses to
release on bail any person or cancels a subsisting order releasing a person on
bail or rescinds or varies an order, it shall state in writing the reasons for
such refusal, cancellation or recission or variation as the case may be.

**51**

In this instance no reasons have been given by the High Court for the refusal
to release the accused-appellant on bail. Therefore I have to conclude that in
refusing to release the accused-appellant on bail the High Court has not taken
into account the procedure and the grounds as set out in Section 14(1) of the
Bail  Act No.30 of 1997 and has further failed to give reasons as required by
Section 15 in respect of such refusal.

  
As noted above the Attorney-General has not adduced any material that would
warrant a refusal of bail as provided for in Section 14(1) (a) or (b).

  
In the circumstances I allow these appeals and set aside the order dated
3.4.2003 refusing the application for bail made in respect of accused-
appellants.



I make order that the accused-appellants remain on the bail that had been
previously ordered by the High Court on 15.11.2002, since the subsequent
orders committing the accused-appellants to remand custody have been made
contrary to the provisions of the Bail Act, No. 30 of 1997. The 12th accused-
appellant is also released on the same bail ordered by the High Court in
respect of the other accused by the order dated 15.11.2002.



**EDUSSURIYA, J. \- ** I agree.



**YAPA, J. \-  **I agree.



**J.A.N. DE SILVA, J. - **I agree.



**WEERASURIYA, J. -** I agree.



_Appeals allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/19.html_  

