##  Abeywickrema v. Pathirana and Others - SLR - 120, Vol 1 of 1986 [1986]
LKSC 19; (1986) 1 Sri LR 120 (31 January 1986)

**120**

**

ABEYWICKREMA  
v.  
PATHIRANA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J., RANASINGHE, J., ATUKORALA, J,  
AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J,  
ELECTION PETITION No, 5/83.  
ELECTION PETITION APPEAL No. 1/85.  
ELECTORAL DISTRICT No. 66 -AKMEEMANA.  
DECEMBER 2, 3, 4, 5, 9, 11, 17, 18, 19 AND 20, 1985.

_

Election Petition - Disqualification of candidate in terms of Article 91 (1)
(d) (vii) of the Constitution - Public Office, carrying initial salary of more
than Rs. 6,720 per annum - Resignation - Resignation submitted to wrong
authority - Is acceptance of resignation necessary? Expressio unius exclusio
alterius - Accredited agent - Vacation of post -De Facio cessation of tenure
of office - Estoppel \- Waiver - Practice - Article 55 (5) of the Constitution
- Fundamental right of equality - Article 12 of the Constitution.

_****

**121**

Where the question was whether the 1st respondent who was a Grade III
principal on a salary scale of which the initial salary was not less than Rs.
6,720 per annum in the Department of Education had by tendering his
resignation from the service of the State to the Regional Director of
Education of the area where he was serving and getting such resignation
accepted by the Regional Director who relieved him from his duties, had
effectively terminated his services as a public officer so as to qualify
himself as a candidate at a Parliamentary election-

**

Held** (Wanasundera, J. dissenting):

The letter of resignation did not bring about a valid termination of the 1st
respondent's contract of service because it was not addressed to nor accepted
by the Appointing Authority that is the Educational Services Committee. The
Regional Director, Galle is not the proper authority to accept the
resignation.

The rule in respect of a public officer's resignation is that it can take
effect only when it is accepted by his appointing authority, A. line must be
drawn between an office which gives its holder a status which the law will
protect on the one hand and on the other hand a mere employment under a
contract of service. The rule that wrongful repudiation or wrongful purported
termination of a contract terminates the contract does not apply to an
employee whose employment is in some sense public employment or involves the
tenure of an office, or whose employment takes place under the authority of a
statute or regulation having statutory force or other constituent instrument
giving it a public nature. It is only in origin that Government service is
contracted. Once appointed, the public officer requires a status to which the
rights and duties imposed by public law attaches.

The Constitution of 1978 has given a statutory dimension to the Establishment
Code. The 1st respondent was bound by section 4 of the Establishment Code to
obtain proper acceptance of his resignation. The maxim expressio unius
exclusio alterius does not apply although certain statutes make acceptance of
resignation imperative in certain other categories of employment. The Regional
Director of Education is not the accredited agent of the State for the purpose
of accepting the 1st respondent's resignation from office.

Section 7: 1 of the Establishment Code in regard to the service of notice of
vacation of post is intended to safeguard the interests of the State and it
does not confer a right to the public officer to repudiate the contract of
employment unilaterally. A public officer cannot plead his own breach of duty
as proprio vigore terminating his employment. Until the State chooses to serve
notice of vacation of post the official continues in the eye of the law in
employment.

The de facto ceasing to be a public officer even where de jure the office is
continued to be held is insufficient to avoid the disqualification under
Article 91 (1) ( _d_ ) (vii) of the Constitution.

The doctrine of estoppel is not applicable against the State in its
governmental, public or sovereign capacity.

A waiver must be an intentional act of surrender of rights with knowledge of
what those rights are.

**122**

The doctrine of estoppel or waiver cannot be employed to give a public
authority powers it does not posses. By waiver one cannot convert nullity into
validity.

The practice of Regional directors accepting resignations is bad in law as it
involves giving them power which they do not possess where there has been no
delegation to them of the power of appointment, transfer or dismissal.

Article 55(5) of the Constitution does not protect orders or decisions of a
public officer which are nullities or ultra vires from judicial review.

Article 12 of the Constitution cannot be invoked against discrimination made
by the Constitution itself as the Constitution is the basis supreme law and
generates its own validity and therefore there is no violation of the
Fundamental Right of equality.

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1) _Abeywickrema v. Pathirana_ _[1984] 1 Sri L.R.215_.

(2) _Ganesh Ramachandra v. G.I.P. Railway Co.2 Bomb. L.R. 740.

_

(3) _Howard v. Pickford Tool Co. [1951] 1KB 417, 421_.

(4) _Vine v. National Dock Labour Board [1956] 3 All ER 939.

_

(5) _Barbar v. Manchester Regional Hospital Board [1958] 1 All ER 322.

_

(6) _Francis v. Municipal Council of Kuala Lumpur [1962] 3 All ER 633._

(7) _Vidyodaya University v. Linus Silva [1964] 66 NLR 505.

(8) Mallock v. Abdeen Corporation [1971] 2 All ER 1278._

(9) _Executive committee of U.P. state warehousing corporation v. Chandrakiran
Tyagi AIR 1970 SC 1244.

_

(10) _Gunton v. Richmond LBC [1980] 3 ALL ER 577.

_

(11) _Decro Wall international v. Practitioners in Marketing Ltd. [1971] 2 ALL
ER 216.

_

(12) _ Marshll (Thomas) Exports Ltd. t. Guinle [1978] 3 ALL ER 193.

_

(13) _ Hill v. Parsons & Co., Ltd. [1971] 3 ALL ER 1345.

_

(14) _ Roshenial t. Union of Ildia AIR 1967 SC 1889.

_

(15) _ Dinesh chandra v. state of Assam AIR 1978 SC 17.

_

(16) _De Zoysa v. Public service commission [1960] 62 NLR 492.

_

(17) _ De Alwis v. De silva [1967] 71 NLR 108.

_

(18) _ Venkaterao v. secretary of state AIR 1937 PC 31.

_

(19) _ Rangachari v. Secrtary of state AIR 1937 PC 27.

_

(20) _ High commissioner of India v. Lall AIR 1948 PC 121_.

(21) _ Fletchar v. Nott 60 CLR 55, 97.

_

(22) _ State of U. P. v. Babu Ram AIR 1961 SC 751.

_

(23) _ State of Mysore v. sellary AIR 1965 SC 868.

_

(24) _ Shukla v. state of Gujarat [1970] 1 SCC 419.

_

(25) _ Raj kumar v. Union of India AIR 1989 SC 180, 182.

_

(26) _ Raj Narayan v. Indira Gandhi AIR 1972 SC 1302.

_

(27) _ Union of India v. Gopal Chandra AIR 1978 SC 694.

_

(28) _ A. G. v. A. D. Silva (1953) 54 NLR 529 (P. C. ) ; [1953] AC 461._

**123**

(29)  _Fernando v. Samaraweera (1951) 52 NLR 278, 285.

_

(30) _ Rhyl Urban District council v. Rhyl Amusements Ltd. [1959] TLR 465.

_

(31) _ Barnard v. National dock Labour Board [1953] 1 ALL ER 1113.

_

(32) _ Mayes v. Mayes [1971] 2 ALL ER 397, 402.

_

(33) _ Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign commission [1969] 1 ALL ER 208.

_

(34) _ S.E. Asia Fire Bricks v. Non-Metallic Union [1980] 2 ALL ER 689.

_

(35) _ Harford v. Lynskey [1899] 1 QB 852.

_

(36) _ Royal British Bank v. Turguand (1856) 6 E & E 327.

_

(37) _ Holy-Hutchinson v. Brayhead Ltd. [1968] 1 Q. B. 549 affd [1967] 3 ALL
ER 98 (C.A.)

_

(38) _ Houghton & co. v. Northard Lowe and Wills Ltd. [1927] 1 KB 246.

_

(39) _ Kreditbank Cassel v. Schenkens Ltd. [1927] 1 KB 826.

_

(40) _ British thomson Houston Co., Ltd. v. federated European Bank Ltd.
[1932] 2 KB 176.

_

(41) _ Mahony v. East Holyford Mining Co. [1875] LR. M. 869.

_

(42) _ Re county Life Assurance Co. Ltd. [1870] 5 Ch. App. 288.

_

(43) _ Freeman and Lockyer v. Bucdhurst park properties (Mangal) Ltd. [1964] 1
ALL ER 630.

_

(44) _ Western Fish Products Ltd. v. penwith D. C. (1978) 77 LOR 185, 200-203.

_

(45) _ R. v. Home secretary ex p. Choudhary [1978] 1 WLR 1177.

_

(46) _ R. v. Home secretary ex p. Ram [1979] 3 WLR 89.

_

(47) _ Robertson v. Minister of pensions [1949] 1 KB 227.

_

(48) _Falmouth Boat Construction Co. v. Howell [1950] 1 KB 16.

_

(49) _ Satish chandra Anand v. Union of india AIR 1953 SC 250.

_

(50) _ Purshotam Lal Dhingra v. Union of India AIR 1958 SC 36.

_

(51) _ Shyam Lal v. state of U. P. AIR 1954 S. C. 369.

_

(52) _ Marrikissoon v. Attorney-General [1979] 3 WLR 62 (P. C.)

_ **

APPEAL** from the judgment of the Election judge.

_

K. N. Choksy, P. C._ with _Neville de jacolyun seneviratne, Daya pelpola, D.
H. M. Jayamaha, Lakshman Perera_ and _Miss I. R. Rajepakse_ and _Herman perera
for petitioner-appellant.

_ _

H. L. de silva, P.C._ with _E. d. Wikramanayake, Gomin Dayasiri, Nimal s. de
Silva, senaka Weeraratne_ and _Chitralal Fernando_ for 1st respondent.

_

M. S. Aziz, D. S. G._ with _Tony Fernando, S. C._ as amicus cureae.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**124**

January 31, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C. J.

**

The petitioner-appellant challenges the election of the 1st respondent as
Member of Parliament for the Akmeemana Electorate at the election held on 18th
May, 1983, He seeks a declaration that the election of the 1st respondent is
void in law on the ground that he was a public officer who was disqualified
for election as a Member of Parliament in terms of Article 91 (1) ( _d_ )
(vii) of the Constitution. The public office held by him was that of a
Principal (Grade III) of Galaboda Aturuwella Maha Vidyalaya, Induruwe, under
the Department of Education of the Government of Sri Lanka. The initial of the
salary of the office of Principal (Grade III) was more than Rs. 6,720 per
annum.

The petitioner further averred in his petition that the 1st respondent has
purported to resign from the said public office by a purported letter of
resignation dated 12th April, 1983 which had not been submitted to the
authority authorised to accept the resignation of the 1st respondent nor had
the purported resignation been accepted by the Competent Authority. The
petitioner further pleaded that the due procedures were not fulfilled and
"accordingly there has been no valid resignation in fact or in law by the 1st
respondent of the said public office held by him".

The petition was heard on several dates, and the learned Election Judge
delivered judgment on the 25th February, 1985, dismissing the election
petition . He held that the 1st respondent had ceased to be a public officer
with effect from 21.4.1983.

The petitioner-appellant has preferred this appeal from that judgment to this
court. This appeal raises some important questions of law.

he documentary evidence produced on behalf of the petitioner established the
fact and the election judge has found that the 1st respondent was a principal
(Grade III) in the Department of Education and that the initial of his salary
scale was more than Rs. 6,720 per annum-vide documents marked P 16, P 18, P
19, P 21, P23, P24 and P27. Indeed these facts were not disputed by the 1st
respondent. It is also not disputed that since October 1979 the power of
appointment of teachers and principals (Grade III) of schools was vested in
the Education Services Committee which had been appointed in terms of Article
57 (1) of the Constitution, vide P 1, P 1 A and P2.

**125**

The principal question which arises for decision on this election petition is
whether the 1st respondent was a public officer of the category specified in
Article 19(1) (d) (vii) of the Constitution at the time of his nomination on
22nd April, 1983, and on the date of his election as Member of Parliament
(18th May, 1983). Counsel for the 1st respondent contended that his client had
ceased to be a public officer on the relevant dates, in the first place by
tendering his resignation from the post of Principal (Grade III) in the
Department of Education with effect from 21st April, 1983. The letter of
resignation, relied on by the 1st respondent, is marked P32, dated 12.4.1983
and _addressed to the Regional Director of Education, Galle._ The date stamp
on it shows that it was received at the office of the Regional Director of
Education, Galle on 12.4.1983. This letter refers to the fact that he intends
to be a candidate at the election for the electoral district of Akmeemana and
specifically informs the Regional Director, Galle, that he is resigning from
service with effect from 21.4.83. The letter concludes with a request that his
resignation be accepted. The then acting Regional Director of Education,
Galle, Wijesiri Perera, has on P32 made the minute 'approved' (P32a) dated
21.4.83 and by letter P41 dated 21.4.83 written to the 1st respondent
accepting his resignation from the public service with effect from 21.4.83. A
copy of P41 has been sent to the Secretary, Ministry of Education and to the
acting Principal of Galaboda Aturuwella Maha Vidyalaya.

The findings of the election Judge are the evidence on record established that
the 1st respondent never reported for work on and after 21.04.1983 ; that the
last salary he drew was for March 1983 that he had handed over the keys,
records and equipment of the school in which he last served to the acting
principal of that school; that one Janananda had been appointed to act as
Principal in that school; that the Regional Director, Rupasinghe, who assumed
duties at Galle on 1st May 1983 was aware that the 1st respondent was engaged
in an election campaign. Apart from the terms of P32 which evinced a clear
intention on the part of the 1st respondent to relinquish all the rights and
obligations under his contract of service with the State, his subsequent
conduct confirmed the position that there was a de facto termination of his
employment under the State ; in short, he never functioned as a teacher or a
principal of a school or held himself out as a public officer on and after
21.04.83.

**126**

The Regional Director of Education who is the Head of the Department in terms
of the Establishment Code, both Wijesiri Perera and his successor in office
Rupasinghe acted on the basis that the 1st respondent had resigned from
service. By letter dated 2.6.1983, the Regional Director of Education, Galle
has requested the 1st respondent to pay a sum of Rs. 2,395 due to the Credit
Council on the basis that he has resigned from service. Further no
disciplinary charges were framed against 1st respondent for engaging in
political activities contrary to the provisions of the Establishment Code.
Though the 1st respondent was not on leave from 21.04.1983, no notice of
vacation of post as provided for in section 7 of Chap. V of the Establishment
Code was served on him. The State has at no stage called upon the 1st
respondent to perform his functions as Principal nor called for his
explanation for failure to do so: these items of evidence are relied on by the
1st respondent to show that the State acted on the basis that the 1st
respondent had resigned from service.

Counsel for the 1st respondent further submitted that the Head of the
Department who is the immediate superior officer of the 1st respondent
functioning in Galle has acquiesced in and accepted the position that the 1st
respondent had ceased to be a public officer from 21.04.1983.

Article 90 of the Constitution provides:

"every person who is qualified to be an elector shall be qualified to be
elected as a Member of Parliament unless he is disqualified under the
provisions of Article 91."

Article 91 (1) provides-

"No person shall be qualified to be elected as a Member of Parliament or to
sit and vote in Parliament:-

( _a_ ) .............

( _b_ ) ................

( _c_ ) ..................

( _d_ ) if he is-

(i) ..................

(ii) .............

(iii) a public officer holding any office the initial of the salary scale of
which is not less than Rs. 6,720 per annum."

**127**

One decisive question arising for determination is whether by tendering letter
of resignation (P32) to the Regional Director of Education, Galle and getting
it accepted by him the 1st respondent had effectively terminated his contract
of service and ceased to be a public officer with effect from 21.04.1983.

Counsel for the appellant contended that letter of resignation (P32) is not
valid in terms of the relevant provisions of the Establishment Code which
regulate a public officer's contract of service. P32 not being a valid
resignation in law the contractual bond "vinculum juris" between 1st
respondent and the State has not been severed. According to the Deputy
Solicitor General who appeared as amicus curiae, the letter of resignation
does not comply with the said provisions and is a nullity.

The burden of counsel's submissions was that the 1st respondent remained a
public officer on the material dates, i.e. both on the date of nomination and
on the date of election.

Section 4 of Chap. V of the Establishment Code deals with the subject of
resignation. It reads thus-

"4. **RESIGNATION

**

4:1 An officer may resign his appointment with one month's notice to the
appointing authority through the Head of his Department or on payment of one
month's salary in lieu thereof.

4:2 _If the appointing authority refuses to accept his resignation_ , and the
officer ceases to report for duty, he shall be deemed to have vacated his post
as from the date of such cessation (vide section 7).

4:3 On receipt of the resignation of a pensionable officer, the Head of his
Department should inform the officer in writing that if he resigns his
appointment, he will forfeit all claims to pension or gratuity and all other
benefits of his service prior to resignation should he afterwards succeed in
obtaining employment under Government.

4:3:1 He should also be informed that if his resignation is accepted any
application to withdraw it later, will not be considered.

**128**

4:3:2 An acknowledgment to the effect that he has been informed in these terms
should be obtained from him in writing.

4:4 _"When forwarding a resignation for acceptance by the Appointing
Authority,_ the Head of Department should state that he has complied with the
requirements of sub-section 4:3:

4:5 Acceptance of resignation should be notified in writing to the officer
concerned.

4:6 An officer who resigns forfeits all claims to any benefits arising from
his services prior to resignation, and he will not be entitled to any such
benefits if he is subsequently re-employed."

The 1st respondent's letter of appointment dated 31st July, 1974 (P19)
specifically provided that

"You are subject to regulations of the Public Service Commission and Financial
Regulations, Rules of the Establishment Code, Department Regulations and other
Regulations issued by the Government from time to time".

It is not disputed that the letter of resignation has not accepted by the
"Appointing Authority" as required by the aforesaid section 4(1) of the
Establishment Code. P32 is addressed to the Director of Education and not to
the Appointing Authority, which according to the delegation of authority made
by the Cabinet of Ministers and the Public Service Commission (P1 - Minutes of
the Meeting of Cabinet held on 10.10.1979 and P2 dated 15.10 .79 appointing a
Committee under Article 57(1) of the Constitution) is the _Educational
Services Committee_ By letter dated 26.10.79, marked P62, the Regional
Directors were informed that all their subsisting powers of appointment,
transfers etc., were withdrawn and that according to the decisions of the
Cabinet, the _Educational Services Committee_ was vested with the powers of
appointment, transfer etc., Thus it is clear that the Educational Services
Committee was the "Appointing Authority" for the purposes of the aforesaid
section 4 of the Establishment Code. The letter of resignation (P32) is flawed
by the fact that it was not addressed to the Committee nor was it accepted by
the said Committee. The evidence shows that it was never forwarded by the Head
of Department to the Committee. It is to be

**129**

noted that by circular dated 24.12.81 (P45) Regional Directors of Education
had been informed that the approval of the Committee was necessary to complete
the resignation of officers of the 1st respondent's category. But the
necessary step of acceptance of resignation by the authority competent to do
so, in terms of the aforesaid section 4, had not been taken to give effect to
1st respondent's resignation. Thus, the purported resignation referable to
P32, is not complete and effective.

In the preliminary objection of the 1st respondent filed on the 22nd August
1983, he has stated that his resignation has been submitted to and accepted by
the Regional Director of Education, Galle "who is the authority by whom all
Grade III Principals of Government schools are appointed, transferred and
dismissed" In view of the Cabinet decision set out in P2 of 15.10.79 and
letter P62 of 26.10.79 the stance that the Regional Director of Education is
the proper authority to accept the resignation is untenable. There has been no
express delegation of the power of appointment, transfer etc., in terms of
Article 58(l) of the Constitution, to the Regional Director, Galle. Though at
one stage of the election petition proceedings (See _Abeywickrema v.
Pathirana_ (1)). Counsel for the 1st respondent suggested that there was
implied delegation of such power to the Director, he categorically declared
before us that he was not relying on any implied delegation.

Thus the 1st respondent's letter of resignation P32 is vitiated by the fact
that it has not been duly accepted by the proper authority. Had it been
accepted, by the Educational Services Committee, the other flaws, namely one
month's notice not being given, nor one month's salary in lieu thereof paid
nor it being addressed to the proper authority might be overlooked as not
being fundamental defects, curable by proper acceptance. Thus counsel's
contention that there had been no resignation, in terms of the provisions of
the Establishment Code, on the part of the 1st respondent, has to be upheld.
The appeal then turns on the question of the impact of this conclusion on the
issue whether the 1st respondent had ceased to be a public officer to qualify
himself for the election in question?

A resignation to become effective does not need acceptance by the employer at
all in the absence of any stipulations to that effect, reserved in the
contract of employment or service rules. The giving of a notice terminating a
contractual employment is the exercise of a right in the field of employment.
The law does recognise the concept

**130**

of a unilateral resignation from office which takes effect proprio vigore
irrespective of its acceptance by the other contracting party. But employment
is generally a contract between parties and the general principles of contract
law apply to the contract of service and it is open to an employee to agree to
the fettering or regulating of his right of unilateral resignation. Hence any
question as to the duration of the employment, its terminability by notice,
the length of the notice required to determine it, whether the notice should
be accepted or not, are all matters the subject of the express or implied
terms of the contract of employment. In the case of a government servant, in
regard to the terms relevant to these issues one has to look to his service
Rules. The termination of services of a Public Officer can be brought about in
accordance with the rules governing the conditions of service or by the terms
of his employment or by acceptance of his resignation. The Establishment Code
which governs the conditions of service of a Public Officer provides for the
termination of service of such an officer by the resignation of the officer.
Section 4 spells out the mode of such termination. In terms of section 4 of
the Code the services of a public officer do not stand terminated merely by
his tendering of resignation, to a superior officer. The rule in respect of a
Public officer's resignation is that it can take effect only when it is
accepted by his appointing authority. Tender of resignation by the officer
merely amounts to an offer to quit the services and unless the offer is
accepted by the proper authority it cannot bring about the termination of
services of the resigning employee.

"A contract of service is continuing in its nature and its continuance and the
obligations under it can be terminable in certain defined modes. Mere
resignation obviously is not enough unless it be assented to or unless it
complies with those terms which the law implies or prior agreement of the
parties may permit." - Per Jenkins, C.J., in _Ganesh Ramachandra v. G. I. P.
Railway Co._ (2)

If an authority is not competent to pass an order which can be only passed by
a superior authority, then the order passed by him will amount to a nullity
and is void. The resigner has a right to resign but the resignation can be
effective only after it is accepted by the "Appointing Authority." Unless the
two acts are completed, the transaction remains in inchoate form and
termination of service is not brought about. Hence the resignation sent by a
public officer is no resignation in the eye of the Law until its acceptance by
the proper authority in terms of section 4 of the Code.

**131**

It was urged that in any event though the letter of resignation was not
properly accepted by the State, the 1st respondent's conduct at the relevant
time manifested a unilateral repudiation, whether accepted or not, was
sufficient to bring to an end the relationship of employer and employee; thus
the 1st respondent has ceased to be a public officer. Repudiation occurs where
a party intimates to the other by words or conduct that he does not intend to
perform the contract. As a matter of general contract principle, the wrongful
repudiation or wrongful purported termination of a contract cannot in itself
terminate the contract. If one of the parties wrongfully repudiates all
further liability the contract will not automatically come to an end. The
innocent party may either affirm the contract by treating it as still in force
or on the other hand he may treat it as finally and conclusively discharged.
Where the innocent party wishes to treat himself as discharged he must accept
the repudiation. Unless and until this is done the contract continues in
existence, for an unaccepted repudiation is a thing writ in water, _Howard v.
Pickford Tool Co._ (3).

Mr. H. L. de Silva, submitted that there is however a body of authority which
treats wrongful dismissal as an exception to the general principle, so that
the contract of employment is said to be terminated by wrongful dismissal even
where the employee refuses to accept the dismissal as a termination of the
contract. This conclusion is based on the fact that common law and equitable
remedy will not normally be so applied as to keep a contract of employment in
being following a wrongful dismissal. If a contract of employment is been
following a wrongfully terminated the remedy of the aggrieved party lies in an
action for damages, and the court will not grant a declaration that the
contract of service still subsists. That declaration will amount to an order
for specific performance of personal service, which the court will not decree.

In the case of _Vine v. National Dock Labour Board_ (4) Viscount Kilmuir,
L.C., observed a page 944 as follows:

"This is an entirely different situation from the ordinary master and servant
case. There, if the master, wrongfully dismisses the servant, either summarily
or by giving insufficient notice, the employment is effectively terminated,
albeit in breach of contract. Here the removal of the plaintiff's name from
the register being, in law, a nullity, he

**132**

continued to have the right to be treated as a registered dock worker with all
benefits which, by statute the status has conferred on him. It is therefore,
right that, with the background of this scheme, the court should declare his
rights."

It was also observed by Lord Keith at page 948 that-

"Normally, and apart from the intervention of statute there would never be a
nullity in terminating an ordinary. contract of master and servant. Dismissal
might be in breach of contract and so unlawful, but it could only sound in
damages."

The above was a case where the plaintiff's employment as a registered dock
worker, employed in the Reserve Pool under a statutory scheme by the National
Dock Labour Board, was terminated by a disciplinary committee of a local
board. It was held that the local board, under the statutory scheme set up
under the Dock Workers Regulation of Employment Order 1947, had no power to
delegate its function to a disciplinary committee and that the order of
dismissal accordingly was a nullity, and that in such a case the plaintiff was
entitled to a declaration that his name was never validly removed from the
register as he would otherwise be disabled to work as a dock-worker and he
continued to be an employee of the National Board.

As enunciated in the above case the position will however be different when a
statute intervenes in the relationship of master and servant and the employee
is given a statutory status. If there is a violation of the provisions of the
statute terminating the services of such an employee, he will be eligible for
a declaration that the order terminating the services is a nullity and that he
continues to be in service.

In _Barbar v Manchester regional Hospital Board_ (5) the hospital board
determined the employment of plaintiff who made an appeal under clause 16 of
the terms and conditions of service of hospital medical staff which had a
statutory force. The plaintiff claimed that his service was of which could not
be a nullity and the plaintiff was not therefore entitled to a declaration
that his employment had never been never validly determined. It was held that
the plaintiff's contra6t with the board was between master and servant, the
termination

**133**

validly determined but he was entitled to recover damages for breach of the
contract. This case was not equated to _Vine's case (supra)._ Here, the court
was of the opinion that despite the strong statutory flavour attaching to
plaintiff's contract, it was in essence an ordinary contract between master
and servant and nothing more.

In _Francis v. Municipal Council of Kuala Lumpur_ (6) the plaintiff was
employed by the Defendant Municipal Council as a clerk. The council purported
to dismiss him. This dismissal was held to be ultra vires, because by the
terms of the Ordinance establishing the council the only power to dismiss the
plaintiff was vested, not in the council ,but in its President. The plaintiff
asked for a declaration that he was still employed by the Municipality, his
dismissal having been a nullity. The Privy Council said at p. 637:

"Their Lordships consider that it is beyond doubt that on October 1, 1957,
there was a de facto dismissal of the appellant by his employer the
respondent. On that date he was excluded from the councils premises. Since
then he has not done any work for the council. In these circumstances it seems
to your Lordships that the appellant must be treated as having been wrongfully
dismissed on October 1, 1957, and that his remedy lies in a claim for damages.
It would be wholly unreal to accede to the contention that since October 1,
1957, he had continued and that he still continues to be in the employment of
the respondents................"

It went on to say at page 637:

"In their Lordships' view, when there has been a purported termination of a
contract of service, a declaration to that effect that the contract of service
still subsists will rarely be made. This is a consequence, of the general
principle of law that the courts will not grant specific performance of a
contract of service. Special circumstances will be required before such a
declaration is made and its making will normally be in the discretion of the
court. In their Lordships' view there are no circumstances in the present case
which would make or either just or proper to make such a declaration".

In _Vidyodaya University v. Linus Silva_ (7) it was held by the Privy Council
again that although the university was established and regulated by statute
that did not involve that contracts of employment made with teachers and
subject to section 18 ( _e_ ) of the University Act No.

**134**

45 of 1958, were other than ordinary contracts between master and servant. In
this case the respondent was not shown to have any other status than that of a
servant and proceedings by certiorari were not available where a master
summarily terminates a servant's employment. It is to be noted that Lord
Wilberforce doubted the correctness of this judgment in _Mallock v. Abdeen
Corporation_ (8) where he observed at page 1295:

"I must confess that I could not follow it in this country, insofar as it
involves a denial of any remedy of administrative law to analogous
employments. Statutory provisions similar to those on which the employment
rested would tend to show, to my mind in England and Scotland that it was
sufficiently one of a public character, or one partaking sufficiently of the
nature of an office, to attract the appropriate remedy of administrative law."

A distinction is to be drawn between a pure master and servant case in which
there is no element of public employment or service, no support by statute,
nothing in the nature of an office or a status which is capable of protection
and the tenure of a public office.

A line has to be drawn between an office which gives its holder a status
_which the law will protect specifically_ , on the one hand and, on the other
hand a mere employment under a contract of service.- Wade Administrative
Law-5th Ed. at page 497.

In the case of the _Executive Committee of U.P. State Warehousing Corporation
v. Chandrakiran Tyagi_ (9), after review of the case on the subject, the
Supreme Court of India, observed:

From a review of the English decisions the position emerges as follows The law
relating to master and servant is clear. A contract for personal services will
not be enforced by an order for specific performance nor will it be open for a
servant to refuse to accept the repudiation of a contract of service by his
master and say that the contract has never been terminated. The remedy of the
employee is a claim for damages for wrongful dismissal or for breach of
contract. This is the normal rule and that was applied in _Barbar's case
(supra)_ and _Francis' case (supra)_. But when a statutory status is given to
an employee, the latter will be eligible to get the relief of a declaration
that the order is a nullity and void and that he continues to be in service,
as it will not then be a mere case of a master terminating the services of a
servant . This was the position in _Vine's case (Supra)_."

**135**

The above was a case of a wrongful dismissal of a corporation employee by a
corporation and it was held that the order of dismissal was in breach of the
regulations made under the powers reserved to corporations under section 54 of
the Agricultural Produce Corporation Act of 1956. In deciding the issue the
court observed at pages 1254

1255:

"The regulations are made under the power reserved to the corporation under
section 54 of the act. No doubt they lay down the terms and conditions of
relationship between the corporation and the employees. An order made in
breach of these regulations could be contrary to such terms and conditions but
would not be in breach of any statutory obligation, as was the position which
this court had to deal with in the _Life Insurance Corporation case_ , A.I.R.
1964 - S.C. 847 in the instant case .... the Act does not guarantee any
statutory status to respondents (employees), nor does it impose any obligation
on the appellant in such matters. Under these a circumstances a violation of
regulation 16 (3) as established in this case can only result in the order of
dismissal being held to be wrongful and in consequence making the appellant
liable for damages. But the said order cannot be held to be one which has not
terminated the service wrongfully or which entitled the respondent to ignore
it and ask for being treated as still in service."

The contrary view is that the contract of employment is not necessarily in
principle terminated by wrongful dismissal even though no remedy may lie to
maintain the contract in being (see _Gunton v. Richmond LBC_ (10), _Decro-Wall
International v. Practitioners in Marketing Ltd._ (11), _Marshall (Thomas)
(Exports) Ltd. v. Guinle_ (12) and _Hill v. Parsons & Co., Ltd._ (13)).

In Chitty on Contract Vol. II, paragraph 3515 at page 732 (1983) 25th Ed., the
position is summarised as follows:

"The ultimate answer is that the termination of the contract of employment is
not really a concept with a single clear meaning ; but with that qualification
the better view now seems to be in favour of regarding wrongful dismissal as
in principle terminatory of the contract. On the other hand the elective view
of termination of contract of employment has recently been followed in
granting a declaration that wrongful dismissal was ineffective to determine
the contract. _Gunton v. Richmond LBC (supra)_. (Shaw, L.J. dissenting on this
point) "

**136**

However, the rule that wrongful repudiation or wrongful purported termination
of a contract, terminates the contract does not apply to an employee whose
employment is in some sense public employment or involves the tenure of an
office, or whose employment takes place under the authority of a statute or
regulation having statutory force or other constituent instrument giving it a
public nature.

In Halsbury (4th Ed.) Vol. I, para 10, it is stated:

"It would appear that, in the absence of contrary intention, resignation from
an office held under the Crown is ineffective till accepted. "

Employment generally is a contract between parties and therefore the general
rule is that the contract cannot be unilaterally changed by any party to the
contract. The position is different in Government employment in which
Government derives its powers from the Constitution, to make rules laying down
the conditions of service. By virtue of such power the government can
prescribe the conditions of service without any reference to the other party
and similarly such rules can be changed unilaterally without reference to
employees. It is only the origin of the government service which is
contractual. Once appointed, the public officer acquires a status thereafter
his relations are governed by status and not by contract. The legal position
of a Government Servant is more one of status than of contract and his rights
and obligations are no longer determined by consent of both parties, but by
rules which are framed and altered unilaterally by the State in terms of
Article 55 (4) of the Constitution. The hallmark of the status is the
attachment to the legal relationship of rights and duties imposed by public
law and not by agreement of the parties." _Roshenlal v. Union of India_ (14),
_Dinesh Chandra v. State of Assam_ (15). Further the emoluments of a
government servant and his terms of office are governed by rules, which may be
unilaterally altered by the government without the consent of the employee.
The conditions in Government Service are governed by a complex code,
consisting of constitutional provisions, rules framed under Article 55(4) of
the Constitution and a large mass of other rules and circulars.

The duties of status are fixed by the law. In the language of jurisprudence,
status is a condition of membership of a group whose powers and duties are
exclusively determined by law and not by agreement between the parties
concerned.

**137**

"Status signifies a man's personal condition, so far only as it is imposed
upon him by the law without his own consent, as opposed to the condition which
he has acquired for himself by agreement. The position of a slave is a matter
of status, the position of a free servant is a matter of contract. Marriage
creates a status in this sense, for although it is entered into by way of
consent, it cannot be dissolved in that way and the legal condition created by
it is determined by the law and cannot be modified by the agreement of the
parties. A business partnership on the other hand pertains to the law of
contract and not to that of status"- _Salmond Jurisprudence_ (12th Ed.) pp.
240 - 241.

"A servant under a mere contract of service whatever his contractual rights
be, can always be dismissed and remedy lies in damages for breach of contract.
In other words there is always a power to dismiss him even though under the
contract there is no right to do so. The principle is that one man will not be
compelled to employ another against his will. By contrast, the law will give
specific protection to status, such as membership or office in a trade union,
association or group even though it is merely contractual ; this is a less
personal relationship and an injunction or declaration may be granted so as to
preserve the status. A statutory status such as that of a registered Dock
Worker, will be protected similarly."\- _Wade Administrative Law_ , 5th Ed.,
p. 498.

Article 55 (1) of the constitution provides:

"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers is hereby vested in the
Cabinet of Ministers, and _all public officers shall_ hold office at pleasure"
and

Article 55(4) provides:

"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Cabinet of Ministers shall
provide for and determine all matters relating to public officers including
the formulation of scheme of recruitment and codes of conduct for public
officers, the principles to be followed in making promotions and transfers,
and the procedure for the exercise and the delegation of the powers of
appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers."

**138**

"Public Officer" is defined in Article 170 of the Constitution to mean a
person who holds any paid office under the Republic, other than a judicial
officer but does not include certain persons specified therein.

Article 55 (4) empowers the Cabinet of Ministers to make rules for all matters
relating to public officers, without impinging upon the overriding powers of
pleasure recognised under Article 55(1). Matters relating to "public officer"
comprehends all matters relating to employment, which are incidental to
employment and form part of the terms and conditions of such employment, such
as, provisions as to salary, increments, leave, gratuity, pension, and of
superannuity, promotion and every termination of employment and removal from
service. The power conferred on the Cabinet of Ministers is a power to make
rules which are general in their operation, though they may be applied to a
particular class of public officers. This power is a legislative power and
this rule making function is for the purpose identified in Article 55(4) of
the Constitution as legislative, not executive or judicial in character.

A rule made in exercise of this power by the Cabinet has all the binding force
of a statute, or regulation. The relevant Establishment Code of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (P6) has been issued by the Secretary to the
Ministry of Public Administration under the authority and with the approval of
the Cabinet of Ministers. It is in the exercise of the legislative power
vested in the Cabinet of Minister under Article 55(4), that this Code has been
issued. Though the position might have been otherwise prior to the
Constitution, the code relating to Public Officers acquires by virtue of its
Constitutional origin, statutory force, provided of course it is not
inconsistent with any provisions of the Constitution, including the articles
relating to fundamental rights and Article 55(1), which enshrines the doctrine
of pleasure or the provision of any statute. In a case of breach of any of the
mandatory rules in the code, the aggrieved public officer has, _subject to the
provision of Article 55 (5) of the Constitution,_ a remedy in a Court of law.
The enforceability of a service rule is a question different from that of its
character as to whether it is statutory or otherwise. All statutory rules are
not necessarily enforceable in a court of law. It is only the breach of a
mandatory rule which is justiciable. Once, a rule is held to be mandatory and
not inconsistent with the Constitution, there is no reason why it should not
be enforced, like any other statutory rule but should be considered to be mere
administrative instructions, simply because it relates to matters

**139**

relating to government service. The service-rules in the Code embody the
contract of service between a public officer and the Government. It is a
convenient figure of speech for applying by the law of contract. It does not
mean that the code derives its force from the contract or that the rights and
obligations of the public officer are duties of contract so that they cannot
be varied without his consent.

The general principle in public service is that a public officer holds office
at pleasure. The constitutional doctrine that public officers hold office
during pleasure has two important consequences.

1. The Government has a right to regulate or determine the tenure of its employees at pleasure not withstanding anything in their contract to the contrary.

2. Secondly the Government has no power to restrict or fetter its prerogative power of terminating the services of the employee at pleasure by any contract made with the employee.

Counsel for the 1st respondent referred us to the case of _De Zoysa v. Public
Service Commission_ (16) and _De Alwis v. De Silva_ (17) which followed it in
support of his contention that the Establishment Code did not have the force
of law.

In _De Zoysa v. Public Service Commission (supra)_ H.N.G. Fernando. J. relied
on the Privy Council decision of _Venkatarao v. Secretary of State_ (18),
_Rangachari v. Secretary of State_ (19) to reach his conclusion that the
Public Service Commission rules relating to the procedure to be followed prior
to the retirement of a public officer did not have the same legal effect as a
statutory provision.

In _Venkatarao's case (supra)_ section 96(B) of the Government of India Act
1919 provided in express terms that appointments to Civil Service of the Crown
in India are appointments during His Majesty's Pleasure. The statute also
provided that rules could be made regulating arid conduct of civil servants.
Rules were made which contained provisions for proper departmental inquiry for
dismissal and appeal against dismissal. It was held by the Privy Council that
the rules could not limit in any way the legal right of the Crown to dismiss
at pleasure. The rules gave the members of the civil service a solemn
assurance that the right to dismiss would not be exercised in a capricious or
arbitrary manner, but they did not confer any legal right.

**140**

On a construction of the relevant provisions, the Privy Council held that His
Majesty's pleasure was paramount and could not legally be controlled or
limited by the rules. Two reasons were given for the conclusion, namely (1)
section 96(B) in express terms stated that the office was held during pleasure
and there was no room for the implication of a contractual term that the rules
were to be observed and (2) sub-section (2) of section 96(B) and the rules
made careful provision or redress of grievances in the administrative process.
It held that there is no right in the public servant enforceable by action to
hold his office in accordance with the rules and he could therefore be
dismissed notwithstanding the failure to observe the procedure prescribed by
them. The main point that was urged in _Venkatarao's case (supra)_ was that
under the relevant civil service rules no public servant could be dismissed
except after a properly recorded disciplinary inquiry; the departmental
inquiry prescribed by the rules was found not to have been held. Even so the
Privy Council held that that His Majesty's pleasure was paramount and could
not legally be controlled or limited by the Rules.

In _Rangachari's case (supra)_ , a police officer was dismissed by an
authority subordinate to that, by which he had been appointed. The Privy
Council referred to the following proviso in section 96(B) - "But no person in
that service (the Civil Service of the Crown) may be dismissed by any
authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed" and distinguished
_Venkatarao's case (supra)_ with the following observation :

"It is manifest that the stipulation or proviso as to dismissal is itself of
statutory force and stands on a footing quite other than any matters of rule.
. . which are of infinite variety and can be changed from time to time "

It was held that the proviso was a mandatory provision and qualified the
pleasure tenure and provided conditions precedent to the exercise of powers by
His Majesty.

In _Rengachari's case (supra)_ Their Lordships drew a distinction between the
legal effect of the statutory provision which had been breached in that case
and of a mere rule, framed under the statute which was inconsistent with the
main provisions of the statute. This distinction between the rules and the
provisions of the Act is well emphasised in the _High Commissioner of India v.
Lall_ (20).

**141**

The relevant statute in that case was Government of India Act 1935. The Privy
Council (in an action by the dismissed officer for a declaration that the
order of dismissal was ultra vires and that he was still a member of Indian
Civil Service) was satisfied that subsection 3 of section 240 which provided
for reasonable opportunity being given of showing cause against the action
purported to be taken in regard to him had not been complied with. The Privy
Council made a distinction between the rules and the provisions of the Act and
ruled that subsection 2 & 3 of section 240 indicated a qualification or
exception to the antecedent provision in subsection 1 of section 240. It
observed:

"that provision as to reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the
action proposed, i.e. subsection 3 is now put on the same footing as the
provisions now in subsection 2 and that it is no longer resting on rules
alterable from time to time but is mandatory and necessarily qualifies the
right of the Crown recognised in subsection 1".

The rules which were not incorporated in the statute thus do not impose any
legal restriction upon the right of the Crown to dismiss its servant at
pleasure. The rules could not override or abrogate the statute and the
protection of the rules could not be enforced by an action so as to qualify
the statute, where the statute expressly and clearly laid down that the tenure
was at pleasure. The rules framed under the Act must be consistent with the
And not in derogation of it. The decision of the Privy Council on the
provisions of the Government of India Act 1915 and of 1935, can be sustained
on the ground that the rules made in the excercise of powers conferred under
the Act cannot override or modify the tenure at pleasure provided by section
96 (B) or 240 of the respective Acts, as the case may be. The ultra vires
nature of a rule made under the main Act was commented on by Latham, C. J. in
_Fletcher v. Nott_ (21):

"It is contended that these rules create legal rights so that members of the
force can be dismissed only if the procedure set forth in the rules is
followed. In my opinion the rules do not confer upon the plaintiff the right
which he contends, namely, the right to hold his office unless and until he is
dismissed in accordance with the rules set forth. If according to the true
construction of the Act a constable holds his office only during pleasure, no
rule made under the Act can alter the conditions of his tenure of office so as
to prevent him from being dismissed at the will of the Crown ."

**142**

In my view the rules framed by the Cabinet of Ministers in the exercise of
their power under Article 55 (4) cannot be placed on the same legal footing as
the Public Service Regulations referred to in _Zoysa's case (supra)_ , _De
Alwis v. De Silva (supra)_.

The Establishment Code is a code of conduct for public officers and has been
issued by the Cabinet of Ministers in the exercise of their powers under
Article 55 (4). The exercise of the power is subject to the provisions of the
Constitution. One of the provision being all Public Officers shall hold office
at pleasure (Article 55 (1)). No rule framed under this Article can supersede
the pleasure tenure of the public officers. The Cabinet of Ministers cannot
make any rule abrogating or modifying this tenure. If a rule or code had been
made by the Cabinet within this limit, the rule made by that authority in the
exercise of the powers conferred by the Constitution would be efficacious
within the said limitation. Thus rules framed under Article 55(4) have a
statutory force provided of course they are not inconsistent with any
provision of the Constitution. In case of breach of any of those rules
therefore the aggrieved person has a remedy in a Court of law depending on the
nature of the rule whether mandatory or directory.

It is to be borne in mind that a provision like Article 55(4) of the
Constitution was not there in the earlier Constitution and hence the ruling
and reasoning in De Zoysa's case (supra) and _De Alwis' case (supra)_ in any
event, will not apply to rules framed under Article 55(4). The Article has
given a new dimension to the statutory nature of the Establishment Code.

The provision of the Indian Constitution which corresponds to Article 55 (4)
of our Constitution is Article 309. It provides as follows:

"Subject to the provisions of this Constitution Acts of the appropriate
Legislature may regulate the recruitment and conditions of service of persons
appointed to public service and posts in connection with the affairs of the
Union or of any State.

Provided that it shall be competent for the President ............. or such
person as he may direct in the case of service and posts in connection with
the affairs of the Union and for the Governor of a state or such person as he
may direct in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of
the State, to make rules regulating the recruitment, and the conditions of
service, of persons appointed to such services and posts until provision in
that behalf is

**143**

made by or under an Act of the appropriate legislature under this Article, and
any rule so made shall have effect subject to the provisions of such Act."

Basu in his "Shorter Constitution of India" 9th Ed. at page 697, set out the
law on this article as follows:

"though the position was otherwise prior to the Constitution _(Venkatarao v.
Secretary of State (supra)_ , _Rangachari v. Secretary of State (Supra)_ it is
now settled ( _State of U.P. v. Babu Ram_ (22)) the rules framed under 309 or
under the provisions of the Constituent Acts which are contained under Article
313 ( _State of Mysore v. Sellary_ (23)) have a statutory force provided, of
course, they are not inconsistent with any provision of the Constitution,
including Article 310 itself, which enshrines the doctrine of pleasure; or the
provision of any statute"\- ( _Shukla v. State of Gujarat_ (24)).

The law in India is that the rules framed under Article 309 of the Indian
Constitution, by The President - Governor, as the case may be, are justiciable
and enforceable in a court of law and cannot be regarded as mere
administrative directions. If there is a breach of the statutory rules framed
under Article 309, the aggrieved government servant could have recourse to the
court of redress.

If rules made under Article 309 of the Indian Constitution attract statutory
force, in my view by parity of argument, the rules made under Article 55 (4)
also should be held to have statutory force.

In _Raj Kumar v. Union of India_ (25) the Supreme Court stated that:

"Where a public servant has invited, by his letter of resignation, termination
of his employment, his services normally terminate from the date on which the
letter of resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority and in the
absence of any law or rule governing the conditions of his service to the
contrary, it will not be open to the public servant to withdraw his
resignation, after it is accepted by the appropriate authority. Till the
resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority in consonance with the
rules governing the acceptance, the public servant concerned has _locus
poenitentiae_ , but not thereafter "

**144**

The judgment of the High Court of Punjab, appealed from in the above case is
reported in A.I.R. (Punjab) 1966, p. 221. It sets out valid and persuasive
reasons why acceptance of his resignation in the case of a government servant
is necessary for the termination of his services. The court said:

"We are of the opinion that acceptance of resignation is necessary before the
service of an employee can come to an end. Such an acceptance is a necessary
step in giving effect to the resignation and until that step has been taken
the resignation cannot be said to be complete and effective. In the case of a
civil servant it is not a matter affecting the two parties, namely, the
employee and the Government. The public has also the right to the service of
all the citizens and may demand them in all Departments, Civil as well as in
military. We cannot lose sight of the fact that civil servants are appointed
for the purposes of exercising the functions and carrying on the operations of
the Government. They have to discharge all sorts of duties, judicial as well
as administrative, and it would result in complete chaos if it were held that
the resignation would become effective as soon as a civil servant tendered it.
The exigencies of the Public office may demand that the civil servant must
carry on the operation of the Government and continue to discharge the
functions till the Government is able to make alternative arrangements. A
political organisation would seem to be imperfect which should allow the
repositories of its powers to throw off the responsibility at their **** own
pleasure. Even if the matter be treated as a contract between the parties the
same result would follow. A person who has agreed to serve till his services
are terminated must first make an offer communicating his intention to
terminate and that offer must be accepted."

In _Raj Narayan v. Indira Gandhi_ (26) the **** Supreme Court quoted with the
approval the rulings in _Raj Kumar v. Union of India_ (supra), that when a
public **** servant has invited by his letter of resignation determination of
his employment, his services normally stand terminated from the date on which
letter of resignation is accepted by the appropriate authority and said -

'the question as to when Yasapal-Kapur's (the civil servant in question)
resignation became effective will have to be determined with reference to his
conditions of service."

**145**

In _Union of India v. Gopal Chandra_ (27) the Supreme Court said:

"In the case of a government servant/or functionary, who cannot, under the
conditions of his service/or office, by his own unilateral act of tendering
resignation give up his service or office, normally, the tender of resignation
becomes effective and his service/or office tenure terminated when it is
accepted by the competent authority."

****

I am of the view that the 1st Respondent is bound by section 4 of the
Establishment Code to obtain proper acceptance and that his tenure of office
would stand terminated only from the date on which **** his letter of
resignation P32 was accepted by the appointing authority, who is the
appropriate authority and that the unilateral repudiation of his office by him
was not sufficient to sever his connection with the service.

Mr. de Silva submitted in support of his contention that it was because under
the common law acts of unilateral resignation are legally sufficient to
terminate the contract of public employment, that the legislature provides
that in certain categories of employment unilateral resignation or repudiation
is legally ineffective to terminate the contract. He referred us to section
(11) of the army act No. 17 of 1949 (cap. 357) which reads as follows:

"11(1). An officer of the Regular Force or Regular Reserve shall not have the
right to resign his commission, but may be allowed by the Governor - General
to do so.

11 (2). An officer of the Regular Force or Regular Reserve who tenders the
resignation of his commission to the Governor - General shall not be relieved
of the duties of his appointment until the acceptance of the resignation is
notified in the Gazette."

Similar provision is found in section 11 of the Navy Act No. 34 of 1950 (Cap.
358), section 11 of the Air Force Act No. 41 of 1949 as amended by Act No. 21
of 1954 (Cap. 359) and section 27 of the Police Ordinance No. 16 of 1865, as
amended f1rom time to time up to Act No. 32 of 1956 (Cap. 53). The violation
of these provisions is an **** offence. Our attention was drawn also to the
Compulsory Public **** Service Act No. 70 of 1961 where graduates to whom the
Act applies **** are subject to compulsory public service in terms of section
4 of the Act (here by implication, the right of resignation is taken away).
Under these statutes the right to unilateral resignation from office is taken
away in a limited category of employment.

**146**

It is to be noted that all the statutes, referred to above were enacted prior
to the coming into operation of the present Constitution of 1978. As I stated
earlier the Constitution of 1978 has given a Statutory dimension or base for
the Establishment Code, framed under Article 55(4) of the Constitution. In any
event the fact that statutory law makes a specific provision that resignation
in __ certain specific instances is inoperative until it is accepted does not
necessarily mean that under the common law unilateral resignation was legally
effective to terminate the contract of public employment. The contention that
an intention to alter the general law is to be interred from partial or
limited enactment rests on the maxim " _expressio unius, exclusio alterius_ "
- In Maxwell Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Ed., p. 306-307, it is stated
that -

" ..............that maxim is inapplicable in such cases. The only inference
which a court can draw from such superfluous provisions (which generally find
a place in Acts to meet unfounded objections and idle doubts) is that the
legislature was either ignorant or unmindful of the real state of the law, or
that it acted under the influence of excessive caution. If the law be
different from what the legislature supposed it to be, the implication arising
from the statute, it has been said, cannot operate as a negation of its
existence and any founded on such a mistake has not tie effect of making that
law which the legislature erroneously assumed to be so."

It is not safe to conclude from the aforesaid authority provisions referred to
above that the legislature assumed correctly that unilateral resignation or
repudiation is sufficient to bring to an end a contract of public employment.

Mr. de Silva contended as an alternative to his earlier submission, that the
evidence showed that: 1st respondent by his conduct had repudiated his
contract of employment and that such repudiation has **** been accepted by the
State. He urged that an unaccepted resignation followed by absence from duty
without leave and taken with his subsequent conduct, namely his failure to
perform his duty as a teacher and principal, his handing over all his
equipment and records of the school to Janananda, the acting Principal, his
nomination as a candidate for the election and his participation in a
political campaign in violation of the provisions of the Establishment Code
manifested unequivocally his disposition not to be bound any longer by the
terms

**147**

of the contract. Mr. de Silva maintained that P32 (letter of resignation)
coupled with its attendant circumstances are sufficient to establish the fact
of repudiation of the contract by the 1st respondent.

On the assumption that 1st respondent had unilaterally repudiated the
contract; the next question arises whether the evidence showed that there has
been acceptance of the repudiation by the State and the release of the 1st
respondent from his service. The evidence shows that the 1st respondent was
absent from duty without leave from 21.4.83. The Regional Director of
Education has stated that he did not send any notice of vacation of post
although he had the authority to do so in terms of the relevant circular -
vide para 12 of P45 marked 1B11. He admitted that if a Grade III Principal
does not report for work he would issue a letter of vacation of post and
report the matter to the Director of Education and the Secretary, Educational
Services Committee, but he had not served any notice of vacation of post on
the 1st respondent at any time and that he had not called for any explanation
from him for contesting a parliamentary election, while being Principal of a
Maha Vidyalaya, in breach of section 1 of Chap. XXXII of the Establishment
Code.

The evidence of Wijesiri Perera the Regional Director was that he was never
questioned by the Ministry of Education regarding his acceptance of __ 1st
respondent's resignation P32 and that he had called upon the 1st respondent by
letter P42 dated 2.6.83, to pay "on account of his resignation from service
with effect from 21.4.83 a sum of Rs. 2,395 due from him to the Council."

Mr. de Silva submitted that despite all his aforesaid infraction of duty no
steps __ whatever were taken by the State to indicate to the 1st respondent
that the State was still holding him on to his contract of service and was not
accepting his repudiation of the contract.

Mr. Choksy's rejoinder was that there is no evidence that the Educational
Services Committee, which is the competent authority under Article 58 (1) of
the Constitution had accepted or was aware of the repudiation of his contract
by the 1st respondent and had released him from service by 18th May, the day
of election. The learned election judge has held that-

"the Educational Services Committee is a body which met and functioned in
Colombo. It seems to me that in this regard it was the Regional Director of
Education, the head of Department who was the accredited agent of the State.
By the failure on the part of

**148**

the State's agent to take appropriate action in a situation which clearly
called for action. I am satisfied that the State elected to accept the
repudiation of the contract by the 1st respondent. The State's silence or
inaction in the proved circumstances of this case is evidence of its election
to accept the repudiation of the contract of service by the 1st respondent.
Accordingly I hold that the 1st respondent ceased to be a public officer with
effect from 21.4.83. **** "

I cannot agree with the process of reasoning of the Election Judge. In my view
his conclusion is flawed by his assumption that the Regional Director of
Education, the head of the department was the accredited agent of the State
for the purpose in issue. In terms of Article 58(1) of the Constitution, on
the delegation of powers evidenced by P1 and P2 it is the Educational Services
Committee that would be the agent of the State in regard to appointment,
transfer and termination of services of a public officer employed by the
Ministry of Education. The Regional Director of Education did not have
authority, actual or ostensible as would bind the State "Ostensible authority"
involves a representation by the Principal as to the extent of the agent's
authority. No representation by the agent as to the extent of his authority
can amount to a holding out by the principal. ( _A.G. v. A.D. Silva_ (28)).
Nothing done or omitted to be done by the Regional Director could bind the
Educational Services Committee in the matter of termination of the service of
the 1st respondent. Hence the impugned acts and omissions of a Regional
Director of Education will not affect the State and cannot be treated as
evidence of acceptance of the 1st respondent's repudiation by the state. The
1st respondent has failed to establish-the burden being on him-any act of the
state releasing him for his service by the election date.

Mr. de Silva submitted that in any event the 1st **** respondent had vacated
his post in terms of section 7 of Cap. V of the Establishment Code. This
section reads thus:

"7. Vacation of Post

7: 1 - An officer who absents himself from duty without leave will be deemed
to have vacated his post from the date of such absence ; and he should be
informed accordingly at once by registered post or by personal delivery on
him.

**149**

7: 2 - Charges should not be framed against him nor should he be called upon
to submit an explanation for his absence without leave.

7:3 - If he volunteers an explanation within a reasonable time it should be
considered by the authority who holds delegated authority under the Public
Service Commission Rules to impose disciplinary punishments on him and
permission to resume duties may be allowed or refused by that authority."

It cannot be controverted that the 1st respondent had been absent from duty
without leave from 21.4.83. It was argued by Mr. de Silva that according to
the aforesaid section 7:1 the 1st respondent should be deemed to have vacated
his post from 21.4.83 and had thus vacated his post. I cannot accept counsel's
construction of section 7:1. In my view what the section means is not that a
person who gets himself absent from duty without leave automatically vacates
his post and that his employment comes to an end; but that if he absents
himself without leave, he will be deemed to have vacated his post, for the
purpose of further action, such as termination of his services, being taken
against him. That is why the section requires the officer to be informed that
he is considered to have vacated his post. Section 7:3 provides that if he
volunteers an explanation he will be permitted to resume duty. The vacation of
post under section 7 (1) is only provisional and not final. A further step
confirming the vacation has to be taken by the proper authority to finalise
the termination of service. An officer may absent himself from office without
leave for **** unavoidable reasons such as sudden illness or some other
misfortune. If the construction contended for by Mr. De Silva that an officer,
ipso facto vacates his post, if he absent without leave, is accepted, the
section will work great hardship and injustice to public officers. It is to be
noted that the Deputy Solicitor General disowned that construction.

I agree with Mr. Choksy, that section 7(1) is intended to safeguard the
interests of the state and that is does not confer a right on the public
officer to repudiate the contract of employment unilaterally. It is the State
which alone has the right to treat a public officer, who absents himself
without leave as having vacated his post. A public officer cannot plead his
own breach of duty as _proprio vigore_ ,

**150**

terminating his employment. It is for the other party to the contract viz: the
State to treat that breach as a ground for terminating the employment, and
until the State chooses to do so, the official continues in the eye of the
law, in employment. The State, in this case has not served any vacation of
post notice.

Mr. de Silva went on to submit that the evidence showed that the 1st
respondent had de facto ceased to be a public officer on the relevant dates.
He argued that the disqualification under Article 91 (1)( _d_ )(vii) of the
Constitution applied only to a public officer who is in fact holding an
office, the initial of the salary scale of which is not less than Rs. 6,720
per annum. According to him the de jure holding of such an office is not
sufficient. There should be a de facto holding. He submitted that all the
evidence pointed to the 1st respondent having de facto ceased to hold the
office of Principal of the Maha Vidyalaya. He drew a distinction between de
facto holding and de jure holding and contended that, though in law the 1st
respondent may not have ceased to hold the impugned office, but if in fact he
had ceased to hold that office, he would not suffer the disqualification under
Article 91 of the Constitution. In my view this construction of Article 91 (1)
( _d_ ) (vii) is not tenable. This Article disqualifies a particular category
of public officers, viz. those whose office attracted an initial salary scale
which was not less than Rs. 6,720 per annum. That **** Article does not
consist of three components such as ( _a_ ) a public officer ( _b_ ) holding
an office ( _c_ ) an office the initial of the salary scale of which is not
less than Rs. 6,720 per annum. The words "holding any office
..................Rs. 6,720 per annum" are descriptive of the category of ****
public **** officers who are disqualified. These public officers holding an
office the initial of the salary scale of which is less than Rs 6,720 per
annum are excluded from the disqualification and are entitled to political
rights. Section 13 of the Ceylon Constitutional Order-in-Council 1946
(Soulbury Constitution) (Cap. 379) stipulated that-

"a person shall be disqualified from being elected or appointed as a Senator
or member of the House of Representatives, if he is a public officer."

Under this section all public officers of whatever rank and drawing whatever
salary were disqualified. The disqualification applied to the entire class of
public officers.

The Constitution of Sri Lanka (1972) which **** replaced the Soulbury
Constitution, modified this disqualification by granting political rights to a
certain class of public or State Officers. It disqualified only a "state

**151**

officer" holding any office initial of the salary scale of which is not less
than Rs. 6,720 per annum vide section 70( _c_ )( _v_ ) of the 1972
Constitution. The present 1978 Constitution has adopted this distinction. Thus
the 1972 and 1978 Constitutions do not contain a general disqualification of
all public officers. They disqualify only a class of public officers, viz.
whose office entities them to a salary not less than Rs. 6,720 per annum. A
person acquires a status of a public officer because he holds a paid office
under the Republic. There is no question of a public officer not holding an
office. There can be a de jure holding, and a de facto holding of an office
without being entitled de jure to it. Any officer holding de jure or de facto
an office of the description referred to in Article 91 (1) ( _d_ ) (vii)
suffers the disqualification. The only distinction is that a de jure public
officer continues to bear the stamp of public officer until the legal
termination of his services. While de facto a public officer ceases to be such
when he in fact ceases so to function, I do riot agree with the contention of
Mr. De Silva that for the purpose of article 91 (1) ( _d_ ) (vii), the officer
should hold the office in the sense of in fact functioning as such officer.

The question arises whether the Educational Services Committee or the state is
estopped from questioning the validity of the acceptance of 1st respondent's
resignation by the Regional Director.

For a plea of estoppel to succeed the 1st respondent should establish that (
_a_ ) a representation was made to him by the educational Services Committee
or the State that acceptance of such resignation by the Regional Director was
sufficient, to give efficacy to his resignation and ( _b_ ) that the induced
by such representation to act upon it, and he therefore refrained from
obtaining the acceptance of his resignation by the Committee that the
representation was the cause of his so acting erroneously, that he had been
led to act differently from what he would otherwise have done. The 1st
respondent did not give evidence to substantiate any such inducement and its
impact on him. Hence evidence that the 1st respondent relied on the
representation is wanting. On the other hand in his preliminary objection
dated 22nd of August 1983, the 1st respondent states:

The respondent's resignation has been submitted to and accepted by the
Regional Director of Education, who is the authority by whom all Grade III
Principals of Government Schools are appointed, transferred and dismissed."

**152**

This statement militates against **** any suggestion that the 1st respondent's
conduct was influenced by any representation made by the Educational Services
Committee. It was the result of his own erroneous view of the legal position.

The State is not subject to estoppel to the same extent as an individual or a
private corporation. Otherwise it will be rendered helpless to assert its
powers of government and therefore the doctrine of estoppel is not applicable
against the State in its governmental, public or sovereign capacity.

A waiver would debar a person from raising a particular defence to a claim
against him arising when either he agrees with the particular claiment not to
raise that particular defence or so conducts himself as to be estopped from
raising it.

A waiver must be an intentional act with knowledge. It necessarily implies
knowledge of one's rights vis a vis the other party's infraction and an
election to abandon those rights. Accepting of rent with knowledge of **** the
breach constitutes waiver whether the landlord intended to waive or not.

An Intention to waive a right or benefit to which a person is entitled never
presumed.

"The presumption is against waiver, for though everyone is under our law at
liberty to renounce any benefit to which he is entitled, the intention to
waive a right or benefit to which a person is entitled cannot be lightly
inferred, but must clearly appear from his words or conduct." Per Basnayake,
J. in _Fernando v Samaraweera_ (29).

The waiver must be clearly proved.

In order that a waiver be implied from conduct there must be evidence of
unequivocal act on the part of the creditor showing that he knew what his
rights are and that he intended to surrender them.

"A waiver may be implied if such conduct consists of some unequivocal act on
the part of the creditor showing that he knew what his rights were and that he
intended to surrender them. _Wille -Principles of South African Law,_ 5th Ed.,
p. 356.

The __ 1st respondent's plea of waiver cannot survive the application of the
above tests. The evidence does not show that the Educational Services
Committee was at any material time aware of the 1st respondent's abortive
resignation.

**153**

The doctrine of estoppel or waiver cannot in any event be employed to enlarge
the powers of a public authority. In Public Law the most obvious limitation on
the doctrine of estoppel is that it cannot be invoked so as to give an
authority power which it does not in law possess. In other words no estoppel
can legitimate action which is ultra vires _Wade-Administrative Law,_ 5th Ed.,
p. 233.

Accordingly in _Rhyl_ _Urban Council v. Rhyl_ Amusement _Ltd._ (30) it was
held that the local authority were at liberty to deny the validity of their
own lease contrary to the rules which govern private lettings. No arrangement
between the parties could prevent either of them asserting the fact the lease
was ultra vires and void. The court cited with approval the dictum of Lord
Greene, M.R., that-

"The power given to an authority under a statute is limited to the four
corners of the power given. It would entirely destroy the whole doctrine of
ultra vires if it is possible for the donee of power to extend his power by
creating an estoppel." \- page 475.

Waiver is closely akin to an estoppel. The primary rule is that No waiver of
rights can give a public authority more power than it legitimately possesses.
No amount of waiver can extend a public authority's power or validate action
which is ultra vires. The principle here is that law which exists for the
general public's benefit may not be waived with the same freedom as the rights
of a private person.

"The employees of public authority may often be asked to advise or rule upon
some question which only their employing authority can decide. Expenses may
reasonably be incurred in reliance on the advice given but if it turns out to
be wrong there is usually no legal remedy. The authority's freedom to decide
as it thinks the public interest requires must be on no account be
compromised, hard though the result may be" Wade-5th Ed., p. 341.

In _Attorney-General v. A.D. Silva, (supra)_ the Privy Council observed at
page 537-

"It may be said that it causes hardship to a purchaser at a sale under the
Customs Ordinance, if the burden of ascertaining whether or not the Principal
Collector has authority to enter into the sale is placed upon him. This
undoubtedly is true. But where as in the case of the Customs Ordinance the
Ordinance does not dispense with that necessity, to hold otherwise would be to
hold that public officers had dispensing powers because they then could by
unauthorised acts nullify or extend the provisions of the Ordinance. Of the
two evils, this would be the greater one."

**154**

The evidence of witnesses called on behalf of the 1st respondent supported by
the documents 1 R17, 1 R18, 1 R22 - 34 establish that the Regional Directors
of Education in different parts of the country as Heads of Department have
been accepting letters of resignation and no query has been raised by the
Ministry of Education or by the Educational Services Committee. It is true
that the Ministry had in the case of the resignation of one Stanislaus, a
training master questioned the propriety. But no query was raised regarding
the propriety of the acceptance of 1st respondent's resignation, by the
Regional Director, Galle, although a copy of P41 was sent to the Ministry. The
election Judge concludes -

"It would therefore appear that a fairly widespread practice had grown up of
Heads of Department accepting the resignation of assistant teachers in
contravention of the provisions of the Establishment Code."

But wrong practice does not make good law as it involves giving the Regional
Directors power which they do not possess and no estoppel can give the
authorities power which they do not possess. Admittedly in the delegation of
powers the Regional Director is not the functionary vested with the power of
accepting the resignations of officers of the category of the 1st respondent.

"An element which is essential to the lawful exercise of power is that it
should be exercised by the authority upon whom it is conferred and by no one
else. The principle is strictly applied, even where it causes administrative
inconvenience, except in cases where it may reasonably be inferred that the
power was intended to be delegable. Normally the courts are rigorous in
requiring the power to be exercised by the precise person or body stated in
the statute, and in condemning as ultra vires action taken by agent, sub-
committee or delegates, however expressly authorised by the authority endowed
with the power" _Wade_ at page 319.

In _Barnard v_. _National Dock Labour Board_ (31) __ registered dock workers
were suspended from their employment after a strike. The power to suspend
dockers under the statutory dock labour scheme was vested in the local Dock
Labour Board. The suspensions were made by the Port Manager to whom the Board
has purported to delegate its disciplinary powers. The dockers obtained
declarations that their suspensions were invalid since the Board had no power
to delegate its functions and should have made the decision itself. This case
was approved by the House of Lords in the _Vine's case (supra).

_

**155**

I have held supra that there was no delegation of the power of appointment,
transfer or dismissal, referred to in Article 58(l) of the Constitution, to
the Regional Directors of Education. The plea of waiver' will involve
assumption by the Regional Director of Education of Powers which he does not
in law possess and the legitimation action which is ultra vires and void,
Hence the plea cannot be sustained. "One cannot by waiver convert a nullity
into validity."-Per Simon, J., in _Mayes v. Mayes_ (32).

Mr. de Silva mounted an argument based on Article 55(5) of the Constitution
which provides-

"Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under paragraph
(1) of Article 126 no Court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to
inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, any order or
decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister, the Public Service
Commission, a Committee of the Public Service Commission or of a public
officer in regard to any matter concerning the appointment, transfer,
dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer."

He vehemently contended that the validity of __ the order of the Regional
Director of Education, Galle, accepting the 1st respondent's resignation,
accepting P32 cannot be inquired into or called in question by any court. He
said that the preclusive clause shut out any review of the validity or
legality of any order or decision of a public officer, even __ if it was ultra
vires or incompetent for him to make that order or decision if it was intra
vires for a particular public officer to make the order or decision then it
cannot be disputed that the order or decision is immune in a court of law from
any challenge on whatever Ground, But if the particular officer had no legal
authority under section 58 to make that order Article 55(5) does not bar a
challenge of that order, but if the order/decision of the public officer,
acting ultra vires __ has been adopted by the "Cabinet of __ Ministers", a
Minister, Public Service Commission, a Committee of the Public Service
Commission or of a public officer to whom the Public Service Commission has
made the necessary delegation under Article 58(l), then, of course, such
decision or order becomes the order of that constitutional functionary and
certainly its validity cannot be inquired into. But as was held __ by this
court in its order, between the present appellant and the 1st respondent in
_Abeyawickrema v. Pathirana (supra)_ :

**156**

"The provisions of article 55(5) __ may be invoked or applied only when the
order or decision, in regard to any matter concerning the appointment,
transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer is made, inter
alia, by a 'Public Officer' to whom the Public Service Commission or any
Committee thereof has delegated in terms of Article 58 (1) of the
Constitution, the powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary
control of any category of Public Officers."

An order or decision by an official who had no legal authority to make that
order/decision is in law and is non-existent in the eye of the law; such an
order/decision is inoperative and void and it is open to a court to declare
that it is a nullity.

"If one seeks to show that a determination is a nullity, one is not
questioning the purported determination - one is maintaining that it does not
exit as a determination." Per Lord Reid in the _Anisminic Ltd v. Foreign
Compensation Commission_ (33).

For the purpose of declaring it a nullity, the court has jurisdiction to
inquire into and pronounce upon the invalidity and non-existence of such
order/decision. This view of the law is implicit in the following observation
of Latham, C.J., in _Fletcher v. Nott (supra)_.

" If the Commissioner's action can be attributed to the Crown, as having been
adopted or ratified by the Crown, then the foregoing reasoning will apply to
show, that the dismissal. Even if, without cause, can give no right of action.
If, on the other hand, the Commissioner had no power to dismiss and his action
was not so adopted or ratified, then the position is that the plaintiff has
not been dismissed at all. The dismissal is by reason of its origin bad and
inoperative".

Ouster clauses do not prevent the court from intervening in the case of excess
of jurisdiction; unreviewable administrative actions in just as much a
contradiction as is unfettered discretion - _Wade_ at page 357.

In _S.E. Asia Fire Bricks v. Non - Metallic Union_ (34) the Privy Council when
construing an exclusive provision of the nature of Article 55(5) drew the
distinction between an error of law, which affects the jurisdiction and one
which does not and held that since the award in question in that case
contained errors of law, which did not affect the

**157**

jurisdiction of the industrial court, the award could not be challenged in a
court. Implicit in that ruling is the view that if the error of the law
related to the jurisdiction of the arbitrator to make that award, the
exclusive clause would not immunise it from attack in a court.

The decision of the House of Lords in _Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation
Commission (supra)_ shows that when words in a statute oust the powers of the
court to review a decision of an tribunal, they will be construed strictly and
they will not have the effect of ousting that power, if the inferior tribunal
has acted without jurisdiction - as the decision is a nullity.

I have held earlier that it was not competent for the Regional Director of
Education, Galle to make an order accepting the resignation of the 1st
respondent. Such an order does not attract finality or unreviewability under
Article 55(5). The order has not been adopted by the Committee or Cabinet of
Ministers, for it to acquire legal validity.

Accordingly I hold against Mr. De Silva's submission on the question of
jurisdiction of this court to question the validity of the order of the
Regional Director, Galle. I hold that the said order is null and void in law.

Mr. Choksy submitted that it will be sufficient for the petitioner to
establish that the 1st respondent suffered the disqualification on the
nomination day 22.4.83. On the other hand Mr. De Silva contended that the
crucial day is the day of Election - 18.5.83.

Mr. Choksy submitted that nomination is an integral part of the election
process and that if the 1st respondent was not qualified on the nomination
day, his election is void.

He cited the case _Harford v. Lynskey_ (35) wherein it was held that a
candidate who was disqualified for election at the time of the nomination by
reason of his interest in a contract with a local authority, cannot be
nominated as a candidate, notwithstanding the fact that the disqualification
could have been removed by the date of the poll.

In Parkers "conduct of Parliamentary Elections" 1985 Ed. it is stated at page
45, with reference to _Harford v. Lynskey (supra)_ that-

"the same conclusion would follow if the disqualification was based on the
officer or employment held by the candidate."

**158**

Mr. Choksy drew our attention to section 28 (1) of the Ceylon Parliamentary
Elections, Order-in-Council, 1946, which reads as follows:

"Any person eligible for election as a Member of Parliament may be nominated
as a candidate for election."

Mr. de Silva referred to section 77 ( _a_ ) of the Ceylon Parliamentary
Elections, Order-in-Council, and stated under that the election of a candidate
can be declared void on a election petition only if the candidate was at the
time of the election a person disqualified from election as a Member.

In view of my conclusion that the 1st respondent had not ceased to be a public
officer even on the election day, namely 18.5.83, and that he suffered the
disqualification in terms of Article 91(1)( _d_ )(vii) of the Constitution, it
is not necessary to decide this controversial point.

Finally it was submitted for the 1st respondent that the appellant's
contention that unless his resignation is accepted by his appointing authority
the public officer stands disqualified inevitably leads to violation of the
fundamental right to equality. His counsel has urged that to interpret the
relevant provision of the Establishment Code in such a manner so as to make
the right of candidacy (which is an integral part of the franchise) dependent
on the grant of permission by the Executive to a section of the public service
while other public officers are not so fettered is to violate the __ equality
principle. Counsel drew our attention to certain provisions of the
Constitution which countenance the right of unilateral resignation from
office. He referred to Articles 38 (1) ; 47 66 ( _b_ ) ; 103(3) ; 114(3) ;
153(3) and 156 (4) ( _b_ ) which provide that the office of the functionaries
such as the President, Prime Minister, Ministers and Deputy Ministers, Members
of Parliament, Commissioner of Elections; any judicial officer or scheduled
public officer; the Auditor-General and Parliamentary Commissioner
respectively shall become vacant it the said functionary resigns his office by
a writing under his hand. Counsel argued that there are no intelligible
differentia as between the case of the officers who are given the right of
unilateral resignation from office by the Constitution and the case of other
public officers concerning

**159**

whom no express provision is made in the Constitution. He said that to deny to
a large number of public officers whose right of resignation is not referred
to in the Constitution, such a right of terminating their relationship to
enable them to stand for election while permitting the functionaries referred
to in the Constitution that right of freedom is to make an invidious
distinction that constitutes unlawful discrimination. I cannot agree with the
assumption on which the argument is based that there are no intelligible
differentia or that invidious distinction is drawn between the constitutional
functionaries referred to in the above Articles of the Constitution and the
residue public officers who are not granted the concession of unilateral
resignation. Article 170 of the Constitution defines a 'Public Officer' to
mean a person who holds any paid office under the Republic other than a
judicial officer, but does not include-

( _a_ ) the President,

( _b_ ) the Speaker,

__

( _c_ ) a Minister,

( _d_ ) a Member of the judicial Service Commission,

( _e_ )  a Member of the Public Service Commission,

( _f_ ) a Deputy Minister,

( _g_ ) a Member of Parliament,

( _h_ ) the Secretary - General of Parliament,

( _i_ ) a Member of the President's Staff,

( _j_ ) a Member of the staff of the Secretary - General of Parliament.

The definition of 'Public Officer' in the Constitution is identical with that
in the Establishment Code (vide section 1, Cap. I of the Code) with the
addition that it does not include an employee of a Public lie Corporation, a
Statutory Board or an institution vested in the Government.

It is to be noted that the definition of 'Public Officer' both in the
Constitution and in the Code excludes the President, Minister, Deputy
Minister, Member of Parliament and Judicial Officer pointed to by counsel as
officers entitled to resign unilaterally under the Constitution.

**160**

On the question of resignation, the Code contains a general rule applicable to
all public officers without any distinction, that acceptance is necessary to
complete a resignation. But as pointed out by Mr. de Silva, certain public
officers such as "scheduled public officer" under Article 114 (3), Auditor-
General, Commissioner of Elections and Parliamentary Commissioner out of the
larger fraternity of Public officers are permitted by the Constitution to have
their services terminated on their unilateral resignation. The Constitution
thus provides an advantage or benefit to these officers which that advantage
of benefit is not available to the general run of public officers. In that
view, there appears to be discrimination and unequal treatment of public
officers. If there are no intelligible differentia which distinguish the
public officers who are given the special treatment from those who are left
out, and thus the fundamental right of equality has been there by infringed
that discrimination results from the provisions of the Constitution. Article
12 of the Constitution dealing with equality before the law cannot be invoked
against discrimination made by the Constitution. The Constitution is the basic
supreme law and generates its own validity. The provisions of the Constitution
are binding, because they form part of the Constitution. Assuming all public
officers are similarly circumstanced there is no violation of the Fundamental
Right of equality when **** the Constitution bestows a special treatment to
certain officers.

I hold that the election of the 1st respondent-respondent on 18.5.63 as Member
of Parliament for the Akmeemana Electorate was void in law on the ground that
at the time of his election he was a person disqualified for election as a
Member. I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Election Judge
and make determination that the election was void.

The 1st respondent-respondent shall pay the petitioner-appellant the cost of
this appeal and of the proceedings before the Election Judge.

**

RANASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J. **\- I agree.

**

DE ALWIS, J. **\- I agree.

**

161

WANASUNDERA, J.

**

This is an appeal from the order of the Election Judge dismissing the petition
challenging the 1st respondent's election as a Member of Parliament for the
Akmeemana Electorate (No. 66). The only matter argued before us was whether
the 1st respondent was in law qualified to be elected as a Member of
Parliament. Article 91(1)( _d_ )(vii) of the Constitution disqualifies a
person from being elected as a Member of Parliament or to sit and vote in
Parliament if he is-

" a public officer holding any office the initial of the salary scale of which
is not less than 6,720 per annum."

It is not disputed that the 1st respondent held the office of Principal (Grade
III) of the Galaboda Aturuwella Maha Vidyalaya, induruwa, under the Department
of Education and that his initial salary was more than Rs. 6,720 per annum. It
is however the 1st respondent's position that he had **** ceased to be a
public officer at all material dates. The petition against the 1st respondent
however is based wholly on the ground that notwithstanding the circumstances
relied on by the 1st respondent, the 1st respondent continued to be a public
officer and held **** that office at the time of nomination and/or election
and is therefore disqualified from being elected to Parliament.

It seems that the 1st respondent had not been properly advised about his
position as a public officer and about his disqualification for election. His
conduct and acts appear to be indecisive and confused and not one which we
would have ordinarily expected from one embarking on such an important
venture. By P28 dated 11th April 1983 he had first applied for no pay leave to
contest the election. On the next day, after realising that that may not be
adequate, by P32 of 12th April 1983 he indicated that he was resigning from
his office with effect from 21st April 1983. The nomination date was fixed for
22nd April 1983 and the date of the election was 18th May 1983. All these
letters are addressed to his Head of Department, the Director of Education,
Galle, who is also described as the Regional Director. Probably these two
letters had got into two different files. The Education authorities had
notwithstanding P32 attended to the matter of leave (P28 B, C, D & E) and by
P31 of 21st April 1983 leave was approved from 15th April under 2: 2: 3 of
section 2 of chapter XXXVI of the Establishment Code on the basis that the 1st
respondent was not a staff grade officer.

**162**

His letter of resignation too had been processed (P33 & P34) and **** by P41,
which was apparently issued when the 1st respondent interviewed the Regional
Director, the 1st respondent was notified of the acceptance of his
resignation. This acceptance was by the Regional Director. The letter granting
leave was accordingly cancelled. Copies of the letter accepting the
resignation had been sent to the Auditor-General, the Accountant, S/Education,
C. E . O., and the Acting Principal of the school.

Now Mr. Choksy's submission before us is that the letter of resignation had
not been accepted by the proper authority, namely the Education Services
Committee and that the Regional Director was not competent to deal with the
matter. Hence the 1st respondent did not cease to be a public officer.
Implicit in this submission and a matter that was argued at great length is
the petitioner's further contention that a resignation cannot be effected
unilaterally but, for it to be effective, it has to be accepted by the other
contracting party.

Let me first turn to the applicable legal provisions. The Public Service has
been considered important enough to be dealt with in the Present Constitution
in a separate chapter, namely chapter IX. The 1978 Constitution like the 1972
Constitution intended that the public officers and the public **** service
should be placed within the exclusive domain the Executive. This constitutes a
radical change and a break with tradition. Except for certain types of public
officers, who have to be appointed by the President (Article 54), the
appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of all other public
officers is now vested in the Cabinet of Ministers - Article 55(1). The
Cabinet cannot delegate this power in respect of Heads of Departments, but
must itself exercise it. Article 55(2). The Cabinet is empowered to delegate
all or any of the rest of the powers to the Public Service Commission -Article
55(3). However, the Cabinet can delegate the power of transfer within a
Ministry over certain categories of public officers to a Minister, Upon such a
delegation the Public Service Commission would he denuded of its power.
Article 57 (1) empowers the Cabinet to direct the Chairman of the Public
Service Commission to appoint a Committee of the Public Service Commission to
exercise the powers of the Commission in respect of __ specified categories at
public officers. Such a direction by the Cabinet has to be complied with and
would again denude the Public Service Commission of __ its powers over such
categories of officers. Further sub-delegation both by the Public Service
Commission and such Committee is also permitted.

**163**

Since the coming into operation of the present Constitution in 1978, a series
of directions, delegations and notifications have been made regarding the
exercise of authority over these public officers. In this connection Mr.
Choksy referred us to the documents P7, P7A, P8, P4, 1R12, P1, P1A, P9, P2,
P3, P6, P43, P44 and P45. This abundance of material has not been gazetted or
published and presumably not available even to most members of the public
service, so much so that probably only a very experienced public officer would
be able to find his way through this material to arrive at what may be the
correct position on a matter at any given point of time.

By Cabinet decision of the 4th October 1978 (P7), the Cabinet delegated its
powers over public officers, except for four defined categories, to the Public
Service Commission. The Public Service Commission was also authorised to sub-
delegate its powers in the fo1lowing manner. Regarding staff grade posts for
the purpose of delegation the proper authority for the purpose of delegation
was to the Secretary to the Ministry. In respect of the Combined Services, it
should be the Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration, It should be
the Head of the Department in case of Departments not failing within a
ministry. In regard to non-staff grade public officers, the proper authority
should be the Head of Department. For the purpose of this Cabinet decision a
staff grade officer is defined as one whose initial consolidated salary is Rs
6,720 per annum or above and whose annual increments are Rs. 360 and above.

This Cabinet decision had been communicated to the Public Service Commission
by P7A of 5th October 1978. By P8 dated 11th October 1978, the Public Service
Commission informed the various Regional Directors of Education of the Cabinet
delegation and that Regional Directors could only deal with non-staff grade
public officers. Probably this may have been necessitated by the Regional
Director having earlier exercised power over staff grade officers or due to
some confusion in the matter. Letter dated 2nd February 1979 (P4) from the
Public Service Commission to the Secretary, Ministry of Education, states that
the Public Service Commission had delegated the concurrent powers over new
staff grade posts to the Secretary, the Additional Secretary, and the Senior
Assistant Secretary of the Ministry of Education. Letter dated 8th March 1979
(1R12) is a communication by the Secretary, Ministry of Education to "all
officers in charge of Establishment matters of the Ministry of Education".
This

**164**

has not been issued either by the Cabinet or by the Public Service Commission.
It is issued apparently consequent on P4, but seems to go much beyond it. This
notification is titled "Delegation of Powers" and intended to deal with all
staff officers in the Ministry of Education and is worded as follows :

"It is informed hereby the Powers in respect of appointments, transfers,
dismissal from service and the disciplinary control of officers other than the
officers of the combined services of the Departments of the Ministry of
Education had to be vested in the following manner by the Public Service
Commission under section (1) of Article 58 of the Constitution of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka."

It then proceeds to set out the instruction on the following tabulated form:

_

**_Category Authority_** |  |

**_Authority_**  
---|---|---  
  
(1) _ _Government servants of __ the Staff Grade in the Ministry of __
Education and __ in the Departments of the Ministry.

|  |  Secretary, Ministry of Education  
(2)  Government officers of the Ministry of Education who are not of the Staff
Grade  Secretary". |  |  Secretary to the Ministry of Education, Additional
secretary, senior Assistant _Secretary._  
_

A few months **** later the Cabinet decided on the establishment of an
Educational Services Committee which brought about a complete change in the
supervisory and managerial structure over officers in the Education
Department. By Cabinet Decision dated 10th October 1979 (P1A), the Cabinet
acting in terms of Article 57, directed the Public Service Commission to
appoint a Committee for Education Services. This was notified to the Public
Service Commission (P1) Once this Committee was appointed on 15th October 1979
(P2), the Public Service Commission became denuded of the powers it had
previously exercised over these officers. The previous delegation contained in
documents P7 and P4 mentioned earlier was also formally rescinded. This new
arrangement has been brought to the notice to the Ministry Officials and Heads
of Departments who had previously exercised delegated powers of the Public
Service Commission.

**165**

Three documents P43, P44, and P45 have been produced by the petitioner to show
the delegation of authority by the Educational Services Committee. For the
purpose of this case it is of the utmost significance that Article 58(1)
permits the Committee to delegate its powers to any public officer including a
Regional Director. P43 dated 18th November 1980 contains a delegation of
powers in respect of two categories - staff grades on the one hand and non-
staff grades on the other. As far as it is material for this case, the two
following items may be noted:

_ **_Officers_ ** | ** _Powers   delegated _ ** | **_To Whom_ **  
---|---|---  
|  |  
_(a) _Officers of the staff  grades |   ( _g_ )  Vacation of posts |
Secretary/Addl. Secretary  
_(b) _Officers in Schools **/ **Educational Institutes not falling into the
category of staff officers. |  ( _f_ )  Issue of notices  regarding vacation
of posts  |  Secretary/Addl. Secretary, Heads of Departments and Regional
Director of Education.  
_

Mr. H.L. de Silva submitted that P43 should now be read in conjunction with
1R13, which is a circular dated 26.3.1982 issued by the Secretary, Public
Administration. The expression "Staff officer" is re-defined here to mean a
public officer whose salary is Rs.13,800 or over and entitled to yearly
increments of Rs. 480 and over. The evidence of Mr. Rupasinghe, Regional
Director called by the petitioner to the effect that having regard to this
circular the 1st respondent could not be regarded as a Staff Officer (vide p.
99, Evidence). If this position is correct, a Regional Director could have
dealt with a case of vacation of post of an officer like the 1st respondent.
Vacation of post as we know is one way in which the relationship between the
public officer and the State can be determined. It certainly has affinities
with a case of resignation and repudiation of the contract of service and the
factual situation giving rise to it may include both the above circumstances.
These circumstances are inextricably mixed and are often dealt with together.
The relevant provisions would be referred to later.

Item ( _b_ ) in P43 was amended by P44 dated 8th June 1981 to read that it is
only the Secretary and not the Additional Secretary who should exercise that
power. Then comes P45 dated 24th December 1981, which, is an interesting
document. It has not been issued by the Education Services Committee but by
the Ministry of Education,

**166**

although with the concurrence of the Education Services Committee. In fact it
has been signed not even by the Secretary, Education, but on his behalf by the
Additional Secretary for Secretary, Education. As far as one could gather,
there had been a great deal of doubt and uncertainty relating to the
administration and disciplinary control over public officers, and more
particularly as to the proper authority who should exercise those powers. P45
itself, after referring to the delegations in P43 and P44, frankly mentions
this confusion and doubts as follows:

"As it is not specifically stated who the proper authorities are regarding the
other establishment matters relating to the aforesaid categories of employees,
it is likely that a confused state may arise and as such I wish to state as
follows the due position regarding that for your information."

Among the matters dealt with in P45 are retirements and resignations - the
very matter with which we are concerned. It states -

"(11) _Retirements / Resignations_ : Will be on the recommendation of the
Ministry. Approval is by the Committee.

(12) _Interdiction / Sending on compulsory leave / Issue of notice re vacation
of post, withdrawal of notice of vacation of posts:_ These powers have been
delegated to the Ministry / Departments / Regional Officers (vide circular No.
ESC 1/34 of 18.11.80). However an appeal may be made to the Committee.

To go back to the constitutional provisions, it would _ ****_ be noted that
the provision of Article 55 under which the Public 'Service Commission and the
Education Services Committee derive their authority relates to "the
appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers".
Neither retirement nor resignation is specifically dealt with here. When Mr.
Choksy was questioned on this, he said that those items could come under the
words "disciplinary control". Let us assume for the purpose of argument that
this be so.

P45 highlights the state of uncertainty as to the proper authority who could
deal with a letter of resignation. P45 which has sought to clarify this matter
is as already noted not a rule, regulation, order, directive or notification
of the Cabinet or of the Public Service

**167**

Commission or even of the Educational Services Committee. It is just a letter
of information issued from the Ministry of Education and signed by the
Additional Secretary for the Secretary, Education. if it is indicative of
anything, it certainly shows that resignation and retirement have not been
dealt with in the previous directions on which Mr. Choksy had also relied, or
the position about it has not been clear.

At this stage it is also necessary to look at the Establishment Code to which
Mr. Choksy **** invited our attention. The material portion is section 4 of
Chapter V and is as follows:

"4. _Resignation_

4:1 an officer may submit his resignation from his appointment with one
month's notice to the Appointing Authority through the Head of his Department
or on payment of a month's salary in lieu thereof .

4:2 If the Appointing Authority refuses to accept his resignation and the
officer ceases to report for duty, he should be deemed to have vacated his
post as from the date of such cessation.

4:3 On receipt of the resignation of a pensionable officer, the Head of his
Department should inform the officer in writing, that if he resigns from his
appointment he will _f_ orfeit all claims to a pension, gratuity and all other
benefits arising from his service prior to resignation, should he afterwards
succeed in obtaining re-employment under Government.

4:3:1 He should also be informed that if resignation is accepted, any
application to withdraw it later, will not be considered.

4:3:2 An acknowledgement to the effect that he has been informed in these
terms should be obtained from him in __ writing.

4:4 When forwarding a __ resignation for acceptance by the Appointing
Authority where the Head of Department is not the Appointing Authority, the
Head of Department should state that he has complied with the requirements of
sub-section 4: 3.

4:5 Acceptance of resignation should be notified in writing to the officer
concerned.

**168**

4:6 An officer who resigns, forfeits all claims and benefits arising from his
services prior to resignation. However, if an officer who resigned, rejoined
service, the period of service prior to resignation will be considered for
pension purposes only, provided his work and conduct have been satisfactory."

These provisions may be accepted as being made under Article 55(4) of' the
Constitution, but nevertheless I shall show **** later that they do not
qualify to be regarded as statute law, whether as primary or subordinate
legislation. In spite of what Mr. Choksy said and though section 4:4 __ may __
be in his favour, the contents of sections 4:1, 4:2 and 4:3 may be noted.
First, this permits a public officer to resign his appointment with one
month's notice to the Appointing Authority through the Head of his Department.
Alternatively he can resign by the payment of a month's salary in lieu of the
above notice- in the present case the required notice was not given. As
regards the payment of a month's salary _,_ the 1st respondent agreed to
forego the salary he had earned for the period of 21 days in April, and for
reasons best known to the Regional Director he waived the required month's
salary. Now __ it seems to me that the acceptance of a payment on behalf of __
the State is a revenue and a routine administrative matter. There is nothing
in my view, to prevent a Head of Department like the Regional Director from
dealing with it. Such an act would fall within the ambit of his functions. If
he had made a mistake and the state had suffered by his negligence, the
Regional Director would be personally liable for the loss for which he could
be surcharged. This would not affect the validity of his act. In fact both
sections 4:1 and 4:2 and also 4:3 __ show __ that the Head of Department has
been brought in as a major element in the administrative process relating to
the resignation of office by an officer and he has full authority to process
it __ in fact section 4:3 __ shows that the Regional Director acts as the
mouthpiece of the Government in respect of certain matters in this regard.

Section 4:2 read with section 7 deals with vacation of post. In the context it
provides for certain developments in the resignation process. There could be
no doubt that the power of ordering a vacation of office notice would be with
the Head of the Department. **** Notwithstanding the provisions of section 4:4
which states that the acceptance or the letter of resignation should be by the
appointing authority, the provisions I have referred to show that when the
resignation process is short circuited by certain circumstances dealt

**169**

under sections 4:1 or 4:2 the Regional Director is vested with actual
authority to take decisions and make orders. Even outside these circumstances
he is generally regarded by these provisions as the public officer who
processes the resignation and through whom the appointing authority would be
dealing. The Regional Director is an important officer and plays a pivotal
role in the process. These considerations are of vital importance when we have
to consider the questions whether the Regional Director had ostensible
authority in this matter or regarding acquiescence or ratification of his acts
by the appointing authority or the State.

The amount of confusion and doubt about the proper authority who could
exercise these various functions and powers is best seen in the practices arid
acts of the Education Services. Commission, the Ministry of Education, and by
the Regional Directors when dealing with resignations. Unfortunately up to
date the State has avoided making any definitive pronouncement about the
practices that had hitherto prevailed or about the status of the 1st
respondent apart from the legal submissions made by Attorney-General's
representative who appeared as amicus.

There is clearest evidence that at least in seven or eight instances- that is
the entire evidence pro and contra on this matter -Regional Directors have
accepted letters of resignation of teachers. This would have been clearly
wrong according to the submissions of the petitioner. An attempt was made by
the petitioner to show that those were irregular acts on the part of some
errant public officials and that the Education Services Committee had not been
negligent about its rights, for when it had become aware of such a __
transgression it had sought to check the irregularity and had even sharply
pulled up by the officer concerned. Mr. Choksy points to the correspondence
between the Regional Director and the Ministry of Education in regard to the
resignation of T. D. Stanislaus, a training teacher, as evidence of this. This
of course is an isolated instance and the only one. And I find that even
Stanislaus' case does not advance Mr. Choksy's contention. As Mr. H. L. de
Silva pointed out, the contention in Stanislaus' case was not whether or not
the Regional Director was the proper authority to accept the resignation but
whether it was proper for him to have accepted the resignation of Stanislaus
without the approval of the higher authorities when Stanislaus had certain
outstanding obligations which should have been secured by a bond. The
authorities had however failed to obtain such a

**170**

bond from him. This correspondence is as follows: By 1R14 dated 19.03.1980 the
Regional Director, Galle, had accepted the resignation of Mr. Stanislaus. The
Secretary, Education had been informed of this. The Secretary, Education, by
P48 dated 8th September 1980 to the Regional Director has stated, "Please
submit a report regarding this immediately. " then there is a gap on the
correspondence and one year later, by P47 dated 05.08.81, the Secretary,
Education, writes again to the Regional director on this matter. It refers to
the bond. The material portion of the letter is as follows:

"On applying for study leave he is required to sign a Bond to serve the
Government for five years. Before his resignation is accepted please inform
whether the conditions of the bond have been fulfilled. Please send me a copy
of the Bond.

_2\. It has been pointed out earlier that these are duties of the Education
Services Committee "

_

One wonders what Secretary, Education, meant by the ambiguous statement,
"Before his resignation is accepted please inform whether the conditions of
the bond have been fulfilled. " Does not this statement imply that the
Regional Director could have accepted such a resignation but for the special
circumstances attending this case.

By letter P49 dated 12.8.81, the regional Director sent this explanation that
due to some oversight or negligence in his office or in the ministry, the bond
had not been obtained. The secretary, Education's reply is contained in P46
dated 30.12.81. The material portion of the letter reads as follows:

"As you have accepted the resignation of Mr. Stanislaus I wish to inform you
to submit full particulars regarding that to Secretary E.S.C. and obtain the
covering approval of E.S.C. regarding the acceptance of the resignation.

2\. You are hereby informed to explain as to why the amount recoverable from
Mr. Stanislaus on account of his Bond should not be recovered from you."

The Regional Director's explanation is contained in P54 dated 29.3.82 where he
once again reiterated certain circumstances in extenuation.

The tenor of this correspondence appears to me to support Mr. de Silva's
contention that it does not highlight the issue as to the incompetence of a
Regional Director accepting a letter of resignation but that he should not
have accepted the resignation in that case as there was an outstanding bond
Further, this is fortified by the view that even in the circumstances of this
case the Regional Director's

**171**

acceptance of the resignation could have been ratified by the Education
Services Committee. One knows that In law the relation of principal and agent
could be created _ex post_ _facto_ by ratification. If on the other hand the
authorities were taking a hard line on this matter, then logically they should
have disowned the Regional Director's act, declared that act null arid void
and punished him for arrogating to himself powers of higher authorities. This
correspondence however did not affect Mr. Stanislaus' resignation which as to
be expected confirmed to be operative with everyone accepting it as an
accomplished fact.

As against this we have at least seven or eight clear instances spanning a
period from August 1980 to January 1984 from widely different areas such as
Colombo, Kandy, Galle, Kalutara and Tangalle, where the Regional Directors
have considered it proper to accept the resignations of teachers without demur
from either the Education Services Committee or the Ministry. These acts of
the Regional Directors according to the submissions of petitioner are again
both void and illegal and they are subsequent to the establishment of the
Education Services Committee. But neither the Education Services Committee nor
the Ministry or the Government has at any time thought it necessary to raise
any question about the validity of the acts of those Regional Directors or to
take action against them. In August 1980 the Acting Regional Director, Galle,
accepted the resignation of Mr. Ginige, an Assistant Teacher- IR16. In August
1982 the Regional Director, Tangalle, accepted the resignation of
Liyanapathirana, a teacher- 1R32. In September 1982 again the Regional
Director, Tangalle, accepted the resignation of Weerawardhana, an Assistant
teacher -1R30. In October 1982 the Regional Director, Colombo accepted the
resignation of Nanayakkara, an Assistant Graduate - Teacher- 1R34. In November
1982 the Regional Director, Kalutara, Mr. Rupasinghe accepted the resignation
of Divitotahena, a Graduate Assistant Teacher - 1R26. Strangely enough it is
this gentleman who was called as a witness by the petitioner to establish the
wrongfulness of such an act and to speak to the non-existence of such a
practice. In July 1983 the Regional Director, Kalutara, accepted the,
resignation of S.K. Ranjith Ananda, an Assistant Teacher - 1R23. In December
1983 the Regional Director, Galle, had accepted the resignation of Upasena, an
Assistant Teacher - 1R18. And in January 1984 the Regional Director, Kandy,
had accepted the resignation of Kandana Arachchi, an Assistant Teacher- 1R28.

**172**

As against this incontrovertible evidence no counter material has been placed
by the petitioner to establish a different course of Practice. The evidence of
the witness called on behalf of the petitioner on this aspect of the case is
more unsatisfactory. In fact there seems to be some justification in Mr. H. L.
de Silva's statement that no Material whatsoever has been placed before the
Election Judge to show that the Education Services Committee had at any time
exercised this power even in a single instance. Even in the present case, as
stated earlier, a copy of the Regional Director's letter accepting the
resignation had been sent to the Ministry of Education, so that the
authorities were fully aware of what was happening.

I have earlier referred to the petitioner's letter of resignation dated 12th
April 1983 and its acceptance by the Regional Director, Galle. There are also
a number of other circumstances surrounding this act of resignation indicating
the conduct of the 1st respondent on the one hand and the State on the other,
which helps to throw light on the present status of the 1st respondent which
is **** the matter in issue in this case.

The letter of resignation P32 of 12th April 1983 clearly indicated that the
1st respondent was resigning to contest the election of the vacant Akmeemana
seat. When the 1st respondent met the Regional Director, Galle, in the office
on the 21st April, i.e. the day before the nomination date, he had again
indicated that he was leaving public office in order to be eligible to contest
the Parliamentary election. His intention of leaving the public service was
left in no doubt; a little prior to this, he had handed over his duties. The
keys and all equipment to Mr. Jananada, the Acting Principal, who by letter
P39 of 12th April 1983 had informed the Regional Director of this. A copy of
the acceptance of his resignation had also been sent to the Acting Principal.
The 1st respondent, as we all know, found his way to Parliament and never went
back to the **** school. He carried on a very **** active and public political
campaign to win his election. Such activity could not have been counternanced
if he remained a teacher. Sometime later a permanent Principal as successor to
the 1st respondent had been appointed.

If the position is that the 1st respondent's resignation was invalid and he
was not on leave, action should have been taken against him for vacation of
office as a public servant due to his non attendance at **** the place of
work. The Establishment Code requires this to be done

**173**

and every public officer knows that it is usually done as a matter of routine.
If a Principal of a school absents himself, it would be strange if his absence
is not noticed and felt as it is bound to lead to a disruption in the running
of the school. No disciplinary action has been taken against him for taking
part in politics, The 1st respondent had not been paid his salary since March
1983, but on the other hand the authorities had demanded and recovered from
the 1st respondent the repayment of a sum of Rs. 2,395 as Credit Council dues
consequent on his resignation - P42. All the circumstances detailed above
pertaining to the 1st respondent's resignation, some contemporaneous and
others surrounding it, are in their totality relevant to show the nature,
character and the legal effect of the 1st respondent's action in seeking to
resign from the public service prior to the nomination day.

The Attorney-General was apparently given notice of this petition of appeal in
terms of the provisions of section 82A(3) of the Elections Order in Council.
But he was not present when this appeal first came up for hearing. Then in the
course of the hearing we found that important questions of public law,
particularly those relating to the status of public officers and the nature of
the reliefs they could obtain under the present Constitution and the
interpretation of certain provisions of the Establishment Code relating to
resignation and vacation of office seemed to be in issue; we decided that the
matter should go before a collective court and we ourselves noticed the
Attorney-General to appear as _amicus_. While the Deputy Solicitor-General
addressed us as _amicus_ and made representations on the law, he declined to
deal with the facts and up to now neither the Education Services Committee nor
the State has been prepared to make a categorical pronouncement regarding the
status and position of the 1st respondent at the material times. They have
certainly not claimed him as a public officer. In view of this situation what
indeed is the use of an outsider trying to establish a relationship between
two parties in which the only party who can make a pronouncement is not
prepared to commit itself? No court can be justified in shutting its eyes to
the course of conduct of the State and the 1st respondent in this matter where
the 1st respondent had been regarded for all purposes as no longer a public
officer. These are matters of general public knowledge. Our decision therefore
should not be a flight from reality. It should be wedded to facts. Based on
some academic theory if we were to hold that the 1st respondent, in spite of
the separation from

**174**

his __ office in every practical way, continued to be a public officer after
the 21st April, we would surely be flying in the face of both facts and
Commonsense.

I now turn to what I consider to be the first of the two main issues in this
appeal. Even assuming that acceptance is necessary to make a resignation
effective - it is unnecessary to decide this question now -has there been in
this case in the eye of the law a sufficient acceptance of the letter of
resignation by the State? Mr. H. L. de Silva's position is succinctly recorded
by us in the order we had made resignation. Elaborating this he stated that
the acceptance of the resignation by the Regional Director was lawful and
valid. Mr. de Silva's position is succinctly recorded by us in the order we
had made when this matter first came before us. He contended -

" ................that the delegation of the powers referred to in Article 58
(1) may either be express or implied and that in the absense of express
delegation where the Regional Director had under colour of office, been in the
habit of accepting letters of resignation from Public Officers working under
him and where such acceptance had not been rejected or disowned by the
Ministry of the Department of Education, but had been acquiesced in, then the
conclusion may, in the circumstances be drawn, that there had been implied
delegation of the powers to the Regional Director and that the __ Regional
Director had implied authority to accept the letter of resignation

In our judgment the burden of establishing that the powers referred to in
Article 58(1) of the Constitution had not been expressly delegated to the
Regional Director of Education, Galle, rests on the petitioner arid it ho
established that there was no express delegation of the relevant powers to __
the Regional Director, then the 1st respondent may lead evidence to establish
that there had been an implied delegation of the powers referred to in Article
58(l) by the Public Service Commission or the Committee thereof to the
Regional Director, so as to make the exercise of such power by the Regional
Director, valid and binding."

(Vide 1984 (1) S.L.R. at p. 218.)

Mr. Choksy submitted that the Regional Director had not been vested with
authority to accept a resignation and this power lay only with the Education
Services Committee. Accordingly the purported acceptance of the resignation by
the Regional Director was without

**175**

effect and a nullity. The parties were locked in issue on this among other
matters. I find that the evidence of a practice of letters being accepted by
Regional Directors has been introduced into the record before the Election
Judge and was argued before us Mr. de Silva took us painstakingly through this
of al and documentary material. As tar as I could gather, there was no
deviation from this position in Mr. de Silva's address to us. The legal issues
then that arise from this material lie directly in the path leading to a
decision in this case and it is not possible to by-pass them in reaching a
just decision. Incidentally the fact that a person who has performed an act
does not have actual authority does not foreclose further discussion of this
matter. There are a number of intricate legal principles that will have to be
considered in this regard.

The main issue in this regard is the question of _ultra vires_ in the Regional
Director purporting to accept the resignation. An examination of the relevant
low on this point is now called for. Let me begin with an authoritative text,
Professor S. A. de Smith's "Judicial Review of Administrative Action" (4th
Edn.), where in Chapter 3 he had analysed the topic of _ultra vires_ in public
law with particular reference to the kind of problem we are dealing with. He
begins by saying that the term  _ultra vires'_ first came to be used in
relation to municipal corporations, then to the other new types of local
government authorities, and finally to the Crown and its servants and even to
inferior judicial bodies. In relation to Crown servants, be gives examples,
which are set out below _ ****_ of cases of implied, apparent and ostensible
authority of such persons or agents. He asks the question whether the _ultra
vires_ doctrine can be modified by conduct or inertia of a public body or the
acts of its servants or agents and by way of answer states that the private
law __ analogies are potentially relevant in dealing with this matter. The
private law analogies are obviously those of agency whose terminology he
adopts and may include the developments that have taken place in Company law
in relation to agency. A brief reference to such developments will also be
made later.

These matters are discussed by Professor de Smith under the heading "Vires,
Agency and Estoppel" at page 100. It is as follows :-

"Can the operation of the _ultra vires_ doctrine be modified by the conduct or
inertia of a public body, or the acts of its Servants or agents? Private law
analogies are potentially relevant

**176**

(1) X __ may bind himself by deed or by contract to take a particular course
of action, or not to do something which he would otherwise be entitled to do.

(2) X's agent, Z, may bind X to perform a contract with Y although Z has acted
without express authority from X. It is enough that Z has implied or apparent
(ostensible) authority, or possibly that Z was acting in the course of his
'usual' authority.

(3) X permits Y to do something (or X refrains from objecting to something
done by Y) which Y is not legally entitled to do. Because of waiver,
acquiescence or delay, X may have forfeited his right to assert that Y is not
legally entitled so to act.

(4) X, or X's servant or agent, makes a representation of fact or gives an
undertaking or assurance to Y on which Y is intended to rely **** and on which
Y does rely to his detriment. X may then be estopped from denying the truth of
the statement or from going back on the undertaking.

It is by no means clear how far some of these principles are applicable to
public law situations. Several relevant cases are inadequately reasoned or
appear to conflict with one another - in particular, hard cases have been
allowed to make dubious law - and any short statement of the existing legal
position is bound to be tentative. Authoritative clarification from the House
of Lords is awaited.

(1) A public body with limited powers cannot bind itself to act _ultra vires_
: __ and if it purports to do so it can repudiate its undertaking, for it
cannot extend its powers by creating an estoppel. Nor, in general, can a body
entrusted with duties arid discretionary powers for the public benefit
effectively fetter itself in the discharge of its duties (including duties to
exercise its powers free from extraneous impediments).

(2) It is thought that the general rules of agency apply in public law, except
that an agent ( _a_ ) __ cannot bind his principal to do what is _ultra vires_
and probably ( _b_ ) cannot bind his principal by exceeding his own authority
if that authority is circumscribed by statute; but the existing case law on
agency in public law is equivocal. "

**177**

As stated earlier, problems of _ultra vires_ and agency are presented in a
similar manner in the realm of agency and Company law. Principles analogous to
what de Smith has stated have been developed in the law of agency and company
law, especially under the well known rule in _Royal British Bank v. Turquand,_
(36) __ Garner Administrative Law (4th Edn.) - states at page 302, __ that the
effect of the rule in _Turquand's case_ (supra) applies equally to local
authorities. It is therefore not surprising that Professor de Smith's analysis
reflects some of these principles.

Accordingly the main principles that can be gathered from judicial decision in
these branches of comparative law may be noted now. The principles relating to
agency in regard to companies and corporate institutions (as against
individuals) had seen great development beginning with _Turquand's case
(supra). The basic principles which by analogy have relevance to the present
situation are as follows:-_ _The rule of "indoor management" or the rule in
Turquand's case_ (supra) is to the effect that a person dealing in good faith
with a company may assume that acts within its constitution and rules have
been duly performed and he is not bound to inquire whether or not such
internal management has been regular. As the case law shows, the rule need not
be confined to outsiders or third parties. Vide _Holy-Hutchinson v. Brayhead
Ltd._ (37) __ affirmed by the Court of Appeal. Also see Pennington's Company
Law (3rd Ed.) p. 123. The full scope of the rule is that a company or
corporation would be bound by the acts of fits "agents" provided that the
transaction, consistent with the articles, comes within the scope of the
authority which they could or might have had. Sometimes the area concerned has
been described as " Potential" authority. Basically it includes two main types
of situations, namely (1) where authority might have been conferred though in
fact it has not been so conferred, and (2) where authority had been conferred
but subject to conditions which relate to indoor management and such
conditions remain unfulfilled.

Every officer and person associated with the activities of a company has the
ostensible authority to exercise all the powers necessary for the due
performance of his primary functions. This is commonly described as the usual
authority. When one deals with such a person on this basis and he sues the
company he could succeed on the basis of "usual authority" unless it is
negatived by the articles and it is not negatived if under the articles power
could have been so conferred.

**178**

What is the position when we deal with a case concerning the exercise of
functions other than primary functions? There are passages in _Houghton & Co.
v. Northward Lowe and Wills Ltd. _(38) _, Kreditbank Cassel v. Schenkens Ltd._
(39) __ and _British Thomson-Houston Co., Ltd. v. Federated European Bank
Ltd._ (40) __ which support the view that the _Turquand_ principle would apply
even to such situations, provided there is actual knowledge of the Articles.
That is to say that he was aware that such authority could have been delegated
under the Articles. In the present case it would be noted that such an
exercise was possible and such authority had in fact been exercised. When we
consider the case of a supposed exercise of a power of delegation in such
situations, it would also be necessary to find out whether the supposed
exercise of the delegation would have been normal and regular in the
circumstances of the particular case.

There is also a third situation, namely the exercise of authority by a _de
facto_ officer, If a company represents that a person holds office in the
company, it cannot escape liability by appealing to the doctrine of
constructive notice and showing that he could not have been appointed. It is
one thing for the company to say that the powers of a _de_ _facto_ officer are
limited just as in the case of _de jure_ directors, but it is another thing to
say that they have no powers at all. The doctrine of constructive notice as
modified by the _Turquand_ rule restricts the power of a _de_ _facto_ officer
to bind the company in the same way as it restricts the power of persons duly
appointed but no further. The appointment or its absence is really irrelevant.
Vide _Mahony v. East Holyford Mining Co._ (41) where __ the judges proceeded
on the basis that it is unnecessary to invoke the rule in _Turquand's case
(supra)_ in regard to the appointment, though it was applicable in deciding
the scope of the powers of the directors concerned. The doctrine of
constructive notice as modified by the Turquand rule applies both to the
possibility of appointment and the possibility of having the necessary powers,
if appointed. In _Mahony's case (supra) ****_ Lord Penzance said that although
the directors and the secretary had usurped those offices, the bank was
entitled to assume they were validly appointed if in conformity with the
memorandum and articles they could have been validly appointed. In _Re County
Life Assurance Co., Ltd._ (42) _,_ Gifford, L J. stated that a company is
bound by what

**179**

takes place in the usual course of business with a third party, _where the
third party deals bona fide with persons who are de facto_ directors and who,
so far as they could tell, might have been _de jure_ directors.

The extent to which the _Turquand_ principle has been pushed forward can be
seen from the Court of Appeal decision in _Freeman and Lockyer v. Buckhurst
Park Properties (Mangal) Ltd._ (43). _Dipl_ ock L.J. said:

"If in the case of a company the board of directors who have actual authority
under the memorandum and articles of association to manage the company's
business permit an agent to act in the management or conduct of the company's
business, they thereby represent to all persons dealing with such agent that
he has authority to enter on behalf of the corporation into contracts of a
kind which an agent authorised to do acts of the kind which he is in __ fact
permitted to do usually enters into in the ordinary course of such business.
The making of such a representation is itself an act of management of the
company's business. Prima facie it falls within the 'actual' authority of the
board of trustees and unless its memorandum or articles oil the company either
make such a contract ultra vires the company or prohibit the delegation of
such authority to the agent, the company is estopped from denying to anyone
who has entered into a contract with the agent in reliance upon such
'apparent' authority that the agent had authority to contract on behalf of the
company."

This case was followed in _Hely-Hotchinson v Brayhead Ltd. (supta)_ mentioned
earlier.

The examination of the legal position in other branches of the law not wholly
unconnected with the situation we are dealing with may by way of analogy be of
some help in analysing the case before us. Professor Wade has said in a
chapter under "Delegation" -

"An element which is essential to the lawful exercise of power is that it
should be exercised by the authority upon whom it is conferred, and by no one
else. The principle is strictly applied, even where it causes administrative
inconvenience, _except in cases where it may reasonably be inferred that the
power was intended to be delegable. "_ (Emphasis __ by me) Wade Administrative
Law (5th Ed.) P. 319.

**180**

De Smith is prepared to concede that the general rules of agency could apply
in this situation. He has made two reservations. First, he states that an
agent cannot bind his principal to do what is _ultra vires_. Second, he states
with some hesitation that an agent cannot bind his principal by exceeding his
own authority if that authority is circumscribed by statute. Two matters
stated by de Smith may have particular relevance to the problem we are faced
with. In a foot note to the last item (2) of the quotation at page 100 of his
work, de Smith has stated:

"The important leading case, _Att. Gen for Ceylon v. Silva (supra)_ involved
an erroneous representation by a Crown servant as to the scope of his _own_
authority. It is not clear from the Privy Council's judgment whether the Crown
had held him out as possessing the necessary authority (which was, however,
limited by statute) ; or indeed whether the doctrine of 'usual' authority has
any application at all in public law, see _Western Fish Products Ltd. v.
Penwith D. C._ (44). And see R. v. _Home Secretary, ex p. Choudhary_ (45) __
(Home Secretary not bound by leave to enter granted by immigration officer
inconsistently with the Act or immigration rules, but see _R. v._ _Home
Secretary ex p. Ram_ (46) (leave invalid when immigrant ought to have
disclosed to officer material change of circumstances)."

De Smith also refers to another development in this branch of the law. He
states:

"However, there is a growing body of authority, attributable in large part to
the efforts of Lord Denning, to the effect that in some circumstances when
public bodies and officers, in their dealings with a citizen, take it upon
themselves to assume authority on a matter concerning him, the citizen is
entitled to rely on their having the authority that they have asserted if he
cannot reasonably be expected to know the limits of that authority; and he
should not be required to suffer for his reliance if they lack the necessary
authority.

In this connection de Smith refers to Lord Denning's judgments **** in
_Robertson v. Minister of Pensions_ (47) __ and _Falmouth Boat Construction
Co. v. Howell (48).

_

**181**

Let me therefore approach this matter then in terms of the careful arid
cautious statements enunciated by de Smith without resort to any wider
principles. The first principle is that a public body with limited powers
cannot bind itself to act _ultra vires_ and an agent cannot bind his principal
by doing anything _ultra vires_ the principal. In so far as the present case
is concerned, there is no such problem. It is the petitioner's whole case that
the Education Services Committee has been vested with the power of accepting
letters of resignation, so that both the issues of the principal acting _ultra
vires_ and the agent trying to exceed the authority of the principal does not
arise for consideration here.

The second principle enunciated by de Smith has two aspects. First, an agent
of a public institution cannot bind his principal by exceeding his own
authority if that authority is circumscribed by statute. This is the principle
in _Attorney - General v. Silva (supra)_. Second, he asks the question whether
the principal would have been bound even in such a case if he held him out as
possessing the necessary authority. This is apparently the principle of
"ostensible authority" referred to earlier in this report in the law of
agency.

Let me even assume that we are here dealing with the case of a _de facto_
agent to whom a delegation could have been made. To reiterate, the Education
Services Committee was empowered to delegate its powers to any public officer.
The next question is whether there are any provisions of a "statutory nature"
which imposes limitations on the delegated authority. Undoubtedly there are a
number of orders and directives relevant to this matter, but they would be
relevant only if they are statutory provisions and such provisions impose
limitations. Administrative instructions and orders would not suffice for this
purpose.

To answer this second question we have to determine the nature and character
of the material that regulate and govern the affairs of the public service and
public officers. In de _Zoysa v. The Public Services Commission (supra)_ the
Supreme Court dealt with this identical question, namely the status of rules
made by the Public Service Commission, under the Soulbury Constitution.
Justice H. N. G. Fernando in a closely reasoned judgment held that the rules
made by the Public Service Commission could not be dignified to the status of
subordinate legislation and that they were in effect merely

**182**

Administrative Directions and Instructions. This case was followed with
approval by the Supreme Court in _De Alwis v. De Silva, (supra)_ where it was
held that the Manual of Procedure did not have the status and character of a
law, primary or subordinate.

Mr. Chosky sought to distinguish these cases by relying on the Provisions of
Article 55 (4), which he stated did not have a counterpart in the earlier
Constitutions. Mr. Azeez on the other hand hesitated to claim statutory status
for the Establishment Code, but nevertheless argued that it had a statutory
base or had the underpinnings of statutory provisions. It may however be
pointed out that the principal documents we have to consider. P 43, P 44 and P
45 are not documents made or issued by the Public Service Commission under
Article 55 (4). Only the Establishment Code at the most may qualify to come
within those provisions.

The provisions of Chapter IX of the present Constitution, following the
thinking of the 1972 Constitution, displays a radical departure in many
respects from what obtained prior to 1972. Chapter IX could be properly
understood only in the light of the historical background to these provisions
and the mischief it has sought to remedy.

Every person acquainted with the post-independence period of our history,
especially the constitutional and legal issues that cropped up during that
period, would know how the actions of the Government and the Public Service
Commission dealing with practically every aspect of their control over public
officers were challenged and taken to the courts. A stage came when the
Government found itself practically hamstrung by injunctions and court orders
and not given a free hand to run the public service and thereby the
administration as efficiently as it would wish. The 1972 reforms came
undoubtedly as a reaction to this. The thinking behind the framers of the
Constitution was that the public service must be made the exclusive domain of
the Executive without interference from the courts. Vide section 106.

The present Constitution has only given refinement to that thinking. The
present Article 55 (5), which is in effect a preclusive clause of the greatest
coverage, appears to shut the courts out from this domain except for a
violation of a fundamental right. While it is true that Article 55 (4) is a
new provision, it dovetails into the scheme and is intended to give the
Cabinet the widest authority and flexibility in regulating the

**183**

public service. Such provisions have to be flexible and less formal than
legislation. They also do not lend themselves to formal regulation because
they, as the Privy Council said, "are matters of rule which are of infinite
variety and can be changed from time to time".

If the provisions and procedures formulated by the Cabinet had the dignity of
legislation, whether primary or subordinate, then it would have been difficult
to justify the preclusive provision contained in Article 55(5) and further it
is doubtful whether that preclusive provision could have achieved the desired
result, since it may not have been adequate to shut out the courts when the
violation of __ statutory provisions are in issue.

The reasoning of Justice H.N.G. Fernando in _de Zoysa's case (supra),_ which
is unexceptional, seems also to be equally valid in the present context. A
distinction has to be borne in mind between subordinate legislation, which may
consist in the form of rules and regulations, and mere administrative
instructions and directions. If we examine the provisions of the Constitution
we find that it has by a careful use of the language maintained this
distinction. For example, under Article 136 the Rule Making Committee of the
Supreme courts is empowered to make rules. Similarly the judicial Service
Commission is empowered to makes under Article 112 (8). But Article 55(4) does
not speak of rules. What the Cabinet is empowered to do under this provision
is to "provide for and determine all maters relating to public officers". Such
matters are itemised as-

( _a_ ) the formulation of schemes of recruitment:

( _b_ ) Code of conduct for public officers;

( _c_ ) principles to be followed in making promotions and transfers;

( _d_ ) procedure for the exercise and delegation of the powers of
appointment, transfer, etc.

All these matters have the characteristics of guide lines rather than of rules
or regulations. We do find sometimes certain provisions which may not fall
within the category of primary of subordinate legislation being given the
legal effect of rules or regulations by express statement to that effect.
There is no such provision in respect of __ Article 55(4). Further rules and
regulations are required by law to be Gazetted. Many rules and regulations
have to be tabled in Parliament for Parliamentary sanction. There are no such
requirements in this case. All this is indicative of the fact they were
intended to be

**184**

administrative procedures in the nature of mere internal rules and guidelines
giving the executive the necessary latitude and flexibility to administer the
public service and to adjust them to the dynamic needs of the administration.
As a corollary to this, they have to be non-justiciable and placed beyond the
reach of the courts.

The position in India under the corresponding provisions in that Constitution
is most interesting. The relevant Articles in the Indian Constitution are
Articles 309 and 313. Article 309 enables the Legislature to legislate in
regard to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to the
public services in connection with the affairs of the Union of any State. The
proviso states that until provision is made by an appropriate Legislature,
rules on those matters may be laid down by the Executive. The rule-making
power of Government is identical with that of the Legislature. Article 313 is
a transitional provision and is to the effect that until provision is made
under the Constitution, all laws in force immediately before the commencement
of the constitution and applicable to any public service or any post shall
continue in force in so far as consistent with the Constitution. Laws in force
in this context would include all rules and regulations and all Government
notifications. These were given statutory force by section 96B(4) of the
Government of India Act 1919. While such provision are expressly given
statutory force by these constitutional provisions, they are however not made
justiciable. They are In fact regarded as Execution Instructions. Sambandan v.
R. T. S., 1958 A.I.R. Madras 243. The scope of these provisions were discussed
by the Privy Council before Independence in the trilogy of cases - R. Venkata
Rao v. Secretary of State for India (supra) (18) Rangachari v. Secretary of
State for India (supra) and I.M. Lall's case (supra).

_

_ In _Venkata Rao's case_ _(supra)_ the privy Council gave the following
reasons for their view:-

"1 The rules were manifold in number and most minute in particularity and were
all capable of change. To uphold the contention of the appellant that an
action would lie for any breach of any of those rules would involve a control
by the courts over Government in the most detailed work of managing its
services and such control would cause not merely inconvenience but confusion,
and

2. Section 96B makes careful provision for redress of grievances by administrative processes."

**185**

The subsequent Indian cases have followed the above cases and taken the view
that the courts will only intervene when the conditions specifically set out
__ in the Constitution in Articles 310 and 311 are violated and not otherwise.
Vide _Satish Chandra Anand v. Union of India._ (49) _Purshotam Lal Dhingra v.
Union of India,_ (50) __ and _Shyam L al v. State of U. P._ (51)

As far as our provisions are concerned, we too have adequate administrative
procedures for the redress of grievances. But what is most significant about
the Indian provisions is that notwithstanding that they can claim to enjoy a
statutory status, all those provisions (except the specific conditions
mentioned in the constitution itself) have been regarded as purely
administrative rules falling within the domain of the Executive and are
regarded as being beyond the reach of the courts. Therefore to say that the
Indian provisions are statutory provisions - they are actually enacted by the
Legislature and expressed to be so - is not to the point. What matters is that
they are still treated as pure administrative instructions and procedures and
beyond the peach of the Courts.

In my view the provisions of Article 55 (4) are non-statutory in nature and
Article 55(4) and Article 55(5) are complimentary and support each other.
Article 55(5) makes the provisions made by the cabinet arid executive action
consequent thereon also non justiciable. Compared with this, the power of sub-
delegation contained in Article 58 is even of lesser importance and can in no
quality be regarded as statutory provisions. In the result I hold that there
are no statutory limitations on the power of delegation contained in Article
58 and that the __ Regional Director's act meets the second requirement
enunciated by de Smith to establish valid agency. With this conclusion it
necessarily follows that the acceptance of the resignation by the Regional
Director is valid. On this ground alone the petition would fail.

But one of the main issues in the case and the principle objection taken by
the 1st respondent from the outset to this election petition, is the
preclusive nature of Article 55 (5) as a bar to the petitioner's case.
Considering that it was a matter argued before us, having regard to its
constitutional importance and the fact that it buttresses the finding I have
just made, some pronouncement on it is called for here.

**

186

**

There is no doubt - and it has been conceded by all counsel that Article 55(5)
is a preclusive clause. The parties are however divided on the extent of its
coverage. Mr. Chosky's contention is that it cannot shut out the court when a
question of _vires_ is involved. Mr. Azeez was again hesitant to engage in any
general discussion of this provision - though we had decided to send this
appeal before a collective court mainly on this matter. To a pointed question
by me he conceded that in view of this provision it would not be open to a
third party to canvass a decision of the administration. Any other answer
would have serious repercussions on the administration of the public service
and would put the clock back to the position that prevailed prior to 1972,
opening the internal administration of the public service to the full scrutiny
of the courts once again.

Even a cursory look at Article 55(5) shows that it goes well beyond the usual
kind of preclusive clause. Article 55(5) states that no court or tribunal
shall have power or jurisdiction over any order or decision of the Cabinet of
Ministers, the Public Service Commission, a Committee of the Public Service
commission, or of a public officer in regard to any matter concerning the
appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer.
It goes on to state specifically that a court or tribunal cannot "inquire
into, pronounce upon, or in any manner call in question any such order or
decision."

But it is not only in width and range that this preclusive provision is of an
exceptional kind. The wording is undoubtedly cast extensively going well
beyond the usual type of preclusive clauses which have come up for decision,
but this is also a provision embodied in the Constitution constituting a part
of the fundamental law of the country and relating to the administrative
structure of government. In _Marrikissoon v. Attorney-General,_ (52), the
Privy Council referred to this aspect of the matter, but left the matter
undecided.

In the U.K. law, the courts have grappled with the problem of preclusive
clauses and of the vesting of uncontrolled power in a tribunal. But this is in
ordinary legislation.

The leading case on the subject is the well known _Anisminic case_ (supra).
The U.K. more than most countries is wedded to the concept of the rule of law
which they feel is protected primarily by the courts. Ouster clauses are
naturally abhorrent to the court system which obtains there. Such clauses are
looked at with disfavour and the need for them is not very much appreciated.
There has also been a large

**187**

measure of public support and Parliamentary acquiescence for such decision
until the reaction to the _Anisminic_ ruling. In the result the U.K. courts
have found it possible to virtually entrench in the law the principle that an
executive body or tribunal should riot be allowed to be the final judge of the
extent of its own power notwithstanding any preclusive clauses.

While such a principle has the persuasiveness arid simplicity of a fundamental
principle, it is one-sided and does not seek to reach any kind of compromise
with what may have been the actual intentions of Parliament. Parliament had
also persisted in enacting preclusive clauses with the intention of
withdrawing certain administrative acts and decisions from the jurisdiction of
the court in the interests of good administration. The cleverness and wisdom
of the judicial pronouncements lie in their avoiding any confrontation with
the Legislature and providing a reason which can be passed off as self-evident
and making it appear that the courts are actually acting in conformity with
the intentions of Parliament rather than defying them.

Professor Wade in his work "Administrative Law" (5th Edn.), at page 604,
states that as a result of the _Anisminic_ judgment.

" .............. The policy of the courts __ thus becomes one of total
disobedience to Parliament. Under the basic distinction which formerly __
obtained, and which the House of Lords supposed that they were upholding in
the _Anisminic_ case, judges could at least say that they were obeying
Parliament in some situations, while construing ouster clauses as not
applicable in others. But now they seem to have lost sight of the reasons
which justified their attitude originally."

By way of contrast Professor Wade speaks of the different approach in __ the
Australian cases at page 609. He says:

"The High Court of Australia has made interesting attempts to steer a middle
course. Its solution is to retain power to quash for plain excess of
jurisdiction, but not to intervene where the tribunal has made a bona fide
attempt to exercise its authority in a matter relating to the subject with
which the legislation deals and capable reasonably of being referred to the
power possessed by the tribunal. "'

**188**

This Australian approach merits consideration in its own right, but has great
appeal when we have to deal with a constitutional provision of that nature
which embodies the will of a sovereign People. It ought not to be brushed
aside except for good and weighty reasons.

There is therefore much to be said for a literal interpretation of Article
55(5), which would have the effect of shutting out the courts completely from
this sphere. First, this is a constitutional provision. The wording of Article
55(5), excluding matters of fundamental rights, suggests the inclusion of
everything else. Further this administrative sphere is regulated by a
hierarchy of self regulating and self correcting processes with no less than
the Cabinet of Ministers itself at the head.

Let us however assume that there is substance in Mr. Choksy's submissions and
a literal interpretation would be too drastic. Could we discover a less
rigorous test which can accommodate the examples given by Mr. Choksy?

Some of __ the examples that were given or come to one's mind in this
connection may be extreme or even fanciful like the General Manager of
Railways purporting to make an appointment to the medical services or the
Ayurvedic Commissioner making appointments to the Fisheries Department. Such
examples, if not extreme, are more often than not seen to be unreal and
illusory when analysed. Professor I.D. Campbell in __ a learned article
disposed of such an example - the office boy __ exercising the power of a
director - in the following vein:

"To take the fantastic but over popular instance of the office boy, it would
be unusual (to use no stronger word) for the directors to have power to
delegate to the office boy power to conclude important contracts; but if such
a power of __ delegation _were_ included in the articles, a delegation to the
office __ boy would be a perfectly normal exercise of the power of delegation.
Had it been a power to delegate authority to such person or persons as the
directors may think fit delegation to the office boy would be an unusual
exercise of the power, It would be so unusual that the outsider would be put
on inquiry."

This of course is not the only way of dealing with the matter. There are
usually, in our law, adequate administrative procedures and appeals to rectify
errors and dishonest acts, and it would be remarkable if the outrageous
examples that were given could have actually happened or remained unremedied.

**189**

Such examples go to highlight the problem. They may indicate one extreme. At
the other there is the perfectly lawful act for which no preclusive clause is
needed - even though validity may have to be finally determined in judicial
proceedings. Leaving these extremes out, there is middle ground where an act,
to use terminology from another branch of law may be voidable rather than void
as these terms are used strictly. They would include to borrow the wording of
the Australian case the instance where the power that had been exercised is
capable reasonably of being referred to the power possessed by that authority
and a bona fide attempt had been made to exercise that power. As the earlier
**** discussions relating to Professor de Smith's issues show, this would
include cases of implied ostensible or apparent authority. The present case
falls well within this category. In my view the preclusive provision ****
should be given effect to at least in this third category and I can see no
after instance for its application than the present case. This case involves a
matter of what is essentially indoor management and the exercise of potential
powers by the Regional Director and where in fact there has been a practice of
his exercising such functions.

To sum up, if we seek to apply the rigorous principles enunciated by de Smith,
stated earlier, and take the petitioner's case at its highest, I find that we
have here a case where the Education Services Committee has been duly vested
with authority to accept resignations. It was fully authorised by Article 58
to sub-delegate this power to any public officer. So that a Regional Director
of Education, a Head of a Department, and who ordinarily constituted the
channel of communication between teachers in the region and the Education
Services Committee, could have constituted a proper authority in law for
vesting this authority. The procedures for such delegation were also non-
statutory and there were no statutory procedures imposing limitations on the
agent.

Stated in negative terms enunciated by de Smith, we find that the Regional
Director did not purport to exercise a power which the Education Services
Committee did not possess, nor did the Regional Director exercise a power
which he was potentially incapable of being delegated. There were also no
statutory powers trammelling the exercise of powers of both these authorities.
Further, we find that the conduct of the Education Services Committee, the
Ministry of Education, and the Government has been such that by their acts of

**190**

commission or omission they had held out or represented the Regional Director
as an officer who was capable of or was entitled to exercise his power. The
Education Services Committee also appears to have acquiesced in the exercise
of power by the Regional Director or had itself neglected to exercise that
power and remained idle and permitted the Regional Director to exercise the
power.

In the result I hold that in virtue of Article 55(5), this court cannot
inquire into the validity of the acceptance of the 1st respondent's letter of
appointment.

The effect of Article 55 (5) in this case is to screen and shut out any
inquiry into the validity of the acceptance of the letter of resignation. This
ruling reinforces my earlier ruling on the other issue and their conjoint
effect is that the 1st respondent was duly qualified to be nominated and
elected for this seat.

In view of this conclusion I find it unnecessary to consider the other matters
raised by both counsel. I would accordingly dismiss this appeal with costs
both here and before the Election judge. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

Election of 1st respondent declared void.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/19.html_  

