##  Premalal Perera v. Weerasuriya and Others - SLR - 177, Vol 2 of 1985
[1985] LKSC 19; (1985) 2 Sri LR 177 (10 July 1985)

**

177

PREMALAL PERERA  
v.  
WEERASURIYA AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
RANASINGHE, J. ATUKORALE, J. AND L.H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 18 OF 1985.  
MAY 16, 30 and 31, 1985.

_

Fundamental Rights of freedom of thought, conscience and religion, and of
equality - Articles 10, 12 (1) and 14 (1) (e) and 4 (d) of the Constitution -
Circular to deduct contribution from salary to the National Security Fund in
the: absence of objection - Can it amount to infringement of Fundamental
Rights ?

_

The petitioner an employee of the Government Railway Department complained
that a circular authorising the deduction of a contribution from him to the
National Security Fund in the absence of objection by him infringes (1) his
Fundamental Right of freedom of thought, conscience and freedom (Article 10,
14 (1) (e) of the` Constitution) because the money is to be used to buy arms
and weapons which will be employed in the destruction of human' life and
violence which is repugnant to the tenets of the Buddhist faith and belief
which he professes and by requiring express objection forces him to make
public- his opinions with a view to singling him out for and exposing him to
harassment and (2) his right to equality (Article 12 (1) of the Constitution)
because employees of the Health Department for' instance have not been called
upon to contribute to the National Security Fund.

**178**

**

Held :

**

(1) The Fundamental Right of freedom of thought, conscience and religion is by
our Constitution cast in absolute terms and it will have to give way only to
any law, written or unwritten, which was in force at the time the Constitution
came into operation but only to the extent of any inconsistency as between
them.

(2) Beliefs rooted in religion are protected. A religious belief need not be
logical, acceptable, consistent or comprehensible in order to be protected.
Unless the claim is bizarre and clearly non-religious in motivation, it is not
within the judicial function and judicial competence to inquire whether the
person seeking protection has correctly perceived the commands of his
particular faith. The courts are not the arbiters of scriptural interpretation
and should not undertake to dissect religious beliefs.

(3) A regulation neutral on the face of it may in its application nonetheless
offend the constitutional requirement if it unduly burdens the full and free
exercise of a right.

(4) The necessity to express objection openly to the deduction does not and
cannot amount to a violation of the precept of petitioner's religion as
asserted in the: petition because no penal sanctions or disabilities are
prescribed for objectors to the deduction and there was no interference in any
way with the full and free practice by the petitioner of his religion.

(5) The material before Court was insufficient to decide whether the right to
equality has been violated by the fact that Health Department employees were
not called upon to make the contribution to the National Security Fund.

**

Cases referred to :

**

  1. Reynolds v.U.S.145 
  2. West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette 319 U.S.624 
  3. Braunfeld v. Brown 366 U.S. 599 
  4. Sherbert v. Verner 374 U.S. 398 
  5. Wisconsin v. Yoder 406 U.S. 205 
  6. Thomas v. Review Board of the Indiana Employment Security Division 450 U.S. 707. 
  7. Gillette v. United States 401 U.S. 437 
  8. United States v. Seeger 380 U.S. 163 
  9. Welsh v. United States 398 U.S. 333
  10. Gallagher's case 366 U.S., 517 
  11. Elmore Perera v. Montague Jayawickreme, Minister of Public Administration et. al [1985] 1 SLR 285. 

**

APPLICATION** Complaining of infringement of Fundamental Rights.

R.K.W. Goonesekera with Desmond Fernando, J. Yoosoof and N. Punchihewa for the
petitioner.

S. Maharoof, Senior State Counsel for the respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**179**

July 10, 1985 **  
RANASINGHE .J**

On 17.12.84 the 1st respondent, who is the General Manager, Railway
department, issued the Circular, which has been market IR2 in these
proceedings, to the several officers of the Department, set out therein,
directing them to deduct, from those employees of the Department, who signify
their consent, in the specified form, to a deduction of a day's salary (or any
larger sum) from their salary for the month of January 1985 as a contribution
from them towards what was then called, the National Security Fund.
Thereafter, on 31.12.84, the 1st respondent issued further Circular, P2, in
regard to the self-same matter P2 alters the basis upon which the deduction,
referred to in the earlier Circular 1R2 is to be made. According to P2 such
deduction is to be made from all those employed in the Railway Department,
except those who inform the Accounts Section that they do not consent to the
said deduction ( Sinhala language) P2 also sets out the reasons why such
alteration in procedure is being made, viz : the need to make the contribution
to the said Fund without delay within the month of January 1985 itself, the
lack of time within which to make such deduction after obtaining the consent,
on account of the end-of-the-year transfers.

The petitioner, who joined the Ceylon Government Railway on or about 8.9.1977
as an unskilled worker, is presently attached to the Chief Mechanical
Engineer's sub-department workshop at Ratmalana, but has, however, been under
interdiction from 5.7.80. The petitioner has made this application to this
Court on 28.12.85, under the provisions of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution
praying for declarations that the aforesaid Circular P2 violates the
Fundamental Rights guaranteed to the petitioner by the provisions of Articles
10 and / or 12 (1) of the Constitution and that the deduction made by the 1st
respondent in pursuance of the said Circular, P2, of a sum of Rs.19 from his
salary for the month of January 1985 constitutes an infringement of the said
Fundamental Rights. Orders directing the 1st respondent to refund the said sum
of Rs.19 so deducted, and not to make any further deductions from the
petitioner's salary.

**180**

The petitioner states : that, when he was paid his salary for the month of
January 1985 on 31.1.85, he found that a sum of Rs.19 had been deducted :
that, upon his informing the officer, who paid him his salary, that he had not
expressed his consent to any such deduction, he was informed of the Circular
P2 which he then found exhibited on the notice-board : that he had no
intimation of the Circular P2 before the said deduction was made from his
salary for the month of January 1985 : that, in any event, there was no
obligation cast upon him to communicate his objection to any such deduction :
that he verily believes that the monies of the said National Security Fund are
to be utilized, inter alia, for the purchase of arms and military equipment to
be used for the destruction of human life, including those of the member of
the minority Tamil community who are protesting and agitating against the
atrocities committed, with the approval of the Government, by the armed forces
of the Government : that the petitioner, being a Buddhist, is against the
taking of human life and the use of violence : that the use of violence, and
of military operations, by the Government is in direct violation of the
teachings and practice of Buddhism : that such deductions have not been made
from the salaries of all public officers, for instance, the members of the
Department of Health ; that the armed services have also been used, by the
Government, for the suppression of the protests of the University students and
of anti-government literature, for the disruption of peaceful demonstrations,
and against those who lost their employment as a result of the strike in July
1983 ; that the procedure set out in P2 is a means of picking out those whose
views are in conflict with the views of the party now in power with a view to
subjecting them to political harassment and victimization ; the petitioner,
therefore, pleads that the said Circular, P2, and the consequent deduction of
the sum of Rs.19 form his salary for the month of January 1985, constitute an
infringement of not only the Fundamental Right of the freedom of thought,
conscience and religion, including the freedom to have or adopt a religion or
belief of his choice guaranteed by Article 10 of the Constitution but also the
Fundamental Right of equality before the law and of equal protection of the
law guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

The 1st respondent accepts both the issuance of the two Circulars 1R2 and P2,
and also the deduction of the said sum of Rs.19 from the salary due to the
petitioner for the month of January '85, and further states : that the said
deduction was made in the belief that the

**181**

petitioner has consented : that the 1st respondent became aware of the
petitioner's objection only after the institution of these proceedings ; that,
in view of the fact that the petitioner states he objects to such deduction,
he the 1st respondent, undertakes to refund the said sum of Rs.19 to the
petitioner ; the said Circular P2 was not issued with any intention of singing
out any employee of the department for harassment or victimization. The 1st
respondent denies that P2 was either intended to or does violate any
Fundamental Right of the petitioner.

The 3rd respondent, who is the Secretary of the Ministry of National Security
has in his affidavit, set out how the contributions made to the National
Security Fund were, and are, to be utilized.

The contents of the Circular P2 themselves, and the affidavit of the 1st
respondent make it clear that the deduction referred to in P2 is to be made
only from the salary for the month of January 1985, and that no further
deductions were to be made. The operative period of P2 was confined to the
month of January 1985 ; and it has ceased to be in operating thereafter.

Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the petitioner
makes no complaint of a violation of any fundamental right of his in respect
of the Circular 1 R2. The petitioner's position is that, of the two circulars,
it is only P2 that he alleges constitutes a violation of his fundamental
rights, viz : those Fundamental Rights referred to in his petition, 1 R2,
though dealing with the self-same subject matter the petitioner submits, gives
no room for him to complain of a violation of any fundamental right guaranteed
to him by the Constitution. Learned Counsel further submitted : that it is the
requirement, set out in P2, of an express objection in writing by those who do
not want a deduction to be made, which distinguishes P2 from 1 R2 and which
makes it objectionable : that when, in order to prevent the deduction, he
submits a written objection, he thereby makes public his religious beliefs,
and also matters connected with his conscience and thoughts which he is under
no obligation to disclose to anyone : that the said requirement compels him to
do something which he would not otherwise have done nor could have been
required to do concerning a matter in respect of which he had complete freedom
to think and believe in : that the imposition of such a requirement operates
to compel him to make a disclosure in regard to a matter, which he was free to
keep to himself; and thereby expose himself to penalties and to harassment.

**182**

Learned Counsel for the petitioner relied on several American decisions to
support his contention that the said Circular P2 amounts to an infringement of
the freedom of thought, conscience and religion the petitioner is entitled to.

Article 10 of our Constitution guarantees to every person the "Freedom of
thought, conscience and religion, -including the freedom to have or adopt a
religion or belief of his choice" ; and Article 14 '(1) (e)" assures to every
citizen the freedom, either by himself or in association with others, and
either in public or in private, to manifest his religion or belief in worship,
observance, practice and teaching".

The First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States provides :
"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion or
prohibiting the` free exercise thereof ; . . . .""

In India Article 25 of the Constitution guarantees to all persons the
"freedom-of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate
religion".

In India, the freedom so assured to every person is, however, made subject to
the limitations set out in the same article in the

Constitution itself. In America, the freedom of religion is declared in
absolute terms and it has been left to the Courts to evolve exceptions to such
freedom. With us in Sri Lanka the freedom of religion spelt out in Article 10
as set out above, has also been cast in absolute terms. This Article, along
with Article 11, are the only rights, from and out of all the Fundamental
Rights declared and recognized by Chapter III of the Constitution, which are
not made subject to any restrictions. Whilst the exercise and operation of the
rights set out in Articles 12, 13 and 14 are all made subject to the
respective restrictions set out in Article 15, no such restriction can,
however, be imposed in Sri Lanka upon the exercise and operation of the
freedom of thought, conscience and religion so declared and recognized by the
Constitution. In view, however, of the provisions of Article 16 (1) of the
Constitution any existing written or unwritten law, which conflicts with any
of the provisions of Chapter III - which includes the aforesaid Article 10 -
will prevail over the provisions of the said Chapter.

The content and reach of the Fundamental Right of freedom of thought,
conscience and religion, embodied in our Constitution does not appear to have
been considered by this Court earlier. In determining the nature and the scope
of the said constitutional right, a

**183**

consideration of the decisions handed down by the American and Indian Supreme
Courts in respect of the. corresponding rights embodied in the American and
Indian Constitutions would seem: to be both relevant and helpful.

In the case of Reynolds v. U. S. (1) which wag-decided by the Supreme Court of
the United States, Reynolds,' who was charged in the 187 as, while Utah was
still a territory, in a territorial court with having committed bigamy,
testified in his defence that Mormon doctrine to which he adhered, did not
merely permit plural marriages but required, and that, if he failed or refused
to practice polygamy when circumstances would admit", he would be punished by
"damnation in the life to come". Reynolds was convicted by the trial court ,
and the conviction was affirmed by the Supreme Court. Chief Justice Waite, who
delivered the opinion of the Court, did, in the course of the judgment, whilst
laying down the now well-known "belief -action'' distinction, pose the
question whether those who make polygamy a part of their religion are excepted
from-the operation of the law prohibiting bigamy ; and proceeded to deal with
it in this way "if they are, then those who do not make polygamy a part of
their religious belief may be found guilty and punished while those who do,
most be acquitted and go free. This would be introducing a new element to
criminal law. Laws are made for the government, of actions, and while they
cannot interfere with the mere religious belief and opinions, they may with
practices. Suppose one believed that human sacrifices were a necessary part of
religious worship, would it be seriously contended that the civil government
;under which e lived could not interfere to prevent a sacrifice ? Or if a wife
religiously believed it was her duty to burn herself upon the funeral pyre o!
her dead husband, would it be beyond the power of the civil government to
prevent her carrying her belief into practice ? So here, as a law of the
organization of society under the exclusive dominion of the United States, it
is provided that plural marriages shall not be allowed. Can a man excuse' his
practices to the contrary because of his religious belief ? To permit this
would be to make the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the
law of the land, and in effect to permit every citizen to become a law unto
himself. Government could exist only in name under such circumstances''. -

**184**

In June 1943, six months after the attack on Pearl Harbour and the entry of
the United. States into World War ll, the Supreme Court of the United States
delivered the judgment in the case of West Virginia State Board of Education
v. Barnette, (2) which is one of that group of cases which have since become
famous as the "flag-Salute" cases. What came up for consideration in that case
was an application made on behalf of a Jehovah's Witness to restrain the
enforcement of a resolution of the Board of Education of West Virginia that
all teachers and pupils in the public schools established by the State of
Virginia "shall be required to participate in the salute honoring the Nation
represented by the Flag : provided however that refusal to salute the Flag be
regarded as an act of insubordination, and shall be dealt with accordingly"
the Salute was to be accompanied by the making of also a pledge of allegiance.
Failure to conform was to be dealt with by expulsion ; and readmission was
denied until compliance. The expelled child was considered to be "unlawfully
absent" and was liable to be proceeded against as a "delinquent" which meant
that the parents or guardians of such child were liable to prosecution and if
convicted were subject to a fine not exceeding $50 and a term of imprisonment
not exceeding thirty days. Justice Jackson who delivered the opinion of the
Court stated : that the real issue in this matter was not whether people with
religious scruples had to be excused from the flag-salute, but whether anyone
can be required to salute the flag against his will that the freedom asserted
by the petitioners did not bring them into conflict with rights asserted by
any other individual that the compulsory flag-salute and pledge require
affirmation of a belief and an attitude of mind that that was really an issue
of freedom of expression. In coming to the conclusion that the principle,
which should decide the case is that no one could be compelled by the
government to profess a belief, Justice Jackson observed :

"If there is any fixed star in our constitutional constellation, it is that no
official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics,
nationalism, religion or other matters of opinion or force citizens of confess
by word or act their faith therein. If there are any circumstances which
permit an exception, they do not now occur to us".

**185**

The Supreme Court accordingly affirmed the judgment of the lower court
enjoining enforcement of the said resolution of. the West Virginia State Board
of Education. This group - "flag-salute" cases -. has been, considered the
most ""graphic illustration of the relationship, between the constitutional
protection of speech and religion".

The question, whether, even if religious belief cannot be a defence to all
criminal charges, there are in America some cases where religious conscience
can excuse compliance with the law, came to, be considered by the Supreme
Court in 1961 , almost a century, after the. decision in Reynold's case
(supra), in the case of Braunfeld v. Brown (3) which said decision is,
incidentally, also considered to be the. "first-crack" in the "belief-action".
distinction drawn by Chief Justice Waite in the Reynold's case (supra). In
this case the Supreme Court was called upon to consider the constitutionality
of a criminal statute enacted in 1959 by the State of Pennsylvania (and better
known as a "Sunday closing" law) proscribing the Sunday retail sale of certain
enumerated commodities. Braunfeld and several other merchants of Pennsylvania,
who were members of the Orthodox Jewish faith which requires he closing of
their places of business and a total abstention of all manner of work from
nightfall each Friday until nightfall each Saturday, and` who were engaged in
the retail sale of the commodities so proscribed instituted proceedings in the
original court seeking a permanent injunction against the enforcement of the
said "Sunday-closing'' law, on the basis that the enforcement of the said law
will prohibit the free exercise of their religion because, due to the
compulsion to close on Sunday, they will suffer economic loss, to the benefit
of their non-Sabbatarian competitors if they also continue their. Sabbath
observance by closing their business on Saturday ; that in the result they
will have either to give up their Sabbath observance, which is a basic tenet
of their Orthodox Jewish faith, or face serious economic disadvantage by
continuing to, adhere to their Sabbath. Chief Justice Warren delivering the
opinion of the Court stated: that the issue was whether the First and
Fourteenth (which guarantee the equal protection of the laws) Amendments
forbid application of the Sunday Closing Law to the petitioners ; that certain
aspects of religious worship, cannot, in any way, be restricted or burdened by
legislation ; that compulsion by law of the acceptance of any, creed or the
practice of any form of worship is strictly forbidden, the freedom to held
religious beliefs, and opinion is absolute ; that state _action in compelling
(as in Barnette "s case) (supra) school children to salute the

**186**

flag, on pain of expulsion from public school is contrary to the First
Amendment when applied to those students whose religious beliefs forbade
saluting a flag ; that the freedom to act, even when the action is in accord
with one's religious convictions is not totally free from legislative
restrictions ; that (as pointed out in Reynold's case) (supra) legislative
power over mere opinion is forbidden, but it may reach people's actions when
they are found to be in violation of important social duties or subversive of
good order, even when the actions are demanded by one's religion , that, if
the purpose or effect of a law is to impede the observance of one or all
religion of is to discriminate invidiously between religions, that; law is
constitutionally invalid even though the burden may be characterised as being
only indirect ; that if the State regulates conduct by enacting a general law
within !t power, the purpose and effect of which is to advance the State's
secular goals, the statute is valid despite its indirect burden on religious
observances, unless the state may accomplish its purpose by means which do not
impose a burden ; that, in this case, however, the statute does not make
criminal the holding of any religious belief or opinion,' nor does it force
anyone to embrace any religious belief or to say or believe anything in
conflict with his religious tenets, the law simply regulates a secular
activity, viz., setting one day of the week apart from others as a day of rest
; and as applied to the petitioners operates so as to make the practice of
their' religious beliefs more expensive , they are not faced with as serious a
choice as making their religious practices and subjecting themselves to
criminal prosecution , the option available to them is wholly different than
when legislation attempts to make a religious practice itself unlawful. Having
set out these grounds, 'Chief Justice Warren (with whom the majority
concurred) held that the said statute cannot be said to be invalid either on'
its face or as applied. Although the majority rejected the claim based upon
the Free Exercise claim (based upon the First Amendment), yet both the
majority opinion and the dissenting judgment agreed that there could be cases
in which exemption for religion might be required.'

Adell Sherbert had been working in a 'mill in South Carolina for sometime
prior to 1957. In 1957 she became a member of the Seventh-day Adventist
Church, a basic tenet of which prohibits labour on' Saturdays The mill, which
had been- working only five days in the week, changed over to a six-day work
week in 1959, and as A.S. would not work on Saturdays, she was discharged.
A.S. could not find

**187**

other employment because the jobs, which were available, all required her to
work on Saturday. A.S. then applied for State Unemployment Compensation. These
benefits were also refused on the ground that she had failed "without good
cause" to accept available suitable work when offered to her. A.S. then came
into court. In the case of Sherbert v. Verner (4) the South Carolina Supreme
Court rejected her contention, that the disqualifying provisions of the South
Carolina Unemployment Compensation Act, in terms of which the benefits, which
she would otherwise have been entitled to, were denied to her, abridged her
right to the free exercise of her religion secured to her under the Free
Exercise Clause of the First Amendment. The State Supreme Court held that A.S.
"s ineligibility infringed no constitutional liberties because such a
construction on 'the statute ''places no restriction upon the appellant's
(i.e. A.S."s) freedom of religion nor does it in any way prevent her in the
exercise of her right and freedom to observe her religious beliefs in
accordance with the dictates of her conscience". Brennan, J., who had earlier
dissented from the majority decision in Braunfeld's case (supra), delivered
the opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States (with which Warren, C.J
, Black, J., Clark, J., who had all formed the majority in Braunfeld's case,
(supra) concurred) holding in favour of A.S. that A.S. s conscientious
objection to Saturday work constitutes no conduct prompted by religious
beliefs of a kind within reach of state legislation : that there was no
compelling State interest enforced in the eligibility provision which
justified infringement of A. S.'s. First Amendment right ; that the
disqualification from receiving the said benefit imposes a burden on the free
exercise of A.S.'s religion

The impact of the compulsory school attendance laws of the State of Wisconsin
on the rights of those who profess the Amish religious faith, to the free
exercise of their religious beliefs came up for consideration by the Supreme
Court of the United States in the year 1972 in the case of Wisconsin v. Yoder
(5). Wisconsin laws required the children to attend school until the age of
16. The three respondents Y., Y., and M., who were all members of the Old
Order Amish religion declined to send their children, who were 14 and 15 years
of age, to public school after completing the eighth grade, and were convicted
of violating the State's compulsory attendance law. The respondents so refused
because they believed' that by sending them to High School they would not only
expose themselves to the danger of the censure of the Church community but
would also

**188**

endanger their own salvation and that of their children. The State accepted
the sincerity of the respondent's religious belief. Chief Justice Burger; who
delivered the opinion of the Court affirming the decision of the Supreme Court
of Wisconsin in favour of the respondents, observed : that, in order for the
State of Wisconsin to compel school attendance beyond the eighth grade against
a claim that such attendance interferes with the practice of a legitimate
religious belief, it must appear either that the State does not deny the free
exercise of religious belief by its requirement or that there is a State
interest of such magnitude as to override the interest claiming protection
under the Free Exercise Clause ; that to have the protection of the Religion
Clause, the claim must be rooted in religious belief ; that a regulation
neutral . on the face of it may in its application nonetheless offend the
constitutional requirement for government neutrality if it. unduly-, burdens
the free exercise of religion ; that the First; and Fourteenth Amendments
prevent the- State, however strong The, State's interest in, Universal
compulsory education is, from compelling respondents to cause their children
to attend formal High School at age 16.

The nature and the extent of the protection that is accorded. in the United
States to a citizen's belief rooted in religion was once again considered by
the Supreme Court of the United States: of America in 1980 in the case of
Thomas v. Review Board of .the Indiana Employment Security Division (6)
Thomas, who was a Jehovah's witness and who was employed n a foundry and
machinery company, was transferred from the roll foundry to another department
of the company which produced turrets for military tanks. He claimed that his
religious beliefs prevented him from participating in the production of war
materials and requested a lay-.off. When such-request was denied him. Thomas,
quit, asserting that his religious beliefs prevented him from participating in
the production of war weapons- He then applied for Unemployment Compensation ;
and the, respondent Review Board denied him such benefits by,-applying the
disqualifying provisions of the relevant statute, viz., that his voluntary
term nation was- not based upon "good cause'' arising in connection with-his
work. The Supreme Court of Indiana, reversing the decision of the Indiana
Court; of-Appeal, denied Thomas relief on the ground that good cause" which
justifies voluntary termination must be "job related and objective in
character'' that; as. Thomas had quit voluntarily, for personal reasons he did
not qualify for benefits that denying Thomas benefits would

**189**

create only an-indirect burden on his free exercise right, and that the burden
was justified by the legitimate state interest in preserving the integrity of
the insurance fund and maintaining a stable work force by encouraging workers
not to leave their job for personal reasons.' Chief Justice Burger, delivering
the opinion of the Supreme Court of the United States, which set aside the-
judgment of the Supreme Court of Indiana and gave Thomas relief, observed :
that only benefits rooted in religion are protected by the Free Exercise
Clause, which by its terms gives special protection to the exercise of
religion - that the determination. of what is a "religious" belief or practice
is more often than not a difficult and delicate task, and the resolution of
that question is not to turn upon a judicial perception of the particular
belief or practice in question , that religious-beliefs need not be
acceptable, logical, consistent or comprehensible to others in order to merit
Constitutional protection - that Thomas was put to a choice between fidelity
to religious belief or cessation of work ; that where the.-state conditions
receipts of an important benefit upon conduct proscribed by a religious faith
or where it denies such a benefit because of conduct mandated by religious
belief,; thereby putting substantial pressure on an adherent to modify his
behaviour and to violate his beliefs, a burden upon religion exists : that
only interests of the highest order can overbalance! legitimate claims to the
free exercise of religion. The principles which had earlier been applied in
Yoder's case (supra) and Sherbert's case (supra) were once again applied in
this case.

The conscientious objector exemption found in the United States Selective
Service Act came up for consideration by the Supreme Court of the United
States in 1971, in the case of Gillette v. United States (7). Since 1940, the
policy of the draft laws has been to extend the objection to all persons who
have religious objections to all wars and to limit the exemption to those
persons whose objections to war are religious". In Gillette's case (supra) the
challenge to the constitutionality of these laws came from Gillette whose
objections were limited to the Vietnam War, rather than to war in general.
Gillette in defending a prosecution for failure to report for induction
contended that he viewed the Vietnam War as "unjust", and that based on a
"humanist approach to religion" his decision not to serve in an unjust war was
guided by fundamental principles' of conscience and deeply held views about
the purpose and obligation of human existence. Justice Marshall rejecting the
claim based on the Free Exercise Clause

**190**

stated : that the conscription laws, applied to such persons as others, are
not designed to interfere with any religion, ritual or practice and do not
work a penalty against any theological position : that the incidental burdens
felt by persons in Gillette's position are strictly justified by substantial
government interests that relate directly to the very impacts questioned.

In 1948 the American Congress defined, in sec. 6 Q) of the Universal Military
Training and Service Act, ""religious training and belief" as including ""an
individual's belief in a relation to a Supreme Being involving duties superior
to those arising from any human relation" and excluding "essentially
political, sociological or philosophic views or a merely personal code." In
1957 when Daniel Seeger applied for conscientious objector status he informed
the draft board that he was not sure he believed in God, but that he did have
a ""belief in and devotion to goodness and virtue for their own sakes, and a
religious faith in a purely ethical creed." The draft board denied Seeger
exemption on the ground that his views were not "religious" as defined in the
said sec. 6 (J). It was contended that the "Supreme Being Clause" was
unconstitutional because it distinguished between theistic and-non-theistic
religious beliefs. The Supreme Court of the United - States upheld the
constitutionality of the said sec. 6 (j) - United States v. Seeger (8). Whilst
doing so, the Supreme Court, however, laid down a definition of ''religion"
which took in beliefs like Seeger"s. Observing that a narrow construction of
the said sec. 6 (j) might exclude Buddhists and Hindus as persons whose views
were not "religious," the Supreme Court stated that a view was religious if it
was "a sincere and meaningful belief which occupies in the life of. the
possessor a place parallel to that filled by the God of those admittedly
qualifying for the exemption."

In 1970 the Supreme Court dealt with this issue again in the case of Welsh v.
United States (9). This decision was made, when the reference to the Supreme
Being was still part-of the aforesaid sec. 6 (j) - the said reference to a
Supreme Being was eliminated by Congress in 1967. Welsh's claim for
conscientious objector states was turned down by the draft board on the ground
that his views were not "religious". Justice Black, who delivered the opinion
of the _Supreme Court of the United States, took the view : that Welsh was
entitled to an exemption under sec. 6 (j) because his views were religious.;
that what is necessary for a conscientious objection to al

**191**

wars to be 'religious', within the meaning' of sec. 6 (j) is that such
opposition to war-should stem `from the objector's moral, ethical or religious
beliefs about what is right and wrong and that such beliefs be held with the
strength of traditional religious convictions , that, if an individual deeply
and sincerely holds beliefs that are purely ethical or moral in source and
content but that nevertheless impose upon him a duty of conscience to refrain
from participating in war at any time, these beliefs certainly occupy in the
'life of the individual "a place parallel to that filled by .... '. God" in
traditionally religious persons.

The effect of the corresponding Articles - 25 and 26 - of the Indian
Constitution is to provide : that free exercise of religion is subject to the
restrictions imposed by the state on grounds of public order, morality and
health : that the state does not interfere in matters of religion, not only in
regard to its doctrinal and ritual aspects, but also acts done in pursuance of
religion, and that there is thus a guarantee for rituals, observances,
ceremonies and modes_ of worship which are an integral part of the religion :
that the "essential part" of a religion is primarily to be ascertained with
reference to the doctrine of that religion itself, and would include practices
which are regarded by the community as part of its religion.

Just as in the United State of America so too in Sri Lanka "the right to free
religious expression embodies a precious: heritage of our history- ; and in a
pluralistic society "the protection of a self-expression, however unique, of
the individual and the group becomes ever more important" ; and "the varying
currents of the sub-cultures that flow into the mainstream of our national
life give it depth and beauty."

A consideration of the provisions in the Constitution of Sri Lanka, which
assure to the people of Sri Lanka the freedom to have and adopt a religion or
belief of their choice together with the freedom to manifest such religion or
belief - Articles 10 and 14(1)(e)-, against the background of not only the
provisions of Article 4(d) of the Constitution itself, but also the
aforementioned principles elucidated by the Supreme Court of the United States
and the Supreme Court of India, makes it clear : that the guarantee of the
freedom of religion, thought and conscience, like the rights set out in
Articles 11 , 13(3) and (4) is absolute, unfettered by even the likelihood of
the imposition of any restriction whatsoever after the promulgation of the

**192**

Constitution : that such freedom will have to, if at all, give way only to any
law, written or unwritten, which was in force at the time the Constitution
came into operation, and that too only to the extent of any inconsistency as
between them : that beliefs rooted in religion are protected : that the
determination of what is a "religious" belief or practice does not depend upon
a judicial perception of the particular belief or practice : that a religious
belief need not be logical, acceptable, consistent or comprehensible in order
to be protected that unless where the claim is so bizarre, so clearly non-
religious in motivation, it is not within the judicial function and judicial
competence to inquire whether the person seeking protection has correctly
perceived the commands of his particular faith : that the courts are not the
arbiters of scriptural interpretation, and should not undertake to dissect
religious beliefs : that evidence of experts and of religious dignitaries may
be considered by court only for the purpose of deciding whether the professed
belief is rooted in religion : the only other issue the court could decide is
whether the claimant honestly and sincerely entertained and held such belief :
that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what is to be orthodox in
religion or other matters of opinion or force citizens to proclaim by word or
act their belief in them : that a regulation neutral on the face of it may in
its application nonetheless offend the constitutional requirement if it unduly
burdens the full and free exercise of a right : that where an employee is put
to a choice between fidelity to a religious belief or cessation of work, the
coercive impact on the employee is unmistakable : that, where the state
conditions receipt of an important benefit upon conduct proscribed by a
religious faith, or where, it denies such benefit because of conduct mandated
by religious belief and thereby puts substantial pressure on, an adherent to
modify his behaviour and to violate his belief, there exists then a burden on
religion : that, in such a case while the compulsion maybe indirect the
infringement upon the exercise is nonetheless substantial : that even if the
impugned law does not compel overt affirmation of a repugnant belief, nor even
prohibit outright any of the complainant's religious practices, yet, if their
effect is that the complainant may not simultaneously practise the religion or
carry on his trade or employment without being hampered by a substantial
disadvantage, the effect is that there is then a clog on the full and free
exercise of religion.

**193**

The petitioner, as already set out earlier, makes no complaint against the
first Circular, 1 R2. It is the subsequent Circular P2, dated 31.12-84, that,
he submits, violates his Fundamental Rights. The vital difference between the
two Circulars is that the said deduction from the pay-sheet for the month of
January 1985 was to be made, according to 1 R2, only from those who expressly
`signify their consent in writing, in the specified form, to such a deduction.
No deduction was to be made from a person who does not express such consent.
All that a person, who did not desire to make such a contribution had to do to
prevent the deduction was merely to remain silent. According to P2, however,
the deduction was to be made from the pay-sheet, except from those who
communicate their objection . The deduction is to be made, unless an objection
was raised. Both circulars-required every employee of the department to do an
act upon which the deduction by the accounts unit of the department was made
to depend. The act of the employee, would, in the one case, be the written
expression of consent. In the other, it would be the expression of an
objection to each deduction. 1 R2 required the deduction to be made only if
there is an expression of consent: P2 required the deduction to be made,
unless there was an expression of objection. P2 directs a deduction only if
there is no objection expressed. If an objection is expressed there is then to
be no deduction. Whether or not a deduction was to be made - whether under 1
R2 or under P2 - ultimately depended entirely upon the wishes of the
petitioner, and upon what he, the petitioner, did. The petitioner takes
exception to the requirement, set out in P2, of the communication of an
objection if the petitioner does not desire to make the contribution. What is
being complained of as being objectionable is the compulsion to register
expressly an objection where an employee does not agree to a deduction.

The petitioner does not want the deduction made because he does not desire to
contribute towards the said National Security Fund, as the said Fund is to be
used, inter alia, for a purpose which his religion does not permit him to
subscribe to, viz. : purchase of military equipment.

That a Buddhist cannot, in keeping with the teachings of the Dhamma he has
taken refuge in, destroy, or even lend support in any form to the destruction
of, the life of any living being does not admit of any controversy. The
respondents have not challenged in any way the

**194**

fact of the existence of such a religious tenet or precept which constitutes
one of the five precepts - Pancha Seela - which any one professing the
religion of Lord Buddha undertakes of his own free will. Nor do they challenge
the genuineness and the sincerity of the petitioner's own assertion that he
has undertaken the said precept in terms of which he must abstain form taking
the life of any living being.

The objection, which has to be made by a person such as the petitioner, in
terms of the requirement set out in P2, is not one which a Buddhist is
prevented by the tenets or precepts of the religion he professes, from giving
expression to. If such objection is not expressly registered, a deduction will
be made under and by virtue of P2. Such a deduction made in the absence of an
objection from a person, who has both the freedom and the opportunity to
object, would amount to a contribution made at least with the acquiesence of
such person. The expression of such a protest openly and without any
reservations does not and cannot amount in any way to a violation of the
precept of his religion asserted by the petitioner.

The petitioner further contends that the expression of an objection would
result in his being singled out for victimization and harassment by the 1 st
respondent. The 1 st respondent has categorically denied any such sinister
purpose behind the imposition of the requirement embodied in P2. There is no
material before this Court upon which it could now be said that the fears
expressed by the petitioner are justified. The proclamation of one's views and
opinions, which an express protest, such as is required by P2, would entail,
would be no different from what would ensue from an expression of consent as
is set out in 1 R2. Whatever the form of expression be-whether as an
expression of consent in terms of 1 R2, or as an expression of protest as
stipulated by P2-such expression must inevitably and unmistakably make public
the views and beliefs inwardly-entertained by such person upon the subject. If
the expression in accordance with 1 R2 does not cause any harm, the expression
in accordance with P2 cannot cause .any greater degree of harm. What injures
the religious susceptibilities is not the requirement to make a communication
- whether of consent or of objection-but rather the requirement to make a
contribution from the monthly salary to the Fund set out in the said Circulars
P2 and 1 R2. If there is a protest, no deduction will be made, and there would
be no contribution towards the Fund from such employee.

**195**

No penal sanction is attached to a failure to contribute to the said Fund. Nor
is a person, who does not contribute made to suffer any disability. The
circular does not compel any overt affirmation of any belief which is
repugnant to the petitioner, as was done in Bamette's case (supra), Nor does
it prohibit outright any religious practice which the petitioner desires to
engage in as the law which was upheld in Reynold's case (supra) did. There is
no economic or other material disadvantage the petitioner would be subject to
if he does not agree to a deduction, as Adell Sherbert in Sherbert's case
(supra) had to-face. The petitioner was not confronted with a situation in
which he had to choose between being true and faithful to an immutable tenet
of the religion he professes and adheres to, or suffering a penalty or the
infliction of a disability, as the petitioners in Braunteld's case (supra),
Gallagher's case (10), Sherbert's case (supra), Yoder's case (supra) and
Thomas' case (supra) had to face.

In this view of the matter, I am of opinion that the expression of the
objection which the petitioner had to make, as was required by

the terms of the Circular P2, in-order to prevent a deduction and thereby
avoid making a contribution to the aforesaid National Security Fund, did not
interfere in any way with the full and free exercise by the petitioner of his
religion.

The petitioner's application, based upon a violation of the Fundamental Right
embodied in Articles 10 and 14 (1) (e) of, the Constitution must, therefore,
stand dismissed.

The petitioner has also complained of a violation of the Fundamental Right
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution - right to equality. The submission is
: that such deductions have not been made from the salaries of all public
officers : that, for instance, the employees of the Department of Health have
not been called upon to do so : that, therefore, the petitioner has not been
subjected to a disadvantage which other public servants have not been
subjected to. Apart from the bare assertion made in the petition, which was
supported in the petitioner's affidavit, no other independent evidence was
exhibited to this Court along with the petition. The 1 st respondent, in his
affidavit, denied any such inequality of treatment and discrimination. Towards
the concluding stages of the argument before this Court, learned Counsel for
the petitioner moved, in his reply, to tender an affidavit to support the
allegation that the employees of -the Health Department

**196**

have not been required to make any such contribution Learned Senior State
Counsel appearing for the respondents objected to the said affidavit being
accepted at that stage as he himself would not then have an opportunity to
contradict the averments in any such affidavit and prejudice would be caused
to the respondents. The application was, in these circumstances, refused by
this Court.

The content and reach of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution was considered by
a Full Bench of this Court recently, in the case of Elmore Perera v. Montague
Jayawickreme, Minister of Public Administration, et al (11 ). Having regard to
the principles set out by this Court in the said judgment it appears to me
that the material placed before this Court by the petitioner, to establish his
claim under this heading, falls far short of what is required to enable him to
obtain relief in respect of an infringement of the Fundamental Right embodied
in the said Article 12 (1 ). This claim too must, therefore, fail.

The 1 st respondent has, as set out earlier, undertaken to refund the
aforesaid sum of Rs. 19, deducted from the petitioner's salary for the month
of January 85. If the said sum has not yet- been refunded, the 1 st respondent
should take steps to refund the said sum to the petitioner forthwith.

In view of the opinion I have formed in regard to the principal matter in
issue in this application, I do not propose to consider the preliminary
objection - which briefly is that, as the 1 st respondent has agreed to refund
the sum of Rs. 19 referred to in the petition, a further consideration of the
application has become academic, and that a Court will not proceed to consider
questions where a matter could be disposed of on other grounds - raised on
behalf of the respondents to the hearing of this application.

The petitioner's application is, accordingly, refused, but without costs.

**

ATUKORALE, J. **\- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J. **\- I agree.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/19.html_  

