##  Wijeratne and Another v. The People'S Bank and Another - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of
1984 [1984] LKSC 19; (1984) 1 Sri LR 1 (1 January 1984)

# 1



**WIJERATNE AND ANOTHER**

**v.**

**THE PEOPLE'S BANK AND ANOTHER**



SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J., COLIN‑THOME, J.,

SOZA, J. AND RANASINGHE, J.

S.C. ‑ 63/83 & 65/83

JANUARY 9 10 11 AND 12, 1984.



Applications under Article 126 seeking relief for alleged breach of
fundamental rights ‑ Articles 4(c) and 12 of the Constitution ‑ Alleged
discrimination and deprivation of promotional prospects by People's Bank ‑ Is
it Infringement by executive or administrative action? Maintainability.



The People's Bank reorganised its security services so as to place the
petitioners in Class B of the Inspectors Grade although at the relevant period
they were drawing a salary higher than Class A of the Inspectors Grade. Two
applications were filed under Article 126 of the Constitution alleging
discrimination and deprivation of promotional prospects and infringement
thereby of fundamental rights to equality contrary to Article 12 and Article
4( _a_ ) and ( _d_ ) of the Constitution.



The petitioners contended that the Co‑operative movement in Sri Lanka was
organised as a part of executive or administrative action and the People's
Bank was an agency created by the State to further or promote the Co‑operative
movement.



Hence the Bank was an organ of Government and/or an administrative agency of
the State.



On a preliminary objection that the application was not maintainable as the
action of the People's Bank was not executive or administrative action‑



# Held



The jurisdiction of  the Supreme Court to grant relief under Article 126 of
the Constitution is limited to infringements of fundamental rights by
executive or administrative action.



The petitioners' service has no connection with the relationship of the
People's Bank and the Co‑operative movement and it is not necessary to
consider the legal character of this relationship. A public corporation can
for certain purposes serve as an agent or surrogate of the State. It all
depends on the nature of its functions,

# 2



whether it is performing a governmental function or not. It may happen that
certain of its functions may be governmental, whilst the others are not. When
a public corporation is performing its non‑governmental functions its action
does not have the attributes of State action or " executive or administrative
action "



It is not possible to make an exhaustive enumeration of the tests which would
invariably and in all cases provide an unfailing answer to the question
whether a corporation is a governmental agency or instrumentality.
Consideration of any single factor or the various factors seriatim will not
suffice but the Court will have to consider the cumulative effect of all the
factors to arrive at a decision.



The main role of the People's Bank is that of a commercial Bank. There is no
nexus between the State and the banking activities of the People's Bank. The
State is not involved in the commercial activities of the Bank. The commercial
activities of the Bank cannot qualify as State action.



The petitioners are employed by the Bank in connection with its commercial
activities. The employment of the petitioners in the Bank cannot be stamped as
State employment There is no State action involved in the People's Bank
re‑organising its security services and formulating its own scheme of
recruitment to carry on its banking activity. In the circumstances even if
there is substance in the allegation of the petitioners that there was
discrimination in the matter of their appointment, their grievances cannot
form the subject‑matter of an application to the Supreme Court for relief
under Article 126 of the Constitution where the alleged infringement is not by
executive or administrative action.



**Cases referred to**



(1)        _Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation of_ _Sri Lanka_ (1982) 1. Sri
L.R.1.



(2)        _Trendtex Trading Corporation v. Central Bank_ (1977) 1 All E.R. 88
1,894.



(3)        _Pfizer v. Minister of Health_ (1963) 3 All E.R, 779, 785.



(4)        _New York v. United States_ (1945) 326 U, S. Reports 572.



(5)        _Ramana v. I.A. Authority of_ _India A.I.R._ (1979) S.C. 1628.



(6)        _Jackson v. Metropolitan Edition Co._ (1974) 4 19 U.S. 365.



**APPLICATIONS** under Article 126 of the Constitution.



_Nimal Senanayake, S.A.,_ with _Faiz Mustapha, Miss S.M. Senaratne, Miss A.B.
Dissanayake, Saliya Mathew, L.E. Samarasinghe_ and _Miss Theleopa_ for
petitioners.



_Dr. J.A.L. Cooray_ with _K. Kanag ‑Iswaran _and _M.B. Peramuna_ for 1st
respondent (S.C, 63/83).



_Mark Fernando_ for 1st respondent (S.C. 65/83).



_K.M.M.B. Kulatunga, S.A., Solicitor ‑General _with _Sunil de Silva, Deputy
Solicitor ‑General_ and _A. Kasturiarachchi, S.C._ for Attorney‑General. _ _

_Cur. adv. vult._



# 3

** **

January 24, 1984.



**SHARVANANDA, J.**



The petitioners above named are security officers of the People's Bank, the
1st respondent above named. The duties performed by these officers consist in
providing security for cash transport for all bank vehicles when transporting
cash and other security during twenty‑four hours of the day and in doing such
assignment as instructed by the Bank. Under the Bank's reorganisation of
security service the petitioners had been placed in the category of Class B
inspectors of the security service, though at the relevant time they had been
drawing a salary higher than Class A inspectors of the service. They complain
that the purpose and result of placing them in Class B inspectors grade is to
deprive them of the opportunity of promotion to Superintendent's grade open to
the other officers in the Inspectors' grade, who were drawing a lower salary.
They state that the action of the People's Bank constitutes an infringement of
their fundamental rights to equality and contrary to Article 12 and Article 4(
_c_ ) & ( _d_ ) of the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka. By their applications they have applied to this Court for relief
under Article 126.



The People's Bank has denied the petitioners' allegation of discrimination and
has sought to justify their scheme of security service consisting of several
gradation of officers. At the commencement of the hearing of the applications
which were taken up together, counsel for the People's Bank took the
preliminary objection that the applications under Article 126 of the
Constitution cannot be maintained as there had been no infringement of
petitioners' alleged fundamental rights by "executive or administrative
action". This court decided to hear argument on the preliminary objection
which went to the root of the inquiry.



The question emerges whether the action of the People's Bank in placing the
petitioners in category B Inspectors' Grade of service although they were
drawing a salary higher than Class A Inspectors savours of " executive or
administrative action ". The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to entertain
and grant relief under Article 126 is limited to infringements of fundamental
rights by " executive or administrative action " only. If the infringement
does not stem from "executive or administrative action " the Supreme Court has
no

# 4



jurisdiction under Article 126 to entertain or grant the expeditious relief
provided by Article 126 to the applicant. If " executive or administrative
action " is not the causa causans of any infringement of fundamental rights
assured by the Constitution, the remedy will have, as was conceded by all
parties, to be pursued by way of an ordinary action in the competent civil
court.



In support of his preliminary objection counsel for the respondent relied
heavily on the judgement of this court in the case of _Wijetunga v. Insurance
Corporation of Sri Lanka_ (1) where on a review of all relevant authorities I
held that an employee of the Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka was not
entitled to maintain his application under Article 126 of the Constitution for
the alleged infringement by the Corporation of his fundamental right of
freedom of speech and expression and freedom to join a trade union, guaranteed
to him by Articles 14(1)( _a_ ) and 14(1)( _d_ ) of the Constitution, on the
ground that the action of the Corporation did not constitute " executive or
administrative action ", in respect of which only the jurisdiction vested in
the Supreme Court by Article 126 of the Constitution could be invoked by an
aggrieved person. In that judgement I have examined fairly exhaustively the
connotation and significance of the term " executive or administrative
action". Counsel for the petitioners has not urged any convincing argument or
contention which persuades me to review the tests framed by me to identify "
executive or administrative action ". On the other hand re‑examination of the
problem has confirmed the correctness of the above judgement in S.C. 87/82.



The cardinal question as to whether the People's Bank is properly to be
regarded as merely an instrument subservient to the State or in truth, is a
commercial bank not identifiable with the State has to be decided by looking
into the function and control of the bank. As Lord Denning stated in _Trendtex
Trading Corporation v. Central Bank_ (2). " I would look to all evidence to
see whether the organisation was under government control and exercises
governmental functions". Hence whether the People's Bank is to be accorded the
status of a department of Government, and an "alter ego" or organ of the
Government or not must depend on its Constitution, its powers and duties and
its activities.

# 5

** **

The People's Bank is a statutory Corporation. It was established as a body
corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal and called the
People's Bank by Act No.29 of 1961. It provides that the People's Bank may sue
and be sued in such name. Section 4 of the Act states that the purpose of the
bank "shall be to develop the co‑operative movement of Ceylon, rural banking
and agricultural credit by furnishing financial and other assistance to
co‑operative societies, approved societies, Cultivation Committees and other
persons ".



Section 5 provides that in carrying out its purposes the Bank may exercise all
or any of the following powers: ‑



"( _a_ )      to grant subject to the provisions of sub‑section (2).‑



(i)         short‑term, medium‑term and long‑term loans and other
accommodation to co‑operative societies, approved societies and Cultivation
Committees ;



(ii)        short‑term, medium‑term and long‑term loans to co‑operative
societies, approved societies, Cultivation Committees and individuals for
constructing, repairing or renovating buildings ;



(iii)       short‑term, medium‑term and long‑term loans and other
accommodation to any person who intends to carry on or is carrying on any
agricultural, industrial or business undertaking which, in the opinion of the
Board of Directors of the Bank, is a small‑scale undertaking; and



(iv)       short‑term loans to persons resident in rural areas for the
purchase of articles necessary for their personal or domestic requirements;



( _b_ )        to carry on and transact, subject to such modifications and
exceptions as may be prescribed, the kinds of business similar to those
carried on and transacted by the Bank of Ceylon under the Bank of Ceylon
Ordinance;



(According to section 71 read with the First Schedule of that Ordinance the
Bank was authorised to carry on, inter             alia, the business of
banking).



( _c_ )        to carry on the business of a pawnbroker subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed :-

# 6



( _d_ )    to provide technical assistance to any person to whom the Bank
grants any loan or overdraft, and to undertake or sponsor the training of
persons in assessing the value of land and the credit worthiness of borrowers,
in assaying gold, in banking and in finance ;



( _e_ )        to acquire, hold, take or give or lease or hire, mortgage,
pledge and sell or otherwise dispose of any immovable or movable property ;



( _f_ )        to invest the idle funds of the Bank in such securities as the
Board of Directors of the Bank may consider appropriate ;



( _g_ )        to employ such officers and servants as may be necessary for
carrying out the work of the Bank ;



( _h_ )        to make rules in respect of the conditions of service, and
disciplinary control of the officers and servants of the Bank ;



( _i_ )         to establish provident funds and pension funds for, and
schemes for the benefit of such officers and servants, and to make
contributions to such funds and schemes from the funds of the Bank;



( _j_ )        to borrow funds for the purpose of the business of the Bank and
to give security for any loans or overdrafts obtained ;

                                                             

( _k_ )        to enter into contracts ; and



( _l_ )         to do all such other things as are connected with or
incidental to the exercise of the aforesaid powers."



Section 7 provides ‑



"(1)      The general supervision, control of administration of the affairs
and business of the Bank shall be vested in the Board of Directors of the
Bank;



 (2)       The Board may exercise all or any of the powers of the Bank.  


Section 8 of the Act, as amended by Act No. 61/80 provides that the Board
shall consist of ten directors appointed by the Minister, two of whom shall be
nominated by the Minister in charge of the subject of Co‑operatives.

# 7



Section 8 as amended by Act No. 25/78 enables the Minister to remove a
Director from office without assigning any reason thereof. Section 10 as
amended by Act No. 25/78 empowers the Minister to appoint a Chairman of the
Board from among the directors and that he could terminate the appointment of
the Chairman without assigning any reason.



Section 12 as amended by Act No. 61/80 states that the authorised capital of
the bank "shall be 1000 million rupees divided into 20 million shares of Rs.50
each."



Section 15 mandates the Government to ‑



( _a_ )        grant to the Bank out of the Consolidated Funds of Ceylon‑



(i)                  a sum of five hundred thousand rupees out of which the
preliminary expenses connected with the establishment of the Bank, other than
any expenses relating to the construction of buildings, shall be defrayed and
any balance of which after such preliminary expenses are defrayed shall be
disposed of as provided by subsection (4) of section 22 (viz. by crediting to
the Special Reserve of the Bank).



(ii)        two million rupees which shall be disposed of as provided by
subsection (2) and subsection (5) of section 22 (viz; by crediting to the
Special Reserve of the Bank).



(iii)       such sum as may be authorised by resolution of the House of
Representatives to be granted out of the Consolidated Fund of Ceylon for the
entitlement of the bad and doubful debts in excess of the assets of any
co‑operative bank which is dissolved under the provisions of this Act; and



( _b_ )        lend to the Bank such sums as may be authorised by resolution
passed by the House of Representatives to be lent to the Bank out of the
Consolidated Fund of Ceylon for the granting of long‑term or medium‑term loans
by the Bank.



(2)        Every sum lent out of the Consolidated Fund of Ceylon to the Bank
under paragraph ( _b_ ) of subsection (i) shall be repaid by the Bank in
accordance with such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Minister
with the concurrence of the Minister of Finance "

# 8



            Section 21 provides that the Minister of Finance shall guarantee the repayment of any sum due to the Bank on any loan, overdraft or other accommodation granted by the Bank with the approval of the Minister and the repayment of any sum due on debentures issued, under this Act.



Section 23 provides for the dissolution of the Co‑operative Federal Bank of
Ceylon Ltd., and for the assets and liabilities of the co‑operative Federal
Bank Ltd., to be the assets and liabilities of the Bank.



Section 25 says -



( _a_ )        no co‑operative society shall, unless exempted in writing by
the Commissioner of Co‑operative Development, deposit its funds in or maintain
any current or deposit account with any commercial bank other than the Bank ;



( _b_ )        No co‑operative society shall, except with the written approval
of the Commissioner of Co‑operative Development, obtain a medium‑term or
long‑term loan from any commercial bank other than the Bank.



Section 32 states that ‑



"(1)      There shall be a General Manager of the Bank who shall be the Bank's
chief executive officer and who shall conduct the business of the Bank under
the general supervision and control of the Board. . ."



Section 34 states -



"(1)      The accounts of the Bank for each financial year shall be submitted
to the Auditor‑General for audit.



Section 36 vested in the General Manager of the Bank or any accountant or any
other officer of the Bank authorised by the General Manager, the power to
examine the books and accounts of any co‑operative society to which and of any
other person to whom a loan has been granted by the Bank.



Section 37 provides for recommendation to the Commissioner of Co‑operative
Development by the Board for action to be taken to dissolve and liquidate a
co‑operative society against which the General Manager has reported adversely.

# 9

** **

By section 41, as amended by section 57 of the Act No. 18 of 1965 the Bank
become liable for payment of income tax.



Section 42(a) which is a new section enacted by the People's Bank (Amendment)
Act No. 61/80 provides:-



" the Minister may from time to time give general or special directions in
writing to the Board as to the performance of the duties and the exercise of
powers of the Bank and it shall be the duty of the Board to comply with such
directions ".



Section 71 of the Finance Act No. 11/63 as amended by Law No. 16/73 authorises
the Bank to acquire in whole or any part              any agricultural,
residence or business premises, if the Bank was satisfied that these premises
were‑



(a)        sold in execution of a mortgage decree;



(b)        transferred by the owner of the premises to any other person in
satisfaction of a debt or by way of conditional transfer.



Counsel for the petitioner pointed to the inter‑connection of the activities
of the Bank and the Co‑operative Movement and submitted that the Bank was
established principally for the purpose of developing the Co‑operative
Movement in Sri Lanka and for providing financial assistance to co‑operative
societies and other institutions and for undertaking performance of the
objectives of the Co‑operative Federal Bank of Ceylon Ltd. He also contended
that the Co‑operative Movement in Sri Lanka was from its inception organised
as a part of " executive and administrative " action in Sri Lanka and that the
Bank was an agency to further or promote the co‑operative movement in Sri
Lanka and that hence the Bank was an organ of Government and/or administrative
agency of the State.



A co‑operative society is a voluntary organisation of private persons in a
group to work on an equal footing for the promotion of their economic
interest. It aims at a common end which is of benefit to all members of the
society. It works on the principle of mutual help. The intention of the
Co‑operative Movement is to secure for men of small means the same advantages
which a wealthier person buying, selling or borrowing on a bigger scale and
with substantial property to support his credit, can enjoy in his independent
dealings. Its main object is the promotion of the economic interest

# 10



of its members in accordance with co‑operative principles. On this view of the
Co‑operative Movement it is a matter of State policy to encourage the
financing of co‑operative societies and in implementation of that policy to
give State aid by way of financial facilities and funds. In this background it
cannot be said that by giving such State aid, the State participates in the
activities of the Co‑operative Movement or societies and involves itself in
the affairs of the society. However laudable the State policy be co‑operative
societies who are the beneficiaries of such policy do not thereby become
departments of State and their action cannot be characterised as State action.



It is however not necessary in the circumstances of this case to go into the
question of legal character of the relationship of the People's Bank and the
Co‑operative Movement in Sri Lanka as the petitioners' service as Security
Officers of the Bank has no connections to that relationship.



When private individuals or groups are endowed by the State with powers or
functions governmental in nature, they become agencies or instrumentalities of
the State, only when exercising these powers or performing these functions.



A public corporation can for certain purposes serve as an agent or surrogate
of the State. It all depends on the nature of its functions, whether it is
performing a governmental function or not. It may happen that certain of its
functions may be governmental, whilst the others may not. When a public
corporation is performing its non‑governmental functions its action does not
have the attributes of State action or " executive or administrative action ".
When the Bank performs its functions of redemption or acquisition of land,
under Section 71 of the Finance Act No. 11/63, it may be urged with certain
cogency that such action of the Bank constitutes executive or administrative
action ". But in this case, the petitioners were not employed in the service
of the Bank for the performance of duties connected with the exercise by the
Bank of its powers under the said section 71.



It is quite apparent from the material before us that the major role of the
1st respondent is in the commercial sphere and that its main role is that of a
commercial bank. Such commercial activities of the Bank cannot qualify as
State actions. Having regard to the duties

# 11

** **

performed by the petitioners it appears that the petitioners are employed by
the Bank in connection with their commercial activities. In that perspective
their employment in the Bank cannot be stamped as State employment. There is
no nexus between the State and the banking activities of the 1st respondent
for such action of the Bank to be treated as that of the State. The State is
not involved in the commercial activities of the 1st respondent.



State action comprehends official action of all government officers. The more
difficult problem arises when the label is sought to be affixed to conduct of
private individuals or groups with whom Government is somehow " involved " or
who allegedly, exercise government authority. In cases where the State's only
significant involvement is through financial support or limited regulation of
the private entity it may be well to inquire whether the State has so
thoroughly insinuated itself into the operations of the enterprise.



Government which represents the executive authority of the State may act
through the instrumentality or agency of natural persons or it may employ the
instrumentality or agency of juridical persons to carry out its functions.



In the early days when the Government had limited traditional functions it
could carry out these functions through civil servants consisting of natural
persons. But with the concept of welfare State superseding that of a police
State it was found that the civil service was not sufficient to handle the new
services, which required initiative and expertise for their effective
administration. The public corporations were thus conceived to operate the new
public enterprises. Parliament thus came to create autonomous corporations.
Government was thus able to handle the new problems through the medium of
public Corporations which, subject to certain limitations with regard to
carrying of Government policy, were free to carry out their functions in their
own way. Unlike a department of Government these corporations were not
tramelled by the all pervasive control of the Government. The measure of
control exercised by the Government over these corporations may vary from
corporation to corporation according to exigencies of each case. It is in this
background that the question arises as how to determine whether a particular
corporation is acting as instrumentality or agency of the Government for its
action to be labelled "executive or administrative action".

# 12



            When a corporation is wholly controlled by Government not only in its policy making but also in execution of its functions it would be an instrumentality or agency of the State. On the other hand where the Directors of the Corporation though appointed by the government with a direction to carry out governmental policies are otherwise free from the fetters of governmental control in the discharge of their functions, the corporation cannot be treated as instrumentality or agency of the State. It is not possible to formulate an all inclusive or exhaustive test to determine whether the corporation can be identified with the government. Mere finding of some control by the State would not be determinative of the question. The existence of deep and pervasive State control may afford an indication that a corporation is a State agency.



Then again when a corporation is endowed by the State with powers or functions
governmental in nature it may become an agency or instrumentality of the State
when exercising those powers or performing those functions. With the
development of the welfare State it has become difficult to define what
functions are governmental and what are not. Governmental purposes include the
traditional activities of government, for example, defence, foreign affairs,
maintenance of law and order and administration of justice. Since Victorian
times there has been a vast extension of the powers and purposes of government
in all democratic countries. Indeed, it is difficult in modern complex
societies readily to discern any activity which could not constitute a purpose
or function of government. Wilmer, L.J. pointed out in _Pfizer v. Minister of
Health_ (3) that since mid‑Victorian times there has been a revolution in
political thought and " a totally differnt conception prevails today as to
what is and what is not within the functions of Government ". Douglas, J.
observed to the same effect in _New York v. United States_ (4). "A State's
projects is as much a legitimate governmental activity where it is traditional
or akin to private enterprise or conducted for profit ". If the functions of
the corporations are of public importance and closely related to governmental
functions it would be a relevant factor in categorising the corporation as an
instrumentality or agency of the Government. The public nature of the
functions, if impregnated with governmental character or tied with the
government may render the corporation an agency of the government.

# 13

** **

It will thus be seen that there are several factors which may have to be
considered in determining whether a corporation is an agency or
instrumentalitly of the government. Bhagawathi, J. in his very lucid judgement
in _Ramana v. I.A. Authority of India_ (5). summarised some of those factors "
whether there is any financial assistance given by the State, and if so, what
is the magnitude of such assistance whether there is any other form of
assistance given by the State, and if so, whether it is of the usual kind or
it is extraordinary, whether there is any control of the management and
policies of the corporation by the State and what is the nature and extent of
such control, whether the corporation enjoys State conferred or
State‑protected monopoly status and whether the functions carried out by the
corporation are public functions closely related to governmental functions ".



 He further observed that this particularisation of relevant factors is
however not exhaustive and by its very nature it cannot be, because with
increasing assumption of new tasks, growing complexities of management and
administration and the necessity of continuing adjustment in relation between
the corporation and government calling for flexibility, adaptability and
innovative skills, it is not possible to make an exhaustive enumeration of the
tests which would invariably and in all cases provide an unfailing answer to
the question whether a corporation is governmental instrumentality or agency.
Consideration of any single factor may not suffice, a court will have to
consider the cumulative effect of these various factors to arrive at its
decision. " It is not enough to examine seriatim each of the factors upon
which a claimant relies and to dismiss each as being individually insufficient
to support a finding of State action. It is the aggregate that is
controlling"‑per Douglas, J. in _Jackson v. Metropolitan Edition Co._ (6). It
is the cumulative effect of all the relevant factors that determines the
measure of State responsibility.



Bearing the above considerations in mind, I cannot find any State action
involved in the People's Bank reorganising its security services and
formulating its own scheme of recruitment to carry on its banking activity.
The petitioners are employed in connexion with the commercial activity of the
Bank. In the circumstances even if there is substance in their allegation of
discrimination in the matter of their appointment, in the absence of executive
or administrative

# 14



action, their grievance cannot form the subject‑matter of an application to
this Court for relief under Article 126 of the Constitution. Their application
to this Court is misconceived. Accordingly, I uphold the preliminary objection
of the 1st respondent and dismiss each of the applications‑S.C. No. 63/83 and
S.C. No. 65/83 with half costs.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J. **‑ I agree.

** **

**SOZA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RANASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Preliminary objection upheld and applications dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/19.html_  

