##  Kobbekaduwa v. Jayewardene and Others - SLR - 416, Vol 1 of 1983 [1983]
LKSC 19; (1983) 1 Sri LR 416 (10 January 1983)

##### 416

KOBBEKADUWA

**v**

JAYEWARDENE AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT,

SHARVANANDA J., WANASUNDERA J.,

VICTOR PERERA J., SOZA J. AND

RANASINGHE J.

ELECTION PETITION NO.3/82.

DECEMBER 13,14 and 15, 1982.



Election ‑ Election petitions ‑ S 93 (a) of Presidential Act No. 15 of 1981-
corrupt practice of false state­ment of fact in relation to the personal
character or conduct of opposing candidate‑Illegal practice of causing­ to be
printed,  published and distributed a publication not bearing on its face the
names and addresses of the publisher by agent of 1st respondent ‑ S80 (c),
12(1) and, presidential Elections Act No.15 of 1981- Should unincorporated
body be made a party respondent - Material facts­ ‑ Particulars ‑ Affidavit.



#  417  


At the Presidential election held on 20th October 1982 the 1st respondent was
declared duly elected as the President of the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka. The petitioner who was a candidate at the said election sought to
have the said election of the 1st respondent avoided on four counts of the
commission of the corrupt practice of making false statements relating to the
personal character and conduct of the petitioner by the 2nd respondent as
agent of the 1st respondent and /or with his knowledge and consent, and on a
fifth count of the commission of the illegal practice of causing to be
printed, published and distributed the document marked X which did not bear on
its face the names and addresses of the printer and publisher by the 3rd
respondent and the United National Party as agents of the 1st respondent.



(1) In order to establish the commission of the corrupt practice of false
statement of fact in relation to the personal character or conduct of a
candidate the petitioner must prove:



(i) That there had been a publication by the candidate or with his knowledge
or consent or by his agent.  


(ii) The statement is a false statement of fact.  


(iii) The statement is in relation to the personal character or conduct of the
opposing candidate and not to his public or political character or conduct.  


(iv) The statement is made for the purpose of affecting the result of the
election. It must be reasonably calculated to prejudice the prospects of the
candidate's election. It need not be defamatory at common law so long as it is
a statement calculated to influence the electors.



(2) The words of the statement will be interpreted

#  418  


according to their real and true meaning and no necessarily according to their
literal sense. The true meaning will depend on the occasion of the
publication, the persons published, the person, attacked and the readers
intended to be addressed. Reference to character or conduct must be direct and
not inferential or by indirect implication.



A distinction must be drawn between a false statement of fact which affects
the personal, character or conduct of a candidate and a false statement of
fact which deals with the political position or reputation or action of the
candidate.



(3) The alleged false statement that the petitioner sent his nomination papers
through Mr. Ratnasiri Wickremanayake is at the worst merely a criticism of the
petitioner's public conduct. Reading an  indirect implication of arrogance
into the statement will not still bring it within the ambit of s.80(c) and no
corrupt practice is disclosed.



(4) The document X does bear on its face the name of a printer and publisher.
The allegation that there are false names represents a divergence from the
allegation in the petition. Further the document must refer to an election
under the Act. X' does not refer directly or by implication to the
Presidential election held on 20th October 1982. Further the agent must be the
election agent or an authorised agent.



The word "agent" in s.85 does not embrace everybody who comes within the wide
concept of agent in election law but only an election agent an authorised
agent. It is not the petitioner's case that either the 3rd respondent or the
United National Party was the election agent or authorised agent of the 1st
respondent.  


(5) Although the United National Party is an unincorporated body it should
have been cited as respondent in compliance with the  imperative

**  419**



provisions of s.95(1)(b) of the Act and then applied for directions from the
Chief Justice as to the further steps to have the Party represented in the
proceedings. The provisions of s.96 are mandatory and failure to duly comply
with them renders the whole petition and not merely the particular charge
invalid and a nullity.



(6) Failure to give the names of the supporters of the United National Party
referred to in the affidavit is not a good ground of objection as no complaint
has been made that the supporters of the United National Party had committed
an illegal practice. only persons who are alleged to have committed an illegal
practice are required to be in made respondents.



Section 96 makes a distinction between material facts and particulars.
Material facts are those which go to make out the petitioner's case against
the respondent. The word 'material' means necessary for the purpose of
formulating the charge and if any one material fact is omitted the statement
of claim is bad and liable to be struck out. The present petition cannot be
flawed on this ground.



The function of particulars is quite different. It is to fill the picture of
the petitioner's charge against the respondent with information sufficiently
detailed to enable the respondent to become aware of the case he has to meet
and to prepare for the trial. An election petition is not liable to be
dismissed _in limine_ merely because full particulars of the corrupt practice
alleged are not set out because amendment or amplification can be ordered by
the Court under s.97 (1) of the Act.



(7) The function of an affidavit is to verify the facts alleged in the
petition. The affidavit furnishes prima facie evidence of the facts deposed to
in the affidavit. 'In an affidavit a person can depose only to facts to which
he is able to testify

#  
420

  
Of his knowledge and observation. There is substance in the allegation that
the petition is not accompanied by the necessary affidavit in support of the
alleged illegal practice.



# Cases referred to-



1\. _North Louth Case_ (1910) 6 0'M&H. 103  


2\. _Sunder land Case_ (1896) 5 0'M&H. 53  


3\. _Cockermouth Division case_ (1901) 50 M&H' 155.159,160.  


4\. _Ram Singh v Iinder Singh_ (Indian Election Cases (1935‑1950) by H.S.
DhobiaVol. 1 p. 341,347.  


5\. _Illangaratne v. G.E.de Silva_ 49 NLR  169,172,173,179.  


6\. _Don Phillip v Illangaratne_ 51 NLR 561,571,573.  


7\. _R.v.I.CR. Haulage_ [1944] A11 ER 691,693.  


8\. _Willis v. Association of Universities_ [1964]2 A11 ER 39,42.  


9. _Bonser v. Musicians Union_ [1956] AC 104  


10.  _Nair v. Teck_ [1967] 2 All ER 34 P.C.  


11. _Wijewardona v. Senanayake_ 80 C.L.W.1.



Election Petition challenging election of the Election of the President  K.
Shanmugalingam with Gomin Dayasiri intructed by Nimal de Silva for the
petitioner



P. Navaratnerajah Q.C. with J.,W. Subasinghe S.A., K.N. Choksy S.A., L.C.
Seneviratne and Lakshman Perera instructed by John Wilson for 1st respondent.



Eric Amerasinghe S.A., with George Candappa, N.S.A.Goonetillke, Ajit
Tilakawardene, Quintus Palliyaguru, Dudely Fernando and Sarath  Ratnayake
instructed by H.A.P. Perera for 2nd respondent.



K.N.Choksy S.A. with Mark Fernando, Daya Pelpola, D.H.N. Jayamaha,  Ronald
Perera and Miss. I.R.Rajepakse instructed by D.F.R. Jayamaha for the 3rd
respondent.

#  421

**  
January 10th 1983  
 **

**SHARVANANDA, J.,  
 **

At the Presidential Election held on the 20th October,1982, the lst Respondent
was declared duly elected as the President of the Democratic Socia­list
Republic of Sri Lanka. The Petitioner was one of the candidates at the said
election. He has filed this petition in terms of section 93(a) of the
Presidential Act No.15 of 1981 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act').



The 1st Respondent was a candidate nominated by the United National Party,
which was a recog­nised Political Party and the Petitioner was a candidate
nominated by the Sri Lanka Freedom Party which is also a recognised Political
Party.



The nomination of candidates took place on 17th September 1982. By his
petition filed on 11.11.1982 the Petitioner has challenged the validity of the
election of the 1st Respondent on the following grounds ........



_Allegations_.



1\. That the _2nd respondent as agent of the 1st respondent and/or with his
knowledge or consent committed the corrupt practice_ of making or publishing
during the election for the purpose of affecting the result of the said
election, a false statement of fact in relation to the personal character or
conduct of Sri Lanka Freedom Party candidate H.S.R.B. Kobbekaduwa (the
Petitioner) in terms of section 80(c) of the said Presidential Elec­tion Act,
in that :‑



"   the 2nd Respondent did at an election meeting held in support of the
candidature of the 1st Respondent at the Road Reservation in front of Beruwela
Railway Station on ' _18th day  
_

#  422

  
of September 1982‑ make a speech in which he stated inter alia



"It was seen over the television at the handing over of the nominations, who
is the. suitable person to be the President of this country. _Mr. Hector
Kobbekaduwa without_ _going to, the Election Commissioner to hand over the
nomination papers sent Mr._ _Ratnasiri Wickrmanayake, the Party Secretary
instead_. Yet was possible for everyone to view how modestly our President
behaved on that occasion.



The Petitioner states that the said statement was made by the 2nd respondent
as agent of the 1st' Respondent and/or with his knowledge or consent and that
the said words are false and constitute false statement of fact in relation to
the person character or conduct of the said candidate, H.S. B.Kobbekaduwa, for
the purpose of affecting t said Election.

The Petitioner states that the 2nd respondent committed similar acts of
corrupt practice repeating the aforesaid statements at Matugama, Bulathsinhala
and Kalutara on 18th September 194 These are the subject‑matter of the 2nd,
3rd 4th charges.



It is to be noted that the aforesaid acts of corrupt practice are alleged to
have been committed by the 2nd respondent as the agent of the 1st respondent
and/or with his knowledge and consent _all on 18th September 1982 ,_ the day
following the nominations day and not thereafter.



The 5th ground of challenge is that the 3rd respondent who is the General
Secretary of the United National Party and the United National Party, acting
as agents of the 1st respondent, in the Presidential Elections "caused to be
printed,



#  423





published and/or distributed hand bills or adver­tisements, placards or
prospectus representing a Ration Book and containing inter alia a photograph
of the candidate H. S. R. B. Kobbekaduwa and a state­ment alleged to have been
made by the said H.S.R.B Kobbekaduwa. The said publication was printed,
published and/or distributed by the 3rd Respondent and the United National
Party as the agent of the 1st Respondent and the United National Party as the
agents of the 1st respondent all over the country in the said election
campaign between 17th Septem­ber 1982 and 20th October 1982. The said
publica­tion does not bear upon its face the names and addresses of its
Printer and Publisher, which is an illegal practice under section 85 of the
Presi­dential Elections Act. One copy of the said publi­cation is annexed
hereto marked 'X'. Thus the, _3rd respondent and the said United National
Party as agents of the 1st respondent had committed the illegal practice of
causing to be printed_ , pub­lished or distributed the said publication,
marked X' which does not bear upon its face the names and addresses of its
Printer and Publisher."



The relief claimed by the Petitioner are that this Court determines that the
1st Respondent was not duly elected or returned as the President of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka at the election held on 20th
October 1982 and that the election is void.



The Respondents to the petition are Mr.J.R. Jayewardene, the 1st Respondent,
whose election as President is sought to be avoided, Mr. Lalith
Athu­lathmudali, the 2nd Respondent, who as the agent of the 1st Respondent is
alleged to have committed the corrupt practice of publishing the false
statements of fact referred to above in breach of section 80(c) of the Act and
Mr. Harsha Abeywar­dena, the 3rd Respondent, who as the agent of the 1st
Respondent is alleged to have caused to be



#  424

printed published and/or distributed the hand bills representing a Ration Book
(copy marked X')  containing inter alia  a photograph of the petitioner and
containing inter and a statement alleged to have been made by him, _which did
not bear upon its face the name and address of its Printer and Publisher, in
breach of, section 85 of the Act._



_Preliminary Objections._



The Respondents have and have taken several preliminary objections to the
petition and have moved that the petition be rejected or dismissed.



The main objections of the  respondents are that:-



1\. The petition does not disclose any corrupt practice within the meaning of
section 80(c) of the 1st and 2nd Respondents submit that, assuming that the
2nd Respondent submit made the alleged false statements referred to in
paragraphs 3,4,5 &  6 of the petition, the said statements do not  constitute
false in relation to the personal character or conduct of the candidate
H.S.R.B. Kobbekaduwa.



2.The petition does not disclose any illegal practice within the meaning of
section 85 of the Act.



The 1st and 3rd Respondents further submit that the said publication X' does
not contravene  section 85 of the Act . The petition does not aver or allege
that the document X' refers to the Presidential Election and hence, there was
no breach of section 85 of the Act.  



3.The petition has not complied with the man­datory provisions of section
95(l)(b) of the Act, in that the petitioner has failed to join



**  425  
 **

as Respondent to the petition the United National Party, who is alleged to
have committed the illegal. practice under section 85 of the Act.



4(a) The supporters of the United National Party, referred to in paragraph  3
of the affidavit of Randeni Arachchige Sarath Wijese­kera (filed in support of
the petition) as having distributed on behalf of the 1st Respondent, the
United National Party candi­date, the document 'X' have not been named either
in the said affidavit or in the petition and that accordingly the petition
does not comply with the requirements of section 96(c) and (d) of the Act.



(b)        The petitioner has failed to join as res­pondents to the petition
as required by section 95(l)(b) of the Act the said suppor­ters who according
to the affidavit would appear to have committed an illegal practice under
section 85\.



5.The petitioner has not filed affidavits in support of his allegation of the
illegal practice set out in paragraph 7 of the petition and that the petition
accordingly does not comply with the requirements of section 96(d) of the Act.



###### **FIRST OBJECTION**



###### Corrupt Practice  


The statement of fact which the petitioner asserts is false and which
constitutes an infrac­tion of section 80(c) of the Act is that " _Mr. Hec­tor
Kobbekaduwa without going to the Election Commissioner to hand over the
nomination Papers sent Mr. Ratnasiri Wickramanayke, the Secretary ,_



#  426



instead. "Counsel for the petitioner rightly conceded that the observations,
namely "It was seen over the television at the handing over of the nomination,
who is the suitable person to be the President of this Country" and "yet it
was possible for everyone to view how modestly our President behaved on that
occasion" were expressions of opinion by the speaker and were not prohibited
by section 80(c) of the Act.



Section 12(l) of the Act provides that "no candidate shall be nominated by
means of more than, three separate nomination papers. "And section  13(1)
provides that each nomination paper shall be deli­vered to the Commissioner at
the place of nomi­nation .... by the candidate or the person who has signed
his nomination paper.



Counsel for the petitioner specified that the falsity in the 2nd Respondent's
aforesaid statement lay in the assertion that Mr. Kobbekaduwa had all the
nomination papers delivered to the Commissioner by Mr. Ratnasiri
Wickremanayake, the Secretary of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party.



The question then arises whether the statement namely that Mr. Hector
Kobbekaduwa had sent Mr. Ratnasiri Wickremanayake, the Party Secretary, to
hand over the nomination papers, to the Commissioner is a false statement that
is struck by section 80(c) of the Act. For the purpose of the present
preliminary proceeding, it has to be assumed that statement is untrue. But it
is not every incorrect statement that is penalised by section 80(c).



Section 80(c) provides as follows-



"Every person who makes or publishes before or during the election for the
purpose of affecting the result of that election _any false_



**  427**



_statexent of fact in.relation to the personal, character or conduct of any
candidate,_ shall be guilty of corrupt practice."



In order to bring the case within the ambit of section 80(c) read with section
91(c) of the Act, the petitioner must prove ‑



Firstly        -     that there had been a publication by the candidate or
with his knowledge or consent or by his agent.



Secondly   -      the statements is a false statement of fact.



Thirdly      -      the statement  is in relation to the to personal character
or conduct of the opposing candidate and not Public or Political character or
conduct.



Fourthly    -      the statement is made for the purpose of affecting the
result of the election. It must be reasonably calculated to prejudice the
pros­pects of the candidate's election.



Thus what is open to objection is a statement of facts with reference to false
the personal character or conduct of the candidate. In what has come to be
known as the _North Louth case_ reported in (1910) 6 0.M & H 103,(1) it was
observed by Gibson, J., at page 163 that :‑



" a Politician for his public conduct may be criticised, held up to obloquy;
for that the statute gives no redress; but when the man beneath the Politician
has his honour, vera­city and purity assailed, he is entitled to



#  428



demand that his constituents shall not be poisoned against him by false
statements containing such unfounded imputations."



In the Sunderland case, reported in (1986)  5 O. M.& H 53,(2) a similar view
was taken by Baron Pollock, who observed at page 62 that the principal words
here are any false statement of fact and if it be in relation to the
candidate, the Court has nothing whatever to do with the question which arises
in cases of libel as to whether there was malice. Any false statement, whether
charging dishonesty or merely bringing a man into contempt if it affects or is
calculated to affect, the election, comes within this Act.... Thus election,
comes within this which may be ascribed to perfectly innocent acts may come
within candidate at the time of election the mischief of the election statute.



The false statement of fact need not be defamatory at common law, so long as
it is statement which is calculated to influence electors, as for instance, a
statement made in hunting country that the candidate shot a fox or a statement
made to promoters of total abstinence that the candidate has taken a glass of
wine; bit it is essential that it should relate to the personal rather than
the political character or conduct of the candidate. The words of the
statement will be interpreted according  to their real and true meaning and
not necessarily according to their literal sense. The question to be
determined is what in the circumstances is the true meaning which the reader
would place upon a statement. The true meaning will depend on the occasion of
the publication, the persons published, the person attacked and the readers
intended to be addressed. Vide Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th, Edition,
Vol.15; paragraph  790, pages 431 ‑ 432.

  

#  429



In the oft quoted case, known as Cockermouth Division case, reported in (1901)
5 O.M & H 155 at page 159, 160 (3) Darling J., stated the law thus ‑



" What the act forbids is this ‑ you shall not make or publish any false
statement of fact in relation to the personal character or conduct of the
candidate. If you do, it is an illegal .L practice. It is not an offence to
say something which may be severe about another person, nor which may be
unjustifiable, nor which may be derogatory, unless it amounts to a false
statement of fact in relation to the personal character or conduct of such
candi­date, and I think the Act says that there is a great distinction to be
drawn between a false statement of fact, which affects the personal character
or conduct of a candidate and a false statement of fact which deals with the
political position or reputation or action of the candidate. If that were not
kept in mind, this statute would simply have prohibited all sorts of criticism
which was not strictly true relating to the political behaviour and opinion of
the candidate. That is why it carefully provides that a false statement, in
order to be an illegal practice, must relate to the personal

conduct."



It could be noticed that in prescribing the requirement that the false
statement should be in relation to the personal character of the candi­date, a
distinction is intended to be drawn between the personal character of the
candidate and his public or political character. The provision postu­lates
that if a false statement is made in regard to the public or political
character of the candidate it would not constitute corrupt practice, even if
it is likely to prejudice the prospects of the candidate's election. This
inhibition is



#  430



probably based on the theory that the electors would not be deceived by a
false statement or  criticism of the public character or conduct of a
candidate. The public and political character or conduct of a candidate is
open to public view. Even if any false statement is made about his public
conduct or character, the electorate would be able to judge the allegations on
the merits and may not be misled by any false allegation on, that behalf. But
the position with regard to private or personal character or conduct of the
candidate is very  different. Circulation of false statements bout the private
or personal character of the candidate during the period preceding the
election is likely to work against the freedom of election itself inasmuch as
the effect created by false statements cannot be countered by a denial at
proper time and so the constituency has to be protected against the
circulation of such false statements which a likely to affect the voting of
the electorate. That is why dissemination of false statements about the
personal character or conduct of a candidate made a corrupt practice. The
words "personal  character or conduct" are clear and do not require further
elucidation or definition. The character a person may ordinarily be equated
with his mental or moral nature. Conduct connotes a person's action or
behaviour. Hence, for the false statement, constitute a corrupt practice under
section 80 of the Act, it must be in the nature of disclosure of some private
scandal in what might call the secret life of the candidate and reference to
the personal character or conduct the candidate attacked must be explicit it
derivable from the plain meaning of the words the document. The reference must
not be inferential; an indirect implication does not infringe

section 80 (c).



In _Ram Singh vs. Inder Singh_ (The Indian Election Cases 1935 ‑ 1950) by
H.S.Dhobia, Vol.1,



#  431

page 341 (4) the Court observed at page 347:‑





"We are not at all impressed by the argument that the statement contains an
innuendo to the effect that S. Bhat Singh had been deceiving the electorate.
We feel no doubt that if a charge of this kind is made, I it must be sustained
by a false statement directly relat­ing to the personal character or conduct
of the candidate and not one which by indirect implication may be understood
as satisfying that mandatory provision of law. The reference to the personal
character or conduct of the candidate must be explicit and derivable from the
plain meaning of the words used. To hold otherwise would, in our opinion, be
to nullify the effect of the qualifying clause "in rela­tion to the personal
character or conduct of any candidate" for there is hardly a false statement
of fact that can be made, referring to a person, which cannot by a more, or
less elaborate process of reasoning be shown to contain an indirect reference
to the personal character or conduct of that person. The principle underlying
this provision of the law appears to us to be that the public character or
conduct of a public men or politician is public property and the risk of
persons being misled regarding a candidate by a false 6tate­ment relating to
his public or political character and conduct is therefore slight, and is
out‑weighed by the paramount necessity of allowing free and unfettered public
criticism of the public or political acts, of public men and politicians.
Whilst on the other hand facts relating to the personal character or conduct
of such men are, in the nature of things, not generally known and a false
statement relating to the personal character or conduct of a candidate may be
calculated

#  432





Seriously to mislead the electors to the prejudice of such candidate."



Thought it is clear that the statute wants to make a broad distinction between
public or conduct on the one hand and private or personal character or conduct
on the other, a sharp and clear‑cut dividing line cannot be drawn
disting­uishing one from the other. In discussing the distinction between
private or personal character or conduct and public character or conduct,
sometimes reference is made to the "man beneath the politician" and it is said
that if a statement of fact affects the man beneath the politician, it touches
his private character and if it affects the politician, it does not touch his
private character. There may be some false statement of fact which clearly
affect the private character of the candidate; if, for instance it is said
that the candi­date is a bribe taker, there can be no doubt that, the
statement is in regard to private character and conduct, and so if the
statement is shown to be false it would undoubtedly be a corrupt practice.
Vide _Illangaratne vs. G.E. de Silva_ , 49 N.L.R 169, at 172‑113 and 179 (5);
and _Don Philip vs. Illagaratne_ , 51 X.L.R., 561. (6). If the socio economic
policy of the Party to which the candidate belongs is falsely criticised and
it is suggested in strong words that the said policy would cause the ruin of
the country, that clearly would W criticism, though false, against the public
charac­ter of the candidate and as such would be outside", the purview of the
statute. But if a statement alleges that a candidate is buying votes by
offering bribes that clearly and unequivocally affects his private character,
even though in a sense it W: his public character which is falsely criticised.
It is idle to contend that it is a false statement only against the public
character of the candidate. Having regard to the moral turpitude or personal
delinquency involved in the allegation that state‑



#  432



ment in question certainly affects his private character as well.



Having regard to the propositions enunciated above, can it be said that the
impugned statement infringes section 80(c)? There is nothing expressly
derogatory of the personal character or conduct of the petitioner. In fact the
burden of Mr. Shanmugalingam's submission was that the sting lies in the
inference from the statement. Further the reference is to his conduct qua
candidate for Presidency, on the occasion of his submitting his nomination
papers to the Commissioner in terms of section 13(l) of the Act. The statement
does not cast any reflection or aspersion on the honour, veracity or purity of
the man beneath the public man; at the worst, it 4S merely a criticism of the
petitioner's public conduct. Such criticism does not come within the mischief
envisaged by the law.



Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the impugned statement which is
sandwiched between two expressions of opinion, should be considered in its
context. He contended that it would have conveyed to the audience the
inference that while the President (1st Respondent) was modest, Mr.Kobbekaduwa
was arrogant. From the fact that the speaker had described the President's
conduct as modest, it does not follow from his omission to comment on Mr.
Kobbekaduwa's behaviour that he intended the audi­ence to draw the inference
that Mr. Kobbekaduwa was arrogant. No imputation or aspersion is cast when one
candidate is praised and nothing is stated about the other. There is no
express reference to the personal character or conduct of Mr. Kobbekaduwa.
Counsel's submission involves reading an indirect implication in order to
bring the state­ment within the ambit of section 80(c).



In my view the averments relating to the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th charges of
corrupt practice under



#  434



section 80(c) do not disclose any offence under  that section.



**_SECOND OBJECTION_**



###### Illegal Practice

** **

The fifth charge contained in the petition  the petitioner is that of
"printing, publishing and. distributing the publication 'X' by the third
respon­dent and the United National Party as agents of the, first respondent,
without the said _publication bearing upon its face the names and addresses of
its printer and publisher "_ ‑ an illegal practice under section 85 of the
Act. This section provides that "a candidate or his agent who prints,
publishes, distributes or causes to be printed, published', or distributed any
handbills etc., which refers to, an election under the Act and which does not
bear upon its face the names and addresses of its ­printer and publisher shall
be guilty of an illegal practice." The basis of the petitioner's charge is the
allegation that the document IV does not bear, upon its face the name and
address of its printer, and publisher. This allegation lacks any founda­tion.
For, the document X' instead of substan­tiating this charge negates it. The
document 'X' exhibits the statement "Printed at the State Printing Corporation
and Published by Pathmasiri of Gothatuwa, Angoda." When confronted with this
patent contradiction between the petitioner's aver X' Cousel f or the
petioner's averments and the document X' Counsel for the petitioner submitted
that what was meant was that the document 'X' does not bear the name and
address of its true printer and publisher. This ingenious tit I clarification
cannot be accepted . The petitioner's averment in  his petitioner and
affidavit, that the publication X' does not bear upon its face the names and
addresses of its Printer and Publisher" does not lend support t‑.c this far
fetched construc­tion. Petitioner has nether in his petition nor in  


#  435



his affidavit suggested that the name and address­ of the Printer and
Publisher appearing in document X' are false and not the name and address of
the true printer and publisher of 'X' Section 96 of the Act requires the
petition to state concisely the material facts on which he relies and to set
forth full particulars of the illegal practices that he alleges. The
petitioner cannot be allowed to depart from his statement of material facts
and the particulars of illegal practice set out by him in his petition and
amend his petition after the time prescribed by section 102(2). Counsel's
explanation involves setting up a new case, diverging from that adumbrated in
the petition. Such a course is not permissible. Since there is a sufficient
identification of the Printer and Publisher on the publication X', the 3rd
respondent and the United National Party could, have had it distributed
without rendering themselves guilty of illegal practice under section 85 of
the Act. The peti­tioner's charge of illegal practice under section 85 of the
Act, does not rest on any basis of fact; the charge, therefore, fails.



Further, neither in the petition nor in his affidavit does the petitioner
suggest that the document X' refers to the Presidential Election. An
ingredient of the offence of illegal practice under section 85 of the Act is
that the impugned document must refer to an election under the Act. Ex facie
the document X' does not refer to the Presidential Election held on 20th
October 1982. As stated by Nagalingam, J., in _Don Philip VS. Illangaratne,_
51 N.L.R. 561 at 573 (6).



"Before a document could be said to be one which falls within the class of
publication referred to in section 58 (1) (c) of the Parliamentary Elections
(Order in Council) 1946 ( which corresponds to section 85 of the Act). It must
be shown that it either express‑

#  436



ly or at any rate by I implication refers to the election and any document,
however mischievous it may b its effect on the election itself, if it has no
reference to the election, though made use of for false propa­ganda against
the candidate at the  election, is outside the scope of this section.  


Counsel for the petitioner submitted that though the document 'X' does not
expressly refer to the Presidential Election, yet by implication it, refers to
it. In my view to imply such reference one cannot look outside the document.
The document must contain the indicia pointing to the Presidential Election.
The impugned statement does not satisfy the test. Hence the charge of illegal
practice under section 85 fails on this ground also.



Further the agent referred to in the body of section 85 is the election agent
or authorised agent of the candidate and not. every body who comes within the
wide concept of "agent" in election law  It is to be noted that only " _the
candidate or his agent_ " who can be found guilty of an illegal practice as
referred to in section 85 and not any agent in election law  It is significant
that contrast to section 80 (1) which makes every person who commits any one
of those offences referred to there guilty of corrupt practice, section 85 of
the Act restricts the persons who can be guilty illegal practice under it to
the candidate or  hit', or his agent only The rationale of this limitation is
that the election agent acts for the candidate and,"' may be described as his
alter ego for the purpose of his election.



Section 58(1)(c) of the unamended Parliamentary Order in Council 1946 made it
a corrupt practice for any person to print or publish etc., any handbill which
does not bear upon its face the,

#  437



name and address of it. This section 58(c) was repealed by Act No.6 of 1956.
It would appear that at the present stage of the development of Election Law,
both under the Parliamentary Elections Act No.1 of 1981 (Section 86) and
Presidential Elec­tions Law No.2 of 1981, the candidate or his election or
authorised agent alone is now penalised for such printing etc., without the
name and address of the printer and publisher. The marginal note to section 85
also supports the restrictive interpretation that the word 'his agent I in the
body of the section is confined to election agent, and authorised agent of the
candidate. It is not the petitioner's case that either the third respon­dent
or the United National Party is the election agent or authorised agent of the
lst respondent. On this ground too the charge is not tenable.



In my view the averments in the petition do not disclose the commission of the
offence of illegal practice by the 1st and /or 3rd respondent.



###### **THIRD OBJECTION**



###### Failure to join the U.N.P. as a Respondent



Counsel for the petitioner contended that the word 'person' occurring in the
Act referred only to a natural person. Counsel for the respondents on the
other hand argued that the word included also an artificial or legal person
and an unincorporated body of persons, such as an organisation as the United
National Party or the Sri Lanka Freedom Party. Section 2 (c) of the
Interpretation Ordi­nance (Cap. 2) provides that the expression person'
unless there be something the repugnant in the subject or context, _" includes
a body of persons corporate or unincorporate._



 Section 95 (1)(b) makes it mandatory that the petitioner shall join as
respondent to his election



#  438



petition "any other candidate or person against whom allegations of any
corrupt or illegal practice are made in the petition."



'Corrupt practice' under the Act, consists of personation, treating, undue
influence, bribery and publishing of false statements (vide sections 76‑80 of
the Act).



Selection 80 provides that any person convicted of corrupt practice by the
High Court shall, in the case of personation be liable to rigorous
imprison­ment and in any other case to a fine not _exceeding five hundred
rupees_ or to imprisonment and every person so convicted, would become
incapable for a period of seven years of being registered as an elector or of
voting under the Act.



"Illegal practice" under the Act consists of making certain payments,
publication of false state­ments in any newspaper, certain employment of
persons for payment for the purpose of promoting the election of a candidate,
and printing or Publishing of election publications by the candi­date or his
agent which do not bear the names and addresses of the printer and publisher
(Vide sections 82,85 of the Act).



Section 86 prescribes the punishment for the commission of the offences of
illegal practice. It provides



"Every person Who commits an illegal practice shall on‑ conversion by the High
Court be liable to a fine not exceeding three hundred rupees and shall by
conviction become incapa­ble for a period of three years from the date of his
conviction of being registered as an elector or of voting at an election under
this Act.

#  439



Counsel for the petitioner opened his case by submitting that only a natural
person can commit the offence of corrupt or illegal practice but confronted
with the question whether an incorporated company could not commit the corrupt
practice of bribery or, being the proprietor of a newspaper, could not commit
the illegal practice of publishing false reports in its newspaper he conceded
that a juristic person like an unincorporated company can commit such
offences. . But he persisted in his contention that an unincorporate body like
a firm or an organized political party is not a party is not a "person" in the
eye, of the law and cannot be convicted of such offence; as by its very
nature, it cannot be registered as an elector or cannot vote and hence cannot
suffer the penalty consequent on a conviction for such offence. The argument
finds its refutation in the concession that an incorporated company can commit
a Corrupt or illegal practice. The physical impossibility of making the
company suffer the consequent punishment of being deprived of civic rights
does not ensure to the benefit of the company and immunise it from liability
for corrupt or illegal practice when, the punishment there to for includes a
fine. Since fine is the only type of punishment appropriate to, an
incorporated or unincorporated body, the company or body can be fined ‑for the
commission of the offence of corrupt or illegal practice. Where the only
punishment for an offence that the Court can impose is corporal, the Court
will not stultify itself by embarking on a trial in which if a verdict of
guilty is found no effective order by way of sen­tence can be made
_(R.V.I.C.R. Haulage (1944) 1 A.E.R. 691 at 693._ (7)). Since a fine can be
imposed and recovered from an incorporated or unincorporate body, an
allegation of any corrupt or illegal practice can be made against such a body
as an organised political party. It is a matter of signi­ficance that the
punishment for the corrupt prac‑

#  440  


tice of personation is rigorous imprisonment (vide section 80(l)(a)). Neither
a corporate nor an, incorporate body can commit the offence of persona­tion.



In the instant case, the petitioner, though he has alleged in paragraph 7 of
his petition that the third respondent and the United National Party, acted as
agents of the 1st respondent in the, Presidential Election and that they had
committed the illegal practice of causing to be printed, published or
distributed the publication, 'X' which does not bear upon its face the names
and addresses:' of its Printer and Publisher, had omitted to join  the United
National Party as respondent.



In view of the peremptary requirement of section 95(l) (b), when an allegation
of illegal practice has been made in the petition against the United National
Party, the United National Party, should have been made a party. It is to be
not that section 96(d) requires that the election petition should set forth
the names of the parties alleged to have committed the illegal practice
complained of and the petitioner had in compliance with that requirement,
stated that the third respondent and the United National Party committed the
illegal practice alleged by him.



It is a principle of substantive law that f the preservation of the purity and
freedom elections, the member returned shall be answerable not only for his
own acts, but for the acts of his agents whom he puts in his place to
represent him in the conduct of the election. Section 91 provides for an
election to be avoided on the ground that corrupt or illegal practice was
committed in connection with the election by the candidate or by any agent of
the candidate.



An unincorporated body like a political party

#  441



can be the agent of a candidate for election purposes. _Don Philip vs.
Illangaratne ,_ 51 N.L.R. 561 at 571 (6).



An association of persons or a society or a Political Party and /or its
prominent members, who set up the candidate, sponsor his cause and work to
promote his election may be aptly called the it agent" of the candidate for
election purposes  _A.I.R. 1959 Assam p. 200 at 203, followed in A.I.R. 1961
Rajasthan, 122 at 127_



The Presidential Elections Act No.15 of 1981, like the Interpretation
Ordinance section 2(c) recognises that a body unincorporate may have a
juridical personality. We have reached the point foreseen by Professor Dicey
long ago.



"When a body of twenty or two thousand or two hundred thousand men bind
themselves together to act in a particular way for some common purpose, they
create a body which by no fic­tion of law, but by the very nature of things,
differs from the individuals of whom it is constituted."



_Vide Lord Denning in Willis vs. Association of Universities (1964) 2 A.E.R.
39 at 42 (8)_.



A recognised political party though it is a body unincorporate is endowed with
a quasi‑legal personality and status by the Presidential Elec­tions Act read
with the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981\. It is identified by the
Act as a separate legal entity, apart from its members. It has been enabled to
nominate candidates for the Presidential election. Similarly a political party
other than a recognised  political party is recog­nised by the Presidential
Election Act ‑ vide sec­tion 12 and Form 'A' in the First Schedule to the Act.
Section 20(l) directs the Commissioner to

#  442



allot to the candidate nominated by a recognised political party the approved
symbol allotted t' that party under the Parliamentary Elections Act, 1981.





Counselor the petitioner Pointed out the procedural difficulty of enabling the
United National party to be joined as respondent to his petition. In our law
no action can be brought by or against any party other than a natural person
unless such party has been given by statute, expressly or impliedly either a
legal person under the name by which it sues or is sued or a right to sue or
be sued by that name. A trade union though it is a body unincorporate has thus
been enabled to sue or be sued in its registered name. _Bonser vs Musicians
Union_ , 1956, A.C. 104. (9). He submitted that a political party cannot,
according to rules governing civil procedure, be made a party respon­dent
under its name. The difficulty envisaged by Counsel cannot be allowed to
defeat the salutary object of making the party against whom an allegation of
corrupt or illegal practice is made a respondent to the petition. Substantive
law cannot be jettisoned because of  procedural problems. The law is however
not so powerless. Presidential election-petition proceedings are sui generis.
The election rules governing such proceedings are set out in the Fourth
Schedule to the Act. Section 105(2) provides for casus  omissus; it states
that matters not provided for by the rules contained in the Fourth Schedule to
the Act, shall be dealt with in such Manner as the Chief Justice shall direct
in the Respondents rightly pointed out the pointed out the petitioner could
have cited the United National Party as a Respondent and applied for
directions from the Chief Justice for the further steps to have t party
represented in the proceedings. The provi­sions of section 96 are mandatory
and failure to duly comply with same renders the petition invalid





#  443



and nullity. _Nair vs. Teck_ (1967) 2 A. E.R. 34, P.C.(10) _Wijewardena vs.
Senanayake_ 80 C.L.W. 1 (11) affirmed in appeal IN 74 N.L.R.. 97.



In this case the petitioner has filed one petition challenging the 1st
respondent's election on the grounds that the respondents had committed
corrupt and illegal practices and has furnished security on the basis of one
petition. The petition has to stand or fall at a single petition has to stand
or fall as a single petition and not as an  aggregate of petitions depending
on the number of grounds of challenge. In the circums­tances it is not open to
the petitioner to seek to salvage his petition by stating that the failure to
join the United National Party as a Respondent against whom the allegation of
illegal practice was made avoids only that charge but that the petition is
good for the purpose of maintaining the other charges preferred in it. In my
view, this course of action is not available to the petitioner; for the vice
of the omission to join the United National Party to his election petition
which included an allegation of illegal practice against the Party affects the
entire petition and renders the entire petition a nullity. Had there been two
petitioners, one incorporating the charges of corrupt practice and the other
the charge of illegal practice the position would have been different; the
petition relating to the corrupt practice would have been saved. But, we have
only one petition and that petition has not complied with the imperative
requirements of section 95.



Counsel then submitted that if the petition does not disclose an offence of
illegal practice under section 85 of the Act, then that charge is not a valid
charge in law and has to be disregarded and that in that event, the failure to
join the United National Party would not, in the circums­tances be of any
relevance. I cannot agree with this contention. For what section 95 postulates
is

#  444



an allegation of corrupt or illegal practice and not the establishment
thereof. Having made the allegation in his petition, the petitioner cannot
make default in complying with the law relating to the allegation whether it
is tenable in law or not. I uphold this objection and dismiss the petition on
this ground too.



######  **FOURTH OBJECTION**  


In the affidavit of Randeni Arachchige Sarath Wijesekera, that was attached to
the petition, he states in paragraph 3 that on the 17th October 1982 if
supporters of the United National Party went about in our area distributing
leaflets, handbills and advertisements on behalf of the United National Party
candidate Mr. J.R. Jayewardene and gave me a copy of a Ration Book marked
'X"'. It was in rela­tion to the publication 'X' that the illegal practice
under section 85 is said to have been committed.



Objection is taken that the names of the said supporters of the United
National Party, referred to in the affidavit have not been given.



According to paragraph 7 of the petition the illegal practice alleged to have
been committed by the 3rd respondent and the United National Party, as agents
of the 1st respondent is that "they had committed an illegal practice of
causing to be printed, published or distributed the said publi­cation marked
'V, which does not bear upon its face the name and address of its Printer and
Publisher." No complaint has been made against the  supporters of the United
National Party that they had committed any illegal practice.



Section 95 (1)(b) requires only the, person against whom an allegation of any
illegal practice is main the petition to be made respondent­ Since the
petitioner has not made any allegation in

#  445  


his petition that the said United National Party supporters, had committed any
corrupt or illegal practice, they need not have been joined as respondents to
the petition. The above averment in Mr. Wijesekera's affidavit was intended to
support the allegation in the petition that the United National Party had
committed the illegal practice of causing to be distributed the impugned
publication 'X'. Though it does not expressly state that the United National
Party had caused the said document X' to be distributed through its
supporters, it is only on that footing that the affidavit can be said to have
any relevancy. Section 96 makes a distinc­tion between I material facts' and
particulars,? Material facts are those which go to make out the petitioner's
case against the respondent. The word material' means necessary for the
purpose of formulating the charge and if any one material fact is omitted the
statement of claim is bad and liable to be struck out. In this case, it cannot
be seriously stated that the petition is flawed for want of concise statement
of the material facts on which the petitioner relies. The function of
particulars is quite different. It is to fill the picture of the petitioner's
charge against the respondent with information sufficiently detailed to enable
the respondent to become aware of the case he has to meet and to prepare for
the trial. An election petition is not liable to be" dismissed in limine
merely because full particulars of the corrupt practice alleged in the
petition are not set out.



Section 97(l) enables the Court to allow the to be amended particulars
specified in the petition the opinion or amplified in such manner as may in of
the Court be necessary for ensuring a  fair and effective trial.



In my view there is no substance in this objection and I reject this
objection.



#  446





# _FIFTH OBJECTION_



As stated earlier the burden of the petitioner's allegation of illegal
practice under section 85 of the Act is that the 3rd Respondent and the United
National Party as agents of the 1st Respondent had committed the illegal
practice of causing to be printed, published or distributed the impugned
publication marked 'X'.



Section 96(d) requires that the petition "shall be accompanied by an
_affidavit in support of the allegation of such corrupt or illegal practice._
­and the date and place of the commission of such practice.



The function of an affidavit is to verify the facts alleged in the petition.
The affidavit furni­shes prima facie evidence of the facts deposed to in the
affidavit. Section 13 of the Oaths and Affir­mation Ordinance (Cap.17)
furnishes the sanction against a false affidavit by making the deponent guilty
of the offence of giving false evidence. In an affidavit a person can depose
only to facts which he is able of his own knowledge and obser­vation to
testify. It is apparent from a reading of the petitioner's affidavit, that the
statement of facts relating to the printing, publication and, distribution of
the publication 'X' is not testified to by the petitioner from his own
knowledge and observation. That is why he has filed the affidavit of
Mr.Wijesekera in support of alleged illegal practice. The illegal practice
alleged in paragraph 7 of the petition is  that the 3rd respondent and the
United National Party caused to be printed, published or distributed t said
publication 'X' Wijesekera's affidavit does not testify to any of these
matters and. does not support this allegation. On this view of the matter,
there is substance in the objection of respondents





#  447



that the petition is not accompanied by the necessary affidavit.



Since the petition does not show that the respondents have committed any
corrupt or illegal practice, in connection with the Presidential elec­tion,
the petition challenging the election of  the 1st respondent as President is
not warranted in law and is untenable. The petition is, also, not properly
constituted in terms of section 95(l)  (b) of the Act. I therefore dismiss the
election peti­tion of the petitioner and direct the petitioner to pay the 1st
respondent Rs. 4500/‑ and the 2nd and 3rd respondents Rs. 3000/‑ each as costs
of this proceeding.



**WANASUNDERA, J.,** ‑ I agree.



**SOZA, J.,** ‑ I agree.



**RANASINGHE, J.,** ‑ I agree.



**_Petition dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/19.html_  

