##  Bandaranaike v. Attorney General - SLR - 786, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC
19; (1982) 2 Sri LR 786 (6 December 1982)

# 786

**BANDARANAIKE**

**v.**

**ATTORNEY ‑GENERAL**

#### SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J., AND VICTOR PERERA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 104/82

NOVEMBER 25,1982



    Constitution Articles 83(5) 83, 84, 85, 120, 122, 123, 132 ‑ Bill to amend Constitution Certificate of Cabinet ‑ Jurisdiction of Supreme Court.



A Bill to amend the constitution to provide that the term of the first
Parliament be extended was referred to the Supreme Court for special
determination in terms of Article 122(1) of the Constitution. The Secretary to
the Cabinet had endorsed the Bill that in the view of the Cabinet it was
urgent in the National interest.



The Supreme Court made and communicated the following determination: " The
majority of this court is of the view that the period of the first Parliament
may be extended as proposed by the Draft Bill which is described in its long
title as being for the amendment of the constitution and is intended to be
passed with the special majority required by Article 83 and submitted to the
People by Referendum. In view of this decision Court in terms of Article 120
Proviso (b) states that it does not have and exercise any further jurisdiction
in respect of the said Bill. Three members of the Court are not in agreement
with the above views."



Following this determination the Bill was passed with the special majority
required by Article 83 and was submitted to the people at a Referendum.



The Petitioner  alleged that the Supreme Court had made certain errors and
therefore the determination was invalid.



# Held -

**  **

1) The determination was valid as the reasons were given in the determination.



2) Once the Cabinet of Ministers certifies that the Bill is to be passed by a
special majority and submitted to the people at a Referendum the Supreme Court
exercise no further jurisdiction.



#  787

**  **

3) The majority view is the view of the whole Supreme Court assembled.



**Cases referred to:**

**  **

(1) _Grindley v. Barker (1978) 1 BOS P 229_

_  _

(2) _Picea Holdings v. London Rent Tribunal (1971) 1 A.E.R. 805._

**  **

**PETITION** for correction of alleged errors in determination of Supreme
Court on Urgent Bill referred to it.



_Felix R. Dias Bandaranaike _ petitioner in person.



_Cur. adv. vult._



December 6, 1982.

**  **

**SHARVANANDA, J.** read the following unanimous order of the Court:



 A Bill titled "an Act amend the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka" was referred to the Supreme Court by His Excellency the
President, in terms of Article 122(1)(b) of the Constitution, for the special
determination of the Court as to Whether the Bill or any provision thereof was
inconsistent with the constitution. The Bill bore the endorsement under the
hand of the Secretary to the Cabinet, that in the view of the Cabinet of
Ministers, it was urgent in the national interest. The Bill was certified in
terms of Article 120(b) of the Constitution by the Cabinet of Ministers that
the said Bill was intended to be passed with the special majority required by
Article 83 of the Constitution and submitted to the People by Referendum.



The Reference was considered on 3rd November 1982 by a Bench of seven Judges.
At the hearing of the reference, the petitioner and 2nd petitioner-responded
were heard. Thereafter the Court made and communicated the following
determination in terms of Article 123(1) of the Constitution, to the president
and to the speaker of Parliament:



"The majority of this court is of the view that the period of the first
Parliament may be extended as proposed by the draft Bill which is described in
its long title as being for the amendment of the Constitution and is intended
to be passed with the special majority required by Article 83 and submitted to
the People by Referendum. In view of this  decision this Court in terms in
Article 120 Proviso (b) states that it does not have and exercise any further
jurisdiction in respect of the said Bill.



# 788



Three members of this Court are not in agreement with the above views. "



Following on the above determination, the Bill has been passed with the
special majority required by Article 83 of the Constitution and been submitted
to the People by Referendum in terms of Article 85(1) of the Constitution.



In his petition dated 10th November, 1982, the petitioner has alleged that
this Court has committed certain errors by reason of which no valid
determination has been made by the Supreme Court upon the Reference made
respecting the Fourth Amendment. He, has moved this Court to exercise its
inherent jurisdiction to take action, on the basis of that there has been no
valid determination.



We gave the petitioner a full and patient hearing on his submission.



He urged three grounds in support of his contention that the determination of
the Supreme Court was invalid, namely:



1.that the determination of the Supreme Court has not been accompanied by the
reason therefor, as required by the mandatory provision of Article 123(1) of
the Constitution.



2.that in view of the fact that the Court had divided four; three in its
determination, it should be presumed that the Court entertained a doubt, as
referred to in Article 123(3) of the Constitution.



3.that a valid determination requires unanimity among the judges, the decision
of the majority does not operate to constitute a determination of this Court.



We have considered the contentions of the petitioner and we regret to state
that the contentions are not well founded and have no merit.



Articles 120, 121, 122, 123, 124 and 125 of the Constitution spell out the
nature and ambit of the constitutional jurisdiction vested in the Supreme
Court. They have to be read together and not in isolation.



Article 120 provides that the Supreme Court shall have sole and exclusive
jurisdiction to determine any question whether any Bill or



# 789



any provision thereof is inconsistent with the Constitution. The Article must
be read subject to the provisos (a) to (d) which control it. The Primary
purpose of function of a proviso is to limit the general primary purpose of
function of a pro I application of the enactment. The proviso exempts the
cases which fall within its terms from the operation of the enacting clause.



Proviso (a) and (d) to Article 120 reads as follows:



(a) in the case of a Bill described in its long title as being for the
amendment of any provision of the Constitution, or for the repeal and
replacement of the Constitution, the only question which the Supreme Court may
determine is whether such Bill requires approval by the People at a Referendum
by virtue of the provisions of article 83;



(b) Where the Cabinet of Ministers certifies that a Bill, which is described
in its long title as being for the amendment of any provisions of the
Constitution, or for, the repeal and f the Constitution, is intended to be
passed replacement o with the special majority required by Article 83 and
submitted to the People by Referendum, the Supreme Court shall have and
exercise no jurisdiction in respect of such Bill."



The questions that can arise as the nature words of a proposed Bill are:‑



1) Is it inconsistent with any provision of the Constitution?



2) Is the Bill for the amendment of any provision of the Constitution?
(amendment includes, repeal, alteration and addition: Article 82(7)



3) Is the Bill for the repeal and replacement of the Constitution?



When a Bill or any provision therein is found to be inconsistent with the
Constitution, then the next question is how is it to be enacted into law: Is
it sufficient to be passed by the special majority required by Article 84(2),
namely two third majority or Does such a Bill or any provision thereof require
to be passed by the special majority required by Article 84(2) and approved by
the People at a Referendum in terms of the provisions of Article 83?



#  790



Article 82(5) provides for the amendment of any provision of the Constitution.
It has to be read subject to the provisions of Article 83.



Article 82(5) states:



"A Bill for the amendment of any provision of the Constitution or for the
repeal and replacement of the Constitution, shall become law if the number of
votes cast in favour thereof amounts to not less than two‑thirds of the whole
number of Members (including those not present) and upon a certificate by the
President or the Speaker, as the case may be, being endorsed thereon in
accordance with the provisions of Article 80 or 79."



Article 83 states:



Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the provisions of Article 82‑



(a) a Bill for the amendment or for the repeal and replacement of or which is
inconsistent with any of the provisons of Article 1,2,3,6,7,8,9,10 and 11 or
of this Article; and



(b) a Bill for the amendment or for the repeal and replacement of or which is
inconsistent with the provisions of paragraph (2) of Article 30 or of
paragraph (2) of Article 62 which would extend the term of office of the
President or the duration of President, as the case may be, to over six years,



shall become law if the number of votes cast in favour thereof amounts to not
less than two‑thirds of the, whole number of Members (including those not
present), is approved by the People at a Referendum and a certificate is
endorsed thereon by the President in accordance with Article 80.



Articles 82(5), 83(a) and 84 prescribe the ways in which a Bill which is
inconsistent with any provision of the Constitution or which seeks to amend
any provision of the Constitution may be validly enacted into Law. Subject to
the limitations contained in these Articles it is competent for Parliament to
pass any law, whether it is inconsistent with any provision of the
Constitution or seeks to amend any provision of the Constitution. The
legislative power of



# 791



the People exercised by Parliament consisting of elected representatives of
the People and by the People at a Referendum. (Vide Articles 3 and 4(a) knows
no legal limitation. There is no foundation whatever for the contention of the
petitioner that there is an area which is outside the legislative power of the
People, exercised by Parliament and by the People at a Referendum.



Article 120 postulates that an amendment of any provision of the Constitution
involves inconsistency with some provision of the Constitution. The provisos
(a) and (b) to Article 120, are based on that assumption. Proviso (b) to
Article 120 provides for the case of the amendment being intended to be passed
with the special majority required by Article 83 and submitted to the People
by Referendum. The effect of that proviso is that when the Cabinet of
Ministers so certifies with respect to the Bill, the, Supreme Court, is
relieved of the task of determining whether the Bill requires the approval of
the People at a Referendum. In view of the said certificate the Court has only
to be satisfied that the Bill can be enacted as proposed in the certificate.
On being so satisfied, the Supreme Court exercises no further jurisdiction in
respect of the said Bill. According to the proviso (b) to Article 120 the
Constitutional jurisdiction of the Supreme Court with respect to the proposed
Bill is confined to the question whether the Bill falls within Article 83 and
whether the course of action proposed by the Cabinet of Ministers with respect
to the Bill conforms to. the requirements of the Constitution.



As stated earlier Article 122 has to be read with Article 120 and when so read
the reference by the President under Article 122(b) attracts provisions of
Article 122(b) attracts provisions of Article 120 and the determination on
such reference is governed by Article 120 read with the relevant proviso.
Article 121 and Article 122 prescribe the conditions for the invocation of the
constitutional jurisdiction vested in the Supreme Court by Article 120 read
with its provisos. On this view of the matter the provisions of Article 123(2)
will apply only in cases where the provisos to Article 120 do not apply.



Article 123(1) states that the determination of the Supreme Court shall be
accompanied by the reasons therefore. An intelligent reading of the
determination of the majority, will show that the majority of the Court were
of the view that the period of the first Parliament could be extended by the
process specified in the certificate of the



# 792



Cabinet and that, in the circumstances, Article 120 Proviso (b) applied to the
determination in question. The reason for that conclusion is manifest.



With respect to the alleged second error it must be stated that neither the
majority nor the minority had any doubt that the Bill was inconsistent with
the Constitution. The difference of opinion was grounded on the question
whether the period of the first Parliament could be extended as proposed by
the draft Bill. Hence arguments based on the supposition of the existence of
such doubt are irrelevant.



The last ground has even less merit than the above. Articles 118 to 136 in
Chap. XVI of the Constitution deal with the various kinds of jurisdiction of
the Supreme Court and the manner of their exercise by the Supreme Court.
Article 132(1) provides that the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court shall
ordinarily be exercised at all time by not less than three Judges of the
Supreme Court sitting together on, the Supreme Court. No distinction is made
in this respect between, constitutional jurisdiction and appellate
jurisdiction. Article 132(4) provides that "the Judgment of the Supreme Court
shall, when it is not an unanimous decision, be the decision of the majority."
In the scheme of the chapter, it is quite clear that the provisions of Article
132(4) applies equally to the " _determination_ " referred to in Article 121,
122, 123, 125 and 126 and the _" Judgment_" referred to in Article 127 , "
_opinion_ "  referred to in Article 129(1) and " _determination "_ under
129(2) and again to the "determination" under Article 130, all made by the
Supreme Court in the exercise of its several jurisdiction. The petitioner
tried to draw a distinction between "determination" and "judgment" and
submitted that article 132(4) does not apply to the "determination" when it
exercises original jurisdiction and pronounces "judgment" when it exercises
appellant ­jurisdiction. That this distinction is untenable is demonstrated by
Article 130 which provides that the Supreme Court shall have the power to hear
and determine and make such orders as provided by law on any appeal from an
order or _judgment_ of the Court of Appeal in the case of an election
petition. The descriptions 'determination'  'judgment _',_ 'opinion'
'decision', 'conclusion' are different labels for the same concept.



It is to be noted that the Court of Appeal when it gives judgment in an
election petition, it does so, in the exercise of original jurisdiction.



# 793

**  **

The petitioner's submission further overooks the well‑established rule of law
that "where a number of persons are entrusted with powers not of a private
confidence, but in some respect of a general nature, and all of them are
regularly assembled, the majority will conclude the minority and their act
will be the act of the whole". _Grindley vs. Barker_ (1), _Picea Holdings vs.
London Rent Tribunal_ (2). Article 132(4) is based on this important rule of
law.



There is no substance in the petitioner's allegation that this Court committed
errors in making its determination.



The application is unwarranted.



We accordingly refuse notice of the application on the respondent and dismiss
the application.



Notice refused.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/19.html_  

