##  Thirunavakarasu v. Siriwardena and Others - SLR - 185, Vol 1 of 1981
[1981] LKSC 19; (1981) 1 Sri LR 185 (12 March 1981)

**185**

**THIRUNAVAKARASU  
V.  
SIRIWARDENA AND OTHERS**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAWICKREMA J, ISMAIL J. AND WANASUNDERA J.  
S. C. 33/80 C. A. APPLICATION NO. 669/78  
C. A. (L. A.) No .14/80 S. C.  
JANUARY 22ND AND 23, 1981.  
**  
_Writs-Certiorari and Mandamus-S 20(1) and s 34 Industrial Disputes Act -
Interpretation of Award. - Failure to quantify award - Jurisdiction-Regulation
29 made under Industrial Disputes, Act -Right of arbitrator to correct
clerical and arithmetical error -Repudiation.  
_  
Regulation 29 (made under the Industrial Disputes Act) allows an arbitrator to
correct any clerical or arithmetical error in the award. This is a merely
ministerial or administration act and can be exercised ex mero motu by the
tribunal and in the absence of the parties. On other hand the powers given by
s 34 of the Industrial Disputes Act are markedly different and can only be
exercised by the Tribunal upon a reference by the Commissioner or one of the
interested parties. The section contemplates a "decision" on the part of the
Tribunal upon such reference. If, for any reason, the matter cannot be
referred to the original Tribunal, it must go to an Industrial Court, The
decision must follow a hearing. A hearing is essential and can be dispensed
with only upon the consent of the parties. Section 34 clearly envisages
proceedings of a quasi-judicial nature. It permits interpretation of the
original award. It enables the arbitrator to quantify the back wages ordered
in the original award and so make a supplementary award.  
  
What an award seeks to do is to resolve the dispute by formulating a new set
of terms and conditions, which are fair and reasonable to both parties and
imposing such terms on the parties so that these terms and conditions will
supersede the original position of the parties and provide anew relationship
that would henceforth guide the conduct of the parties. These terms and
conditions are statutorily made implied terms in the contract of employment.
The award will additionally be operative for a minimum period of twelve
months. The law allows a repudiation at any time after the required minimum
period but such repudiation can have only prospective application and cannot
affect any rights and obligations that have already accrued to the parties.
.From and after the date of repudiation the parties are freed from the
constraints and fetters of the award and the parties may order their affairs
like any other employer or employee but any change can only be effected from
the prevailing position - the terms and conditions then subsisting (including
those that came in by way of the award) necessarily forming the starting
point.  
  
(1) Commercial Banks Association v Thalgodapitiya - 60 N L R 241  
  
(2) South Indian Bank v Checko (1964) Labour Law Journal 19  
  
(3) Yamuna Mills Co, Ltd. v. Majoor Mahajan Mandal 11957) (1) Labour Law
Journal 620:  
  
(4l Bilash Chandra Mitra v. Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd A I R 1953 Cal. 613.  
  
(5) J. C. Adak v. Mukherjee AIR 1950 Cal. 577.  
  
(6) Mangaladas Narandas v. Payment of Wages Authority (1957) (11) Labour Law
Journal 256.  
  
(7) Workmen of Andra Bank Ltd. v. Andra Bank Ltd (1964) (1) Labour Law Journal
243

**186**

**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_V. S. A. Pullenayagam with S. C. Chandrahasan and Miss Mangalam
Kanapathipillai_ for petitioner-appellant.  
  
1st respondent-respondent not represented.  
  
_Nimal Senanayake's with Miss S. M. Senaratne and Mrs. A. B. Dissanayake_ for
the 2nd respondent-respondent:  
  
_Douglas Premaratne, Senior State Counsel with K: C. Kamalasabayson,_ State
Counsel for 3rd respondent-respondent.

  _Cur. adv. vult,_

March 12, 1981.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from a Judgment of the Court of appeal refusing the
application of the appellant for the issue of Mandates in the nature of Writs
of Certiorari and Mandamus to quash an award of the 1st respondent who
functioned as an arbitrator under the Industrial Disputes Act.  
  
In February 1973, the appellant-employer had terminated the services of six
workmen (who are represented in these proceedings by their Union, the 2nd
respondent) on the grounds of insubordination and absenteeism. Upon
representation made to him, the Minister in terms of section 4 of the said Act
referred this dispute to the 1st respondent for settlement by arbitration: The
award of the 1st respondent was made on 5th November 1975 and was published in
the Gazette of 5th December 1975.  
  
The award was to the effect that four of the workmen should be reinstated with
full back wages during the period of non-employment. Another one was also o to
be reinstated, but with half back wages. The sixth workman was to be
reinstated without the payment of back wages. In his case, however, the
employer was given the choice of keeping him or terminating his services upon
the payment of compensation. `  
  
The appellant sought to quash this award by an application for a Mandate in
the nature of a writ of Certiorari. In June 1977, the Supreme Court refused
his application. The workmen were there after reinstated, but the -appellant
refused to pay the back wages declared by the award. The appellant's excuse is
that the award' is defective: inasmuch as the arbitrator had failed or
neglected to compute the actual amount he was liable to pay.

**187**

On 4th November 1977, the appellant, acting in terms of the provisions of
section 20(1) of the Act, gave written notice to the Commissioner of. Labour
and the respondent Union repudiating the award. In terms of this section, the
award comes to an end only upon three months succeeding the month in which the
notice is, received by the Commissioner of Labour, and that would be from 1st
March 1978.  
  
In December 1977, that is while the award was still operative and awaiting the
'repudiation taking effect, the 2nd respondent Union, acting in terms of
section 34, made an application to the arbitrator seeking an. interpretation
of the award. This was presumably done to have the matter of back wages
elucidated.  
  
The appellant objected to these proceedings and he made another application to
the Court for a Mandate in the nature of a Writ of Prohibition to prevent the
arbitrator from embarking on any such inquiry. This petition was numbered S.
C. Application No. 206/78:  
  
The arbitrator who had already taken some steps to hold an inquiry proceeded
with the inquiry since further proceedings by him were not restrained by any
order of court. After inquiry on the 1st of September 1978, the arbitrator
made an order quantifying the amounts which were due as back wages to these
workmen.  
  
The appellant has now made a further application to quash this ',supplementary
award". The present application 'and application No. S. C. 206/78 were taken
up together by the Court of Appeal. The two grounds urged before us by Mr.
Pullenayagam were also the basis of the submissions before. That Court.  
  
The first ground relates to the interpretation of the provisions of section
34. More specifically it turns on the correct meaning to be assigned to the
words "Interpretation of any award". in that section. Mr. Pullenayagam
contended that the "interpretation "

**188**

permitted by section 34 was a restricted power. He seeks support for his
submission in the ordinary meaning of the word 'interpret' and submits that
this restricted power does not enable the arbitrator to quantify the back
wages as he sought to do in this case.,  
  
Mr. Pullenayagam's second submission is more substantial in nature. It
challenges the jurisdiction of the arbitrator to make the "supplementary
award". This is the manner in which he has reason -ed it out. The
"supplimentary award"-is by section 34(2) "deemed to form part of and' shall
have the same effect in all respects as the original- award". Since the
original award ceased to be operative with effect from 1st March 1978, the
arbitrator had no authority, subsequent to that date, to engage in the
interpretation of an award which was now null and void.  
  
The Court of Appeal has held against the appellant on both these grounds:  
  
Our attention has been drawn to regulation 29 made under the Industrial
Disputes Act and the decision in Commercial. Bank Association v.
Thalgodapitiya, l which relates to the first ground. There are no local
decisions touching the second ground and the matter as far as we are aware is
res integra.  
  
Regulation 29 allows an arbitrator to correct any clerical, or arithmetical
error in the award. Mr. Premaratne, Senior State Counsel, has quite rightly
compared this regulation with the power given to a Court by section 189, Civil
Procedure Code, to correct clerical or arithmetical errors or any error
arising from an accidental slip or omission. The powers given here are merely
ministerial or administrative in nature and can be exercised ex mero motu by
the tribunal and' in the absence of the parties. On the other hand, the power
given by section 34 of the Industrial Disputes Act is markedly different.
Under section 34 of the Act, the power can only be exercised by the Tribunal
upon a reference by the Commissioner one of the interested parties. The
section contemplates a "decision" on the part of the Tribunal upon such
reference. If, for any reason, the matter cannot be referred to the original
Tribunal, it must go to an Industrial Court. The-decision must follow a
hearing and a hearing is essential and can be dispensed with only upon the
consent of the parties. Section 34 clearly envisages proceedings of a

**189**

quasi-judicial nature. The very fact that there exists another provision for
the correction of clerical or arithmetical errors in regulation 29 is
sufficient to indicate the wider scope of the powers of section 34.  
  
Let me now see whether the restricted meaning of the word "interpretation"
given by Mr.- Pullenayagam adequately fits the context of section 34. The
dictionary meaning or the word "interpretation" is "the action of interpreting
or explaining: explanation, exposition". And the word interpret is defined as
"to expound the meaning of (something abstruse or mysterious); to render
(words, writings or author etc.) clear or explicit' to elucidate, to explain".
In fact one of the first examples given in the use of the word is
"Interpretation of Nature" a phrase used by Bacon to denote the discovery of
natural laws by means of induction. It will be observed that these meanings
are consonant with what we understand by the term `interpretation' in the
legal sphere.  
  
Courts when called upon to interpret statutes and documents are permitted to
look at extraneous material. The functions of a court cannot be equated to
that of a mechanical instrument which merely reproduces faithfully and
impersonally something that has been pre-recorded. It is now generally
admitted that courts have and often do 'play a creative role in exercise of
their functions. If authority is needed to show the use of this term in its
wider context, one has only to think of cases like Heydon's case or of
statutes and reputed texts which recognise the right of a court to admit
extrinsic material in aid of interpretation. I n such contexts we find that
the term interpretation is used to describe that exercise. Vide Phipson :
Evidence, 8th Edn., Chapter XLVI.  
  
Turning from these general observations to the facts of the present case I
find that it bears close similarity to the facts in the case of Commercial
Bank Association v. Thalgodapitiya. (supra) I n that case the Commissioner of
Labour referred for settlement by arbitration an industrial dispute relating
to certain superannuating schemes. The arbitrator in his award had formulated
two separate schemes-one in respect of pensions and the other for a provident
fund. As regards the provident fund scheme, the arbitrator had specified the
date on which it should come into force; but due to

**190**

inadvertence, he failed to specify a date for the commencement of the pension
scheme.  
  
The matter was referred back to the arbitrator in terms of section 34 and the
arbitrator stated that he had intended the pension fund scheme also to start
from the same date as the provident fund scheme. It was sought to argue that
the arbitrator, had misconstrued section 34 and had acted contrary to the
provisions of section 18(2) which deals with the date the award comes into
force. It would appear that he point now taken up by Mr. Pullenayegurn was not
an argument put forward in that case. Weerasooriya, J., however, in the course
of his judgment went on to make certain observations about the scope of
section 34. He said:  
  
"The Act does not contain express provision for the correction or modification
of an award once it has been made. Such provision is contained in section 14
of the Arbitration Ordinance (Cap. 83) and section 687 and 688 of the Civil
Procedure Code. But section 21 of the Act provides that neither the
Arbitration Ordinance nor the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code relating
to arbitration shall apply to proceedings before an arbitrator under the Act.
Notwithstanding the absence of express provision in the Act for the correction
or modification of an award, I am unable to take the view 'that an award once
made must remain unalterable even in respect of obvious errors and. omissions.
It seems to me that an arbitrator to whom an award is referred for
interpretation under section 34(1) of the Act is entitled to correct such
errors and omissions in the award in giving his decision on any question
submitted to him."  
  
At the date of this decision, regulation 29 had not been enacted and the
absence of such a provision has obviously influenced these dicta. The
provision of section 34 are no doubt circumscribed and must be interpreted
within limits, but Justice Weerasooriya appears to have taken an unduly narrow
view of these provisions almost equating them to regulation 29. I have already
contrasted these two provisions and sought to show that they are mutually
exclusive and should operate as such.  
  
Justice Weerasooriya was 1oth to inquire into the corresponding position where
arbitration under the civil law was concerned .I

**191**

 think such a comparison could be useful bearing in mind no doubt that there
are some differences between such civil law arbitration and industrial
arbitration. An industrial arbitrator has much wider powers both as regards
the scope of the inquiry and the kind of orders he can make than an arbitrator
in the civil law. In short we can fairly say that arbitration under the
Industrial Law is intended to be even more liberal, informal and flexible than
commercial arbitration. And the effect of section 21 of the Industrial
Disputes Act is to indicate that even the rules relating to arbitration in the
civil law should not be allowed to trammel the powers of inquiry given to an
arbitrator under the Act. Nevertheless, some of the basic principles and
concepts of arbitration are common to both. While it is true that the
Industrial Disputes Act expressly states that the provisions relating to
arbitration under the civil law are inapplicable, a comparison of these
provisions should no doubt be helpful and enable us to take our bearings and
to accord to industrial arbitration a latitude even greater than what now
obtains in arbitration under the civil law.  
  
But under the Civil Procedure Code and the Arbitration Ordinance (Cap. 98),
there are wide-ranging provisions for amendments and corrections to be made in
an award. Section 14 of the Arbitration Ordinance reads:  
  
"The court may, on the application of either party, modify, or correct an
award, where it appears that a part of the award is upon matters not referred
to the arbitrators (provided that such part can be separated from the other
part and does not affect the decision on the matter referred), or where the
award is imperfect in form, or contains any obvious error which can be amended
without affecting such decision. The court may also, on such application, make
such order as it thinks just respecting the costs of the arbitration, if any
question arise respecting such costs and the award contains no sufficient
provision concerning them."  
  
Section 15 provides for remitting the award back to the arbitrator. It reads:  
  
"In any of the following cases the court shall have power to remit the award
or any of the matters referred to arbitration to

**192**

the reconsideration of the same arbitrators or umpire, upon such terms as it
may think proper, that is to say:  
  
(a) if the award has left undetermined some of-the matters referred to
arbitration, or if it determine matters not referred to arbitration;  
  
(b) if the award is so indefinite as to be incapable of execution  
  
(c) if an objection to the legality of the award is apparent upon the face of
the award."  
  
The corresponding provisions of the Civil Procedure Code are sections .688 to
690.  
  
Coming back to the present case, we find that the arbitrator has ordered back
wages for the period of non-employment. The wages including allowances are
generally ascertainable from the pay sheet and about which there could be
little likelihood of contention. At the second inquiry these matters appear to
have been agreed upon as revealed by the arbitrator's order:  
  
"As regards the amounts payable to the workmen concerned up to the date on
which they were to be reinstated according to the award, there is no dispute
between the parties."  
  
In the case of Commercial Bank Association v. Thalgodapitiya (supra), a date
which was in the mind of the arbitrator of which there was no specific
indication in the written record came to be inserted as a correction. In the
present case, the correction of the award involves a pure arithmetical
exercise, namely the calculation of the sum concerned which has to be arrived
at by multiplying two readily available figures, i. e. the amount of wages
into the number of months that were relevant. The results arrived at
correspond exactly to the determination in the award and is now spelled out
numerically and in no wise go beyond it or fall short of it. In these
circumstances, could one say that the arbitrator acted unreasonably or that he
ought not to have acted in the manner he has done, or that his action falls
outside the provisions of section 34  
  
For the above reasons l am unable to accept the argument submitted to me by
the appellant and this ground therefore fails.  
  
The second submission of Mr. Pullenayagam is a matter of some complexity and
we have been informed that there are no local decisions dealing with the
question. The question that has been posed is whether or not an award once it
is repudiated, has the effect, as it were, of wiping-the slate clean so that
the award and its effects will

**193**

disappear altogether as if they had never existed from the inception. I must
confess that I find it difficult to accept this argument both on principle'
and practice. t do not think it can be seriously contended that in respect of
the factual position relating to such an award that facts and events that had
already transpired could be wished away and made to disappear in this manner.
The view that any rights and obligations created and subsisting under an award
would also be rendered null and void from their inception by virtue of a
repudiation, is based on a similar misconception. To find an answer to this
question we need go to the roots of industrial arbitration and try to
understand what it signifies.  
  
The Industrial Disputes Act provides for State intervention in the resolution
of disputes between management and workmen. The procedures that are devised
therein for the settlement of industrial disputes are founded on a view that
such disputes reach beyond the interests of the contesting parties and are
matters of real concern to the community at large;  
  
The award in the case of an arbitration therefore is not intended to be a
respite -and to provide a temporary breathing space leaving the parties free
thereafter to reopen the disputes. No; the award is intended to be a true
settlement of the existing dispute and that settlement is made binding on the
parties with the sanction-of the award behind it., What the award seeks to do
is to resolve the dispute by formulating a new set of terms and conditions,
which are fair and reasonable to both parties, and imposing such terms on the
parties so that these terms and conditions will supersede the original
position of the parties and provide a new relationship that would henceforth
guide the conduct of the parties. These terms and conditions are statutorily
made implied terms in the contract of employment. In addition to that, the
award will be binding on the parties and is made operative in its character of
an award for a minimum period of twelve months. This means that there are some
special sanctions, including criminal sanctions to back the award in its
character as an award. During that period and in respect of that period. when
the award will subsist, all rights and liabilities pertaining to the award in
its character as an award can be enforced as an award.

**194**

The law no doubt allows a repudiation of the award at any time after the
required minimum period. What then is the effect of such a repudiation? In my
view such a repudiation can have only prospective application and cannot
affect any rights and obligations that have already' accrued to the parties
and have become terms and conditions of service. From and after the date of
repudiation the parties are freed from the constraints and fetters of the
award in its nature as an award. Henceforth the parties would be at liberty to
order their affairs like any' other employer or employee but- and this is
important-any change that is sought can only be effected from the prevailing
position; by this. I mean that the terms and conditions then subsisting (which
will include those that came in by way of the award) must necessarily form the
starting point. A repudiation of an award in my view can never result in a
going back to the contentious position of the parties which had originally
prevailed at the time of the dispute. To do so would be to devalue the concept
of arbitration altogether and to make arbitral proceedings an almost useless
exercise.  
  
In this connection I observe that the Indian cases-that I have been able to
peruse appear to proceed on these same lines. In South Indian Bank v. Checko
(2) which is a judgment of the Indian Supreme Court, I find a clear exposition
of the legal position relating to this matter. The court observed:  
  
"Quite apart from this, however, it appears to us that even if an award has
ceased to be in operation or in force and has ceased to be binding on the
parties under the provisions of S. 19(6), it will continue to have its effect
as a contract between the parties that has been made by industrial
adjudication in . place of the old contract. So long as the award remains in
operation under S. 19(3), S. 23(c) stands in the way of any strike by the
workmen and lockout by the employer in respect of any matter covered by the
award. Again, so long as the award is binding on a party, breach of any of its
terms will make the party liable to penalty under S. 29 of the Act, to
imprisonment which; may extend to six months or with fine or with both. After
the period of its operation, and also the period for which the award is
binding have elapsed Ss. 23 and 29 can have no ,operation. We can however see
nothing in the scheme of the Industrial Disputes Act to justify a conclusion
that merely

**195**

because these special provision. as. regards prohibition of strikes and
lockouts and of penalties for breach of award cease to be effective, the new
contract as embodied in the award should also cease to be effective. On the
contrary, the very purpose for which industrial adjudication has been given
the peculiar authority and right of making new contracts between employers and
workmen makes it reasonable to think that even though the period of operation
of the award and the period for which it remains binding on the parties may
elapse-in respect of both of which special provisions have been made under Ss.
23 and 29 respectively-may expire, the new contract would continue to govern
the relations between the parties till it is displaced by another contract."  
  
_In Yamuna Mills Co. Ltd. Majoor Mahajan Mandl, (3)_ Justice Tendolkar of the
Bombay High Court had attempted to analyze the legal position between the
employer and employee consequent on a repudiation or termination of an award.
He said as follows:  
  
". . . But the question that we have been called upon to determine goes a
little further than that and the question is by what is the relationship
between the employers and the employees regulated after an award is
terminated? Does termination of the award create a vacuum and leave the
employees to the tender mercy of the employer? Does it, by providing that the
award shall cease to have effect, get rid of the award so as to bring about
the result that any agreement that governed the relations of the parties prior
to the date of the award is thereby revived; or does it preserve such rights
as the employees have, prior to the date of termination, already enjoyed under
the award or does it preserve the whole of the award until" it is changed by
the procedure prescribed by the Bombay Industrial Relations Act for a change?
Now, quite obviously it would not be possible for any court to take the view
that the termination of the award creates a vacuum in which the employees are
at the tender mercy of the employer; nor does it appear to us to be possible
to hold that by the termination of the award the contract or agreement that
governed the relations of the employer and the employees prior to the : award
is in some manner revived. Initially that contract or agreement had binding
effect; but it ceased to have such effect on the award taking effect and the

**196**

moment the award became binding on the parties, the antecedent contract or
agreement was superseded by the award. It is not a case of an antecedent
contract or agreement being suspended, because there is no provision for
suspension which can even be spelt out from any of the sections of the Bombay
Industrial Relations Act. The award, or as the case may be, a registered
agreement or a settlement under the Bombay Industrial Relations Act, has
obviously the effect of superseding the contract. or agreement that existed
and that regulated the relations between the employer and the employees prior
to the registered agreement, settlement or award taking effect under the
provisions of the Act. Then we come to the next possibility: Is only so much
of the award, preserved as relates to the rights already enjoyed by the
employees before the termination of the award? We find it difficult so to
hold. There is no principle or logic in dealing with an award in this
piecemeal manner and preserving rights that have already been actually enjoyed
and destroying those which, although they may have accrued, have to be enjoyed
in future in terms of the award. Mr. Patel for the petitioners has argued that
on the termination of the award the effect or rather the result that is
brought about is that the rights of parties are frozen as of that date.
Assuming such a concept of freezing the rights was adopted, even the freezing
would be in respect of rights that have already accrued and it is not quite
easy to conceive of rights which would not accrue to an employee under. an
industrial award and: which can only be contingent.. in any event, if the
original contract or agreement has been superseded by the award, holding that
the award is no longer what governs the relations between the employer and the
employees would necessarily create a vacuum. Trying to save the creation of a
vacuum by splitting up the award into two parts, the award under which
benefits have already been enjoyed and that part of the award under which
benefits have not been enjoyed, is dissecting the award in a manner riot
justified in law or logic. There appears to be on the scene after the
termination of the award only one thing that can govern the relations between
the employer and the employees and that undoubtedly can be nothing else than
the award itself. The result of the award ceasing to have effect is not that
the award ceases to exist; the result of the award ceasing to have effect is,

**197**

as I have already pointed out, that it is open to either party to give a
'notice of change and to attempt to bring about a change; . Further, it is
open to the employer in cases. in which he can bring about a change `without a
notice of change such as the matters enumerated in Such. III to proceed to
bring about the change, because the impediment placed in his way by S. 46(3)
is removed. But until a change is brought about by the act either of the
employer or the employee after following the relevant provisions in the Bombay
Industrial Relations Act, 1946 , the award that exists shall continue to
regulate the relations between the employer and employees."  
  
In _Bilash Chandra Mitra v. Balmer Lawrie & Co. Ltd. 4_ we find that facts are
somewhat similar to the case before us.  
  
In that case the plaintiff, who was the employee, brought an action in the
civil court, claiming a declaration that he continued to be in :employment and
for the recovery of pay and allowances under an award. The award had been made
in consequence of an' industrial dispute in which` the plaintiff alleged that
he was wrongfully retired from his post. The award had decreed reinstatement
and the payment of salary and allowances commencing from the date of such
termination. The plaintiff 'however had neither been reinstated nor paid his
salary and allowances.  
  
One of the objections taken in the case was that, since the plaintiff had not
been reinstated, he cannot claim wages or salary, The Court said:  
  
". . . . The Award declared that, the plaintiff is reinstated to his previous
service and post with effect from the date on which the Award would become .
effective and as a consequence of reinstatement the plaintiff would get
arrears of pay, and allowances. Further, a time limit was fixed within which
the amount had to be paid. It is thus clear that nothing as left to be done by
the defendant company. The plaintiff was restored to his service by the Award
itself and he was declared entitled to arrears of pay and allowances. There
was automatic reinstatement by virtue. of the Award. The. Award fixed the
liability of the. company to pay the arrears of salary and allowances. In
other words a sort of decree. for a sum_ to be calculated arithmetically had
been passed against the defendant and in favour of the plaintiff."

**198**

 Another objection that was taken was that relief by way of ordinary action
did not lie and the proper. mode of action was recovery under section 29 of
the Industrial Disputes Act., In answer, the Court said:  
  
"In the present case the plaintiff is not merely claiming the arrears of
salary and allowance due up to the date of the Award but also salary and
allowance which accrued due after the Award on the strength of the declaration
as to reinstatement made by the Award. In other words the plaintiff's claim
extends to or comprises further relief which flows from the Award. The Award
has created a debt in favour of the plaintiff and I fail to . see why payment
of such debt cannot be enforced by suit. The debt has accrued from the
relationship of the master and servant: It is a civil liability and for:
enforcement of such liability recourse can be had to an action in 'a civil
court (S. 9 Civil P. c.) though no doubt the remedy. of proceedings for.
enforcement of the provisions of S. 29 of the Act is also available for
punishing the person so liable."  
  
The decision in J. C. Adak v. Mukherjee, (5) is even more in point. In this
case an award had been made under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes
Act declaring that the workman should be paid dearness allowances at a'
certain` rate. The award was binding on the parties and was operative for a
period of one year., There was provision in the Act to reconsider the matter
if , a material change occurs in. the circumstances upon which the award was
based. Accordingly, while the award was still in effect, such a reference was
made and the. Tribunal dealing with it declared that the term imposed by the`
original award had : by lapse of time become inoperative and sought to nullify
the award:  
  
In' an application to quash this second award, the respondent took an
objection somewhat similar to the one taken in by the appellant in the present
case. The court said -  
  
"On behalf of the respondent, it was contended that the award.. of 15: 5. 1948
had ceased to be effective after 25. 5..1949 and, therefore, the modification
of the award made by the, award of 20.5.. 1949 could not affect the interest
of the petitioner. Therefore, this Court should not make. an order which is-of
no benefit to the petitioner. This contention, I do

**199**

not think, is right: It overlooks the fact that though the award of 15.5. 1948
had become ineffective by the passing of time , the rights flowing there from
have not been wiped out. The award directed payment of certain dearness
allowances which, if not paid, created a debt in favour of the workmen, and it
was a binding debt. The award binds the parties in the same way, as if the
terms were agreed between them. In my view, the payment of this debt can be
enforced by a civil suit.- It is a fallacy to say that the penalty clause in
the Act bars such a suit."  
  
The above case was cited with approval in _Mangaldas Narandas v. Payment of
Wages Authority, (6)_ where the court said:  
  
"When an award is delivered .by the industrial tribunal' it has the effect of
imposing a statutory contract governing the relations of` the employer and,
the employee. It is true that statutory contract may be terminated in the
manner prescribed by Sub-sec. (6) of S. 19'. After the statutory contract is
terminated by notice the employer by, failing to abide by the terms of the
award does not incur the penalties provided by the Industrial Disputes Act;
nor can the award be enforced. in the manner prescribed by S. 20 of Industrial
Disputes '(Appellate Tribunal) Act, 1950. But the termination of the award
has, in our judgment, not the effect of extinguishing the rights flowing
therefrom. Evidently by the termination of the award the contract of
employment is not terminated. The employer and the employee remain master and
servant in the industry in which' they are engaged, unless by notice the
employer has also simultaneously with the termination of the award terminated
the employment of .the employee. If the employment is not terminated, it is
difficult to hold that the rights which had been granted' under the award
automatically cease to be effective from the date on which notice of
termination of the' award becomes effective. In our Judgment, the effect of
termination of the award. is only to prevent enforcement of the obligations
under the award in. the manner prescribed, but the rights' and obligations
which flow from the award are not wiped out."  
  
Similar views have. been expressed in Workmen of Andra Bank Ltd. v. Andra Bank
Ltd' (7)  
  
For the reasons set but above, this appeal' fails and I would accordingly
dismiss it with costs. The appellant will pay to each of

**200**

the 2nd and 3rd respondents half the amount at which the costs of such party
is assessed on taxation in respect of this appeal.  
  
Mr. Senanayake complained that over five years have elapsed since the date of
the original award and the appellant, by successive resort to the court, has
succeeded till now in keeping these workmen away from what was rightly due to
them. He expressed a fear, having regard to some remarks made at the hearing,
that there may be a likelihood of further obstacles being placed in his way.
The decision we have now, given places beyond doubt the continuing obligation
of the appellant to pay these amounts to the workmen. Since no date appears to
have been fixed for payment, to avoid technical advantage being taken of this
and/or of the delay occasioned by orders for stay of executions made by the
courts, we would,' in the exercise of our powers, order that they be paid to
the workmen on or before the 15th of May 1981.: n view of this order, we hope
that fears expressed by Mr. Senanayake will prove groundless.  
  
**SAMARAWICKREMA, J. -**   I agree  
  
**ISMAIL, J.  **\- I agree  
  
**_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/19.html_  

