##  In Re the Eighteenth Amendment To the Constitution - SLR - 71, Vol 3 of
2002 [2002] LKSC 19; (2002) 3 Sri LR 71 (3 October 2002)

**71**

**IN RE THE EIGHTEENTH AMENDMENT TO THE  
CONSTITUTION**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,  
ISMAIL, J.,  
EDUSSURIYA, J.,  
YAPA, J. AND  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
SD NOS. 12, 14, 22-24, 29 AND 36 OF 2002  
OCTOBER 03, 2002.  
  
_Constitution - 18th Amendment to the Constitution - Amendments to Articles
relating to the Constitutional Council - Inconsistency with Article 3 read
with Article 4 of the Constitution - Alienation of legislative and judicial
power of the People - Infringement of fundamental rights - Article 12 (1) -
Articles 84 (2) and 83 (a) of the Constitution - Special majority and approval
of the People at a Referendum.  
  
_A Bill titled the "Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution" was placed on
the Order Paper of Parliament for 18th September, 2002\. Seven petitions were
presented invoking the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in terms of Article
121 (1) for a determination in terms of Article 123 of the Constitution, in
respect of the Bill.  
  
The Bill provides, inter alia, for the following :  
  
(1) A provision conferring power on the Council to make rules - Clause 2.  
  
(2) A provision enabling the payment of emoluments to the members of the
Council \- Clause 3.  
  
(3) A provision conferring total immunity from judicial review of the
decisions of the Council - Clause 4.

**72**

(4) A provision providing immunity from suit against the Council, its members
and officers - Clause 5.  
  
(5) A provision for punishment for interference with the Council - Clause 5.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Article 3 of the Constitution mandates that in Sri Lanka sovereignty is in
the People and is inalienable. Sovereignty includes powers of government,
fundamental rights and franchise.  
  
(2) The manner in which the sovereignty of the People is exercised is set out
in Article 4. The legislative power of the People is exercised by Parliament
(Article 4 (a)), Articles 4 (d) and (e) refer to fundamental rights and
franchise which are also components of sovereignty).  
  
(3) Articles 3 and 4 must be read together and hence no organ of government
shall alienate the sovereignty of the People in the exercise of its power
entrusted to it. The Constitution does not attribute any unfettered discretion
or authority to any organ or body established under the Constitution. That
would be inconsistent with the Rule of Law.  
  
(4) Under Clause 2 (proposed Article 41 FF) of the Bill which empowers the
Council to make rules of procedure and guidelines to be followed by it, the
Council is required before gazetting the rules (whereupon they would come into
effect) to communicate such rules to Parliament. No approval of Parliament is
required as in the case of rules made by the Supreme Court under Article 136
of the Constitution. Hence, Clause 2 alienates the legislative power of the
People in violation of Article 4 (a); in the circumstances Clause 2 requires
to be passed by the special majority and approved by the People at a
Referendum in terms of Article 84 (2) by virtue of Article 83. The above
inconsistency with the Constitution will cease if Clause 2 is amended
requiring the rules to be placed before Parliament for approval or the power
of the Council is restricted to the formulation of guidelines only.  
  
(5) By Clause 4 it is sought to amend Article 41 H of the Constitution
removing the only form of judicial control which that Article reserved against
decisions of the Council namely, fundamental rights jurisdiction under Article
126.

**73**

This is an alienation of judicial power of the People in respect of an
executive body such as the Constitutional Council. Such provision is violative
of Article 3. It is also violative of Article 3 in that the creating of a
different class of persons who are immuned from judicial review is violative
of Article 12 (1). Consequently, it is an alienation of the sovereignty of the
People. Therefore, Clause 4 requires to be passed by the special majority
under Article 84 (2) and approved by the People at a Referendum by virtue of
Article 83 of the Constitution.  
  
(6) Clause 5 provides for two new Article namely, 41 j and 41k The immunity
from suit sought to be conferred by the proposed Article 41 j on the Council,
its members and officers is an alienation of the judicial power of the People.
It also constitutes such alienation as it violates Article 12 (1) which
guarantees a fundamental right which is a component of sovereignty.  
  
(7) The provisions of the proposed Article 41 k for penalizing interference
with the Council will preclude any representations being made by the majority
community for whom there is no special representation in the Council such as
is available to the minority communities. Hence, it is violative of Article 12
(1) which guarantees a fundamental right which is a component of sovereignty
of the People. In the circumstances, the proposed Article 41 k requires to be
passed by the special majority under Article 84 (2) and approved by the People
at a Referendum by virtue of Article 83 of the Constitution.  
  
**PETITIONS** challenging the "Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution" in
terms of Article 121 (1) for a determination under Article 123 of the
Constitution.  
  
Counsel for petitioners :

SD 12/2000 - | Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne, PC with Gaston Jayakody.  
---|---  
SD 14/2000 -  | Manohara de Silva.  
SD 22/2000 - | J. C. Weliamuna with Lilanthi de Silva, Chrismal Warnasooriya
and Sanath Jayawardane.  
SD 23/2000 - | M. A. Sumanthiran with Viran Corea and Renuka Senanayake.  
  
**74**

SD 24/2000 - | Manohara de Silva with W. D. Weeraratne.  
---|---  
SD 29/2000 -  | Wijayadasa Rajapakse, PC with Kapila Liyanagamage and Ranjith
Meegaswatte.  
SD 36/2000 - |  Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne, PC with Gaston Jayakody and
Pubudini  Wickramaratne.  
  
Counsel for the State :  
  
_K. C. Kamalasabayson, PC, Attorney-General with S. Marsoof, PC_ , Additional
Solicitor-General, Uditha Egalahewa, State Counsel and Harsha Fernando, State
Counsel.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 03, 2002  
  
A Bill bearing the title "18th Amendment to the Constitution" was placed on
the Order Paper of Parliament for 18th September, 2002\. Seven petitions,
numbered as above have been presented invoking the jurisdiction of this Court
in terms of Article 121 (1) for a determination in terms of Article 123 of the
Constitution in respect of the Bill.  
  
Upon receipt of the petitions the Court issued notice on the Attorney-General
as required by Article 134 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
The Counsel representing the petitioners and the Attorney-General were heard
before this Bench at the sittings held on 03. 10. 2002.  
  
The petitioners contended that Clauses 2, 4 and 5 of the Bill are
inconsistent with Article 3 read with Article 4 of the Constitution and that
if they require to become law, they must be passed by

**75**

a two-thirds (2/3) majority in Parliament and thereafter be approved by the
People at a Referendum, in terms of Article 83 of the Constitution.  
  
Since extensive references were made to Clause 4 of the Bill, we would
consider this first.  
  
**CLAUSE 4  
**  
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend Article 41 (H) of the Constitution and is
in the following terms :  
  
Article 41 (H) of the Constitution is hereby amended by the  substitution for
the words and figures "subject to the provisions of paragraphs (1), (2), (4)
and (5) of Article 126, no Court shall" of the words "No Court, including the
Supreme Court acting under Article 136 shall".  
  
Counsel for the petitioners argued that by the amendment of Article 41 (H) of
the Constitution, the power of the Supreme Court to exercise its jurisdiction
over any "decision, recommendation and approval of the Constitutional
Council", set up by Article 41 (A) of the Constitution, is taken away.  
      
The Constitution, inter alia, provides for the amendment or repeal so of the
provisions of the Constitution. Provision is made in regard to such amendments
or repeals in Articles 82 and 83 of the Constitution.  
  
Article 83 of the Constitution refers to the approval of certain Bills at a
Referendum. This Article reads as follows :  
  
"Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the provisions of Article 82 -

**76**

(a) a Bill for the amendment or for the repeal and replacement of or which is
inconsistent with any of the provisions of Articles 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10
and 11, or of this Article, and  
  
(b) a Bill for the amendment or for the repeal and replacement of or which is
inconsistent with the provisions of paragraph  (2) of Article 30 or of
paragraph (2) of Article 62 which would extend the term of office of the
President or the duration of Parliament, as the case may be, to over 6 years,
shall become law if the number of votes cast in favour thereof amount to not
less than two-thirds of the whole number of Members (including those not
present), is approved by the People at a Referendum and a certificate is
endorsed thereon by the President in accordance with Article 80.".  
  
It is not disputed that Article 83 makes no reference to proposed Articles 41
(F), 41 (H), 41 (J) and 41 (K), which respectively are mentioned in Clauses 2,
4 and 5 of the Bill. However, the arguments put forward by the petitioners
were to the effect that although the aforementioned Articles are not referred
to in Article 83, the provisions in the proposed Articles are inconsistent
with Article 3 read with Article 4, which is specifically mentioned in Article
83 of the Constitution.  
  
Article 3 of the Constitution, which is an entrenched provision, deals with
the sovereignty of the People and reads as follows :  
  
"In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the People and is inalienable.
Sovereignty includes the powers of government, fundamental rights and the
franchise."  
  
It was the unanimous contention of all the petitioners that Article 4 is
complementary to Article 3 of the Constitution. In fact, this Court has ruled
in a series of cases that Article 3 is linked up with Article

**77**

4 and that these two Articles must be read together (vide SD 5/80, 1/82, 2/83,
1/84 and 7/87).  
  
Article 4 of the Constitution deals with the exercise of sovereignty and
provides that -  
  
"The Sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in the following
manner :  
  
(a) the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament,
consisting of elected representatives of the People and by the People at a
Referendum;  
  
(b) the executive power of the People, including the defence of Sri Lanka,
shall be exercised by the President of the Republic elected by the People;  
  
(c) the judicial power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament through
courts, tribunals and institutions created and established, or recognized, by
the Constitution, or created and established by law, except in regard to
matters relating to the privileges, immunities and powers of Parliament and of
its Members, wherein the judicial power of the People may be exercised
directly by Parliament according to Law;  
  
(d) the fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and
recognized shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of
government, and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the
manner and to the extent hereinafter provided; and  
  
(e) the franchise shall be exercisable at the election of the President of the
Republic and of the Members of Parliament and at every Referendum by every
citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years, and who, being qualified
to be

**78**

an elector as hereinafter provided, has his name entered in the register of
electors.".  
  
Thus, in terms of Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution, fundamental rights and
franchise constitute the sovereignty of the People, and is inalienable. The
Constitution does not attribute any unfettered discretion or authority to any
organ or body established under the Constitution. Even the immunity given to
the President under Article 35, has been  limited in relation to Court
proceedings specified in Article 35 (3). Moreover, the Supreme Court has
entertained and decided the questions in relation to Emergency Regulations
made by the President [Joseph Perera v. Attorney-General - (1992 - 1 Sri LR.
pg 199)] and Presidential Appointments (Silva v. Bandaranayake \- (1997)1 Sri
L.R. pg 92).  
  
By the envisaged 18th amendment, the Constitutional Council is clothed with
unlimited and unfettered immunity on their decisions, recommendations and
approvals. If such immunity is given to the Constitutional Council, it would
in effect be elevated to a body that is not subject to law, which is
inconsistent with the Rule of Law. The Rule of Law, means briefly the
exclusion of the existence of arbitrariness and maintaining equality before
the Law (A. V. Dicey \- Law of the Constitution, pg. 120).  
  
Hitherto, without exception, executive and administrative action have been
subjected to the jurisdiction enshrined in Article 126 of the Constitution.
The total immunity expected in terms of the proposed amendment to the
Constitution would effectively shut out the justiciability of actions of the
Constitutional Council in the exercise of the fundamental rights jurisdiction
by the Supreme Court.  
      
The Constitutional Council established under the 17th Amendment, is part of
the Executive and is attributed executive power. Thus, the Council would come
within the executive organ of Government in regard to Article 4 (a) of the
Constitution, referred to above. It is,

**79**

therefore, the duty of the Constitutional Council to respect, secure and
advance the fundamental rights which are declared and recognized by the
Constitution. The functions of the Constitutional Council would come within
the framework of executive action as provided for in terms of Article 17 of
the Constitution. Article 17 enables every person to apply to the Supreme
Court in respect of the infringement or imminent  infringement of a
fundamental right.  
  
The effect of the amendment in Clause 4 is to introduce a different class of
people whose actions are not subject to judicial review. There is no
justification for such immunity to be granted, which is contrary to Article 12
(1) of the Constitution and the basic principles of Rule of Law.  
  
The concept of judicial review of administrative action, being a predominant
feature of Constitutional jurisprudence, prevents total immunity being given
to anybody, created under the Constitution as such restriction of judicial
scrutiny, would impair the very foundation of the Constitution and the Rule of
Law. The total immunity contemplated by the amendment, taking away the
judicial review of the actions of the Constitutional Council out of the
fundamental rights jurisdiction, in effect would alienate the judicial power
from the people in contravention of Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution. It
is to be noted that Article 3 of the Constitution specifically refers to the
following :  
  
(A) the sovereignty is in the people and that it is inalienable, and  
  
(B) the sovereignty includes the powers of Government, fundamental rights and
the franchise.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons we determine that Clause 4 of the Bill is
inconsistent with Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution. We also state that the
Bill in its present form is therefore required to be passed by the special
majority in terms of the provision of paragraph (2) of Article 84 and approved
by the people at a Referendum by virtue of the provisions of Article 83.

**80**

**CLAUSE 2  
  
**Clause 2 of the Bill is to amend Article 41 (F) of the Constitution and to
insert a new Article, namely, Article 41 (FF) which would deal with the rule
making powers of the Constitutional Council. This new  Article is in the
following terms :  
  
"(1) The Council may, from time to time, make rules setting out the procedure
and guidelines to be followed by it, in the performance and discharge of the
duties and functions assigned to it under the Constitution, or by any other
Law.  
  
(2) Every rule made under paragraph (1) of this Article, shall be published in
the Gazette and shall come into operation on the date of such publication.  
  
(3) The Council shall, before the publication of any rule formulated in terms
of this Article in the Gazette, communicate such rule to Parliament.".  
  
The petitioners submitted that that these Rules would be for the purpose of
setting out the procedure and guidelines to be followed by the Constitutional
Council itself. It was also pointed out that no provision has been made in the
amendment that these Rules must be approved by Parliament. The amendment
merely requires the Constitutional Council to communicate such Rules to
Parliament.  
  
The Constitutional Council, as pointed out earlier is established by the 17th
amendment. The proposed amendment enables the Council to exercise legislative
power which according to Article 4 (a) of the Constitution, is reposed in the
People and is exercised by Parliament. In terms of Article 76 (1) of the
Constitution, Parliament cannot abdicate or alienate its legislative power.  
  
The Rule making power of the Constitutional Council is derived from the
Constitution. The amendment shows that this power is not subjected to any kind
of control. However, the other organs, which

**81**

are created by the Constitution, and thus have the power to make Rules, are
quite correctly subjected to the accepted norms of Parliamentary control. For
instance, the Rules of the Supreme Court made under Article 136 of the
Constitution, should as soon as convenient  after their publication in the
Gazette, be brought before Parliament for approval. The proposed amendment
thus undermines the Parliamentary control over the Rule making powers of an
institution established by the Constitution, which in turn is an abdication as
well as an alienation that affects the sovereignty of the People, which is
inconsistent with Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution. Hence, this Clause
requires approval by the People at a Referendum in addition to a two-thirds
majority votes (including those not present) in terms of Article 83 of the
Constitution.  
  
We are of the opinion that if Clause 2 is amended by incorporating the
requirement for the Rules prepared by Constitutional Council to be placed
before the Parliament in order to obtain approval or the power of the Council
is restricted to the formulation of guidelines only, the inconsistency with
Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution would cease and the approval by the
People at a Referendum in terms of Article 83 of the Constitution would not be
necessary.  
  
**CLAUSE 5  
**  
Clause 5 of the Bill consists of 2 Articles, namely 41 J and 41 K (1) and (2),
which are proposed to be inserted immediately after Article 41 H of the
Constitution. While 41 J refers to immunity from suit, 41 K (1) and (2) deal
with the interference with the Council. These two Articles are in the
following terms :  
  
"41 J No suit or proceeding shall lie against the Council, the Chairman, a
Member, the Secretary or an officer of the Council in respect of anything done
or omitted to be done by the Council, the Chairman, a Member, the Secretary or
any officer of the Council in the performance or discharge of any duty or
function conferred or assigned in terms of the Constitution or by any other
Law.  
  
41 (K)(1) Every person who, otherwise than in the course of such persons
lawful duty, directly or indirectly by himself or by or with any other person,
in any manner whatsoever

**8** **2**

influences or attempts to influence or interferes with any decision or
recommendation of the Council, shall be guilty of an offence and shall on
conviction be liable to a fine not exceeding one hundred thousand rupees or to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding seven years, or to both such fine and
imprisonment.  
  
(2) A High Court established under Article 154 P of the Constitution shall
have jurisdiction to hear and determine any matter referred to in paragraph
(1).".  
  
Learned counsel in petitions No. 14/2002 and 24/2002 contended that the
proposed Article 41 (K) (1) would have implications, violative of Article 12
(1) of the Constitution. His submission was that Article 41 (3) of the
Constitution provides for the mandatory appointment of 3 persons from the
minority communities to represent their interest, whereas the majority
community as such is not represented in the Constitutional Council to
safeguard their interest. Accordingly, any representation made in respect of
the majority community, would entail the consequences of prosecution. Whilst
the minority communities could communicate with their representatives in the
Constitutional Council, the majority community would be denied such
opportunity in the absence of any specific representation, which in turn would
be violative of Article 12 (1).  
  
Article 3, referred to above, specifically mentions that sovereignty includes
fundamental rights and which is "in the people and is inalienable". Article 4
(a) which refers to the exercise of sovereignty specifies that the fundamental
rights which are declared and recognized by the Constitution must be
"respected, secured and advanced" by all the organs of the Government. This
Article further contemplates  that the fundamental rights cannot be abridged,
restricted or denied.  
  
In such circumstances the proposed Article 41 (K) is inconsistent with Article
3 read with Article 4 of the Constitution.  
  
The Attorney-General conceded that there is much merit in these submissions
and suggested in his submissions tendered after the hearing was concluded, the
following to be considered :

**8** **3**

(a) an appropriate definition to be included in the proposed Article to
exclude any representation that may be made to the Council by any person or,

in the alternative:  
  
(b) The words "otherwise than in the course of such person's lawful duties
directly or indirectly by himself or by or with any other persons in any
manner whatsoever influence or attempt to influence or" be deleted from the
proposed Article to ensure protection to persons making representation to the
Council.  
  
Since the suggestions were not made at the time of the hearing of these
applications, which would have given an opportunity for the petitioners also
to consider the views expressed by the Attorney-General, it would not be
possible for this Court to consider them.  
  
We, therefore, determine that the proposed Article 41 (K) is inconsistent with
Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution. The proposed Article therefore is
required to be passed by the special majority in terms of paragraph 2 of
Article 84 and approved by the people at a Referendum by virtue of the
provisions of Article 83.  
  
The proposed Article 41J referred to above, which grants an immunity to the
Constitutional Council, the Chairman, a Member, the Secretary or an officer,
from judicial proceedings in respect of anything done or omitted to be done,
attracts both objections dealt with, in the preceding paragraphs of this
determination. They are :  
  
(1) that it would alienate the judicial power from the people;  
  
(2) that it creates a special class of people in violation of Article 12 (1)
of the Constitution, who would not be subjected to judicial review.

**84**

For the reasons stated above we determine that there is merit on both grounds
of objections and the proposed Article 41J is therefore inconsistent with
Article 3 read with Article 4 of the Constitution.  
  
For the reasons stated above, the Bill, in its present form, requires approval
by People at a Referendum in addition to a two-thirds majority vote (including
those not present) in terms of Article 83 of the Constitution.  
  
We shall place on record our deep appreciation of the assistance given by the
Attorney-General and all the other learned Counsel who made submissions in
this matter.  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, CJ.  
  
S. W. B. WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
  
DR. SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
A. ISMAIL, J.  
  
P. EDUSSURIYA, J.  
  
H. S. YAPA, J.  
  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
**  
Clauses 2, 4 and 5 of the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution
unconstitutional and require to be passed by the special majority and approved
by the People at a Referendum - subject to the suggestion of Court in respect
of Clause 2.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/19.html_  

