##  Prasanna Withanage v. Saraths Amunugama, Minister of Rehabilitation,
Reconstruction and Development of the Northern Region and Others - SLR - 391,
Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 19; (2001) 1 Sri LR 391 (15 September 2001)

**391**

**PRASANNA WITHANAGE  
v.  
SARATH AMUNUGAMA, MINISTER OF REHABILITATION,  
RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT OF  
THE NORTHERN REGION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
EDUSSURIYA, J  
SC APPLICATION NO. 516/2000  
28TH MAY, 2001  
  
_Fundamental rights - Public exhibition of a film - Public Performance
Ordinance (Cap. 176) - Suspension of exhibition of film by the Minister -
Section 6 of the National Film Corporation Act, No. 47 of 1971 -
Considerations of the morale of members of the forces and national security -
Emergency Regulation No. 14 - Articles 12(1), 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(8) of the
Constitution.  
  
_The petitioner complained that the exhibition of a film produced by him
"Purahanda Kaluwara" (Death on a Full Moon Day) which had been approved by the
Public Performance Board for public exhibition on a certificate of the Board
dated 06. 03. 2000 was suspended by the 1st respondent Minister. The subjects
and functions of the National Film Corporation had been assigned to him. The
petitioner's film had won several international awards and the "Viswa Keerthi
Sammanaya" at the Sri Lanka Presidential Film Awards on 11. 02. 2000.  
  
In the meantime on 03.05.2000 the Cabinet of Ministers decided, in view of
LTTE activity in the North, to place the country on a war footing; and on the
same day the President made a new set of Emergency Regulations in which ER14
provided for censorship of certain publications. The petitioner sought the
approval of the 4th respondent (Competent Authority under ER 14) to exhibit
the film, which approval was declined by letter dated 22.05.2000. Consequent
upon a judgement of the Supreme Court on 30. 06. 2000, a new ER 14 was made on
01. 07. 2000 which had the effect of invalidating the 4th respondent's
decision dated 22\. 05. 2000; whereupon after discussion between the
petitioner and the 3rd respondent, the Chairman, National Film Corporation
(NFC), the petitioner was

**392**

informed by letter dated 07. 07. 2000 that the film would be released for
exhibition on 21. 08. 2000.  
  
Under the National Film Corporation Act, No. 47 of 1971 the 2nd respondent
(NFC) has inter alia, the exclusive right to distribute films within Sri
Lanka. However, subsequent to the NFC letter dated 07. 07. 2000, the 4th
respondent by letter dated 17. 07. 2000 informed the 3rd respondent that
certain sections of the film were likely to affect the "morale" of the
security forces.  
  
Notwithstanding the clearance of the film. by the NFC, the 1st respondent
purporting to act under section 6 of the NFC Act (which empowers the Minister
to give directions to the Corporation to comply with the general policy of the
Government with respect to the film industry in carrying out the objects of
the Corporation under the Act) by letter dated 21. 07. 2000, directed the 3rd
respondent to defer the exhibition of the film as the country was then "on a
war footing" and until the security situation improved. That direction was
communicated to the petitioner by the 3rd respondent.  
  
**Held :  
  
**ER 14(2) did not apply to the petitioner or to the NFC (as a distributor of
films for exhibition at cinemas): that the 4th respondent (Competent
Authority) could not have suspended, and did not take action to suspend the
release of the petitioner's film: that the 1st to 3rd respondents had no power
to suspend the release of the film, either under ER 14 or section 6 of the NFC
Act: that the 1st to 3rd respondents acted in breach of the audi alteram
partem rule in suspending the release of the film and that the 1st to 3rd
respondents acted unlawfully. arbitrarily, and thereby infringed the
petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 12(1), 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(g) of
the Constitution.  
  
**Case referred to :  
  
**1\. _Leader Publications (Pvt) Ltd. v. Rubasinghe_ (2000) 1 Sri LR 265  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Upul Jayasuriya_ with _P. Radhakrishnan_ for petitioner.  
  
_Saleem Marsoof, P.C_., Additional Solicitor-General with _Mrs. I.D. de Silva_
Senior State Counsel for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
_  
**393**

August 02, 2001.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
  
**The Petitioner is a film producer. In 1997 he directed and produced his
fourth film, 'Purahanda Kaluwara' (Death on a Full Moon Day')  
  
The 4th Respondent was the Competent Authority appointed under Emergency
Regulation 14 ("ER 14") of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)
Regulations, No. 1 of 2000 as amended on 1. 7. 2000. In response to an inquiry
from the 3rd Respondent (the Chairman of the National Film Corporation), the
4th Respondent informed the 3rd Respondent by letter dated 17. 7. 2000 that :  
  
" **. . .** you may take an appropriate decision with regard to exhibition of
the above film. However, I wish to point out that in my opinion certain
sections of this film, which describe the conduct of the soldiers (are?)
likely to affect the morale of the security forces. (Especially the exhumation
of the coffin and its follow-up scenes) **. . .** "  
  
Section 57 of the National Film Corporation of Sri Lanka Act, No. 47 of 1971
("the NFC Act"), grants the National Film Corporation (the 2nd Respondent) the
exclusive right to sell, supply and. distribute films within Sri Lanka.  
  
The 1st Respondent was the Minister of Rehabilitation, Reconstruction and
Development of the Northern Region. The subjects and functions of the National
Film Corporation had been assigned to him. By letter dated 21. 07. 2000 he
wrote to the 3rd Respondent as follows :  
  
In terms of the powers vested in me under section 6 of the (NFC Act), I hereby
direct the National Film Corporation to defer the exhibition of the film 'Pura
Sanda Kaluwara'.  
  
02\. I am sending this directive in view of the fact that the country is now
on a war footing. The producer may be

**394**

informed that this film will be exhibited, as soon as the security situation
improves."  
  
The same day the 3rd Respondent sent the Petitioner a copy of that letter,
stating that the 2nd Respondent was "compelled to suspend the release of
'Purahanda Kaluwara' until such time a directive is received from the Ministry
to the effect that the security situation has improved".  
  
In consequence, the exhibition of 'Purahanda Kaluwara' (which the 2nd
Respondent had previously scheduled for release on 21. 08. 2000) was
indefinitely suspended. The Petitioner complains that his fundamental rights
under Articles 12(1), 14(1)(a), and 14(1)(g) were thereby infringed.  
  
**FACTS  
  
**'Purahanda Kaluwara' had been exhibited at several international film
festivals, and won several international awards, including the prize for the
best film at the 19th Amiens International Film Festival (the Grand Prix) and
at the 13th Fribourg International Film Festival (the International Film
Critics Award). The film was also awarded the "Vishwa Keerthi Sammanaya" at
the Sri Lanka Presidential Film Awards on 11. 02. 2000 for having won the most
number of international awards.  
  
On 17. 03. 99 the acting Chairman of the 2nd Respondent had written to the
Petitioner warmly congratulating him, and stating that the 2nd Respondent
would schedule his film for early release under its special scheme for films
which had won international recognition.  
  
The film was submitted to the Public Performances Board under the Public
Performances Ordinance (Cap 176). The members of that Board are appointed by
the Minister in charge of the subject of Defence. The Board issued its
certificate dated 06. 03. 2000 under section 6, certifying the film as
suitable

**395**

for unrestricted public exhibition. That certificate was never revoked.  
  
By letters dated 16. 03. 2000 and 11. 04. 2000, the 5th and 6th Respondents -
respectively, the Assistant General Manager (Exhibition) and the Assistant
General Manager (Production), of the 2nd Respondent - wrote to the Petitioner
about various matters connected with the release of the film, told him that
the date of release would be informed in due course, and asked him to provide
14 copies of the film and advertising material.  
  
The Petitioner stated, and the Respondents did not deny, that he then took
steps to get the required number of copies of the film made in India, and to
procure advertising material, at a cost of over two million rupees; and that
he obtained a loan of Rs. 1.5 million from the 2nd Respondent for this
purpose.  
  
The release of the film was delayed due to events in May and June. In view of
the security situation which prevailed after the LTTE attacks at Elephant
Pass, a Cabinet decision was taken on 03. 05. 2000: "to place the country on a
war footing and take measures to create awareness and participation of the
people, especially in matters of civil defence."  
  
Immediately thereafter the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)
Regulations, No. 1 of 2000, were promulgated on 03. 05. 2000 (and amended on
10. 05\. 2000).  
  
The Petitioner sought the approval of the 4th Respondent (who was functioning
as the Competent Authority under those Regulations) for the release and
exhibition of his film. By letter dated 22. 05. 2000 the 4th Respondent stated
that the theme as well as several scenes could not be approved under those
Regulations.

**396**

Those Regulations were considered by this Court in _Leader Publications (Pvt)
Ltd. v. Rubasinghe_ ,(1). This Court held that (those Emergency Regulations
did not make provision for the appointment of a Competent Authority, and that
accordingly) the 4th Respondent was not the duly appointed Competent
Authority. In consequence, a new ER 14 was introduced on 01. 07. 2000 (which I
quote below in full). The Petitioner thereupon wrote to the 3rd Respondent on
03. 07. 2000 asserting that the 4th Respondent's decision dated 22. 05. 2000
was invalid, and requesting the 2nd Respondent to release his film. After a
discussion between the Petitioner and the 3rd Respondent, the 5th Respondent
informed the Petitioner by letter dated 07. 07. 2000 that his film would be
released for exhibition on 21. 08. 2000 and asked him to obtain and hand over
the necessary copies.  
  
Then followed the letters of 17. 07. 2000 and 21. 07. 2000 embodying the
decisions which the Petitioner impugns. I must note that the 4th Respondent
only expressed his **opinion** , and that, too, about morale, and not about
national security (under ER 14(2)(b)); and that he made no **order**
underER14(3).  
  
Although the 1st Respondent had originally mentioned only the fact that
Cabinet had decided to place the country on a war footing as the justification
for his "directive", in his affidavit he gave rather different and more
detailed reasons. He referred to the 4th Respondent's ruling under the
repealed Regulations, as well as a discussion he had had with the 4th
Respondent and Major General Sarath Munasinghe, both members of the State
Media Information Centre. He averred that after viewing the film, he was
convinced that exhibiting it would be in violation of ER 14; and would
adversely affect the war effort and the prevailing recruitment drive. He
claimed that as a Minister he was duty bound to prevent any situation which
may affect the morale of the security forces, the war effort of the
Government, the recruitment drive launched by the Armed Forces and the Police,
and any violation of the laws of the country by the distribution and release
of the film.

**397**

**THE LEGAL PROVISIONS  
**  
ER 14 provides :  
  
14(1) The President may appoint, by name or by office, a person or body of
persons, to be the Competent Authority, for the purposes of this regulation.  
  
(2) The editor or publisher of a newspaper or any person authorised by or
under law to establish and operate a broadcasting station or a television
station shall not, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, print, publish,
distribute, transmit or broadcast whether by means of electronic devices or
otherwise, or cause to be printed, published, distributed, transmitted, or
broadcast whether by electronic devices or otherwise -  
  
(a) any material containing any matter which pertains to any operations
carried out or proposed to be carried out, by the Armed Forces or the Police
Force (including the Special Task Force), the procurement or proposed
procurement of arms or supplies by any such forces, the deployment of troops
or personnel, or the deployment or use of equipment, including aircraft or
naval vessels, by any such forces, or  
  
any statement pertaining to the official conduct or the performance of the
Head or any member of any of the Armed Forces or the Police Force, which
affect (sic) the morale of the members of such forces; or  
  
(b) any material which would or might in the opinion of the Competent
Authority be prejudicial to the interests of national security or the
preservation of public order or the maintenance of supplies and services
essential to the life of the community or inciting or encouraging persons to
mutiny, riot or civil commotion, or to commit the breach of any law for the
time being in force.

**398**

(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of paragraph (4), where any person
prints (etc) **. . .** , or causes to be printed (etc) **. . .** , whether by
electronic means or otherwise, any matter in contravention of the provisions
of paragraph (2) of this regulation, the Competent Authority may for reasons
stated therein, make all or any of the following orders:-  
  
(a) that the person named in such order shall not print (etc) **. . .** or in
any way be concerned in the printing (etc) of any material for such period as
is specified in such order or until the date on which this regulation ceases
to be in force;  
  
(b) that the press or equipment used for such printing (etc) **. . .** shall
for such period as is specified in such order or until the date on which this
regulation ceases to be in force, not be used for the purpose of printing
(etc) **. . .** of any material referred to in paragraph (2) of this
regulation, and the Competent Authority may by the same order authorise any
person specified therein to take such steps as appears to the person so
authorised to be necessary, for preventing the printing (etc) of any such
material.  
  
(4) Any person who prints (etc) **. . .** any material in contravention of
paragraph (2) of this regulation or who causes the printing (etc) **. . .** of
any such material shall be guilty of an offence.  
  
(5) At any time after an order has been made under this regulation, the
President may direct that the operation of this order be suspended, subject to
such conditions as the President thinks fit, and may at any time revoke such
direction.  
  
(6) For the purpose of this regulation, there shall be one or more Advisory
Committees consisting of persons appointed by the President and any person
dissatisfied with any order made under this regulation may make his objections
in respect thereof, to the appropriate Advisory Committee.

**399**

(7) It shall be. the duty of the Competent Authority to secure that in any
case where an order is made under this regulation, the editor or publisher of
a newspaper or any person authorised by or under law to establish and operate
a broadcasting station or a television station as the case may be, affected
thereby is informed that he may make representations to the President in
writing with respect to that order and that he may whether or not such other
representations are made, make objections to the appropriate Advisory
Committee.  
  
((8) and (9) made provisions in respect of the proceedings and report of the
Advisory Committee.)  
  
(10) The Competent Authority may from time to time, issue guidelines which he
will take into consideration in the exercise and discharge of his powers and
functions under this regulation.  
  
(11) In this regulation -  
  
"material" includes -  
  
(a) a "cinematograph film" which includes a sound track and any other article
on which sounds have been recorded for the purpose of their being reproduced
in connection with the exhibition of such a film;  
  
(b) a "publication" which means, in relation to a cinematograph film, the
exhibition of the film to the public and includes the mechanical or electrical
production of any sounds in connection with the exhibition of the film as
aforesaid; and  
  
(c) a "newspaper" which includes any journal, magazine, pamphlet or other
publication; and  
  
"printing press" includes any machinery, apparatus or plant capable of being
used for printing, lithography,

**400**

photography, or other mode of representing or reproducing words in a visible
form, or any type or other article belonging to such machinery, apparatus or
plant."  
  
**Section 6 of the NFC Act provides  
  
**"In the exercise of its powers and the carrying out of its objects under
this Act, the Corporation shall comply with the general policy of the
Government with respect to the film industry and with any general or special
directions issued by the Minister in relation to such policy."  
  
**THE FILM  
  
**We did not view the film. It was agreed that the synopsis of the film, set
out in the citation for the Amiens Grand Prix, was accurate and sufficient for
the purpose of this case. According to that citation :  
  
**. . .** the story is set in the dry zone in the region of Anuradhapura, at a
time when the farmers have been suffering from severe drought. A sealed
coffin, said to contain the remains of a young soldier killed in action has
been brought back to the village. But a letter has come too, belatedly, a
letter of hope in which the young man promises that he will use the money he
has earned as a soldier to build a small house and pay the expenses for his
sister's wedding. The father, a blind old man chooses to believe the letter
rather than the evidence of the coffin and, as he denies that his son is dead,
he also logically refuses to accept the compensation money that is allocated
to each family which has lost an enlisted son.  
  
Pressure builds up as his family and various representatives of the village
social hierarchy try to persuade him to sign the form by which he would lay
claim to the compensation money and thus assent to his son's death.

**401**

His quiet obstinacy finally forces them to dig up and open the sealed coffin
which proves to be empty. The film ends on the serene image of the old man
sitting by a tank while children play in the shallow water and the long
awaited rain starts to fall.  
  
His stubborn refusal to bow to what others too easily regard as fate has
momentarily shattered the myths and certainties to which the villagers cling
in order to survive. His hope, which others deem absurd and mad has revealed
where the real absurdity lies: in a war time society which accepts that young
men should risk and lose their lives in order to earn a living. The emptiness
of the coffin echoes the hollow emptiness of the words by which we try to
disguise the stark reality of death and of wasted life. "Missing in action",
the administration says. "Patriotic sacrifice", says a monk who comes to visit
the bereaved family.  
  
Money will not be given. And therefore it will not be open on alms giving
rituals which have become meaningless, It will not go to avid creditors. The
mechanism has been momentarily stalled. There is no meaning in a young man's
death, there is no compensation for the loss of a son.  
  
In his written submissions, Mr. Marsoof, PC, ASG, on behalf of the
Respondents, elaborated on the "objectionable" aspects of the film  
  
"The film which portrays the absurdity of a war-time society which accepts
that young men should risk and lose their lives in order to earn a living and
contains scene where a banana trunk is substituted for a dead soldier in a
coffin sent by the army to his parents would have not only had an adverse
effect on the recruitment drive, but also on the morale of the armed forces
and the kith and kin of a large number of soldiers who were either deceased or
engaged in the ongoing civil war **. . .** this

**402**

completely false depiction of the stark reality of death and waste of life as
presented in the film **. . .** without any disclaimer that it does not refer
to any persons living or dead and is entirely fictitious would have had an
adverse impact on the audience **. . .** the motion picture is able to stir up
emotions more deeply than any other form of art and its impact on a nation
that has experienced and is still experiencing a war situation of the
dimensions which is presently raging could be counter-productive to the
efforts of the Government."  
  
I must observe, in passing, that at no stage was the Petitioner told that the
addition of a disclaimer as suggested above would have enabled the release of
the film. As the submission has been made that the central incident was false
or fictitious, it becomes necessary to refer to the Petitioner's contention to
the contrary. With his counter-affidavit the Petitioner annexed an extract
from a publication entitled "A Soldier's Version" by the same Major General
Sarath Munasinghe referred to in the 1st Respondent's affidavit :  
  
"On 13 October 1986 terrorists attacked troops **. . .** Nine soldiers were
killed and some were reported missing. Lt (S.C.), a volunteer artillery
officer too was reported killed during this attack. Two days later I visited
the funeral house **. . .** The coffin was sealed. Family members were
screaming at us requesting permission to open the sealed coffin to get a last
glimpse of their loved one. Following day, the sealed coffin was buried.  
  
A few years later Lt (S.C.) and I had lunch together **. . .** By that time
all of us knew what exactly had happened. Immediately after the attack, Lt
(S.C.) and another soldier were captured by the LTTE. (Lt S.C.) managed to
conceal his identity... Much later, when Mr. Vijaya Kumaratunge visited
Jaffna, the LTTE allowed Vijaya Kumaratunge to talk to the Army prisoners held
by the LTTE. It was

**403**

Mr. Kumaratunge's effort that saved the lives of (Lt S.C. and other captives).
The LTTE agreed to release these personnel to Vijaya Kumaratunge."  
  
The Petitioner alleged that the Competent Authority had allowed that
publication in July 2000. That was not denied by the Respondents.  
  
In his counter-affidavit, the Petitioner explained his reasons for making the
film :  
  
" **. . .** I felt it was necessary to portray the difficult human struggle of
people in a country facing a civil war and their strong spirit for survival, a
story of hope. The main theme of my film is, the great hope a father has that
his son will never break a promise to him. In my film, the son, who is a
soldier at the war-front, promises his father that he will return home and
complete the house which is being built and conclude preparations for his
sister's wedding. So when the sealed coffin arrives the father refuses to
believe that his son is dead, the father insists that his son is alive and
will return home. He refuses to sign the forms which will entitle the family
to the compensation payment. He digs up the coffin to prove his belief. I have
focused on the indomitable human sprit of a father throughout this film. It is
a spirit of hope, not of despair - something which I believe is vital for all
of us in Sri Lanka to hold on to in these difficult times."  
  
**THE ISSUES  
  
**Prima facie, the indefinite suspension of the release of the Petitioner's
film was an infringement of his freedom of speech and expression under Article
14(1)(a).  
  
The Constitution permits restrictions to be imposed on the freedom of speech
and expression. That can be done even by means of Emergency Regulations, but
only under Article

**404**

15(7), and - in so far as this case is concerned - such restrictions must be
''in the interests of national security". In Abeysekera v. Rubasinghe, (2000)
1 Sri LR 314, Amerasinghe, J. considered similar provisions contained in the
Emergency (Prohibition on Publication and Transmission of Sensitive Military
Information) Regulation No. 1 of 1998. I respectfully agree with him that
exceptions to Article 14(1)(a) must be narrowly construed (at p 381); that the
burden of justifying restrictions imposed under Article 15(7) is heavy (at p
355); and that decisions taken in abuse of the powers conferred by Emergency
Regulations are subject to judicial review (at pp 361, 383).  
  
Was the suspension a lawful restriction, by virtue of ER 14 and/or section 6
of the NFC Act (or any order or decision thereunder)? This involves several
questions :  
  
(1) Was ER 14(2) a permissible restriction on freedom of speech;  
  
(2) Even if ER 14(2) was a permissible restriction,  
  
(a) was ER 14(2) inapplicable to producers of films intended for exhibition at
cinemas, distributors of films for exhibition at cinemas, and exhibitors of
films at cinemas;  
  
(b) was the exhibition of the film prohibited by reason of either (1) its
contents (under ER 14(2)(a)), or (ii) the opinion of the Competent Authority
(under ER 14(2)(b));  
  
(3) Was the "directive" given by the 1st Respondent and/or the decision dated
21. 07. 2000 of the 3rd Respondent, lawful and valid under section 6 of the
NFC Act;  
  
(4) Was the aforesaid "directive" and decision of the 1st and 3rd Respondents
in breach of the audi alteram partem rule.

**405**

**(1) VALIDITY OF ER 14(2)  
  
**The petitioner in Abeysekera v. Rubasinghe submitted that the purpose of the
regulation impugned in that case was to protect the government from
embarrassment, exposure or wrongdoing, and was "over-broad" and
"disproportionate", While agreeing that there was some ambiguity in that
regulation, Amerasinghe, J. - taking into consideration the title
("Prohibition on Publication and Transmission of Sensitive Military
Information") and a portion of its text (which made it clear that what was
prohibited was material pertaining to the Forces engaged **in the Northern and
Eastern provinces** and their operations in those areas) - interpreted the
provisions restrictively (see pp 367, 381). Upon that restrictive
interpretation, he rejected the petitioner's submission that the regulation
was over-broad.  
  
There is a similar ambiguity in the provisions now under consideration, but
the factors which led Amerasinghe, J. to give that regulation a narrow
interpretation are not present in this case.  
  
There are two other relevant matters.  
  
It was not alleged that the film contained any matter pertaining to the
operations of the Forces, the procurement of arms and supplies for the Forces,
or the deployment or use of troops, personnel and equipment. The Respondent's
case was that the film contained material (equivalent to a "statement"?)
pertaining to the conduct or performance of any member of the Forces, which
would affect the morale of the members of the Forces.  
  
Since Emergency Regulations can only be made in the interests of national
security, the preservation of public order, the maintenance of essential
supplies and services, etc, the question arises whether ER 14(2)(a) prohibits
**all** statements which affect the morale of servicemen, regardless of their
effect

**406**

on national security (etc), **or** whether ER 14(2)(a) should be restrictively
interpreted (cf _Abeysekera v. Rubasinghe_ ) so as to include only statements
prejudicial to national security (etc)?  
  
Every statement about the conduct or performance of the Head or a member of
the Forces which might affect the morale of members of the Forces does not
necessarily prejudice national security. On the contrary, some such statements
may actually promote national security. Thus statements which disclose
misconduct or negligence of members of the Forces, for instance in regard to
the conduct of security operations, the procurement of arms and supplies, or
the deployment of troops, may adversely affect the morale of members of the
Forces. But the concealment of such matters may much more seriously prejudice
national security. To take a hypothetical example, if unknown to them,
soldiers were being issued substandard weapons, ammunition or equipment,
purchased at inflated prices, disclosure would most certainly affect their
morale. On the other hand, non-disclosure would endanger their lives, and the
security of the nation. Disclosure and exposure may be the most effective and
expeditious means of remedying a situation enormously prejudicial to national
security.  
  
Further, ER 14(2)(b) lays down a wholly uncertain and subjective standard:
what purports to be prohibited is material which **in the opinion of the
Competent Authority** would (or even might) be prejudicial to national
security, or the preservation of public order, etc. It is arguable that the
Regulations have failed to prescribe with sufficient clarity what acts and
omissions are prohibited, but have instead delegated that function to the
Competent Authority (perhaps by means of "guidelines" issued under ER 14(10)).  
  
It is arguable, therefore, that _Abeysekera v. Rubasinghe_ is distinguishable,
and that ER 14(2) is "over-broad" and uncertain. However, that question was
not fully argued; the

**407**

Emergency itself has now lapsed; and this case can be disposed of on other
grounds. It is unnecessary to decide whether ER 14(2) was a permissible
restriction on the freedom of speech and expression.  
  
**(2) APPLICABILITY OF ER 14  
  
**(a) Ex facie, ER 14(2) is applicable only to two categories of persons;
editors and publishers of newspapers, and persons operating broadcasting or
television stations. Producers of films, distributors of films for exhibition
at cinemas, and owners of cinemas at which films are exhibited, are not
covered.  
  
Mr. Marsoof submitted, first, that ER 14(3) and ER 14(4) had the effect of
widening the category of persons to whom ER 14(2) applies. It is abundantly
clear that those provisions apply **only** to those persons who contravene ER
14(2), and merely give teeth to ER 14(2); thus ER 14(4) provides that **those
persons** are guilty of an offence, and ER 14(3) empowers the Competent
Authority to prohibit and prevent future publications, broadcasts, etc, by
**those persons**. ER14(7) confirms that ER 14(3) only applies to **those
persons** , namely editors, publishers, and persons operating broadcasting and
television stations.  
  
Mr. Marsoof also relied on the definitions in ER 14(11): that "material"
includes films, and that "publication" includes the exhibition of films to the
public". Therefore, he argued, ER 14(2) applies to the exhibition of films to
the public. However, that definition does not have the effect of widening the
category of **persons** to whom ER 14(2) applies: it only expands the category
of **acts** which such persons are prohibited from doing. Accordingly, the
effect, of ER 14(11) is only that persons operating television stations \-
**not** cinema owners - are prohibited from exhibiting to the public films
which fall within ER 14(2)(a) or (b).

**408**

(b) It is therefore unnecessary to decide the question whether the exhibition
of the film was prohibited under or by virtue of ER 14(2)(a) or (b).  
  
**3\. SECTION 6 OF THE NFC ACT  
  
**Section 6 authorises the Minister to give directions "in relation to the
general policy of the Government with respect to the film industry": not in
relation to Government policy in general. The 1st Respondent was therefore not
entitled to give directions in relation to Government policy on national
security-that was a matter for other Ministers.  
  
But even assuming that "directions relating to Government policy with respect
to the film industry" could be construed to include directions prohibiting the
distribution and exhibition of films violative of the Emergency Regulations,
the Is' Respondent was only entitled to give directions in relation to
**policy** , and not the **implementation** of policy - which was a matter for
the 2nd Respondent Corporation.  
  
The 1st Respondent's "directive", given after viewing the film and discussing
it with others, was not in relation to policy, but its implementation.
Certifying a film to be fit for public exhibition was, by statute, a matter
for the Public Performances Board, and not for him.  
  
In any event, that "directive" was based on the incorrect assumption that ER
14(2) applied to the distribution of films by the 2nd Respondent, and to the
exhibition of films by cinema owners.  
  
It is significant that the 4th Respondent did not express the opinion that the
film might be prejudicial to national security when the 3rd Respondent
inquired from the 4th Respondent, or after viewing it in the company of the
1st Respondent.

**409**

Finally, even if section 6, prima facie, empowered the 1st Respondent was
entitled to give that "directive", that would nevertheless have been a
restriction on the Petitioner's freedom of speech and expression. Such
restrictions may only be imposed **by** "law" (as defined), but not **under**
law. Section 6 would be "law", and (under Article 16 of the Constitution)
would be valid notwithstanding any inconsistency with fundamental rights.
However, the impugned restriction was not imposed by section 6, but by a
direction **under** section 6. It was an "executive" act, and not "law" for
the purposes of Articles 15(2) and 15(7). Hence the 1st Respondent's
"directive" \- even if infra wires under section 6 - was not a valid
restriction on the Petitioner's freedom of speech and expression.  
  
The 3rd Respondent made no attempt to exercise an independent judgment in the
matter. He simply rubberstamped the 1st Respondent's decision, and his
decision is vitiated by the same flaws.  
  
**4\. THE AUDI ALTERAM PARTEM RULE  
  
**The Petitioner had taken all steps needed to have his film released for
exhibition by the 2nd Respondent, who had a monopoly in respect of such
exhibition. He had been told that his film would be released early; he had
been asked to obtain the required number of copies and the advertising
material; he had incurred expense; and with full knowledge of the Emergency
Regulations, the 2nd Respondent fixed the date of release for 21. 08. 2000.  
  
The Petitioner's legitimate expectations in respect of the release of his film
had thus matured into a **legal right**. Without any notice or hearing the 1st
and 3rd Respondents summarily took away that right. There was no reason for
such haste, because the film was scheduled for release one month later. Having
given him one specific reason, they now allege other

**410**

reasons. I hold that the 1st to 3rd Respondent have denied the Petitioner
equal treatment and the equal protection of the law.  
  
**DECISION  
  
**For the above reasons, I hold that ER 14(2) did not apply to the Petitioner
or to the 2nd Respondent (as a distributor of films for exhibition at
cinemas); that the 4th Respondent could not have suspended, and did not take
any action to suspend, the release of the Petitioner's film; that the 1st to
3rd Respondents had no power to suspend the release of the film, either under
ER 14 or section 6 of the NFC Act; that the 1st to 3rd Respondents acted in
breach of the audi alteram partem rule in suspending the release of the film;
and that the 1st to 3rd Respondents acted unlawfully, arbitrarily, and
contrary to the 2nd Respondent's practice in regard to the distribution of
films, and thereby infringed the Petitioner's fundamental rights under
Articles 12(1), 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(g).  
  
The 4th Respondent did not interfere with, or instigate interference with, the
Petitioner's rights, and I make no order against him.  
  
The 1st Respondent not only exceeded his own powers under section 6, but
attempted to usurp powers vested in other persons or bodies under the Public
Performances Ordinance and the Emergency Regulations, and directed the
suspension of the Petitioner's films without any notice or hearing. He was
thus primarily responsible for this litigation, and must personally bear the
Petitioner's costs.  
  
The 3rd Respondent gave effect to the 1st Respondent's "directive" Without any
effort to exercise an independent judgment. I hold the 2nd Respondent
Corporation liable for his acts and omissions.

**411**

In determinig what relief this Court should give the Petitioner, the context
of the infringement must be considered. When the 3rd Respondent inquired from
the Competent Authority, he did not express an opinion in terms of ER 14(2)(b)
that the film contained material prejudicial to national security (etc). The
film had been internationally acclaimed, and had received a Presidential award
as well. Further, on 21. 07. 2000, there was no need for summary action: a
discussion with the Petitioner was called for. A good film is the work of many
months, and requires a high investment, and since the 2nd Respondent had a
monopoly, the refusal to release the film seriously affected the Petitioner's
livelihood. There is evidence that the Petitioner had taken a loan of Rs. 1.5
million from the 2nd Respondent. In his affidavit the Petitioner referred to
his investment in the film, and assessed his loss at Rs. 500,000. The 2nd
Respondent's decision has impaired the Petitioner's ability to repay that loan
and interest, and to recoup his investment.  
  
This Court must therefore endeavour to restore the Petitioner, as far as
possible, to the position in which he would have been if his film had been
released as scheduled.  
  
I grant the Petitioner a declaration that the 1st to 3rd Respondents have
infringed his fundamental rights under Articles 12(1), 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(8).
I direct the 2nd Respondent to release the Petitioner's film for exhibition
not later than 15. 09. 2001, and in the event of delay, to pay the Petitioner
compensation at the rate of Rs. 100,000 per month; and if the film is not
released by 15. 11. 2001, the Petitioner may make an appropriate application
to this Court. I further order that the 2nd Respondent shall not be entitled
to claim any interest on the loan of Rs. 1.5 million, and that repayment of
that loan shall commence one year after the date of actual release of the
film. The delay in release has undoubtedly

**412**

caused loss to the Petitioner, and I order the 2nd Respondent to pay the
Petitioner compensation in a sum of Rs. 500,000, not later than 15. 09. 2001.
The 1st Respondent shall personally pay the Petitioner costs in a sum of Rs.
50,000, not later than 15\. 09. 2001.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/19.html_  

