##  Charlet Nona v. Babun Singho - SLR - 149, Vol 3 of 2000 [1998] LKSC 19;
(2000) 3 Sri LR 149 (8 September 1998)

**149**

**CHARLET NONA  
v.  
BABUN SINGHO**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
GUNASEKERA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL 81/98  
SC SPL. LA NO. 103/98  
CA NO. 214/86 (F)  
DC KALUTARA NO. 4314/P  
08TH SEPTEMBER, 1998  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Notice of appeal - Computation of time - Section
754(4) of the Code.  
_  
Section 754(4) of the Civil Procedure Code provides that the notice of appeal
shall be presented to the court of first instance within a period of fourteen
days from the date when the decree or order appealed against was pronounced,
exclusive of the day of that date itself and of the day when the petition is
presented and of Sundays and Public Holidays.  
  
The judgment was pronounced by the District Court on 7th May 1986. The 11th,
18th and 25th were Sundays; the 22nd, 23rd and 24th were Public Holidays. The
notice was filed on 28th Wednesday (the 15th day from the date of the
judgment) which day too has to be excluded in computing the 14 days under the
CPC.  
  
**Held :  
**  
The notice of appeal was filed within the stipulated 14 days.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_N. R. M. Daluwatta, P. C. with M. Maharoof_ for the appellant.  
  
_Mohan Peiris_ for the respondents.  
  
**Editors note:**  
  
Contra Sri Lanka State Trading (Consolidated Export) Corporation v. Dharmadasa
(1987) 2 Sri. L. R 235.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**150**

September 08, 1998.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.**  
  
This is an application for special leave to appeal from the judgment of the
Court of Appeal dated 5.5.98 rejecting the notice of appeal filed in the
original court as having being filed out of time. We grant special leave and
proceed to hear the Appeal today itself.  
  
In terms of subsection 754(4) of the Civil Procedure Code, the notice of
appeal shall be presented to the court of the first instance within a period
of 14 days from the date when the order appealed from was pronounced,
exclusive of that day itself and of the day when the petition is presented,
and of Sundays and Public Holidays.  
  
In this case the judgment was pronounced by the District Court on 7th May
1986. The 11th, 18th and 25th were Sundays, the 22nd, 23rd and 24th were
Public Holidays according to the official calendar of 1986. The notice of
appeal was filed on 28th which day too has to be excluded from the computation
of 14 days in terms of the CPC. Therefore the notice of appeal was in fact
filed within the stipulated 14 days.  
  
For the above reasons, we allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
Court of Appeal, and send this case back to the Court of Appeal to be heard on
the merits. Parties will bear their own costs of this appeal.  
  
We direct the Registrar of this Court to send the record of this case to the
Court of Appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/19.html_  

