##  Siriwardena v. Hewage - SLR - 57, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 19; (1997) 3
Sri LR 57 (2 May 1997)

57

SIRIWARDENA

**v.** ****

**HEWAGE** ****

** **

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 8/96.

C.A. NO. 452/75 (F).

D.C. COLOMBO 2391/ED.

DECEMBER 17, 1996 AND FEBRUARY 27, 1997.



Landlord and Tenant - Sub-letting of premises - Requirement of exclusive
occupation of a part of the premises - Section 9 of the Rent Restriction Act -
Section 10 of The Rent Act.

_ _

The plaintiff as Landlord sued his tenant the defendant for ejectment on the
ground that the latter had sub-let a portion of the premises in suit to the
added defendant. The evidence led in support of the alleged sub-letting
included the evidence of a Grama Sevaka who had issued a certificate that the
added defendant and her daughter were resident at the premises in suit, a
letter from the defendant to the same effect, a writing signed by the added
defendant that she was a tenant of a part of the premises and house-holders
lists. The evidence showed that all this material had been prepared to help
the added defendant's daughter to gain admission to a school. But the child
failed to gain admission to the school as the school authorities were not
satisfied that neither the added defendant nor her daughter resided at the
premises. The Grama Sevaka himself did not state in evidence that the added
defendant in fact occupied a room.



**Held:**

** **

1\. The essential test in every case is whether there is evidence from which
one can infer that there is at least some part of the premises over which the
tenant has, by agreement, placed the sub-tenant in exclusive occupation. There
is no evidence of exclusive occupation of a separate portion of the premises
by the added defendant. -



2\. Even though the requirement of exclusive occupation of the premises was
not expressly provided in section 9 of the Rent Restriction Act as in the case
of subletting under section 10 of the Rent Act, exclusive occupation has to be
established even in a case where the action is instituted in terms of the
provisions of section 9 of the Rent Restriction Act.

**58**

**  
Cases referred to:**

** **

1. _Suppiah Pillai v. Muthukaruppan Pillai_ 54 N.L.R. 572.

_ _

2. _Jayawardena v. Kandiah_ 71 N.L.R. 380.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _Aravinda R.I. Athurupana_ for the plaintiff-
appellant.

_ _

_Faiz Musthapha, PC._ with _Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for the substituted
defendant respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



May 2, 1997.  


**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

** **

The plaintiff, as landlord, instituted these proceedings on 1st March 1971,
seeking, inter alia, the ejectment of his tenant, the original defendant, from
the premises in suit. The ground of ejectment relied on was sub-letting a
portion of the premises to the added defendant. After trial, the District
Court held with the plaintiff and the defendant preferred an appeal to the
Court of Appeal. While the appeal was pending the original defendant died and
his daughter was substituted in his place. The appeal of the defendant was
successful and the Court of Appeal set aside the judgment of the District
Court and the plaintiff's action was dismissed. Hence the present appeal to
this court by the plaintiff.



The defendant in his answer denied the allegation of sub-letting the premises
to the added defendant. By way of further answer the defendant pleaded that
the added defendant prior to her marriage resided in the premises which are
situated next to the premises in suit and that after her marriage she went to
Homagama to reside in her husband's house. On or about the 15th October 1970,
the added defendant, who. was well known to the defendant, came and requested
him "to state that she and her child resided at the defendant's house for the
sole purpose of qualifying for admission to Ananda Balika Vidyalaya as the
defendant's house is situated near Ananda Balika Vidyalaya." (Paragraph 4 of
the answer). The added defendant too in her answer denied the allegation of
sub-letting. In

**59**



paragraph 5 of her answer she specifically averred that she has not been at
any time in constructive or physical occupation as tenant of any portion of
the premises in suit. She further pleaded that on or about the "15th October
1970 she requested the defendant to state to the Grama Sevaka that she resided
at the defendant's house for the sole purpose of qualifying her daughter for
admission to the Ananda Balika Vidyalaya as the defendant's house is situated
in close proximity to the said Ananda Balika Vidyalaya."



It is not in dispute that the original defendant, now deceased, was in
occupation of the premises from 1942 and the plaintiff became the owner of the
premises in or about 1966. The Court of Appeal reversed the judgment of the
District Court on the basis that (a) there was no evidence to support the
finding that the added defendant who was alleged to be the sub-tenant resided
at the premises, and (b) that in any event, there was no proof that the added
defendant was in exclusive occupation of a defined portion of the house.



The plaintiff's case rested on the evidence of Siriwardena, the plaintiff's
husband, Piyasena Alwis, the Grama Sevaka of the area, and in particular the
documents marked P4, P5, P6, P7 and P8. According to Siriwardena, in 1970 he
received information that the defendant had sub-let the premises. However, he
did not know to whom the premises had been sub-let; he had not visited the
premises to verify the informations received. He made a statement to the Grama
Sevaka on 6.10.70 (P1) stating that a portion of the premises had been sub-let
and requesting him to inquire into it. Subsequently, he had learnt from the
Grama sevaka that "there was somebody residing there" and that it was the
added defendant. He further testified that the Grama Sevaka told him that the
defendant was occupying "one room" and that it was "the 2nd room" which he
thought may be the "store room." The notice to quit (P2) was sent and in reply
to P2 the defendant denied the allegation that he had sub-let the premises
(P3).



On a consideration of the evidence of Siriwardena it would appear that he has
merely stated what he learnt from the Grama Sevaka, and his evidence does not
in any way advance the case of the Plaintiff.

**60**



The Grama Sevaka's evidence was that he recorded the complaint of Siriwardena
and that he went for inquiry. He further stated that the added defendant who
was anxious to admit her child to Ananda Balika Vidyalaya brought a letter
from the defendant (P4). P4 is dated 24.10.70 and is addressed to the Grama
Sevaka; admittedly it was written and signed by the defendant. By P4 the
defendant had certified that the added defendant and her daughter had been
residing at the premises in suit far the last 5 years. According to the Grama
Sevaka, he had visited the premises in suit earlier and issued the certificate
of residence marked D1. It is to be noted that D1 and P4 bear the same date,
namely 24.10.70. By D1 the Grama Sevaka certified that the added defendant and
her daughter were resident in the premises in suit. The house-holder's list
number and the rice ration book number have also been noted in D1. Admittedly,
the added defendant was not present when the Grama Sevaka visited the
premises. However, according to the Grama Sevaka "the people in that house
showed me the **place** where she resides and I gave her a certificate." It is
a matter of the utmost significance that in answer to court the Grama Sevaka
further stated that he did not know how the added defendant was residing
there, **whether she was a boarder or a tenant.** He conceded that he had not
made an entry in his official diary in regard to his claim that he visited the
premises in suit. It is very relevant to note that the Grama Sevaka's evidence
was that the inmates of the house showed him the **place** where the added
defendant resided. Nowhere in his evidence does he state that the added
defendant occupied a "room" as claimed by Siriwardena



P4 apart, the other important document relied on by the plaintiff is P5. P5
which is dated 27.10.70 has been written by the Grama Sevaka and admittedly
signed by the added defendant. The added defendant has stated in P5 that she
is permanently residing with her daughter at the premises in suit for the last
one year and eight months, and what is more, she further stated that she pays
a sum of Rs. 35/- as rent for her occupation. P5 could reasonably be construed
as an admission of sub-tenancy. The added defendant in her evidence explained
the circumstances in which she came to sign P5. She was sent for by the Grama
Sevaka on 27.10.70 and she received the message when she was at her work
place, the General

**61**



Hospital, Colombo. She then proceeded to the office of the Grama Sevaka who
had told her that the certificate of residence (D1) he had given was not
sufficient and that he wanted a writing from her. She had not brought her
spectacles and the Grama Sevaka wrote the contents of PS and she signed it. It
is difficult to understand the need for P5 when the Grama Sevaka had three
days earlier issued the certificate of residence, D1. The cross-examination of
the Grama Sevaka in regard to the circumstances in which P5 came to be written
throws grave doubt as to. the bona fides of the conduct of the Grama Sevaka.
The evidence reads thus:



Q. You issued this certificate on 24.10.70 (D1)?  
  
A. Yes.



Q. You got this letter from the added defendant on 27.10.70 (P5)?  
  
A. Yes.



Q. As far as you are concerned once a certificate of residence is given the
matter is completed?



A. Yes.



Q. After the certificate was issued on 24.10.70 when did Gunawathie (added
defendant) come to see you?



A. No answer.



Q. I put it to you that after you issued this certificate, D1, the plaintiff
came and saw you and thereafter you went in search of Gunawathie (added
defendant) and asked her to come and see you?



A. Gunawathie did not come and see me.



Q. Can you give any reason why Gunawathie came to see you after 24.10.70?



A. No answer.



On a consideration of the above evidence, it would appear that the
circumstances in which P5 came into existence lend support to the suggestion
made in cross-examination that P5 was obtained by the Grama Sevaka to advance
the case of the plaintiff. The District Court

**62**



has totally failed to address itself to the infirmities in P5. It seems to me
that it is a document on which no court, acting reasonably, could have placed
any-reliance.



The plaintiff relied heavily on the document P4 referred to above. The
defendant who gave P4 to the added defendant stated that it was at the request
of the added defendant that he gave the letter P4 addressed to the Grama
Sevaka and it was given purely to assist the added defendant in getting her
child admitted to Ananda Balika Vidyalaya which is about half a mile away from
the premises in suit. His position clearly was that neither the added
defendant nor her child was ever in occupation of the premises, although he
gave the letter P4. No doubt P4 constitutes an admission against the defendant
but it is not conclusive. The added defendant gave evidence in support of the
defendant. It seems to me that P4 has to be considered in the light of the
following important facts which are not in dispute: (1) The plaintiff has not
seen the added defendant in the premises; (2) the Grama Sevaka has stated that
the added defendant was not present at the premises at the time of his visit;
(3) it is in evidence that the added defendant's daughter could not gain
admission to the school for the reason that the Janatha Committee which
inspected the premises found that neither the added defendant nor her daughter
resided at the premises in suit. The District Judge has totally failed to
consider these relevant items of a evidence in assessing the evidentiary value
of P4.



P6, P7 and P8 are the other documents relied on by the plaintiff. They are the
householder's lists for the years 1968, 1970, and 1971 respectively. It is
true that these lists have been signed by the defendant and the names of the
added defendant and her daughter have been included as occupants of the
premises. However, it is to be noted that according to P6 the total number of
persons in occupation of the premises was no less than 17. On the other hand,
according to the evidence of Siriwardena this was a small house and it was
very unlikely that as many as 17 persons would have resided in that house. P7
too contains the names of as many as 14 persons. These facts in my view lend
credence to the evidence of the defendant that he was trying to help parents
who were seeking to admit their children to schools in close proximity to his
residence.



**63**



The burden was clearly on the plaintiff to establish first, that the added
defendant was in occupation of a portion of the premises. On a consideration
of the entirety of the evidence, both oral and documentary, I am inclined to
the view that the evidence on this point was weak and tenuous. In any event,
the mere fact of occupation of a portion of the premises is quite insufficient
to discharge the burden that lay on the plaintiff. There is the further
essential requirement which the plaintiff must establish, namely that the
added defendant was in **exclusive** occupation of a portion of the premises.
On this crucial aspect of the case there is **no evidence**. As stated
earlier, nowhere in his evidence has the Grama Sevaka stated that the added
defendant occupied a room. And the District Court has completely overlooked
the vital question of exclusive occupation.



Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera, Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant submitted that
"sub-letting under the **Rent Restriction Act** which applies to this case
since the action was instituted in 1971 does not require exclusive occupation
of a defined and separate part over which the landlord has relinquished his
right of control. This condition was introduced only by the Rent Act section
10(1) when compared with the Rent Restriction Act, section 9". The provisions
of section 9 of the Rent Restriction Act directly arose for consideration by
Gratiaen J., in Suppiah Pillai v. Muttukaruppa Pillai(1). The case for the
plaintiff's was that the 1st defendant (the tenant) had in breach of section
9(1) of the Rent Restriction Act sub-let portions of the premises to the 2nd
and 3rd defendants. Dealing with the concept of sub-letting postulated in
section 9 Gratiaen J., expressed himself in the following terms:



"There is nothing in the provisions of the Act from which one may legitimately
infer that the concept of "sub-letting" prohibited by section 9 is different
to that in which the term is properly understood under the Roman Dutch Law
which governs transactions of this kind in Ceylon. It is essential to the
formation of a contract of tenancy (or of sub-tenancy) that the "thing hired"
is capable of ascertainment as an identifiable entity occupied by the tenant
(or sub-tenant as the case may be) to the exclusion not only of trespassers
but of the landlord (or tenant) himself. As Wille puts it 'The parties must
definitely agree upon the same property as being the subject matter of the
contract and (in the case of a written lease) the subject matter must be
defined or described with

**64**



a degree or precision which will enable it to be identified without recourse
to the evidence of the parties concerned, otherwise no lease is formed'-
Landlord and Tenant in South Africa (3rd Ed) p. 24. It follows that no breach
of section 9(1) of the Act is committed if a tenant, while himself remaining
in occupation of the leased premises, merely permits someone else to share
their use and enjoyment with him ... " I agree with Mr. Choksy that a valid
subletting can effectively take place without any structural demarcation of
the portion sub-let from the rest of the premises; but the essential test in
every case is whether there is evidence from which one can infer that there is
at least some part of the premises over which the tenant has, by agreement,
placed the sub-tenant in exclusive occupation. No such evidence is to be found
in the present case, and the plaintiffs have not established that, since the
date of his agreement with the 2nd and 3rd defendants, the 1 st defendant, qua
tenant, ceased to occupy or to exercise his general control over, any portion
of the premises".



The same view was taken by H. N. G. Fernando, C.J., in Jayawardena v.
Kandiah(2). I therefore find myself unable to agree with the contention of Mr.
Goonesekera that section 9 of the Rent Restriction Act does not require proof
of exclusive occupation of a separate portion of the premises.



Since there is no evidence in the case before us of "exclusive occupation" of
a separate portion of the premises by the added defendant, I am of the opinion
that the Court of Appeal was justified in setting aside the judgment of the
District Court and dismissing the plaintiff's action.



For these reasons, the appeal fails and is dismissed, but in all the
circumstances without costs. I would also direct that the order for costs made
against the plaintiff in the judgment of the Court of Appeal be deleted..



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  


_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/19.html_  

