##  Ariyasinghe v. State Timber Corportaion and 6 Others - SLR - 48, Vol 2 of
1996 [1996] LKSC 19; (1996) 2 Sri LR 48 (1 January 1996)

**48**

**ARIYASINGHE  
****v** **.  
****STATE TIMBER CORPORTAION AND 6 OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
PEREIRA, J.  
S.C.283/1993 (FR)  
SEPTEMBER 22, 1994.

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Constitution ‑ Violation of Article 12 (1) ‑ Scheme of
Promotion‑ Application of same._ __

The Petitioner complained that the 9th and 10th Respondents were appointed to
a Grade (1) Post overlooking him. It was his position that the scheme was bad
and further not properly applied.

Further it was contended that seniority should have been given about half the
weightage and the interview was superficial, and the weightage given too high.

**Held:**

(1) The weightage given to seniority vis‑a‑vis merit can vary depending on the
responsibilities, skills and aptitude required.

(2) Where the interview performance relates to a senior post, interview would
be relevant in assessing the candidate's suitability for the post.

**AN APPLICATION** made under Article 126 for infringement of Article 12 (1).

**Cases referred to :**

1. _Perera v_ _Ranatunga_ _,_ _S.C._ __ 121/91, SCM 27.5.92 ‑ 1993 ‑ 1 SLR 39.

_Jayampathy Wickremaratne_ for Petitioner.

_Asoka de Silva, D.S.G.,_ for 1, 2, 3 Respondents

_Cur._ _adv. vult._

**49**

September 22,1994.

**FERNANDO, J.**

The Petitioner complains that his fundamental right under Article 12 (1) has
been violated by the appointment of the 9th and 10th Respondents to a grade
(1) post in the 1st Respondent's service, overlooking him. Learned Counsel for
the Petitioner submits that the scheme of promotion was bad, and that in any
event the scheme was not properly applied.

In regard to the scheme of appointment, the Petitioner complains that only 20%
of the marks were allocated for seniority, although Government policy required
that promotion be based on seniority and merit; learned counsel submits that
seniority should have been given about half the weightage. He also attacks the
scheme on the ground that 30% of the marks were allocated for interview
performance, and that was quite excessive.

In regard to seniority, the scheme provided an additional 20% for experience,
one mark being allocated for each year of relevant experience. Accordingly, in
effect 40% of the marks were allocated for seniority and criteria related to
seniority. This cannot be regarded as unreasonably low. Further, although
"seniority and merit" are the specified criteria, the weightage given to
seniority vis‑a‑vis merit can vary depending on the responsibilities, skills
and aptitudes required ( _Perera v. Ranatunga,(_ 1)) __

In regard to interview performance, learned Counsel cited certain Indian
decisions which suggested that 30% is too high for interview performance.
However those decisions are distinguishable for at least two reasons. They
deal with the weightage to be given to an interview vis‑a‑vis a written
examination, and secondly they relate to admission to universities and to
recruitment, where this case relates to promotion to a senior post where an
interview would be relevant in assessing the candidate's suitability for post
in question.

We therefore hold that the Petitioner has failed to establish that the scheme
of promotion was arbitrary, unreasonable or discriminatory.

**50**

The Petitioner's second contention is in regard to the application of the
scheme. He claims that he should have been given ten marks for experience but
was only given three. However an examination of the documents relied on by the
petitioner establishes that he did not have ten years' relevant experience but
only three, so that the allocation of marks was perfectly proper.

He also contended that he was only given six marks out of 30 for interview
performance, that the interview was very cursory and lasted only 4 minutes;
and that only four questions had been asked and none about the quality of his
service. However, one of the members of the interview board swore an
affidavit, in which, among other things, he referred to the examination of
several documents produced by the Petitioner relevant to the quality of his
past service. In his counter affidavit the Petitioner admitted the production
of these documents. It is therefore clear that the interview was not
superficial as claimed by the Petitioner, and that the interview board did
endeavour or assess the quality of the Petitioner's services. In these
circumstances, there is no justification whatever for the submission that the
interview board acted unreasonably or capriciously in giving him low marks for
the interview. In any event, the two successful candidates obtained eight and
nine marks more than the Petitioner, so that any error in assessment really
made no difference.

The Petitioner has failed to prove any violation of Article 12. The
application is dismissed without costs.

**DHEERARATNE, J. ‑ **I **** agree.

**PERERA, J. ‑ **I **** agree.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/19.html_  

