##  Wijebahu v. Sumanasekara and Others - SLR - 355, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC
2; (1998) 3 Sri LR 355 (17 June 1998)

**355**

**WIJEBAHU  
v.  
SUMANASEKARA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 148/96  
C.A. APPLICATION NO. 688/93  
30 SEPTEMBER, 13 OCTOBER, 21 NOVEMBER, 1997  
19 JANUARY AND 4 MAY, 1998.

_Ceiling on Housing Property Law - Writ of Certiorari - Tenant's application
to purchase the house let to him - Failure to make the owner of the house a
party to the application - S. 13 of the law - Repeal of the right to purchase
houses - Act No. 4 of 1988 - Owner's right to negate the sale of the house._

On 16.4.86 the tenant applied to the Commissioner for National Housing under
S.13 of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law, No.1 of 1973 to purchase the
house let to him. To the knowledge of the tenant, the appellant was the owner
of the house. But the tenant made the appellant's predecessor in title who had
died in 1982 the respondent to the application. The appellant having learnt
about the inquiry appeared before the Assistant Commissioner on 30.3.89 by
which date the right of tenants to purchase houses in terms of S.13 of the law
had been removed by Act No. 4 of 1988 with effect from 1.1.1987. The
Commissioner decided to recommend the vesting of the house to enable its sale
to the tenant.

**Held:**

The owner had acquired a right under Act No. 4 of 1988 that the house is not
liable to be sold to the tenant in terms of the Ceiling on Housing Property
Law. The application of the tenant was void ab initio as it had been made
against a non-existing person and the provisions of the amending Act barred
the application after the specified date.

**Case referred to:**

_1\. Teyabally v. Hon. R. Premadasa_ SC Appeal No. 69/92 SC Minutes 5
November, 1993.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Faiz Musthapha, PC with S. Mahenthiran_ for the appellant.

_A. K. Premadasa, PC with C. E. de Silva_ for the 1st respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

356

June 17, 1998.

**A. DE Z. GUNAWARDANA, J.**

This is an appeal from a judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing an
application made by the appellant for a Writ of Certiorari seeking to quash,
(a) the decision of the 2nd respondent, the Commissioner for National Housing
recommending the vesting of residential premises No. 35, Dutugemunu Street,
Dehiwala, belonging to the appellant, on an application made by the 1st
respondent to purchase it, and (b) the order made by the Board of Review,
consisting of the 3rd to the 6th respondents dismissing an appeal taken by the
appellant against the said decision.

The subject- matter of this appeal is the premises bearing No. 35, Dutugemunu
Street, Dehiwala, where the 1st respondent is the tenant. It is common ground
that one Dr. Fonseka was the original owner of the said premises. Dr. Fonseka
and his wife had adopted the appellant as a son, although there is no formal
adoption order, made under the Adoption Ordinance. Upon the death of Dr.
Fonseka the premises had devolved on his widow. Mrs. Fonseka had by her last
will bequeathed the property to the appellant. Mrs. Fonseka died on the 15th
of December, 1982 and, upon the will being admitted to probate, by executor's
conveyance bearing No. 1120 dated 6.9.1996, the appellant became the owner of
the said premises.

The 1st respondent's father who was the original tenant under Dr. Fonseka,
died in 1975, and thereupon the 1st respondent's mother became the tenant of
the said premises. She died in 1982 and the 1st respondent became the tenant
of the said premises.

The 1st respondent made an application under section 13 (1) of the Ceiling on
Housing Property Law, on 16.4.1986 (XI) to purchase the said house. The said
application was made on a form issued by the Commissioner of National Housing.
It is pertinent to note that in cage 3 where it is required to give the name
of the owner, it is stated as follows: Said to be, Mrs. Indra Fonseka
(deceased) In consequence of the said application the Commissioner issued a
notice dated 22.3.1989 (X2) addressed to Mrs. Indra Fonseka, who was deceased
at the time.

357

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that upon receipt of said
notice at the appellant's address, the appellant appeared before the 2nd
respondent, the Commissioner, on 30.3.1989, with a view of informing the
Commissioner that Mrs. Fonseka is dead. The Commissioner recorded answers to a
number of questions directed at the appellant on that occasion (vide X3). It
is recorded therein that: Mr. Mohan Wijayabahu, the respondent's adopted son,
present. Thereafter his statement has been recorded, where he has asserted
that he is the present owner of the said premises, and that the tenant, the
2nd respondent has accepted him as the landlord, and paid rent to him. He has
further stated that he is not consenting to the said premises being vested and
sold to the tenant. He has not been cross-examined. This version of the facts
spoken to by the appellant was not disputed by the Commissioner, and has not
filed an affidavit controverting this position.

The Commissioner by his letter dated 24.4.1990 (vide X4) informed the
appellant of the decision to recommend the vesting of the said premises. The
appellant appealed from the said decision to the Board of Review. The Board of
Review by its Order dated 17.7.1993 dismissed the appeal. Thereupon the
appellant sought to challenge the said Order by way of an application for a
Writ of Certiorari in the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal dismissed the
said application by its Order dated 7.2.1996.

The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the said application to
the Commissioner having been made against a deceased person, viz Mrs. Fonseka,
as stated above, was void and barred by the provisions of the Ceiling on
Housing Property (Special Provisions) Amending Act No. 4 of 1988. He contended
that since it is stated in the application itself that the owner Mrs. Indra
Fonseka is dead, the said application to the knowledge of the 1st respondent
was made against a deceased person. He submitted that the proviso to section
13 requires that the application must be made against a named owner. The said
proviso states that where the application is made to purchase a house
described in section 14 (1) the Commissioner shall not take any action in
respect of the application made unless owner of such house consents to the
sale of such house. In other words, without further inquiry, at the threshold
itself, the Commissioner has to stay his hand, if the owner does not consent.
Section 14 stipulates that the house should inter alia be a house in respect
of which ownership of such house was acquired by construction or purchase
before the specified date or purchased before

358

the specified date or by gift or inheritance from a grandfather, a parent or
spouse who had acquired ownership before the specified date. The term
specified date is defined as the date on which the tenant for the time being
or the tenant upon whose death the current tenant succeeded to the tenancy
came into operation. In order to determine these requirements, there must
necessarily be a disclosure in the application itself of the identity of the
owner.

The learned counsel for the 1 st respondent submitted that the only
requirement under section 13 of Ceiling on Housing Property Law is to make an
application to the Commissioner informing the Commissioner that the tenant
desires to purchase the house let to the tenant. He stressed that under the
said law, there is no provision prescribing the form in which the application
has to be made. He cited the case of Mariam Nurban Hussain Teyabally (now Mrs.
M. A. Mansoor) vs. Hon. R. Premadas(1) where at page 5 it is stated as
follows:

It is relevant to note that the law does not stipulate a time limit within
which the application has to be made. Nor is there a prescribed form in which
the application has to be forwarded.

Although the said law does not prescribe a form in which to make the
application, it is nevertheless essential to state the relevant particulars in
the application, to enable the Commissioner to make a decision, because the
provisions of section 13 states that certain requirements have to be
satisfied, before the Commissioner makes a recommendation to the Minister. For
example, in the instant case, the Commissioner had to ascertain whether the
owner would consent to the sale of the said premises to the tenant, because if
the owner did not consent, he could not have proceeded any further with this
application. Thus it was necessary in this case that the name of the present
owner should have been given in the application, so that he would be made the
respondent to the application. Instead of that, what the respondent had done
was to give the name of Mrs. Indra Fonseka, who to the knowledge of the
respondent, was deceased by then. The respondent has made the issue further
uncertain by adding the words, said to be. Whereas by the time the respondent
made the said application, according to her own evidence before the
Commissioner, on 30.03.1989 (X3), the present owner, is the appellant. Further
in the earlier application filed by her in the Rent Board, seeking permission
to renovate the house, she was accepted as the tenant by the appellant. Thus
it appears that, the respondent has, for reasons

**359**

best known to her, omitted to mention the name of the appellant as the owner
of the said premises.

The resulting position is that the respondent has failed to make the
appellant, a respondent to the said application. In this context, whether the
participation of the appellant in the proceedings before the Commissioner on
30. 3. 1989 would regularise the proceedings, also arises for consideration.
In my view this question must be considered in the light of the provisions of
the Ceiling on Housing Property (Special Provisions) Amending Act No. 4 of
1988. It is pertinent to note here the provision in section 3 of the said
amending Act which states as follows:

Section 3. - Notwithstanding anything in the principal enactment, the tenant
of a house or any person who may succeed to the tenancy thereof under section
36 of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, shall not be entitled, from, or after
January 1, 1987, to make an application, under any provision of the principal
enactment, for the purchase of such a house.

Thus by virtue of the above provision, the right that a tenant had to make an
application to purchase a house ceased to exist, with effect from 1.1.1987.

However the learned counsel for the 1st respondent submitted that the said
application was made prior to the said date, and the provisions of section 4
(c) of the said amending Act would apply to save such pending applications.
The said section 4 (c) states that:

Section 4 (c) Any action, proceeding or thing commenced under the principal
enactment, and pending or incompleted on January 1,1987, which action,
proceeding or thing may be carried on and completed as if the principal
enactment had not been amended by this Act.

The learned counsel for the appellant contended that to attract the said
provision, the application or thing should have been duly commenced and
pending or incompleted. It was submitted that, in the present case, there was
no application at all, and as such there was no proceeding or thing commenced
under the Act or pending or incompleted on 30.3.1989, and as such the
provisions of section 4 (c) have no application.

360

It is to be observed from the facts of this case that there was no pending
application before the Commissioner against the present owner, the appellant,
as at 1.1.1987. Therefore, at the time the appellant appeared before the
Commissioner on 30.3.1989, by virtue of the said provisions of section 3, he
had acquired a right that the said premises are not liable to be sold to the
tenant, in terms of the Ceiling on Housing Property Law. In this regard it may
be noted that, the doctrine of acquired rights or vested rights has gained
recognition as a general principle of law. (Lord McNair, The General
Principles of Law Recognised by Civilised Nations, 33 B.Y.I.L (1957) p.16.).
Although there is no uniformity in various municipal legal systems in regard
to the character and content of acquired rights, broadly 'rights', may be
divided into two categories, viz, 'property' rights and 'personal' rights.
'Property' rights in general will not be limited to only real or moveable
property but will also include rights in rem in tangible and intangible goods
and contractual rights whose content is economic. 'Personal' rights relate to
moral or political matters. The concept of 'acquired rights' deals with the
sanctity of property rights under a particular municipal legal system.
Acquired rights has been defined by O'Connel as follows: Acquired rights are
any right, corporeal or incorporeal, property vested under municipal law in
natural or juristic person and of an assessable monetary value. (O'Connel,
International Law, vol. 2 (second edition - London, 1970) p. 763). Therefore,
as the appellant has acquired a right, as aforesaid, it is a violation of a
recognised general principle of law, to have permitted the respondent to
proceed with the said application before the Commissioner.

The learned counsel for the 1st respondent relied on the observation made in
the case of M. N. H. Teyabally v. Hon. Ft. Premadasa and others (Supra), which
states as follows: The submission of Mr. de Silva, that the tenant must make a
fresh application every time there is a change of ownership, is not well-
founded, The learned counsel for the appellant pointed out that the said case
is distinguishable from the present case, as the application of the provisions
of the amending Act No. 4 of 1988 did not arise for consideration, in the said
case. Furthermore, in that case the application had been made against the
current owner and there was a change of ownership thereafter. It was in that
context that the learned Chief Justice made the comment that the proceedings
could have been continued without a formal substitution. It has no bearing at
all on the present case where the application, ab inito is void as having been
made against a non-existing person, and the provisions of the amending Act
barring applications after the specified date.

361

For the reasons stated above, I hereby set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal dated 7.2.1996, and allow the appeal of the appellant, with costs fixed
at Rs. 2,500.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.** \- I agree.

_**Appeal allowed.**_

Tenant's application declared void ab initio.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/2.html_  

