##  Piyangani Navaratne and Others v. Chadrasena - SLR - 170, Vol 1 of 1998
[1997] LKSC 2; (1998) 1 Sri LR 170 (16 December 1997)

**170**

**PRIYANGANI NAVARATNE AND OTHERS  
v.  
CHANDRASENA**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATIONS 172-179/97  
DECEMBER 4TH, 1997.  
  
_Fundamental rights - Ragging - Punishment of offenders violative of Article
12 (1) of the Constitution - Adequacy of punishment - Discretion of Court to
refuse relief to offending petitioners.  
_  
Petitioners were teacher trainees at the Nilwala Educational College. They
were found guilty of ragging freshers which required the victims to be
admitted to hospital for treatment. The petitioners were given an opportunity
of showing cause against that finding after which the finding was affirmed and
their internships were suspended; for one month in the case of females, and
for two months in the case of males. The petitioners resumed internship after
the period of suspension. Next, there was a further inquiry after which the
mate petitioners were informed that they had been expelled from the college,
and the female petitioners were informed that their internship had been
extended for a further period of one year.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The petitioners' fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) were infringed by
reason of the second punishment for the same offence and the antecedent
procedure. However, their conduct amounted cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment of the victims; the original punishments were therefore, lenient and
wholly inadequate. Therefore, in the exercise of the courts discretion apart
from a bare declaration, no relief should be granted, for restoring the
original punishments.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
Ragging is sometimes sought to be justified as being a necessary part of
orientation to life in Universities and other Institutions of higher learning.
Such ragging may be tolerated, if at all, if it is clean fun; but it is
totally unacceptable if it causes pain or suffering, or physical, mental or
emotional distress, to the victims."

**171**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Chula Bandara_ for the petitioners.  
  
_S. Fernando, SC_ for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 16, 1997.  
**  
FERNANDO, J.  
**  
These eight applications were heard together. All eight petitioners were
admitted to the Nilwala Educational College on 28.3.94 (for a three-year
course 1994/97) for the purpose of being trained as teachers. The petitioners
in the first three applications are females, while the other five are males.  
  
On 9.10.95 a new batch of trainees was admitted for the next course, 1995/98.
According to the petitioners:  
  
"On the afternoon of 9.10.95 which was a Saturday, **all** trainees including
seniors and juniors were playing at the College play ground. While at play,
**the senior trainees** separated the newcomers into groups according to their
sex. Thereafter **the seniors** made them to march along the grounds. After
some time, the female trainees were allowed to rest while the male trainees
were asked to do certain physical exercises while **the seniors** looked on.
This group of male students were made to roll over and back several times by
**the senior students.** While this was happening, a few freshers complained
of dizziness and pain doe to **exhaustion**. These trainees who complained
were then taken to the Akuressa Government Hospital in the College bus and
were warded for treatment. All these trainees were discharged from hospital
the following day".  
  
It is clear that this was a collective effort, in which _all_ the seniors were
involved, and the petitioners did not suggest that their involvement was in
any way less than that of the other seniors.  
  
On 30.11.95 each petitioner received a letter from the 1st respondent, the
President of the College, stating that the Disciplinary Committee of the
College had found her/him guilty of ragging the newcomers, and giving her/him
an opportunity to show cause in regard to that finding. The petitioners
submitted explanations denying any

**172**

involvement in the ragging of the newcomers. That denial is contrary to their
affidavits filed in this Court.  
  
The petitioners were due to serve one-year internships commencing 1.1.96. By
letters dated 21.12.95, the 1st respondent informed the petitioners that they
had been found guilty of ragging, and that their internships were suspended:
for one month in the case of the females, and for two months in the case of
the mates. They submitted appeals against the punishments, and commenced their
internships after the period of suspension.  
  
By a Circular dated 7.10.96 the 2nd respondent, the Secretary to the Ministry
of Higher Education, amended the Disciplinary Code of the College, to make
specific mention of ragging, and to give the 2nd respondent powers and
responsibilities in regard to offences of ragging.  
  
In the meantime, there seems to have been a further inquiry, after which, by
letters dated 8.1.97 the male petitioners were informed that they had been
expelled from the College, and by letters dated 13.1.97 the female petitioners
were informed that their internship had been extended for a further one year,
for breach of the terms and conditions of the agreement they had signed when
they joined the College.  
  
The petitioners filed these applications on 12.2.97 alleging the violation of
their fundamental rights under Article 12 (1), on the ground that the
punishment imposed in January 1997 was a second punishment for the same
offence; that it was arbitrary; that the audi alteram pattern rule had not
been observed before imposing that punishment; and that the amendment of the
Disciplinary Code was retrospectively applied to them, although it contained
no express provision making it retrospective.  
  
When applying for leave to proceed, Counsel for the petitioners said that they
did not dispute the first punishment imposed in respect of offence of ragging,
and that their case was confined to the second punishment and the
retrospective application of the amendment.  
  
At the hearing learned State Counsel, quite properly submitted that he did not
object to the grant of a declaration that the petitioners' fundamental rights
under Article 12 (1) had been infringed by reason

**173**

of the imposition of the second punishment, and the antecedent procedure; he
strenuously submitted, however, that in the exercise of our equitable
discretion under Article 126 (4) we should not grant any other relief to the
petitioners.  
  
Mr. Bandara on behalf of the petitioners urged that they had been punished
once, and that the second punishment, imposed contrary to law, should not be
permitted to stand, or should at least be reduced because, he said, expulsion
was a punishment wholly disproportionate to their offence: they were just out
of school, and starting life, and had not realised the seriousness of what
they were doing.  
  
We agree that the petitioners' fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) have
been infringed and grant them a declaration to that effect. However, not only
do they admit the offence of ragging, but it is quite clear that what they say
they did on 9.10.95 constituted severe ragging. On the basis of their own
statements and admissions, it is wholly inequitable to grant them any relief.  
  
The petitioners' misconduct is extremely serious. It is not just a matter
between one individual and another. All the seniors were involved, and the
petitioners did not claim that they were only passive observers. Ragging is
sometimes sought to be justified as being a necessary part of orientation to
life in Universities and other Institutions of higher learning. Such ragging
may be tolerated, if at all, if it is clean fun; but it is totally
unacceptable if it causes pain or suffering, or physical, mental or emotional
distress, to the victims. No normal person could possibly have considered what
happened in this case to be fun: on the contrary, it was cruel, inhuman and
degrading to ill-treat or torment persons to the point of pain and exhaustion
requiring hospitalization, not to mention the possible long-term adverse
mental effects, even on the victims who did not need hospitalization. Should
not this Court refrain from granting relief to petitioners who are plainly
guilty of cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment of their junior colleagues?  
  
I must also note that this was not an instance of ragging by a handful of
seniors. _All_ the seniors got together to bully the newcomers; the ragging
took place in the College premises openly, and for some time, and the fact
that persons in authority did not intervene indicates that what took place was
a form of terrorism.

**174**

In exercising our discretion, we cannot ignore the purpose of the College: to
train teachers to be entrusted with the care and education of the young.
Learned State Counsel submitted, with much justification, that persons guilty
of such misconduct are not fit to be entrusted with the powers and
responsibilities of teachers.  
  
Yet another relevant matter is that ragging is easily done, but difficult to
prove; victims are afraid to complain, because reprisals are likely; those in
authority often fear to get involved, whether by inter­vening, reporting, or
otherwise. The disciplinary authorities are some­times intimidated into
mitigating or even cancelling punishments. In these circumstances, the public
interest demands deterrent, rather than lenient, punishment for admitted or
proven misconduct, and in my view the punishments first imposed were wholly
inadequate for what the petitioners did. To restore those punishments would be
to condone the violation of the rights of the newcomers.  
  
Finally, Mr. Bandara urged in mitigation that the petitioners were young. But
their victims were even younger, and needed help in adjusting to the
complexities of life in a new environment; they were entitled to treatment
that would bring smiles to their anxious faces, and not tears to their eyes or
distress to their minds.  
  
I therefore consider that, apart from a bare declaration, no relief should be
granted to the petitioners.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNASEKERA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Declaration granted._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/2.html_  

