##  Kumarasinghe and Another v. State Development & Construction Corporation -
SLR - 204, Vol 3 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 2; (1994) 3 Sri LR 204 (22 October 1994)

204



KUMARASINGHE AND ANOTHER  

**V.  **

**STATE DEVELOPMENT & CONSTRUCTION **

**CORPORATION**





SUPREME COURT

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 55/93

H.C. (NWP) NO. 275/92

L.T. 23/KU/3141

L.T. 23/KU/3155

OCTOBER 04 1994



Industrial Dispute - Right of Labour Tribunal sitting in Colombo to transfer
case to Labour Tribunal sitting in Kurunegala - Appellate jurisdiction of
Provincial High Court - Are separate appeals necessary from a joint order on
applications of two workmen? - Effect of change of regulation making authority
- Can regulations made by the former regulation making authority be used
pending new regulations by the new authority? - Can tribunal adopt its own
procedure in the absence of procedure?- Sections 31A(1), 31C(1), 31D(3),
31D(6), 31D(7), 31A(2) 39(1) (ff) of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended
by Act, No. 32 of 1990 - Article 154P(3)(c) and 170 of the Constitution of
1978 - High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990,
ss. 2 and 4 - Regulation 324 and S. 31D(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act as
amended by Act, No. 32 of 1990.

_ _

Two workmen working under the respondent at Aralaganwila, Polonnaruwa were
dismissed. They filed applications seeking relief in the Labour Tribunal,
Colombo. On the application of the respondent, the President transferred the
applications to the Labour Tribunal to Kurunegala. The applications were heard
together under regulation 32A and decided by a single order of the Labour
Tribunal. The applications were dismissed. A single appeal was then preferred
to the High Court.



**Held:**

** **

(1) The appointment of Labour Tribunal Presidents though made by the Judicial
Service Commission under Article 170 of the Constitution of 1978 was to an
office and not to a designated post and each person so appointed has identical
powers and island wide jurisdiction. The transfer of a Labour Tribunal case is
an administrative act and not a judicial act and hence the Labour Tribunal
itself has the implied power to transfer a case where it is appropriate to do
so. Hence the transfer of the applications from the Labour Tribunal, Colombo
to the Labour Tribunal, Kurunegala was valid.

**205**



(2) Even if the transfer of the applications was invalid, it is an order which
the Provincial High Court of the Western Province alone could have quashed in
the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction vested in it by section 2 of the
High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990. In the
absence of such an order of the Provincial High Court of the Western Province
the High Court Judge of the North Western Province acted in excess of his
jurisdiction in pronouncing the transfer invalid.



(3) The appellate jurisdiction of a Provincial High Court over the orders of
Labour Tribunals has been conferred upon it by s.2 of Act No. 19 of 1990
(enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 154 P3(c) of the Constitution).
The right of appeal to such court is conferred by s.4 of the said Act and
section 31D(3), as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990, of the Industrial Disputes
Act. The High Court Judge of the North Western Province was in error when he
took the view that the aggrieved party has no right of appeal to another High
Court but the High Court of the Province within which the tribunal to which
the application was originally made is situated.



(4) In view of the fact that the two applications were heard together and
decided by one order against both applicants the absence of separate appeals
would not constitute a failure to follow "a vital step" required by section
31D(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act. The objection is technical and does not
warrant rejection of the appeal. There is no defect in the appeal which can be
regarded as fatal.



(5) Even in the application of imperative requirements of the law, Courts
endeavour as far as possible to avoid a denial of justice. As the joint appeal
is valid the submission based on s. 31D(6) of the Industrial Disputes Act
(relating to stamping of appeals) fails.



(6) In spite of the repeal of section 39(1) (ff) and the enactment of s.
31A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act (both being sections enabling
regulations to be made) the existing regulations made under section 39(1) (ff)
by the Labour Minister remain in force until they are replaced by new
regulations by the Justice Minister. Even if it were otherwise and regulation
32A made under section 39(1)(ff) had become inoperative there is no illegality
in the Tribunal adopting any procedure for hearing applications provided such
procedure is just and fair. In terms of such procedure the tribunal may hear
two or more applications together.



(7) The case will be remitted to the High Court for the appeal to be heard on
the merits, but it must in view of s. 31(7) of the Industrial Disputes Act, be
disposed of within six months.



**Cases referred to:**

** **

1\. Jafferjee v Subramaniam 71 NLR 518.

_ _

2 _. The State Timber Corporation v. Fernando_ S.C. Special Leave to Appeal
Application No. 225/92 SCM 22.03.1993. _ _



**206**



3 _. Manager, URY Group, Passara v. The Democratic Workers' Congress_ 71 NLR
47.

_ _

4 _. Board of Trustees of Tamil University Movement v. De Silva_ (1982) 1 Sri
LR 316.

_ _

5 _. Hewagam Korale East Multipurpose Co-operative Society Ltd., Hanwella v.
Hemawathie Perers_ (1986) 1 CALR 535.

_ _

6 _. James Perera v. Godwin Perera_ 48 NLR 190.

_ _

7 _. Jamila Umma v. Mohamed_ 50 NLR 15.

_ _

8 _. Disanayake v. Siyane Adikari Co-operative Stores Union_ 60 NLR 140.

_ _

9 _. Karunaratne v. Commissioner of Co-operative Development_ 79(2) NLR 193.

_ _

10 _. Vinasithamby v. Joseph_ 65 NLR 359.



**APPEAL** from order of the High Court of the North Western Province.



_S. Sinnathamby_ for the appellants.

_ _

_PA. Ratnayake, S.S.C._ for the respondent. _ _

_Cur adv vult._

  
October 22, 1994.

**  
KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

This is an appeal by two workmen whose joint appeal to the Provincial High
Court of the North Western Province against an order of the Labour Tribunal,
Kurunegala was rejected in limine on the following grounds:



1\. That since the applications were originally filed before the Labour
Tribunal, Colombo, in the Western Province, the High Court which has the
jurisdiction to entertain the said appeal (in terms of S.31 D(3) of the
Industrial Disputes Act, as amended by Act No.32 of 1990) is the High Court of
the Western Province; and The High Court of the North Western Province has no
jurisdiction to entertain it.



2\. The impugned order of the Labour Tribunal, Kurunegala was made consequent
upon a transfer of the workmen's applications to Kurunegala "on the order of
the Labour Tribunal, Colombo" which had no jurisdiction to effect such
transfer in the absence of any provision in the Industrial Disputes Act, which
permits such transfer. The implication of this ground is that it was the
Labour Tribunal Colombo alone which could have heard and decided the said
applications subject, however, to a right of appeal to the Provincial High
Court of the Western Province.

**207**



3\. Notwithstanding the fact that the applications of the two workmen had been
heard together under regulation 32A of the regulations made under the Act, and
decided by a single order of the Labour Tribunal, S.31 D(3) of the Act
requires each of them to file a separate appeal; that by filing a joint
appeal, the workmen had failed to follow the correct procedure which is a
vital step in filing an appeal; and hence the appeal has to be rejected.



This Court granted special leave to appeal on the following questions:



(i) Is the interpretation of S.31D(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act by the
learned High Court Judge correct?



(ii) (a) Was the transfer of the applications of the petitioners to the Labour
Tribunal, Kurunegala invalid?



(b) Assuming that the transfer was invalid, does it deprive the Provincial
High Court of the North Western Province the jurisdiction to hear and
determine the appeal of the petitioners against the order of the Labour
Tribunal, Kurunegala?



(iii) (a) Does the failure of the petitioners to file separate appeals require
the rejection of their joint appeal?

  
(b) Was such failure a defect which was curable by the petitioners with the
permission of the High Court?



# THE RELEVANT FACTS



The 1st appellant is a security guard and the 2nd appellant is the storekeeper
employed by the respondent (State Development & Construction Corporation,
Colombo) and are attached to Aralaganwila, Maduru Oya Project, Polonnaruwa. It
would appear that the respondent terminated their services with effect from
22.08.90 on charges of irregular or fraudulent issue of diesel to a bulldozer
in excess of its capacity. Each of them made an application to the labour
tribunal for relief. These applications are substantially in form 'D' set out
in the First Schedule to the regulations under the Act and

**208**



are addressed to "the Labour Tribunal". Whilst the said Form does not require
such application to specify a particular labour tribunal, regulation 14 read
with regulation 15 requires it to be sent in duplicate to the Secretary,
Labour Tribunals appointed under regulation 11, in terms of which, there is
only one Secretary. He functions at the Head Office in Colombo and transmits
any application received by him to the appropriate tribunal. There is an
assistant secretary attached to each such tribunal who attends to the
administrative work relating to the applications received there.  


At the hearing before us, learned Counsel for the appellant informed us that
despite the requirement that applications should be transmitted to the
Secretary, in Colombo there are occasions when the applicants themselves
submit them to a tribunal which is convenient to them where they are
entertained and inquired into, by the President of that tribunal.



In the instant case, both applications had been transmitted to the Labour
Tribunal, Colombo and were given Colombo numbers. After the filing of answer,
Counsel for the respondent (the employer) applied to have the applications
transferred to the Labour Tribunal, Kurunegala as the workmen's last place of
work was Polonnaruwa whereupon, on 21.02.91 the applications were, of consent,
transferred to the Labour Tribunal, Kurunegala where they were given
Kurunegala numbers. In view of the fact that the alleged acts of misconduct
were committed in the course of the same transaction, the Labour Tribunal
President heard the said applications together. Thereafter he made his order
dated 27.11.92 dismissing their applications on the basis that the termination
of their services was justified. It is against this order that the appellants
made a joint appeal which was rejected in limine by the High Court, on legal
grounds.



# IS THE TRANSFER OF APPLICATIONS TO KURUNEGALA INVALID?



Learned Counsel for the appellants submitted that under S.31A(1) of the Act,
Labour Tribunals are not established areawise; that S.31C(1) empowers any
Labour Tribunal whose jurisdiction is invoked to inquire into an application
made under S.31B(1); that these  


**209**



sections, read with the relevant regulations show that the jurisdiction of a
labour tribunal is islandwide; that the distribution of the cases to labour
tribunals is really the function of the Secretary, which is an administrative
act; that the transfer of a case is, therefore, not a judicial act; and hence
a labour tribunal itself has the implied power to transfer a case where it is
appropriate to do so. Counsel cited in support the decision in Jafferjee v.
Subramaniam(1) where Sirimane J. held that the Public Service Commission
(which was the appointing authority during that period) was not required to
make an appointment to **a designated post** (unlike the case of appointments
by the Judicial Service Commission to District Courts etc. established for
different districts); that such appointment is to **an office** ; and that
each person so appointed has identical powers and islandwide jurisdiction. He
said (p.520) -



"For administrative convenience, the tribunals may be numbered. A fair
distribution of work, or convenience in dealing with disputes in particular
localities, may be considerations that are taken into account when tribunals
are so numbered".



In those days, the Commissioner of Labour transferred officers to tribunals
which are numbered, for the sake of convenience.



Under Article 170 of the 1978 Constitution, the Labour Tribunal President is
defined as a "judicial officer"; and hence, the Judicial Service Commission
now appoints persons to such office; the Commission also transfers such
officers to Tribunals which are numbered, for the sake of convenience.
Notwithstanding this change of the appointing authority, the decision in the
**Jafferjees** case as regards the character and the jurisdiction of a labour
tribunal would still apply. I am therefore, in agreement with the submission
of the learned Counsel for the appellants and hold that the transfer of the
applications from the Labour Tribunal, Colombo to the Labour Tribunal,
Kurunegala was valid.



DOES IMPUGNED INVALIDITY OF TRANSFER AFFECT HIGH COURT'S APPELLATE
JURISDICTION?



Assuming that the transfer by the labour tribunal was invalid, it is an order
which the Provincial High Court of the Western Province



**210**

  
alone could have quashed (in the exercise of its revisionary jurisdiction
given to it by S.2 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act
No.19 of 1990). The Provincial High Court of the North Western Province has no
jurisdiction over such order. The said S.2 provides:



"A High Court established by Article 154 P of the Constitution for a Province
shall, subject to any law, exercise appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in
respect of **orders made by a Labour Tribunal within that Province... "**



In the absence of such review, the order of the Labour Tribunal, Colombo
stands and consequently, no legal objection may be taken against the dispute
being inquired into by the Labour Tribunal, Kurunegala. The pronouncement of
the learned High Court Judge on the validity of the order of the Labour
Tribunal, Colombo is, therefore, in excess of his jurisdiction, and the Labour
Tribunal, Kurunegala was competent to inquire into the dispute subject,
however, to an appeal to the Provincial High Court of the North Western
Province.



IS THE HIGH COURT'S INTERPRETATION OF S.31 D(3) OF INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT
CORRECT?



The appellate jurisdiction of a Provincial High Court over the orders of
Labour tribunals has been conferred upon it by S.2 of Act No.19 of 1990
(enacted pursuant to the provisions of Article 154P(3)(c) of the
Constitution). The right of appeal to such Court is conferred by S.4 of the
said Act and S.31D(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended.

  
The relevant part of S.4 of Act No. 19 of 1990 reads:



"A party aggrieved by any ... order, entered ... by ... a Labour Tribunal ...
may, subject to the provisions of any written law applicable to the procedure
and the manner for appealing and the time for preferring such appeals, appeal
therefrom to the High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution
for the **Province within which such ... tribunal is situated ...**

**211**



" Section 31 D (3) of the Industrial Disputes Act, as amended reads:



"Where the workman who, or the trade union which, makes an application to a
labour tribunal, or the employer to whom that application relates is
dissatisfied with the order of the labour tribunal on that application, such
workman, trade union or employer may, by written petition in which the other
party is mentioned as a respondent, appeal from that order on a question of
law to **the High Court** established under Article 154P of the Constitution,
**for the Province within which such labour tribunal is situated "**



The view taken by the learned High Court Judge is that the aggrieved party has
no right to appeal to another High Court but the High Court of the Province
within which the tribunal to which the application was originally made is
situated. In The State Timber Corporation v Fernando (2) this Court held that
the wording of S.31 (d) (3) does not warrant this view. In the instant case, I
observe that the learned High Court Judge in taking the same view has
emphasised certain words in S. 31 D(3). For the reasons given in the earlier
part of this judgment and in particular, the wording of S. 4 of Act, No. 19 of
1990, I have no doubt that the construction of S. 31 D (3) by the High Court
Judge is wrong and hence reaffirm the decision of this Court in Fernando's
case (Supra).



# IS THE APPEAL 'DEFECTIVE FOR WANT OF SEPARATE APPEALS?  


**IF DEFECTIVE, IS IT CURABLE?**



The next ground for rejecting the appeal is the failure on the part of . the
appellants to prefer separate applications. I am of the opinion that in view
of the fact that the two applications were heard together and decided by one
order against both the applicants, the absence of separate appeals would not
constitute a failure to follow a "vital step" required by S.31 D(3) of the
Industrial Disputes Act; nor does it appear to me that, in the circumstances
of this case, the said section is unequivocal on this question. I think that
the objection taken by the

**212**



High Court Judge is of a technical nature and did not warrant the rejection of
the appeal.



It is also observed that the order of the Labour Tribunal mentions both the
appellants in its caption as applicants Nos. 1 and 2 (which is a virtual
consolidation of the applications). A single appeal was lodged before the High
Court bearing the same caption, which appeal was accepted in the High Court
and allotted a single number. The appeal was then fixed for argument and was
heard and decided on 01.02.93. In the absence of a record of the arguments of
Counsel . or any written submissions, it appears that the appeal was rejected
on grounds raised by the learned High Court Judge himself. Such procedure
caused serious prejudice to the appellants amounting to an injustice. A court
of law has inherent power to remedy such injustice, if necessary by making an
appropriate order for curing the defect, if any, in the appeal.



It is to be noted that particularly in proceedings under the Industrial
Disputes Act which provides for just and equitable relief, parties have been
permitted to cure defects where it is possible to do so without doing violence
to the statute or causing prejudice to the opposite party. Thus in Manager URY
Group, Passara v. The Democratic Workers' Congress(3) the former Supreme Court
permitted the caption in the pleadings and in particular the order of the
President of the Labour Tribunal to be amended by stating the employer's name
to satisfy the requirement of the law as it stood then that relief under the
Act could go only against a natural or a legal person. In Board of Trustees of
Tamil University Movement v. De Silva(4) (Divisional Bench) this Court
approved an order of a Labour Tribunal permitting the amendment of the caption
to substitute as the respondents, "The Board of Trustees of the Tamil
University Movement" in place of "The Tamil University Movement". Wimalaratne
J. said ( pp. 364-365) -  
  
"A labour tribunal will not, in my view, be able to discharge its duty of
making a just and equitable order. if it is to be hamstrung by technicalities
in the correction of mistakes in captions, when the party against whom redress
is claimed can easily be identified".  


**213**



As indicated earlier, it is my view, that there was no defect in the appeal
which can be regarded as fatal. At the same time, it seems to me that if any
body had an interest in seeking a separation of appeals in the High Court, it
was none other than the appellants themselves, on the ground of possible
prejudice which would result from joint proceedings affecting them.



Learned Senior State Counsel informed us that he would not seek to justify the
view taken by the High Court on the power of the Labour Tribunal, Colombo to
transfer the cases to the Labour Tribunal, Kurunegala in view of the fact that
it was done on the application of the employer himself. On being invited to
comment on the legal submissions in the matter, he said that he was not in a
position to seriously challenge those submissions. Consequently, he also did
not support the High Court Judge's view that the Provincial High Court of the
North Western Province had no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal.



However, Senior State Counsel sought to defend the strict construction of S.
31 D(3) of the Industrial Disputes Act and the view taken by the High Court
Judge that the appellants should have preferred separate appeals, in default
of which their appeal had to be rejected. He submitted:



(1) that the wording of S. 31 D (3) only permits a separate appeal by a
workman who is aggrieved with the order of a Labour Tribunal; .



(2) that regulation 32A provides that two or more applications made to a
Labour Tribunal "may be heard together", which is not synonymous with a power
to "consolidate" applications; and hence even though the Tribunal has made a
single order pursuant to proceedings under regulation 32A, the workman should
prefer separate appeals;



(3) that the provisions of S. 31 D(6) which provide that every petition of
appeal to a High Court shall bear stamps to the value of five rupees, tend to
support the strict construction of S. 31D(3). He argued that if joint appeals
were permitted provision would have been made, at least in respect of
stamping.

**214**



In support of the strict construction, counsel cited Hewagam Korale East
Multi-Purpose Co-operative Society Ltd., Hanwella v. Hemawathie Perera (5)
where the appeal of the employer was dismissed for failure to join a necessary
party, namely, the Trade Union which had successfully applied to the Labour
Tribunal for relief on behalf of the workman. In that case, the appellant had
mentioned the workman as respondent and failed to mention the Union, which was
really the "other party" who had to be made a respondent, in terms of the
imperative provisions of S.31 D (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act. An
application to add the Union was refused on the ground of long delay. This
decision is justified firstly because there was non-compliance with a
mandatory provision of the statute. Secondly, it is trite law that the failure
to join a necessary party is fatal unless cured with the leave of Court. No
such considerations arise in the case before us. As such, the decision cited
by counsel has no application.



The principle that the failure to join a necessary party is fatal has been
upheld in several cases where applications for discretionary writs had to be
dismissed on that ground. Vide James Perera v. Godwin Perera (6); Jamila Umma
v. Mohamed(7); Disanayake v. Siyane Adikari Co-operative Stores Union (8);
Karunaratne v. Commissioner of Co-operative Development (9). However, the
Court may permit an application to add necessary parties, provided that on the
date on which the application is made to add them, the substantive application
before the Court is not ready for inquiry. Vinasithamby v. Joseph(10). These
decisions as well as the case of Hemawathie Perera (Supra) cited by the S.S.C.
show-that even in the application of imperative requirements of the law,
Courts endeavour as far as possible to avoid a denial of justice.



What I have said in the earlier part of this judgment suffices to meet the
three submissions made by the S.S.C. against the joint appeal. I wish to add
that in view of my decision that the joint appeal is valid, the submission
based on S. 31 D (6) of the Industrial Disputes Act (relating to stamping of
appeals) must fail.

**215**



Before concluding this judgment, I must refer to an observation by the High
Court Judge that in view of the repeal of S. 39 (1) (ff) and the enactment of
S. 31 A(2) of the Industrial Disputes Act (sections which empower the making
of regulations), the existing regulations made under S. 39 (1) (ff) have
become inoperative; and that no regulations appear to have been made under the
new S. 31A(2). The implication of this observation is that the decision of the
Labour Tribunal to hear the appellants' applications together cannot be
supported because the enabling regulation 32A had been rendered inoperative;
if so, the submission in favour of a joint appeal which is sought to be
justified on the basis of a single order made after a joint hearing should
fail.



I cannot agree with the observation of the High Court Judge. It is correct
that where a statute is wholly repealed, subordinate legislation made
thereunder would cease to have legal force, except in regard to rights and
liabilities which have arisen under such regulations and as regards
proceedings which were pending on the date of such repeal. However, where only
a particular provision of a statute enabling the making of regulations
repealed and replaced with a new provision, the Court has to decide whether in
the context of the entire statute, the regulations made under the repealed
section become inoperative, pending the making of new regulations. The
difference between the repealed S. 39 (1) (ff) and the new S. 31A(2) is that
whilst under the former, the regulations were made by the Minister in charge
of the subject of Labour, under the latter, they are made by the Minister in
charge of subject of Justice, in consultation with the Minister in charge of
the subject of Labour. I am inclined to the view that the existing regulations
remain in force until they are replaced with new regulations. Any other view
would tend to stultify the smooth operation of the Act even to the extent of
leading to absurdity or injustice.



Even if as opined by the High Court Judge, regulation 32A had become
inoperative, I see no illegality in the tribunal adopting any procedure for
hearing applications made to it, provided that such procedure is just and
fair; and in terms of such procedure, the tribunal may hear two or more
applications together.

# 216

#  

# CONCLUSION



For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
High Court, dated 01.02.93 and direct the High Court to hear and determine the
appellant's appeal on the merits. In view of the provisions of S. 31 (7) of
the industrial Disputes Act as amended, I also direct the High Court to
finally dispose of the appeal within six months from the receipt of the
record. The Registrar is directed to forthwith return the record of the High
Court, together with a copy of this judgment. No costs.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

_ _

_Case sent back to High Court for hearing of appeal on merits and disposal
within six months._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/2.html_  

