##  Chitambara Nadar and Another of Colombo v. Elasto Limited of Bentota - SLR
- 325, Vol 2 of 1994 [1993] LKSC 2; (1994) 2 Sri LR 325 (18 October 1993)

**  325**

### CHITAMBARA NADAR

**AND ANOTHER OF COLOMBO**

**v.  
ELASTO LIMITED OF BENTOTA**

SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J. S.C. NO. 5/90

C.A. NO. 1408/83

D.C. COLOMBO 82167/M

OCTOBER 18, 1993.



Jurisdiction ‑ Preliminary issue of law ‑ Civil Procedure Code sections 9(C),
45 ‑Payment on account stated on goods sold and delivered ‑ Refusal to fulfil
an obligation ‑ Law applicable ‑ Is it English Law or Roman Dutch Law?



In an action founded on an account stated there must be some antecedent
liability or some previous transaction with reference to which an account is
stated and in such case the plaintiff is suing upon a **new contract upon a
new cause of action** which is independent of his liability to pay for goods
sold and delivered.



To an action on an account stated the law applicable is the Roman Dutch Law
according to which the creditor must seek out the debtor in which event the

**  326**

District Court of Colombo has no jurisdiction to hear the action, for Bentota
falls outside the territorial limits of the District Court of Colombo.



An action on goods sold and delivered is based on English Law according to
which the debtor must seek out the creditor. Here an action based on goods
sold and delivered would be prescribed.



The present action on accounts stated being governed by Roman Dutch Law, the
District Court of Colombo has no jurisdiction to hear the action.

The decision to try the issue of jurisdiction as a preliminary issue of law
was covered being based also on consent.



# Cases referred to :



1. _         Sonnadara v. Weerasinghe _1 CLW 328. 

2. _         Kappoor Saibo v. Mudalihamy Bass _6 NLR 216, 218.



**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



_D. R. P. Goonetilleke_ for substituted plaintiff‑appellant.

_P. Wimalachandran_ with _A._ _P. Niles_ for defendant‑respondent.  

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 29, 1993.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,**



**             **The Plaintiff who carried on business in partnership at 2nd
Cross Street, Colombo 11, instituted this action in the District Court of
Colombo, against Elasto Ltd., Bentota, for the recovery of a sum of Rs.
38,232.87. At the trial, both parties raised several issues. Issue No. 8 which
related to the jurisdiction of the Court read as follows: "Does this court
have jurisdiction to hear and determine this action?" It is right to add that
the defendant had in the answer expressly

**  327**

pleaded that the court has no jurisdiction to entertain the action. Counsel
for the defendant invited the court to determine issue No. 8 as a preliminary
issue of law in terms of section 147 of the Civil Procedure Code. Counsel for
the plaintiff did not object to this issue being determined as a preliminary
issue of law. Parties filed their written submissions. The District Court
answered the issue in the affirmative and fixed the case for trial on the
remaining issues.



The defendant moved the Court of Appeal to revise the order of the District
Court. Acting in revision, the Court of Appeal set aside the order of the
District Court and held that the District Court had no jurisdiction to hear
and determine the action. The action was accordingly dismissed. The plaintiffs
have now preferred this appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal. At
the outset, Mr. Goonetilake for the plaintiffs‑appellants urged that issue No.
8 involved a consideration of questions of fact and could not have been taken
up as a preliminary issue of law. I do not agree. As rightly submitted by Mr.
Niles for the defendant‑respondent, at the trial Counsel for the plaintiffs
agreed to argue the question of jurisdiction as a preliminary issue of law. In
the written submissions filed on behalf of the plaintiffs, no objection was
taken on the ground that this issue involved questions of fact. The objection
cannot now be taken for the first time in appeal.



Section 45 of the Civil Procedure Code states :‑



"Every plaint shall contain a statement of facts setting out the jurisdiction
of the court to try and determine the claim in respect of which the action is
brought." The Court of Appeal in its judgment stated that there is no plea in
regard to jurisdiction. This is not correct, for in paragraph 4 of the plaint
it is specifically averred that the "cause of action hereinafter pleaded arose
at Colombo within the local limits of the jurisdiction of this court."
According to the plaint

**  328**

therefore the jurisdiction of the court is founded on the plea that the cause
of action arose within the local limits of the District Court of Colombo
(Section 9 (c) of the Civil Procedure Code). Having regard to the definition
of the term "cause of action" in section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code it
could be broadly be said that the cause of action is the "refusal to fulfil an
obligation." The true question that arises for decision is whether it is a
refusal to fulfil an obligation to pay money due for **goods sold and
delivered** as contended for on behalf of the plaintiffs or whether it is a
refusal to fulfil an obligation to pay money due **on an account stated.** as
submitted on behalf of the defendant. If it is the former, the English law
would be applicable and the District Court of Colombo would have jurisdiction,
for under the English law the debtor must seek out the creditor. If it is the
latter, the Roman Dutch Law would apply and the principle is that the creditor
must seek out the debtor. In that event, the District Court of Colombo has no
jurisdiction to hear the action, for Bentota falls outside territorial limits
of the District Court of Colombo.



The question whether the action is one for goods sold and delivered or whether
it is an action on an account stated may be determined on a consideration of
the averments in the amended plaint.



The relevant averments read as follows:



"(4)      The defendant from time to time purchased from the plaintiffs and
the plaintiffs sold and delivered to the defendant tanned leather, industrial
chemicals and foot wear accessories and the cause of action hereinafter
pleaded arose at Colombo within the local limits of the jurisdiction of this
court to recover all sums due to the plaintiffs on the said goods sold and
delivered to the defendant.

**  329**

(5)        The plaintiffs opened an account in the plaintiffs books for the
defendant and debited the defendant with the value of the goods sold to the
defendant and credited the defendant for all payments made from time to time
by the defendant for such purchases.



(6)        The defendant also opened an account in the defendant's books for
the plaintiffs and credited the plaintiffs with the value of the goods sold by
the plaintiffs to the defendant and debited the plaintiffs with all payments
made by the defendant for same.



(7)        The defendant on or about the 31st March, 1977 adjusted the said
accounts between the plaintiffs and the defendant and a sum of Rs. 790.24 was
found due to the plaintiffs which sum the  plaintiffs and  the defendant
confirmed to be correct.



(8)        After the 31st March, 1977 the plaintiffs continued to sell tanned
leather, industrial chemicals and foot wear accessories to the defendant and
the value of the goods sold to the defendant and the payments made by the
defendant from time to time were entered in the books of the plaintiffs and
the defendant as stated in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the plaint.



(9)        The plaintiffs after the 31st March, 1977 from time to time placed
bills for payment and the defendant from time to time made various payments as
shown in the statement of accounts marked "A" and filed herewith.



(10)      The plaintiffs went through the accounts in their books on or about
the 25th April 1978 and found that a sum of Rs. 38,232.87 was due from the
defendant to the plaintiffs for the said goods sold and delivered to the
defendant.



**  330**



(11)      The defendant failed and neglected to pay and settle the said sum of
Rs. 38,232.87 found to be due to the plaintiffs and adjusting the accounts
between the plaintiffs and the defendant on or about the 25th April 1978."



On a scrutiny of the averments in paragraphs 5 and 6, and in particular the
averments in paragraphs 7, 9 and 11, it seems to me that the action is founded
on an account stated. Paragraph 7 specifically speaks of an **adjustment** of
accounts between the parties and that it was agreed that a sum of Rs. 790.24
was due to the plaintiffs, as on 31st March, 1977. Similarly in paragraph 11
it is expressly pleaded that there was an adjustment of accounts between the
plaintiffs and the defendant on or about 25th April, 1978.



Moreover, in the account particulars filed along with the plaint it is
significant that there is no reference to the facts (the quantity, the price)
relating to the goods sold and delivered. On the other hand, under date
23.2.77 there is a reference to a **loan** of Rs. 15,000/­- given by the
plaintiffs to the defendant. The account particulars commence with an opening
balance of 14,455.50 as at 31st March 1976. If the action was for goods sold
and delivered this claim would have been prescribed. What is more, out of the
6 issues raised on behalf of the plaintiffs, 5 issues were based on an account
stated. This clearly shows the true nature of the plaintiffs' claim.



Where the action is founded on an account stated there must be some antecedent
liability or some previous transaction with reference to which an account is
stated ( _Sonnadara v. Weerasinghe_ (1)). __ In the instant case the
antecedent liability is for goods sold and delivered. But the action itself is
based on the amount due to the plaintiffs from the defendant after the
accounts maintained by each other are examined, adjusted, and a balance
struck. As stated by Moncreiff J.,

**  331**

in _Kappoor Saibo v. Mudalihami Baas_ (2). "If this claim (i.e. a claim for
goods sold and delivered) is brought on a valid account stated, the plaintiff
is not suing for goods sold and delivered, nor in a sense possibly upon any
acknowledgment of liability for, or promise to pay for goods sold and
delivered, nor upon a continuing contract. He is suing upon a **new contract,
upon a new cause of action** which is independent of his liability to pay for
goods sold and delivered." (The emphasis is mine).



I accordingly hold that the cause of action pleaded in the plaint is founded
on an account stated and not for goods sold and delivered. The Court of Appeal
rightly held that the District Court of Colombo had no jurisdiction to hear
and determine the action. In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed
with costs.



**KULATUNGA J.,** ‑ I agree.



**RAMANATHAN J.,** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/2.html_  

