##  Ramasamy v. British Ceylon Corporation - SLR - 231, Vol 1 of 1991 [1991]
LKSC 2; (1991) 1 Sri LR 231 (21 March 1991)

**231**

**RAMASAMY  
V.  
BRITISH CEYLON CORPORATION**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
DHEERARATNE, J., AND  
GOONEWARDENE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 60/87; CA 138/75; LT 2/1132/79.  
December 6 and 7, 1990.  
  
_Labour Tribunal proceedings - Business Undertaking (Acquisition) Act No. 35
of 1971, Sections 4 and 17 - Vesting of business undertaking \- Liability of
the undertaking.  
_  
The workman, the Managing Director of B.C.C. Ltd., sued the Respondent Company
for wrongful termination of his services in 1969.  
  
The Business Undertaking of the Respondent Company was vested in the
Government of Sri Lanka on 25.02.72. The Respondent Company moved that it be
discharged from the proceedings as the liabilities of the Company were that of
the Business Undertaking.  
  
The Labour Tribunal discharged the Company and the Court of Appeal affirmed
that order.  
  
**Held:**  
  
(i) The liability of a business undertaking which vests in the Government in
terms of Section 4(1) are under a contract when that contract subsists.
Section 4(1) does not enable the Respondent-Company to be discharged from the
Labour Tribunal proceedings.  
  
(ii) All other liabilities not covered by section 4(1) will vest with the
Government.  
  
(iii) The phrase "all the liabilities" used in Section 17 is wide enough to
cover potential liabilities which will include liabilities flowing from the
order of the Labour Tribunal in the future.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_(1) B.C.C. vs. Weerasekera_ (1982) 1 Sri L.R. 180  
  
_(2) Thileris Perera v. Eliza Nona_ (1948) 50 N.L.R. 176  
  
_(3) Deem Wall S.A. v. marketing Ltd._ W.L.R. (March 19, 1971)  
  
_(4) Weerakoon v. Hewanallika_ (1978 - 79) 2 SLR 97  
  
_(5) United Engineering Union v. Devanayagam_ (1967) 69 N.L.R. 289  
  
_(6) Walters v. Barbergh District Court_ (1982) QBD 82 LGR 235  
  
_(7) Bormelow Edwards Ltd. v. Inland Revenue Commissioner_ (1969) All E.R.
536.

**232**

**APPEAL** from Judgement of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_H. L. De Silva, P.C. with L. C. Senevirathna P.C. and T. Keenwinna_ for
applicant -appellant.  
  
_Lakshman Kadiragamar with Lalitha Senaratna_ for respondent - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

MARCH 21, 1991  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
  
This appeal relates to some interesting questions of law which have arisen in
the interpretation of certain provisions of the Business Undertakings
(Acquisition) Act No. 35 of 1971, in the process of considering the impact of
that Act on a proceeding pending before the Labour Tribunal.  
  
The appellant (Employee) sought relief from the Labour Tribunal by an
application made on 18.06.1969 for termination of his services on 11.04.1969
by the respondent - a limited liability company, the primary relief claimed
being reinstatement with back wages. The various defences taken up by the
respondent-company are immaterial for the decision of this appeal but it is
sufficient to say that the respondent - company did admit that the appellant
was removed from the office of Managing Director.  
  
When the matter was pending before the Labour Tribunal, the business
undertaking of the respondent - company vested in the government of Sri Lanka,
by primary vesting order dated 25.2.1972, made by the Minister of Finance in
terms of section 2(1)(b) of the Business Undertakings (Acquisition) Act No. 35
of 1971. Consequent to this vesting, the respondent - company moved the Labour
Tribunal to have it discharged from the proceedings, on the basis that the
liabilities of the respondent-company in respect of the matter pending before
the Labour Tribunal were liabilities of the business undertaking, which vested
in the Government of Sri Lanka with effect from 25.02.1972. The Labour
Tribunal made order discharging the respondent-company and the Court of Appeal
affirmed that order, the present appeal made by the employee is the sequel. If
such liabilities did vest with the Government, it was common ground before us
that the respondent-company should have been discharged from the proceedings.

**233**

For the proper appreciation of the points of law involved, it would be
convenient at this stage to set out the relevant provisions of the Business
Undertakings (Acquisition) Act.  
  
Section 2(1)  
  
The Minister of Finance on his own motion or at the request of any other
Minister;  
  
(a) .................................................  
  
(b) may, by order published in the Gazette, vest in the Government with effect
from such date as shall be specified in the vesting order any such business
undertaking as shall be so specified.  
  
Section 4(1) subject to the provisions of sub section (2) where any business
undertaking is acquired by or vested in the Government, all the rights and
liabilities under any contract or agreement which relates to the purposes of
that undertaking and which subsists on the date of transfer or on the primary
vesting date of that undertaking shall vest in the Government.  
  
4(2) The Minister of Finance may at any time repudiate the liabilities under
any contract or agreement referred to in subsection (1) if he is of opinion
that such liabilities were incurred mala fide, dishonestly or fraudulently.
Notice of the repudiation may be given by the competent authority to the
parties to the contract or agreement.  
  
4(3) Where the Minister of Finance under subsection (2) repudiates the
liabilities under any contract or agreement such liabilities shall be deemed
never to have vested in the Government.  
  
4(4) For the purpose of this section "liabilities" shall not include any loan
repayable to a director of any business undertaking which is acquired by or
vested in the Government or to any member of the family of such director.

**234**

That portion of section 17 which defines what a business undertaking is,
reads:-  
  
"business undertaking" means any undertaking of a commercial, industrial,
agricultural or professional nature and includes -  
  
(i) all property, movable or immovable which was used for the purposes of the
undertaking on the day immediately preceding the date of transfer or the
primary vesting date and which may be specified by the Minister of Finance in
the primary vesting order;  
  
(ii) subject to the provisions of this Act all rights, powers, privileges and
interests arising in or out of the property or business and all the
liabilities of that undertaking;  
  
(iii) all books, accounts and documents relating to or appertaining to the
business undertaking or any property of that undertaking;  
  
It may be useful at this point, for the sake of clarity, to refer to the
description of "liability" appearing in The Oxford Companion to Law by David
M. Walker (1980) pages 765 and 766, leaving out the reference to the criminal
law aspect.  
  
"Liability. The legal concept of being subject to the power of another, to a
rule of law requiring something to be done or not done. Thus, a person who
contracts to sell goods is liable to deliver them and the buyer is liable to
pay the price. Each is required by |aw to do something and can be compelled by
legal process at the other's instance to do it; the other is empowered to
exact the performance or payment. It is sometimes called subjection. The
correlative concept is power.  
  
A person is said to be under a liability when he is, or at least may be,
legally obliged to do or suffer something. Thus, one may be said to be liable
to perform, to pay, to be sued, to be imprisoned or otherwise to be subject to
some legal duty or legal consequence.

**235**

In general, liability attaches only to persons who are legally responsible; an
insane person does not generally incur any liability.  
  
Liability may arise either from a voluntary act or by force of some rule of
law. Thus, a person who enters into a contract thereby becomes liable to
perform what he has undertaken, or to pay for the counterpart performance, or
otherwise to implement his part of the contract. If he acts in breach of
contract, he becomes liable by law to pay damages in compensation for the
breach. Similarly, if a man acts in breach of any of the general duties made
incumbent on him by statute or common law such as to refrain from injuring his
neighbour, or to maintain his tenant's house in reasonable repair, or to
exercise diligence in administering property of which he is trustee, he incurs
legal liability to make good his omission or default . . . civil liability may
arise from many grounds, from the natural relations of the family, from
undertaking or contract, the commission of a harm, from trust, statute, or
decree of court...  
  
The term liability is sometimes used of the sanction or penalty itself. Thus a
debt is spoken of as a liability.  
  
The term is also used in the analysis of rights and duties (q.v) as a synonym
for 'subjection' and the correlative of 'power'.  
  
From the foregoing description, it would be noticed that the liabilities of
the respondent-company as an employer, in relation to the appellant as an
employee, consequent upon the termination of the tatter's services, could
spring from four different sources, namely:-  
  
(i) under the contract of employment (unquantified).  
  
(ii) by a judgment of a competent civil court exercising its ordinary
jurisdiction in relation to the contract, (quantified); but this situation
does not arise here.  
  
(iii) by operation of the statute - the Industrial Disputes Act which empowers
the Labour Tribunal in the exercise of its just and equitable jurisdiction to
grant relief, (unquantified)  
  
(iv) by the order of the Labour Tribunal (quantified).

**236**

The liabilities of the business undertaking which qualify for vesting in the
Government in terms of section 4(1), are those under a contract when that
contract subsists. The operation of section 4(1) in similar circumstances came
up for consideration before this court in the case of British Ceylon
Corporation V. Weerasekera (1). In that case Victor Perera J. stated at page 1
& 6 as follows:  
  
"In this case the employees were dismissed in 1963 and there was a termination
of their contracts of employment. The company itself had repudiated the
contract of employment and the employees were entitled to claim contractual
damages if they had gone to the courts. Therefore at the date of the vesting
there was no subsisting contract but there remained only a right or liability
to be determined. By resorting to arbitation under the Industrial Disputes Act
they could have obtained reliefs on equitable grounds outside the contract
such as reinstatement if the termination was held to be unjustified . . .  
  
With respect to Victor Perera J. the conclusion reached that there was no
subsisting contract in those (so indeed in the present) circumstances, does
not appear to me to be based on a correct legal foundation.  
  
A contract cannot come to an end by a unilateral act of an employer and it
cannot be generally extinguished otherwise than by performance, payment or
reparation, mutual agreement, operation of law or being set aside by a
competent court, and so long as the bond that unites the parties - vinculum
juris' remains, the contract subsists. See Thideris Perera v. Eliza Nona (2);
Decro - Wall S.A. v. Marketing Ltd. (CA.) (3) and Weerakoon v. Hewamallika (4)
page 108.  
  
However, the difficulty of the application of section 4(1) to the facts of the
present case, appears to come from the word 'under1 in that section. The
proceedings in the Labour Tribunal, no doubt stem from the relationship of
master and servant established by the contract of employment between the
appellant and the respondent - company but it could not be said that those
proceedings, are concerned with liabilities arising 'under* the contract,
particularly because section 31(5) (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act states
as follows:-

**237**

Any relief or redress may be granted by a Labour Tribunal to a workman upon an
application made under subsection (1) notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in any contract of service between him and his employee,  
  
For the above reasons I-hold that section 4(1) does not enable the respondent
- company to get itself discharged from the pending proceedings of the Labour
Tribunal.  
  
I shall now proceed to consider the applicability of the provisions of section
17\. If one looks at the scheme of the Business Undertakings (Acquisition)
Act, in relation to the vesting of liabilities of a business undertaking with
the Government, such liabilities intended by the legislature to be vested
could conveniently be grouped into two categories; namely:-  
  
those liabilities under a subsisting contract or agreement in terms of section
4(1), not repudiated by the Minister in terms of section 4(2) as those
incurred mala fide, dishonestly or fraudulently.  
  
in terms of section 17 (having being caught up in the definition of business
undertaking) "subject to the provisions of the Act", all the liabilities of
that undertaking (read with section 2(1 )(b) ).  
  
The term 'subject to the provisions of this Act' would mean save and except as
otherwise provided by the Act; so that the clear intention of the legislature
appears to be that all other liabilities, not covered by section 4(1), shall
vest with the Government, lock, stock and barrel. The Minister's freedom of
repudiation has been limited to liabilities under subsisting contracts and
agreements specified in section 4(1) only and that seems to have been the
necessity of drafting that part of section 17 in the present shape it has
taken so as to include every other liability in relation to the business
undertaking.  
  
It is contended on behalf of the appellant, on the authority of the majority
judgment of the Privy Council in United Engineering Union v. Devanayagam (5)
that the Labour Tribunals, unlike the ordinary Courts which adjudicate between
existing rights of parties, create new rights. It is therefore contended that
the liabilities of the respondent-

**238**

company will arise only in the future, when the decision of the Labour
Tribunal is pronounced and that section 17 deals with only liabilities in esse
not with potential liabilities. I would like at this juncture to refer to the
following illuminating passage in the minority judgment in Devanayagam's case
(supra) appearing at page 309, with which I am in respectful agreement.  
  
"It is the statute which creates the right to equitable relief by giving to
the workman the option of going to the Labour Tribunal to ask for it instead
of taking what the common law gives him. One method of altering the law on
master and servant would be to enact a new set of rules, as has been done to
some extent in the United Kingdom by the statutes we have mentioned, leaving
to the court only the task of interpretation and application. Another method
frequently employed is to give fresh powers to Court. Under the latter method
the right comes into existence as soon as there is created the relationship,
in this case that of employer and workman, from which it springs, it does not
have to wait for life until the relief granted is spelt out in words by the
court."  
  
If liabilities also flow from the statute as I have already held, they would
not be potential liabilities in the pending proceedings and they exist
unqualified until they are quantified by the order of the Labour Tribunal. The
Dictionary of English Law by Earl Jowitt (Volume 2 1959) at 1085 states.  
  
"Liability, the condition of being actually or potentially subject to an
obligation, either generally as including every kind of obligation, or, in a
more special sense to denote inchoate, future, unascertained or imperfect
obligations as opposed to debts, the essence of which they are ascertained and
certain. Thus when a person becomes surety for another he makes himself
liable, though it is unascertained in what obligation or debt the liability
may ultimately result."  
  
In any event, the words 'all the liabilities' in section 17 are wide enough
even to cover potential liabilities which will include liabilities flowing
from the order of the Labour Tribunal in the future. See also Walters v.
Barbergh District council (6); The Times 21st June 1983; and Bromilow and
Edwards Ltd., v. Inland Revenue Commissioners (7). It was contended on behalf
of the appellant that since a 'business undertaking' is not a legal person and
therefore incapable

**239**

of acquiring any liabilities, that part of section 17 which speaks of 'all the
liabilities of that undertaking' is meaningless and inoperative, in the result
no liabilities whatsoever vest with the Government in terms of that section.
The intention of the legislature appears to me to be quite clear that the
section refers to the proprietor's liabilities in relation to the business
undertaking. As said by Megarry J. in Bromilow and Edwards Ltd., V. Inland
Revenue Commissioners (Supra) " I have no hesitation in choosing the
interpretation which makes sense and makes this part of the subsection work,
as against one which reduces it to dust".  
  
For the above reasons I hold that in terms of section 17, the respondent-
company has been correctly discharged from the proceedings. The appeal is
dismissed with costs.  
  
**AMERASINGHE J. - I agree.  
  
GOONEWARDENE J. - I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/2.html_  

