##  Sai Nona v. Maggie Silva and Another - SLR - 111, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989]
LKSC 2; (1989) 2 Sri LR 111 (21 September 1989)

**

111

SAI NONA  
v.  
MAGGIE SILVA AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE J., AND KULATUNGA, J.  
S.C. No. 33/86  
SC LA No. 20/86  
CA APPLICATION No. 1014/79  
JULY 10, 11, 17, 19, 20, 27 AND AUGUST 01, 1989

_

Acquisition under the Finance Act by People's Bank - Section 71(1)(2)(3)of the
Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963 amended by Law, No. 16 of 1973 - Natural justice

_

The premises sought to be acquired by the Bank under section 71 of the Finance
Act No. 11 of 1963 amended by Law No. 16 of 1973 were owned by CK the husband
of the appellant. He by Deed No. 21446 of 05.02.1964 sold it to D subject to
the right to obtain a retransfer of the land upon payment of the sum of
Rs.1,250/- with interest at 16% p.a. within 3 years of 05.02.1964. CK died on
26.04.65 leaving no issue and without obtaining a reconveyance. D transferred
the land to M a sister of CK by Deed No. 423 of 17.06.65. The Supreme Court in
another case held the transfer to M was subject to the condition in Deed No.
21446. S the widow of CK made an application

**112**

dated 02.09.76 to the People's Bank for redemption of the premises by
acquisition under s. 71(3) of the Finance Act.

M. filed objections to the acquisition and the parties were summoned for an
inquiry on 15.11.77. M was present with her lawyers. S was present also but
moved for a postponement as her lawyer could not be present. This was refused.
The inquiring officer of the Bank made order that in the event of S's lawyers
filing objections these should be copied to both Counsel representing M.
Thereafter submissions against the acquisition were recorded in the presence
of the parties including junior Counsel of S who had arrived by then. S. then
applied for a date for her senior Counsel to appear and make his statement.
This was fixed for 14.12.77. On 28.11.77 the Attorney for S submitted written
counter objections. There was no proof of service of these counter objections
on the counsel for M by the lawyers of S or by the Bank. On 14.12.77 the
lawyer of M had appeared but S was absent and unrepresented. On 15.12.77 M's
lawyer wrote praying for dismissal of S's application. On 14.12.77 the Bank
had written to M's lawyer to call over to make his submissions before
25.02.77. M wrote to the Bank nominating her lawyer to attend the Bank for
discussions. On 13.10.78 the Bank found against M and made his determination
to proceed with the acquisition.

**

Held -

**

(1)  The Bank is not compelled to adopt a particular procedure but what
procedure it adopts must be made known to the parties. If any party is
prejudiced for want of such knowledge it may result in a denial of natural
justice depending on the extent of the prejudice caused.

(2)  The notices of the inquiry give the impression that the scheduled inquiry
is a formal inquiry. When on 15.12.77 the inquiry was postponed to 14.12.77
the petitioner-respondent (M) was entitled to expect the formal inquiry to
continue.

(3)  The failure to issue a copy of the objection's which the inquiring
officer himself had ordered to be copied to the lawyer of the other party
discloses a lack of the judicial spirit required of an inquirer.

(4)  While seeking the submissions of S's lawyer the Bank's only contact with
M was for the purpose of persuading her to amicably settle the dispute.

(5)  the duty of making the correct decision was exclusively on the Bank and
there was no burden on the lawyer of the owner to activate the Bank.

(6)  Whether or not the failure to permit oral hearings would constitute a
denial of natural justice will depend on the facts and circumstances and the
issue in each case.

**

Cases referred to:

**

1\.  _Perera v. Perera_ 41 NLR 344, 346

2\.  _Maggie Silva v. Sai Nona_ 78 NLR 313

3\.  _Perera v. People's Bank_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 39

4. _Emaliyana Perera v. People's Bank_ [1987] 1 Sri LR 181

5\.  _Morgan v. United States_ 298 US 468

**113**

6. _Goldberg v. Kelly_ US 397, 254 at 297

7. _Board of Education v. Rice_ [1911] AC 179

8. _Local Government Board v. Arlidge_ [1915] AC 120, 140

9. _Wiseman v. Borneman._ [1969] 3 All ER 274

10. _Shariff v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani Residents_ 67 NLR 433

11. _Pett. v. Greyhound Racing Association Ltd._ [1968] 2 AC 545, 549

12. _Board of Trustees of Maradana Mosque v. Minister of Education_ 68 NLR 217

13. _Kanda v. Government of the Federation of Malaya_ [1962] AC 322

14. _R v. Wareham Magistrate's Court, ex parte Seldon_ [1988] 1 All ER 746, 753

15. _Clayton v. Chief Constable of Norfolk_ [1983] 1 All ER 984, 992

16. _R v. Assim_ [1966] 2 All ER 887 - 888

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal

_

N.R.M. Daluwatte, P.C._ with _J.C. Boange_ for 1st respondent-appellant (widow
of original owner seeking acquisition)

_

Dr. H.W. Jayewardene, Q.C._ with _Bimal Rajapakse, Harsha Amersekere_ and _H.

Cabral _for the petitioner-respondent (present owner)

_

Faiz Mustapha, P.C._ with _Migel Hatch_ for 2nd respondent-respondent (Bank)

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

September 21, 1989.

**

KULATUNGA. J.

**

This is an appeal by the 1st respondent-appellant (hereinafter referred to as
the appellant) from a judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 31.01.86 by which
that Court quashed a determination dated 18.01.79 made by the 2nd respondent-
respondent (The People's Bank) for the acquisition of certain premises owned
by the petitioner-respondent in terms of Section 71(1) of the Finance Act
No.11 of 1963 as amended by Law No. 16 of 1973. The Court of Appeal held that
the petitioner-respondent was entitled to a writ of certiorari quashing the
said determination on the ground that it had been made without giving a fair
hearing to the petitioner-respondent, in violation of the principles of
natural justice.

The premises sought to be acquired by virtue of the impugned determination
consist of a land called Paragahawatte alias Kosgahawatte (2 Acres. 0R. 36P.)
which was originally owned by one Cornelis de Silva Karunaratne, the 'husband
of the appellant who by

**114**

deed No. 21446 of 05.02.64 sold it to Daniel Fernando subject to the condition
that if the vendor repaid the vendee the sum of Rs.1250/- with interest
thereon at the rate of 16% per annum within a period of 3 years from 05.02.64,
the vendee would reconvey the premises to the vendor. The vendor Karunaratne
died on 26.04.65 without obtaining the reconveyance. Daniel Fernando
transferred the said land to the petitioner-respondent, a sister of the said
Karunaratne by deed No. 423 dated 17.06.65.

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, QC, learned Counsel for the petitioner-respondent
submitted that by this Deed No. 423, the petitioner-respondent redeemed the
premises from Daniel Fernando and became the absolute owner thereof. He argued
that the obligation on the heirs of the original owner Karunaratne is joint
and several and hence it was competent for the petitioner-respondent to redeem
the entirety of the premises.

Mr. Daluwatte, PC, learned Counsel for the appellant contended that the
obligation on the heirs of Karunaratne is joint and hence the discharge of the
obligation and the Deed had to be joint. He cited Weeramantry Vol. I parts III
& IV (1967) Sections 543 and 559 and the decision in _Perera v. Perera_ (1) in
support.

These submissions are relevant to the question as to the extent of the said
premises which the appellant was entitled to redeem through the People's Bank
by an acquisition under the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as amended by Law No.
16 of 1973 and the jurisdiction of the People's Bank- in that regard, an issue
which the petitioner-respondent raised both before the said Bank and in her
application to the Court of Appeal but in respect of which we do not have a
finding either by the Bank or by the Court of Appeal.

I am of the view that in the absence of a finding by the Court below or by the
People's Bank it would not be appropriate for this Court to determine the
aforesaid issue for the first time. However, as I shall discuss later in this
judgment, the submissions of Counsel on this issue are of relevance in
considering whether the Court of Appeal was right in its opinion that the
impugned determination for the acquisition of the property was made without
giving a fair hearing to the petitioner-respondent, in violation of the
principles of natural justice.

According to the amended answer filed by the appellant in DC Negombo 1208/L
(exhibit â€˜B') and the decision in _Maggie Silva v. Sai

_

**115**

_

Nona _(2) the transfer of the said premises by Daniel Fernando to the
petitioner-respondent on deed No. 423 was subject to the condition contained
in deed No. 21446 whereby the original owner Karunaratne reserved for himself,
his heirs, executors, administrators and assigns the right to obtain a
reconveyance of the same before 05.02.67.

According to the pleadings before the Court of Appeal, the said Karunaratne
died issueless and without leaving a last will and leaving as his heirs the
appellant (his wife) who would be entitled to 1/2 of his estate and other
heirs including the petitioner-respondent (his sister) who would be entitled
to the balance 1/2.

None of the heirs including the appellant on whom the right to obtain a
reconveyance of the said premises had devolved upon the demise of the said
Karunaratne applied for any reconveyance from the petitioner-respondent within
the stipulated period ending on 05.02.67. Consequently, the petitioner-
respondent became the absolute owner of the said premises. As the appellant
continued to possess the premises even after 05.02.67 the petitioner-
respondent sued her for a declaration of title, ejectment and damages in DC
Negombo 1208/L and succeeded in appeal to the Supreme Court. _Maggie Silva v.
Sai Nona_ (Supra).

Pursuant to the order of the Supreme Court, the appellant was ejected from the
said premises and possession thereof was given to the petitioner-respondent.
Thereafter, the appellant made an application dated 02.09.76 to the People's
Bank for the redemption of the premises by acquisition in terms of the
provisions of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as amended.

The People's Bank inquired into the appellant's application and on 18.01.79
made its determination under Section 71(3) of the Act for the acquisition of
the premises under reference (exhibit â€˜K1'). This was communicated to the
petitioner-respondent on 19.01.79 (exhibit 'K'). The petitioner-respondent
challenged the said determination in the Court below on two grounds namely
want or excess of jurisdiction and violation of the principles of natural
justice.

Briefly, the position taken by the petitioner-respondent in the Court below
was that after the Supreme Court declared her rights to the premises under
reference as the absolute owner the provisions of the Finance Act had no
application and the appellant had no rights whatsoever against her; that in
any event in view of the fact that the

**116**

appellant's entitlement as an heir being only to 1/2 of the estate of
Karunaratne, the original owner of the premises, she could not claim any
rights to the entirety of the said premises. The petitioner-respondent also
urged that the Bank had denied her a fair hearing before making the impugned
determination in that whilst it was her expectation, induced by the conduct of
the Bank, that a formal inquiry in the presence of both parties would be held
before making the final decision, the Bank failed to make such inquiry.

A determination under Section 71(3) of the Act is reviewable for want of or
excess of jurisdiction either if the bank is not authorised by Section 71(1)
to acquire the same or if Section 71(2) restricts the right of the Bank to
acquire the same. The finality clause contained in Section 71(3) immunes a
termination which conforms to the said provisions - _Perera v. People's Bank_
(3), _Emaliyana Perera vs. People's Bank_ (4). However the judgment of the
Court of Appeal shows that Counsel for the People's Bank had contended that in
view of the finality clauses and the provisions of Section 22 of the
Interpretation Ordinance as amended by Act No. 18 of 1972, the determination
of the Bank can be challenged only on the ground that it is' contrary to the
rules of natural justice. Counsel for the appellant had made some submissions
relevant to the issue of want of or excess of jurisdiction but the Counsel for
the petitioner-respondent appears to have been content to present his case
only on the ground that the impugned decision is not in accordance with the
principles of natural justice; and the Court decided the case only on that
ground. I shall now proceed to consider the facts relevant to the impugned
inquiry.

In her written objections to the proposed acquisition forwarded to the Bank,
the petitioner-respondent set out the background facts ending with the
consolidation of her title to the premises in dispute in terms of the Supreme
Court judgment in 78 NLR 313 and contended that the provisions of Section 71
of the Finance Act have no application and that in any event in view of the
devolution of rights of the original owner on his heirs, the applicant may
claim interests only in respect of a half share of the premises; and as such
the appellant's application (for an acquisition of the entire property) is not
tenable (exhibit 'E').

Thereafter, the parties were summoned for an inquiry on 15.11.77. They were
also informed that in default of appearance, a decision will be taken on the
available material (exhibit 'H'). On 15.11.77, the

**117**

petitioner-respondent was present with messrs J.L. Fernandopillai and E.B.K.
de Zoysa, Attorneys-at-law. The appellant was also present and applied for a
date as her lawyer was not free on that day. This was refused. The inquiring
officer also made an order that in the event of the appellant's lawyer filing
any submissions it should be copied to both Counsel representing the
petitioner-respondent. Thereafter, submissions against the acquisition were
recorded in the presence of the parties including the junior Counsel for the
appellant who had arrived by this time.

The record of the proceedings had on 15.11.77 (exhibit `X') shows that on that
day, Counsel for the petitioner-respondent had confined his submissions to an
outline of the background facts of the case at the end of which he urged that
the petitioner-respondent be permitted to retain the property sought to be
acquired and strongly objected to the proposed acquisition. The appellant was
not ready to make submissions and applied for a date for her Senior Counsel to
appear and to make his statement; this was fixed for 14.12.77 at 2.00 p.m.

On 28.11.77, Mr. Nagahawatte, Attorney-at-Law submitted written counter
objections on behalf of the appellant (exhibit â€˜Y') and by a covering letter
which is in the Bank file of papers applied for a date to support the same.
The Bank's file which had been submitted on the directions of the Court of
Appeal shows that on 08.12.77 the Bank had written to Mr. Nagahawatte fixing
19.12.77 to support the counter objections on which Mr. Nagahawatte failed to
appear. This is also admitted in the affidavits filed on behalf of the Bank in
the Court of Appeal.

There is no evidence to establish that the counter objections filed by Mr.
Nagahawatte had been copied to the petitioner-respondent's lawyers as ordered
by the inquiring officer on 15.11.77. The said objections allege that Daniel
Fernando was not competent to transfer the property until after 05.02.67 and
as such the transfer to the petitioner-respondent on deed No.473 dated
17.06.65 is invalid. The said objections do not answer the challange to the
proposed acquisition based on the ground of the devolution of interests of the
original owner Karunaratne on his heirs and assume that the appellant is
competent to redeem the entirety of the premises through the Bank.

It is significant that despite the lapse of Mr. Nagahawatte to copy the
appellant's counter objections to the lawyers for the

**118**

petitioner-respondent in terms of the inquiring officer's order on 15.11.77,
the Bank failed to cause the same to be served on them or on the petitioner-
respondent or to summon the petitioner-respondent or her representative to
appear on 19.12.77 for which date Mr. Nagahawatte had been specially noticed.

In the meantime there is no record in the Bank file of the proceedings had on
14.12.77 to which date the inquiry had been postponed on 15.11.77. However,
according to a letter dated 15.12.77 addressed to the Bank by Mr. E.B.K. de
Zoysa Attorney-at-Law for the petitioner-respondent (exhibit 'I') Mr. M.K.D.S.
Gunatilake had appeared for the petitioner-respondent on 14.12.77 for the
inquiry but the appellant was absent. In the said letter Mr. de Zoysa states
that on 15.11.77, Counsel had made submissions against the appellant's
application and prays for a dismissal of the application on the ground of the
failure of the appellant to appear on 14.12.77.

According to the Bank file, on 14.12.77 the Bank had written to the
petitioner-respondent to come for a discussion and Mr. Nagahawatte to call
over to make his submissions, before 25.02.77. The affidavits filed by the
Bank in the Court of Appeal state that Mr. Nagahawatte failed to call over as
requested. On 02.03.78, the petitioner-respondent sent a letter to the Bank
through Mr. M.K.D.S. Gunatilake in reply to the Bank's letter of 14.12.77
authorising him to hold discussions and reminding the Bank that her Counsel
had made submissions on her behalf on 15.11.77. She also renewed her request
for a dismissal of the appellant's application for default of appearance on
14.12.77 (exhibit â€˜J').

Official minutes on folio 51 of the Bank file indicate that on 02.03.78, the
inquiring officer acting on the instructions of the Manager, Land Redemption
Branch had endeavoured to persuade the representative of the petitioner-
respondent to amicably settle the dispute but that the representative was not
agreeable to enter into a settlement. Thereafter, on 09.03.77, Mr. M.K.D.S.
Gunatilake wrote to the Bank applying for a copy of the written statement
which had been submitted with reference to the proposed acquisition by the
appellant or by her lawyer on payment of the usual charges. This shows that he
had now become aware of the existence of the counter objections which had been
made in support of the acquisition. However, there is no evidence in the Bank
file that a copy of the counter objections had been issued as requested.

**119**

On the other hand, according to an undated letter written by the bank to Mr.
Nagahawatte, Attorney-at-Law enclosing a copy of the objections made by the
petitioner-respondent (folio 61 of the Bank file) the Bank had called for
counter submissions more particularly regarding Clause 13 i.e. on the legal
issues arising from the devolution of title consequent to the death of the
original owner of the land. Mr. Nagahawatte's undated counter submissions had
been received and filed at folio 63 of the Bank file. These facts are also
admitted in the affidavits filed on behalf of the Bank in the Court of Appeal.

On 13.10.78, the Manager Land Redemption Branch made his final report on the
proposed acquisition wherein he states inter alia, "the objection based on the
interests of heirs cannot be maintained under the provisions of the Finance
Act as Law No. 16 of 1973 considers the wife stepping into the shoes of the
husband to redeem a land lost on a conditional transfer and therefore matters
of testamentary dispositions are not taken into consideration". He therefore
recommends that a determination be made to acquire the property (folio 66 of
the Bank file). On 08.12.78, the Board of Directors of the Bank, acting on the
said report, decided to acquire the property.

During the argument, the learned Queen's Counsel objected to the Counsel for
the appellant reading from the Bank file any documents other than those which
have been formally produced. I have examined the entire Bank file as this
Court is not affected by the said objection in that firstly, the material I
have discovered merely confirms or clarifies the case for the parties to this
appeal; secondly, it is within the power of a Court exercising review
jurisdiction to call for and examine the record, in the interests of justice
and for the effectual exercise of such jurisdiction; thirdly, I also venture
to advance the criticism that with all respect to the Court of Appeal, we are
hampered by the fact that the judgment in appeal has failed to examine the
issues in some depth but for which failure this appeal may not have presented
so much difficulty as appeared to exist at the hearing; fourthly, it would be
impossible to properly apply the relevant legal principles to the case without
a thorough ascertainment of the facts.

Mr. Daluwatte, PC in support of the appeal submitted that the Court of Appeal
was in error in quashing the impugned determination on the ground that it had
been made in violation of the rules of

**120**

natural justice; that in deciding the question, each case must be considered
on its own facts and circumstances; that no rigid rule can be laid down; that
the view taken by the Court of Appeal is technical; and the conclusion that
the bank failed to hold a fair inquiry was reached without a proper
application of the relevant legal principles to the facts of this case.

The learned President's Counsel contended that the petitioner-respondent was
given an adequate opportunity of presenting her case; that no hindrance or
impediment was placed by the Bank in that regard; that consequently she
submitted her written objection to the acquisition (exhibit 'E'); that on
15.11.77 her Counsel made oral submissions (exhibit 'X'); that her submission
based on intestate succession has no relevance; that in any event the said
submission in respect of which the Bank obtained the submissions of the
appellant's Counsel is a matter of law and such consultation did not prejudice
the petitioner-respondent; that the failure to issue a copy of the appellant's
counter submissions (exhibit 'Y') caused no prejudice to the petitioner-
respondent; that no legal bar to the acquisition has been shown to exist; that
the grounds urged against the acquisition only go to the discretion of the
Bank which cannot be questioned by certiorari; that the only ground adduced in
the Court of Appeal was the alleged denial of natural justice; that a fair
hearing was given at the inquiry on 15.11.77; and that the admissions in the
exhibits 'X' and 'J' rebut the complaint as to the lack of a sufficient
inquiry.

Mr. Daluwatte, PC complained that the finding of the Court of Appeal was due
to the erroneous opinion it entertained namely that the bank was obliged to
continue the oral hearing after 15.11.77 and to dismiss the application for
default of appearance on the part of the appellant on 14.12.77 whereas the law
does not require such hearings. He submitted that the Court of Appeal thought
in terms of an inquiry in that sense and not an adequate opportunity to be
heard, which is all that the law requires. He urged that the procedure adopted
by the Bank was neither unreasonable nor unfair.

Dr. H.W. Jayewardene, QC opposing the appeal contended that the Court of
Appeal reached the correct conclusion on a review of the relevant facts and
its judgment is fully justified in the light of the applicable law. He
submitted that the scope of the audi alteram partem rule is now wider and
means the right to a fair hearing and determination of the broadest amplitude;
that it is a principle of justice

**121**

rooted in the Common Law in England and embedded in the due process clause
(14th Amendment) in the American Constitution; and accordingly the State shall
not deprive any person of life, liberty or property, without an opportunity to
be heard in defence of his rights. He drew our attention to Section 22 of the
Interpretation Ordinance (Cap.2) as amended by Act No. 18 of 1972 which has
codified the principle relating to natural justice.

The learned Queen's Counsel argued that under Section 71(1) of the Finance Act
No. 11 of 1963 as amended by Law No. 16 of 1973 the People's Bank has to be
satisfied of the case for acquisition after giving a fair opportunity to the
party affected to be heard which is a fundamental requirement of the common
law in such cases. He contended that the Bank had failed to give a fair
hearing to the petitioner-respondent before making its decision in that-

(a) it failed to provide the petitioner-respondent with a copy of  the
application for acquisition;

(b) it misled the petitioner-respondent to the belief that the formal inquiry
which commenced on 15.11.77 would be continued when it was postponed for
14.12.77 but failed to continue the inquiry or to dismiss the application for
acquisition for default of appearance by the appellant or to make a decision
on the available material as stated in the notices of inquiry (exhibits 'P'
and 'H');

(c) it failed to provide the petitioner-respondent with a copy of

the appellant's counter objections (exhibit â€˜Y');

(d) it heard the Attorney-at-Law for the appellant behind the back of the
petitioner-respondent on the very issue raised by the latter, namely, the
legal issue arising from the devolution of title consequent to the death of
the original owner of the land. Neither the petitioner-respondent nor her
lawyer was informed of such further inquiry.

It was also submitted that the statements of the petitioner-respondent in
exhibits â€˜I' and â€˜J' that her lawyers had made submissions on all the matters
should be considered in the context i.e. those statements were made when she
was unaware of the hearing which the Bank was giving to the appellant and that
in any event even if her lawyers had been remiss in stating her case or in
pursuing steps she was entitled to a fair hearing at the hands of the

**122**

Bank having regard to the consequences of a decision to acquire her land. Our
attention was also drawn to the fact that the bank has not appealed against
the judgment of the Court below. This, it was submitted, is another ground
against interfering with that judgment.

Learned Counsel cited a large number of authorities all of which are no doubt
very helpful for a full appreciation of the legal principles involved in this
sphere. However, I shall refer only to those authorities which are immediately
relevant to the issues before us.

Both in Britain and America, the right to a hearing connotes much the same
opportunities and formalities such as the right to an oral hearing; to be
apprised of the case on the other side; to present evidence and argument; to
rebut adverse evidence by cross-examination and other appropriate means; to
have a reasoned decision; to have a transcribed record of the hearing; and to
appear with Counsel. Legal Control of Government (Administrative Law in
Britain and the United States): Schwartz and Wade (1972) 249.

However, in both systems there are no rigid rules as to which of those
opportunities and formalities should be conformed to ensure a fair hearing
except that in the United States, in view of the fact that this right is
rooted in the Constitution. Courts tend to narrow down the distinction between
the procedure in Courts and before administrative tribunals which distinction
is evident in Britian, e.g. as regards the need for personal hearings by the
decision making authority - _Morgan v. United States_ (5). The opportunity to
be heard must be tailored to the capacities and circumstances of those who are
to be heard - _Goldberg v. Kelly_ (6).

The Courts in Sri Lanka have invariably resorted to English decisions for
elucidation. The following dicta of the _Lord Chancellor in Board of Education
v. Rice_ (7) are in point.

"In such cases the Board of Education will have to ascertain the law and
ascertain the facts. I need not add that in doing either they must act in good
faith and fairly listen to both sides, for that is the duty lying upon anyone
who decides anything. But I do not think they are bound to treat such a
question as though it were a trial. They have no power to administer an oath
and need not examine witnesses. They can obtain information in any way they
think best, always giving a fair opportunity to those who are parties in the
controversy for correcting or contradicting any relevant statement prejudicial
to their view".

**123**

In the case of _Local Government Board v. Arlidge_ (8), Lord Parmoor added the
following refinement as a guide to the application of the principle of natural
justice:

"Where, however, the question of propriety of procedure is raised in a hearing
before some tribunal other than a Court of. Law there is no obligation to
adopt the regular forms of legal procedure. It is sufficient if the case has
been heard in a judicial spirit and in accordance with the principles of
substantial justice.

In determining whether the principles of substantial justice have been
complied with in matters of procedure, regard must be had necessarily to the
nature of the issue to be determined and the constitution of the tribunal".

Lord Morris in _Wiseman v. Borneman_ (9) stated -

"We often speak of the rules of natural justice. But there is nothing rigid or
mechanical about them. What they comprehend has been analysed and described in
many authorities. But this analysis must bring into relief rather their spirit
and their inspiration than any precision of definition or precision as to
application. We do not search for prescriptions which will lay down exactly
what must, in various divergent situations be done. The principles and
procedures are to be applied which, in any particular situation or set of
circumstances, are right and just and fair. Natural justice, it has been said,
is only "fair play in action".

These decisions lay down the principle that a tribunal acting in a quasi
judicial capacity must ascertain the law and the facts hearing the case in a
judicial spirit. In the absence of specific provision, it may adopt its own
procedure provided that such procedure is substantially fair by the parties to
the controversy having regard to the nature of the issues involved, and the
constitution of the tribunal. The procedure to be applied would depend on the
circumstances of each case. It is apparent that the flexibility of procedure
is permitted not for the convenience of the tribunal but in the interest of
efficiency and justice to the affected parties.

It follows that apart from reiterating the general principles and deciding the
case before us in conformity with such principles, it would not be advisable
to lay down any rigid procedure which may be followed by the People's Bank in
making a determination under

**124**

Section 71 of the Finance Act No. 11 of 1963 as amended. Thus, in a particular
case, the issues may be limited to the ascertainment of the existence of the
requisite preconditions under section 71 of the Act in which event each party
would be aware of the case for the other side without the necessity for deep
research or acute legal controversy; and the procedure appropriate to such a
case may be determined accordingly. The instant case is different in that it
involves a complicated question of law consequent upon the devolution of
interests on the heirs of the original owner of the premises sought to be
acquired. Whether the procedure adopted by the bank has been fair has to be
decided in that context and in the light of the conduct of the bank which came
in for considerable criticism by the learned Counsel for the petitioner-
respondent.

I now proceed to examine the submissions of learned Counsel. I do not agree
that the failure to issue a copy of the application for acquisition to the
petitioner-respondent can be subject to serious criticism even though it might
have been helpful if the same were made available. As required by Section
71(2A)(a) of the Act, the Bank has notified her of the fact of such
application (exhibit â€˜C'). There is no legal requirement as to the form in
which an application may be made; nor is there any provision which enjoins the
bank to furnish a copy of the application to the owner of the premises. In its
notice under Section 71(2A) the bank has referred to the relevant provisions
of the law under which the applicant's application was being entertained which
in my view is sufficient compliance with the law. The said notice was followed
up by a request to the petitioner-respondent to forward her objections if any
to the proposed acquisition (exhibit 'D') which she did by exhibit 'E'.

I do not agree with the submission that the objections of the owner only go to
the discretion of the bank and that the issue based on intestate succession to
the original owner of the premises is irrelevant. The decision of the Supreme
Court in 78 NLR 313 declaring the petitioner-respondent to be the owner of the
premises under deed no.473 is not open to challenge. However, that decision
may not be an absolute bar to an application for acquisition of such premises.
In the context, the intestate succession to the original owner is relevant in
that it raises the issue as to whether the appellant is entitled to seek to
redeem the entirety of such premises which issue was raised in the objections
of the petitioner-respondent.

The complaint that the bank has failed to continue the formal

**125**

inquiry which was commenced on 15.11.77 and thereafter entertained submissions
for the appellant behind the back of the petitioner-respondent is worthy of
examination. No doubt the bank is not compelled to adopt a particular
procedure but what procedure it adopts should be made known to the parties. If
any party is prejudiced for want of such knowledge, it may result in a denial
of natural justice depending on the extent of the prejudice caused.

The notices of inquiry (exhibit â€˜P' and 'H') give the impression that the
scheduled inquiry is a formal inquiry. The notices require the parties to
attend, and inform that in default a decision would be made on the available
material. I therefore agree that when on 15.11.77 the inquiry was postponed to
14.12.77, the petitioner-respondent was entitled to expect the formal inquiry
to continue. In the absence of information to her of any change of the
procedure and notice of the counter objections (exhibit â€˜Y') filed on behalf
of the appellant, the petitioner-respondent had reason to apply for dismissal
of the application for default of the appellant's appearance on 14.12.77 on
the assumption that her objections to the proposed acquisition had not been
answered.

The inquiring officer himself was aware of the need to hold a fair inquiry.
This is borne out by the fact that he directed that any submissions which may
be made by the appellant's lawyer should be copied to the petitioner-
respondent's lawyers. Written counter objections (exhibit 'Y') were made but
not copied as directed; nor did the Bank issue a copy thereof to the
petitioner-respondent or her lawyers. It does not appear to have been done
even after her representative M.K.D.S. Gunatilake made a written request for
it on 09.03.78.

In the meantime, on 08.12.77, the Bank fixed 19.12.77 for the appellant's
lawyer to support the counter objections when he could have been heard in the
presence of the petitioner-respondent on 14.12.77 to which date the inquiry
had been postponed on 15.11.77. Even thereafter the inquiring officer was well
aware of the need to hold a fair inquiry. This is borne out by the fact that
he called upon both parties to call over on 25.02.78. Mr. Nagahawatte failed
to turn up whilst the petitioner-respondent's representative met the inquiring
officer on 02.03.78 and confirmed the opposition to the proposed acquisition.

By letters â€˜I' and â€˜J', the petitioner had clearly requested the bank

**126**

to reject the appellant's application on the ground of the latter's default of
appearance on 14.12.77. If the Bank wished to entertain written submissions
the Bank should have informed the petitioner-respondent of the fact that the
inquiry was not complete and given her the opportunity of countering any
further submissions in favour of the acquisition. However, the Bank kept her
in the dark. On the other hand, Mr. Nagahawatte was supplied with a copy of
the petitioner-respondent's objections and was requested to make his
submissions particularly on the legal issue consequent upon the devolution of
title on the death of the original owner. It was therefore natural that the
petitioner-respondent was completely taken by surprise when she received the
impugned determination (exhibit â€˜K1') on 19.01.79.

Mr. Daluwatte, PC argued that the failure to give a copy of the counter
objections of the appellant to the petitioner-respondent did not prejudice the
latter as these objections did not add to the relevant material known to both
parties and that any additions only comprised mere legal submissions.
Considered in isolation this may be correct. Even on the law, I find that
these counter objections do not touch the vital issue of law which the
petitioner-respondent raised. Yet it is not possible to exonerate the Bank on
this lapse. Firstly, the failure to issue a copy of the objections which the
inquiring officer himself had ordered to be copied to the lawyers of the other
party discloses a lack of the judicial spirit required of an inquirer.
Secondly, the Bank did not stop with this lapse but continued to seek the
submissions of the appellant's lawyer in favour of the acquisition whilst the
only contact with the petitioner-respondent on 02.03.78 was for the purpose of
persuading her to amicably settle the dispute.

It is true that the non-disclosure of a report or a legal opinion may not
prejudice a party in a particular case. Thus in _Local Government Board v.
Arlidge_ (Supra) it was held that the non-disclosure of the report of the
inquiring inspector to the Board which made the impugned order was not
material. Lord Parmoor was of the opinion that the view of the inspector on a
matter of law would not be material and proceeded to illustrate it thus at
page 148:

"If the respondent was desirous of raising, as a matter of law, any question
as to the constitution of the tribunal, the non-disclosure of the report, or
the right to give oral testimony, all the material to raise any of these
questions was open to him quite apart from any information to be obtained from
an

**127**

inspection of the inspector's report. Any opinion expressed by the inspector
on such matters could in no way have altered the legal obligation".

The said report was made after a public inquiry into the appeal of Arlidge
against a closing order attended by Arlidge and his solicitor who led evidence
on behalf of Arlidge and after an inspection of the house affected by the
order.

In _Shariff v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian and Pakistani
Residents_ (10) in which the Privy Council directed the quashing of a refusal
to register the appellant as a citizen of Ceylon, the facts and findings were
as follows: The appellant's application was investigated by the Deputy
Commissioner. An inquiry was held with the attendance of the appellant and his
Counsel. At various stages of the inquiry, the Deputy Commissioner obtained
reports on the issue of the genuineness of an education certificate produced
by the appellant but without a full disclosure of such reports to the
appellant. One such report was favourable to the appellant. This he eventually
rejected and held the education certificate to be a fabrication without
adequate inquiry and in circumstances in which appellant's Counsel might have
been made to believe that his submission in favour of the acceptance of the
certificate as genuine would be upheld. The Deputy Commissioner also failed to
give adequate notice to the appellant or his Counsel as to the case against
the appellant. It was held that the principles of natural justice were not
complied with by the Deputy Commissioner.

In the instant case, the inquiring officer engaged in obtaining submissions
and clarifications from the appellant's lawyer whilst the petitioner-
respondent would have continued to rely on the case put forward by her,
confidently hoping that the application for the acquisition of her property
would be rejected, an attitude induced by the fact that she was not informed
of the case for the other side. In the end, the inquiring officer adopted the
submissions of her opponent without any opportunity being given to her to
comment or correct such submissions, on the most vital issue in the case.

Another unsatisfactory feature of this inquiry is that whilst the inquiring
officer was throughout dealing with the appellant's lawyer, he always
communicated with the petitioner-respondent and failed to seek the advice of
her lawyer. The duty of making the correct

**128**

decision is exclusively on the Bank and as such the contention that the burden
was on the owner of the land to activate her lawyer is not tenable. Having
regard to the complicated issues in the case, the inquiring officer, if he was
keen to make a correct decision, ought to have obtained further submissions
from the petitioner-respondent's lawyer also. Alternatively, if she was
informed about the consultations which were taking place it is probable that
she too would have continued to engage the services of her lawyer.

I must not be understood to lay down that in every case of an acquisition the
Bank is required to ensure that the issues are argued by lawyers or that they
must hold oral hearings. Section 41(2) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978
gives the right of representation by an Attorney-at-Law in such cases.
However, whether the failure to permit oral hearings would constitute a denial
of natural justice will depend on the facts and circumstances and the issues
in each case. The Bank may exercise its discretion as to the form of inquiry;
where appropriate they may send for the lawyer for one of the parties to
obtain any clarification provided that the case for the other party is not
prejudiced and the parties are not kept in the dark as to the general
procedure adopted in the particular case. Subject to these remarks, I quote
the following observations of Lord Denning in the case of _Pett v. Greyhound
Racing Association Ltd._ (11) at 549.

"It is not every man who has the ability to defend himself on his own. He
cannot bring out the points in his own favour or the weakness in the other
side. He may be tongue-tied or nervous, confused or wanting in intelligence
..........If justice is to be done, he ought to have someone to speak for him;
and who better than a lawyer who has been trained for the task?"

In the case of _Board of Trustees of Maradana Mosque v. Minister of Education_
(12) where an order under Section 11 of the Assisted Schools and Training
Colleges (Special Provisions) Act No.5 of 1960 placing Zahira College, an
unaided school, under the management of the Director of Education on the
ground of certain contraventions of the provisions of the Act was challenged,
the Privy Council held that the impugned order had been made without a fair
hearing, inter alia, for the reason that the Director had failed to inform the
Board of Trustees of the observations on the point made by a group of teachers
in their letter to him.

In the case of _Kanda v. Government of the Federation of Malaya_

**129**

(13), Kanda, an Inspector of Police who had been dismissed, appealed to the
Privy Council. One of his complaints was that the inquiring officer had been
provided with the report of the Board of Inquiry which held the preliminary
inquiry which contained statements highly prejudicial to him which report was
not available to him. Although the facts of this case have no similarity to
the case before us, the following observations of Lord Denning in declaring
the dismissal to be void for lack of opportunity to Kanda to correct and
contradict the report are appropriate for an application of the scope of the
principle of fairness.

"If the right to be heard is to be a real right which is worth anything, it
must carry with it the right in the accused man to know the case which is made
against him. He must know what evidence has been given and what statements
have been made against him; and then he must be given a fair opportunity to
correct or contradict them. This appears in all cases from the celebrated
judgment of Lord Loreburn, LC in _Board of Education v. Rice_ down to the
decision of their _Lordships in Ceylon University v. Fernando._ It follows, of
course, that the Judge or whoever has to adjudicate must not hear evidence or
receive representations from one side behind the back of the other".

The frontiers of the audi alteram partem rule are ever widening. Thus in _R.
v. Wareham Magistrate's Court, ex parte Seldon_ (14) McCullough, J. said -

"Thus the question is not one of the implication into the provisions under
consideration of a rigid requirement applicable in every case. It is one of
fairness: In some cases fairness will require steps to be taken which in other
cases it will not require".

In the same case McCullough, J. proceeded to cite a passage from _Clayton v.
Chief Constable of Norfolk_ (15) in which Lord Roskill said -

"As Sachs J. said in _R. v. Assim_ (1966) 2 AER at 887-888 it is impossible to
lay down a general rule applicable to every case which may arise, but if
justices ask themselves, before finally ruling, the single question, what is
the fairest thing to do in all the circumstances in the interest of every one
concerned?, they are unlikely to err in their conclusion, for the aim of
judicial process is to secure a fair trial and rules of practice and

**130**

procedure are designed to that end and not otherwise".

So if the inquiring officer of the People's Bank asked himself what is the
fairest thing to do in all the circumstances in the interest of every one
concerned?, he might have given the petitioner-respondent an opportunity of
meeting Mr. Nagahawatte's undated submissions which are in the Bank file and
which were never disclosed to the petitioner-respondent. In the light of his
failure to do so and the other circumstances which I have assessed, I am of
the opinion that the impugned determination is void as it has been made
without giving a fair hearing to the petitioner-respondent. Accordingly, I
affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and dismiss the appeal with costs
payable by the appellant.

The People's Bank did not appeal but was made the 2nd respondent to this
appeal by the appellant. Although the 2nd respondent filed written submissions
in support of the appeal, Mr. Faiz Musthapa, PC for the 2nd respondent very
properly decided that the 2nd respondent will not participate in the hearing
of the appeal.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.,** \- I agree.

**

BANDARANAYAKE, J.,** \- I agree.

_

Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/2.html_  

