##  Chandrasiri v. The Attorney General - SLR - 115, Vol 1 of 1989 [1988] LKSC
2; (1989) 1 Sri LR 115 (11 November 1988)

**

115

CHANDRASIRI  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL

**

SUPREME COURT  
TAMBIAH J, H A. G. DE SILVA J. AND FERNANDO J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 80 of 1986  
S C. (S.L.A.) APPLICATION NO. 1 65 of 1 986  
CA. NO. 647 of 1 982 (F)  
D.C. GALLE NO 4279/M  
JUNE 28 AND OCTOBER 20, 1988

_



Constitution 1978, Article 55 (5) and Constitution 1972, Article 106 (5) _ \-
_Dismissal - Ouster_ \- _Pleasure principle - Jurisdiction of Court - Date of
appeal.

_**

Held

**

(1) While the provisions of the Constitution should be broadly and liberally
interpreted so as to conserve rather that take away the rights of the citizen,
including his right to invoke the jurisdiction of the Courts, nevertheless
fundamental principles and the express provisions of the Constitution cannot
be departed from in the course of" liberal " interpretation. In considering
the scope

**116**

of" ouster" of the jurisdiction of the Courts effected by Section 106 (5) of
the Constitution of 1972 it must necessarily be borne in mind that one
fundamental principle of service under the Slate is that public office is held
at pleasure. unless expressly provided otherwise. The ouster clause was
intended to give effect to the " pleasure principle ". It prevents the ground
of dismissal being questioned ; the ouster clause complements that principle
by taking away the jurisdiction of the Courts to inquire into dismissals.

  2. But an order or decision made by an official having no legal authority to do so. is in law null and void and Article 55(5) and Article 106(5) is no bar to the Court declaring it a nullity.  


  3. !n the case before Court (dismissal of a Grama Sevaka appointed after 1.1.1977 in terms of a circular) there is no such want of authority or _mala fide_ as would suffice to render the termination ultra vires or otherwise a nullity. The expression "dismissal" in Article 106 must include every mode of severance of the employer-employee relationship effected by or on behalf of the employer.

The termination in question was not ultra vires or a nullity, the ouster
clause applied, and the District Court had no jurisdiction to inquire into,
pronounce or otherwise call in question the dismissal of the Appellant.

(4) Unless there are circumstances indicating that the date set out in the
date stamp is incorrect, that date must be assumed to be the date on which the
petition of appeal was filed in preference to the date of the journal entry
which is not necessarily the date of lodging the papers. The date of the date
stamp shows  
the appeal was filed in time.

**

Cases referred to:

**

_

  1. Abeywickrama v. Pathirana - _[1 986] 1 SRI LR 120. 136, 139.
_

  2. Elmore Perera v. Jayawickrema _\- [1985], 1 SRI LR 285. 301
_

  3. Bandaranaike v. Weeraratne - _[1981] 1 SRI LR 10, 16,
_

  4. Abeywickrama v. Pathirana -. _[19861 1 SRI LR 120, 155-7; (also  
[1984] 1 SRI LR 21 5, 217).

_

  5. Wijesiri v. Siriwardene _\- [1982] 1 SRI LR 171,178.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Prins Gunasekera with R. K. Sureshchandra and K. Abhayapala for the Plaintiff-
Respondent-Appellant.

Shibly Aziz, Deputy Solicitor-General, with N. Kariapper, S.C., for the
Defendant-Appellant-Respondent.

_Cur. adv.vult._

**117**

November 11, 1988 **  
FERNANDO, J.

**

The Appellant was selected for appointment as a Grama Sevaka with effect from
1.2.1977, and was informed that he would be trained for a period not exceeding
three months. Thereafter, the Government Agent, Galle, by letter dated
29.4.77, appointed his as a Grama Sevaka in the Galle District with effect
from 2.5.77 and set out the terms and conditions of appointment ; the
appointment was permanent and pensionable, and was subject to a three-year
probationary period. It was further stipulated that his services could be
terminated either during or at the end that period, if his services during
that period were unsatisfactory ; and that if his services were satisfactory,
he would be confirmed at the end of that period in terms of the establishments
Code.

Soon after the General Election of 1977, newly elected Members of Parliament
had expressed their objections to the appointment of Grama Sevakas made after
18.5.77 (the made of dissolution of the National State Assembly.) A Ministry
of Public Agents them to revoke all appointments of Grama Sevakas made after
18.5.77. The Appellant's appointment did not fall within the scope of that
Circular, his application for that post having been made in response to a
Gazette notification in October 1975. Another Circular dated 30.8.77 was sent,
conveying a decision of the Minister directing the revocation of all
appointments of Grama Sevakas made after 1.1.77. The Government Agent, Galle,
by letter dated 5.9.77 informed the Appellant that his services were "
terminated " with immediate effect, and referred to the aforesaid Circular
dated 30.8.77.

It is admitted that at the relevant time the appointing authority had the
power to terminate the services of a public officer, without assigning any
reason, during the probationary period : this condition of employment was (and
continues to be) recognised by the. Establishments Code, and was expressly
mentioned in the aforesaid Gazette notification.

**118**

The Appellant instituted action in the District Court, praying for a
declaration that the termination of his services was unlawful, ultra vires,
unjust and null and void, and/or for damages in a sum of Rs. 60,000.

The question for determination by us relates to the defence pleaded in the
answer that the Court had no jurisdiction by reason of the provisions of
Section 106 (5) of the Constitution of 1972 :

No institution administering justice shall have the power or jurisdiction to
inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, any
recommendation, order or decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister, the
State Services Disciplinary Board, or a state officer, regarding any matter
concerning appointments, transfers, dismissals or disciplinary matters of
state officers. "

By an amended answer. Article 55 (5) of the 1978 Constitution was also
pleaded, and the issue was raised at the trial that the Court had no
jurisdiction to hear and determine the action by reason of that Article ; no
reference being made to section 106 (5).

It had thus to be determined whether the "termination " of the services of the
Appellant was a " dismissal " within the meaning of section 106 (5) if so, no
Court had jurisdiction to inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call
in question such dismissal. The Appellant contended that " dismissal " did not
include " termination " ; that " dismissal " implied that the severance of
the. employer-employee relationship was on account of misconduct or fault,
whereas " termination " did not.

The learned District Judge determined the matter by reference only to Article
55 (5) of the 1 978 Constitution he held that the " termination " of the
Appellant's services did not constitute a " dismissal ", and held that the
Court had jurisdiction. Having answered other issues in favour of the
Appellant he entered judgment in favour of the Appellant.

**119**

In the Court of Appeal, Counsel for both parties agreed that the relevant
constitutional provisions that were operative at the time of the appointment
and termination of the Appellant were those of the 1972 Constitution, and
invited the Court to act on the basis that the learned District Judge had
interpreted section 106 (5) of the 1972 Constitution in his judgment, and to
hear the appeal as though it were an appeal from a decision pertaining to an
interpretation of that section. The Court of Appeal held that although the two
provisions were similar, the learned District Judge had in fact interpreted
Article 55 (5), and that in view of his failure to act in terms of Article
125, the judgment would have to be set aside on that ground alone.

The Court of. Appeal further held, following _Abeywickrama v. Pathirana_ (1),
that, under section 106 (5), it is only in origin that Government service is
contractual that once appointed .a state officer acquires a status to which
the rights and duties imposed by public law attach and that all state officers
held office during the pleasure of the President :

The general principle in public service is that a public officer holds office
at pleasure. The constitutional doctrine that public officers hold office
during pleasure has two important consequences :

  1. The Government has a right to regulate or determine the tenure of its employees at pleasure notwithstanding.  
anything in their contract to the contrary ;  


  2. Secondly the Government has no power to restrict or fetter its prerogative power of terminating the services  
of the employee at pleasure, by any contract made with the employee. "

Thus the express terms of the contract cannot override the fundamental basis
of the tenure of office of public officers.. Although that decision related to
Article 55 (1) of the 1978 Constitution, these observations are equally
applicable to section 107 (1). Indeed, the only difference is that Article-55
(5) introduced a significant exception that though public office is

**120**

held " at pleasure ", powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal and
disciplinary control must not be exercised in violation of fundamental and
language rights, and that in respect of any such violation a public officer
may invoke the jurisdiction of this Court, under Article 126 (1 ): _Elmore
Perera v. Jayawickrema_ (2).

Accordingly, it was rightly held that not only had the judgment of the learned
District Judge to be set aside, but that the Appellant's action had also to be
dismissed.

Having held that' the Appellant was liable to be dismissed, " at pleasure ",
from the public service, the Court of Appeal did not decide whether the
"termination " of the Appellant's services amounted to a " dismissal " within
the meaning of section 106 (5), and if so whether section 106 (5) ousted the
jurisdiction of the District Court.

Counsel for the Appellant contended that- section 106 (5) being a provision
ousting the jurisdiction of the Courts ought to be strictly construed, so as
to limit the extent of the ouster that ".dismissal " should be confined to
those modes of severance of the employer-employee relationship arising from
the alleged misconduct or fault of the officer ; and that " dismissal " should
not be held to include " termination "of services without any such allegation
of misconduct or fault. He relied heavily upon the Sinhala words used in the
letter of termination and in the Constitution, and upon certain provisions of
the Establishments Code he referred to Chapter V of the Establishments Code
now in force which, we were assured, was in these respects the same as the
provisions in force at the relevant time for his submission that there were
three modes in which the employer could bring the employer-employee
relationship to an end :" termination " of the appointment or services of an
officer holding a temporary or probationary appointment (section 6), "
vacation of post " by officers who absent themselves from duty without leave
(section 7), and dismissal" of. officers for misconduct (section 8).Different
consequences flowed from each of these : for instance, a " dismissed " officer
could not be re-employed, while one whose services were terminated while on
probation could be re-employed.

**121**

The Deputy Solicitor-General submitted that the rules set out in the
Establishments Code regarding the delegation and the exercise of the powers of
dismissal and disciplinary control had been formulated under the provisions of
section 106 (3) ; that these provisions referred to were thus within the ambit
of " dismissal and disciplinary control " ; and therefore " termination " by
the employer was one mode of" dismissal ".

While the provisions of the Constitution should be broadly and liberally
interpreted, so as to conserve rather than take away the rights of the
citizen, including his right-to invoke the jurisdiction of the Courts,
nevertheless fundamental principles and express provisions of the Constitution
cannot be* departed from in the course of " liberal " interpretation, in
considering the scope of the " ouster " effected by section 106 (5), we have
necessarily to bear in mind that one fundamental principle of service under
the State is that public office is held at pleasure, unless expressly provided
otherwise. The ouster clause was intended to give effect to the " pleasure
principle ", and not to whittle it down. The application of the " pleasure
principle " prevents the ground of dismissal being questioned ; the ouster
cause complements that principle by taking away the jurisdiction of the Courts
to inquire into dismissals \- on other grounds, such as that rules and
procedures had not been complied with. Further, " appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control " in section 106 (5) cannot be considered
in isolation those words occur in subsections (1), (2), (3) and (4) as well,
and similar words have been used in the corresponding Constitutional
provisions in the Orders-in-Council of 1 931 and 1 946\. If " dismissal " in
section 106 (1) is restrictively interpreted, so as not cover every kind of
termination of services by or on behalf of the employer, serious anomalies and
omissions would result. On that view, who should be legally authorised to
"terminate" the services of a probationary officer ? Dr to issue a " vacation
of post " notice ? Is " compulsory retirement " something other than "
dismissal ", and if 50 who can make such an order ? if" dismissal" is given a
limited meaning, how could the Cabinet, under section 106 (3), make rules
regarding " termination " vacation of post " and "compulsory retirement"7 Of
course, termination by the employee would not in any event be included and can
be the

**122**

subject of .inquiry by a Court, as- held in _Abeywickrama v. Pathirana_ (1). .

The scope of such ouster clauses has been considered in previous decisions of
this Court. Thus the preclusive clause contained in Article 81 (3) has been
given a wide interpretation (3), possibly because that clause concerned
legislative action as well. In regard to section 106 (5). Wanasundera, J.,
observed .in his dissenting judgment in _Abeywickrama v. Pathirana_ (1) :

Every person acquainted with the post-independence period of our history,
especially the constitutional and legal issues that cropped up during that
period, would know how the actions of the Government and the Public Service
Commission dealing with practically every aspect of their control over public
officers were challenged and taken to the courts. A stage came when the
Government found itself practically hamstrung by injunctions and court orders
and not given a free hand to run the public service and thereby the
administration as efficiently as it would wish. The 1 972 reforms came
undoubtedly as a reaction to this. The thinking behind the framers of the
Constitution was that the public service must be made the exclusive domain of
the Executive without interference from the courts. "

While these observations may correctly pinpoint the object of section 106, it
is clear from the majority decision in the same case that the scope of section
106 (5) was too widely stated. A necessary qualification to the ouster
effected by Article 55 (5) was recognised, in terms equally applicable to
section 106 (5) : an order or decision made by an official, having no legal
authority to do so, is in law null and void, and Article 55 (5) is no bar to a
court declaring it to be a nullity. (4)

The ouster clause applies only to a " recommendation, order or decision ", of
certain specified persons and authorities, in regard to " appointment,
transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control ", and not to any' other matters,
and certainly not to all matters connected with the public service. In the
present case, there was an order or decision by a state officer \- the
Government Agent

**123**

Galle - in regard to a matter concerning dismissal. Although the learned
District Judge answered in the affirmative the following issue \- .

" Was the said notification dated 5.9.77 by the Government Agent Galle (a)
malicious, (b) invalid, (c) unlawful?"

neither the documents produced nor the oral evidence established or suggested
any such want of authority or _mala fides_ as would suffice to render the
termination ultra vires or otherwise a nullity.

Consistently with the legislative history of this phrase, and the long-
established " pleasure principle ", and the need to interpret section 1 06
self-consistently, I am of the view " dismissal " must include every mode of
severance of the employer-employee relationship, effected by or on behalf of
the employer. The termination in question was not ultra vires or a nullity,
the ouster clause applied, and the District Court had no jurisdiction to
inquire into, pronounce upon or otherwise call in question the-dismissal of
the Appellant.

Counsel for the Appellant finally submitted that the petition of appeal of the
Respondent (in the District Court) had been filed out of time. It had been
filed in time if the date of filing was taken to be that set out in the date-
stamp appearing on the petition of appeal, but not if, as contended for the
Appellant, the date of the journal entry was regarded as the date on which the
petition of appeal was filed. This submission, which is in effect a
preliminary objection to the appeal being entertained by the Court of Appeal,
was not made _in limine_ in the Court of Appeal, but only after judgment had
been reserved. In any event, unless there are circumstances indicating that
the date set out in the date stamp is incorrect, that date must be assumed to
be the date on which the petition of appeal was filed the party tendering the
petition ot appeal has no control over the process whereby the petition of
appeal reaches the relevant record and the making of the appropriate entry
therein. There is ho reason to assume that in the normal course such entry
would have been made the very same day, and the date of the journal entry thus
cannot be

**124**

presumed to be the date on which the petition of appeal was in fact filed.
This submission must fail.

The appeal is dismissed, but - as the Appellant's dismissal was without fault,
and as an important question of law was involved \- without costs.

**

TAMBIAH. J.,** \- I agree.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.,** \- I agree.

_

Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/2.html_  

