##  Ratwatte v. Goonesekera - SLR - 260, Vol 2 of 1987 [1987] LKSC 2; (1987) 2
Sri LR 260 (26 May 1987)

**260**

**

RATWATTE** **  
v.** **  
GOONESEKERA**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C. J., L. H. DE ALWIS J. AND SENEVIRATNE, J.  
S. C. APPEAL No. 48/84, CA No. 86/75 (F); D: C. COLOMBO No. 2543/52.  
DECEMBER 1, 2, 3, 4 AND 9, 1986.

_

Sale-Shares-Setting aside of sale do grounds of laesio enormis, duress, undue
influence, wilful misrepresentation, and fraud-Meaning of undue Influence.

Civil Procedure-Civil Procedure Code, Section 772-Cross Appeal-Failure to give
notice of objection of undue influence-Inherent jurisdiction-Meaning of undue
influence._

The plaintiff held 500 shares in Consolidated Commercial Agency Ltd. (CCA) and
1251 shares in Ceylon Manufacturers and Merchants Ltd. (CMM). He was also a
Director of these two companies which had been formed on the initative of one
E, W. Miller to take over some of the lines of business of Colombo Commercial
Co. Ltd.

**261**

About 1967 the plaintiff became ill and in December 1968. and January 1969
suffered a serious nervous breakdown. He was given six months leave to proceed
to London for treatment. His disease was diagnosed as manic depression. On
25.01.1969 Miller and the defendant obtained plaintiff's signature to a letter
of resignation from the directorate of CMM and CCA. On 26.01.69 the defendant
and one Mallory Wijesinghe both directors of the two companies visited the
plaintiff at his residence when he was just about to leave for the airport and
obtained his signature to several share transfer forms and receipts and handed
him some cheques representing to him that he was being paid a fair value f or
his shares in the two companies. In July 1969 the plaintiff returned to Sri
Lanka full, restored to health. On 08.06.1970 the plaintiff wrote to the Chief
Accountant CCA Ltd. calling for a cheque for Rs5,000 for his 500 CCA shares.
After sending a letter of demand on 18.05.1971 plaintiff filed this action
complaining that the defendant had pressurised him into transferring his
17,499 CMM shares at Rs.13 per share when a share was worth Rs. 57.78 and his
500 CCA shares at Rs.10 per share when a share was worth Rs. 122.09. The
plaintiff claimed rescission of the sales on the ground of laesio enormis and
on grounds of undue influence, duress, wilful misrepresentation and fraud. The
District Judge upheld the plea of laesio enormis but rejected the other
grounds. The defendant appealed to the Court of Appeal which ordered
rescission of the sale on the ground of undue influence. The defendant
appealed to the Supreme Court and as a preliminary matter submitted that it
was not open to the Court of Appeal to review the finding of the District
Judge on undue influence in the absence of a cross-appeal by the plaintiff or
written notice giving seven days notice under "s.772 CPC that a review of the
District Judge's finding on undue, influence will be sought.

(1) Where no cross-appeal has been filed, the plaintiff's failure to give
seven days written notice under s.772 CPC will not entitle him to a right to
take objection to the decree. But s. 772 of the CPC does not bar the court, in
the exercise of its powers to do complete justice between the parties, from
permitting objection to the decree even though no notice had been given. The
Court of Appeal has inherent jurisdiction to grant or refuse such permission
in the interest of justice.

A respondent not taking any objection can without filing any cross objections
support the decree not only on the grounds decided in his favour but also by
urging that the grounds. decided against him should have been decided in his
favour. He may thus challenge a finding against him although the decree may be
in his favour. But a respondent cannot attack the decree in the appellant's
favour without filing a cross-appeal or giving notice of objections under s.
772 CPC.

(2) Undue influence is the unconscientious use by one person of power
possessed by him over another in order to induce the other to enter into a
contract. The victim of such pressure may be entitled to relief under the
common law of duress or under the equitable doctrine of undue influence.
Equity gives relief where an agreement has been obtained by certain forms of
improper pressure which did not amount to duress at common law because no
element of violence to the person was involved. Mere persistence or pestering
by a person not in any fiduciary relationship is not undue influence.

Contracts which may be rescinded for undue influence fall into two categories:

1\. Where there is no special relationship between the parties.

2\. Where a special relationship of confidence exists.

**262**

In the first case undue influence must be proved as a fact and the onus of
proof is on the donor. In the second case undue influence is presumed to exist
and the onus is on the party taking the benefit to justify that it was free
from undue influence. The Court will not save a person from his folly,
imprudence or want of foresight but it will intervene if the plaintiff proves
that the, defendant exerted domination and by the use of improper pressure
prevailed on him to consent to a transaction that would otherwise not have
been entered into.

There is no rule defining inflexibly what kind or amount of compulsion shall
be sufficient ground for avoiding a transaction. The question to be decided in
such case is whether the party was a free and voluntary agent, whether there
was actual coercion by the other party, whether the latter exercised over the
mind of the other such a degree of general domination or control that his
independence of decision was substantially undermined.

In the instant case there was- no fiduciary relationship between the
contracting parties. Mere persisting, worrying and pestering is not undue
influence. There was no evidence whatsoever of any threat or infusion of any
fears for the future or the present in plaintiff's mind. Further there was
significant delay in repudiating the sale which tends to show the absence of
compulsion. Hence the Court of Appeal misdirected itself in concluding that
undue influence vitiated the transfer of shares.

(3) Laesio enormis is a Roman, and Roman-Dutch law. concept applicable to
rescind sales and leases where the damage suffered is more than half of the
value of the subject-matter.

(4) In Sri Lanka laesio enormis is applicable to rescind sales of immovable
property but it cannot be applied to rescind. transfers of shares in a limited
liability company as shares do not fit into the Roman and Roman-Dutch law
classification of movables and immovables.

**Quaere :**

Does laesio enormis apply to sales of movables in Sri Lanka?

(5) Although s. 63 of our Companies Ordinance 1939 provides. that shares shall
be movable property this is for the purposes of the provisions of the
Companies Ordinance only and not for purposes outside the province of Company
Law. A share is neither movable or immovable property as known to the Roman or
Roman-Dutch law. It is a bundle of rights and liabilities. It is an English
law concept and a typical item of property of the modern commercial era in a
distinct class of its own. It is a chose in action.

(6) The District Judge misdirected himself in applying the principle of laesio
enormis to rescind a transfer of shares.

**

Cases referred to:**

(1) _Bridget Antony v. Imelda Weerasekera-_ (1953) 54 -NLR 553 PC.  

(2) _Earl of Aylesford v. Morris-_ (1873) 8 Ch. App. 484, 490.  

(3) _Mutual Finance Ltd. v. Wetton (John) & Sons Ltd-_[1937] 2 All ER 657,
661.  

(4) _Allcard v. Skinner_ -(1887)36 Ch. D. 145, 181, 182.  

(5) _William v. Bayley-_ (1866) L.R. 1 H.L. 200; 35 L.J. Ch. 717, 14 L.T. 802.  

_

**263**

_

(6) _Tufton v. Sperni-_ (1952) 2 LTR 516, 526, 530 C.A.  

(7) _National-Westminister Bank v. Morgan-_ [1985] 1 AII ER 821, 828.  

(8) _Tate v. Williamson-_ (1866) 2 Ch. App. 55; 60; 15 L.T. 549.  

(9) _Kaufman v. Gerson_ -[1904] 1 KB 591.  

(10) _McGee v. Mignon-_ (1903) T S. 89.  

(11) _Coetze v. Pretorins-_ (1903) ITS 638.  

(12) _Tjollo Ateljees (Eins) Bpk v. Small-_ 1949 (1) SALR 856 (AD).  

(13) _Gooneratne v. Don Philip-_ (1899) 5 NLR 268.  

(14) _Jayawardene v. Amerasekera-_ (1912) 15 NLR 280.  

(15) _Punchirala v. Ahamat_ -(1924) 5 CL Rec 227.  

(16) _Sobana v. Meera Lebbe_ -(1940) 5 CLJ 46.  

(17) _Fernando v. Fernando-_ (1916) 19 NLR 21.  

(18) _Wijesiriwardene v. Gunasekera-_ (1917) 20 NLR 92  

(19) _Bodiga v. Nagoor_ -(1943) 45 NLR 1.  

(20) _Ponnupillai v. Kumaravetpillai-_ (1963) 65 NLR 241.  

(21) _Appuhamy v. Keerala_ -(1970) 73 NLR 422.  

(22) _Short v. Treasury Commissioners-_ [1948] 1 KB 116, 122.  

(23) _Barland's Trustee v. Steel Bros. & Co. Ltd_.-[1901] 1 Ch. 279, 288.  

(24) _Rex v. G. M. Holdings Ltd._ -[1942] 1 All ER 224, 226.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

Mark Fernando P.C_. with _Daya Pelpola_ and _Miss S. Wilegunasekera_ for
defendant appellant.  

_

D. R. P. Gunatillake_ with _S. D. de S. Gunasekera, Neil Perera_ and _Victor
Unantenne_ for the respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult._

May 26, 1987.  
**SHARVANANDA, C.J.**

The plaintiff-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff) instituted
this action on 21.1.72 to set aside his sale to the defendant of 500, shares
in Consolidated Commercial Agency Ltd., (hereinafter referred to as 'CCA') and
1,251 shares in Ceylon Manufacturers and Merchants Ltd., (hereinafter referred
to as 'CMM'). The date of sale was 26.1.69. The grounds upon which the
defendant sought to set aside the transfer/sale of the shares are -

(a) Laesio enormis and

(b) Duress and/or undue influence and/or wilful -misrepresentation and/or
fraud.

The defendant in his answer denied these allegations.

**264**

At the outset of the trial it was admitted that the plaintiff was on
26.1.1969, the owner of 500 shares in CCA and was an Executive Director of the
Company. It was also admitted that the plaintiff was the owner of 17,499
shares in CMM and was a Director of the said Company on the said date. The
case for the plaintiff as set out in his plaint was that the said 17,499
shares which the plaintiff held in CMM had been transferred by the plaintiff
as follows.

(1) To Mrs. C. Seneviratne, 13,746 shares at the rate of Rs. 13.00 per share;

(2) To Mallory Wijesinghe 1,251 shares at the rate of Rs. 13.00 per share.

(3) To the defendant 1,251 shares at the rate of Rs. 13.00 per share and

(4) To one. H. P. M. Nizar, 1,251 shares at the rate of Rs. 13.00 per share.

The plaintiff had also transferred 500 shares which he held in CCA to the
defendant at the rate of Rs. 10/- per share.

The plaintiff stated that at the date of the said transfer of shares the true
value of the said 17,499. shares in CMM was Rs.1,011,092.22 at the rate of Rs.
57.78 per share and the true value of said 500 shares in CCA was Rs. 61,045/-
at the rate of Rs. 122.09 per share. The case of the plaintiff was that the
price paid by the defendant to the plaintiff for the transfer of the said
1,251 shares in CMM was less, than 1/2 the true, value of the said shares, at
the time and date of transfer to the defendant and the said sale of 500 shares
in CCA was also less than 1/2 the true value of the shares at the date of
transfer to the defendant.

The plaintiff stated "that from 19,67 he was not keeping good health and on
27.12.68, he was granted six months" medical leave to enable him to proceed
overseas for treatment and accordingly the plaintiff made the necessary
arrangements to leave for the United Kingdom on 26.1.1969 by plane. According
to Plaintiff in December 1968, and January 1969, he was suffering from a
serious nervous breakdown.

It appears that the two companies CMM and CCA were floated by one E. W.
Miller, who had an interest in Colombo Commercial Co., Ltd. CCA & CMM
eventually took over the business of some of the departments of Colombo
Commercial Co. Ltd., while CMM took over the business of Estate Supplies,
hardware, electrical and agricultural equipment and became the successor to
the Stores and Sales Department of Colombo Commercial Co. Ltd. CCA took over
the

**265**

Estate Agency business of Colombo Commercial Co. Ltd. In 1963, Miller invited
the plaintiff and the defendant to become shareholders and Directors of CCA &
CMM.

E. W. Miller was a very close friend of the plaintiff from about 1950. In
paragraph six of the plaint the plaintiff states "on 24.1.69 the said E. W.
Miller sent for him and requested him to resign from the Directorate of the
two companies on the plea that they were considering an expansion program and
that plaintiff's ill-health would constitute an impediment to their
implementation."

According to plaintiff on 25.1.69, when he was in a weak state of mind and in
ill-health, the said Miller and the defendant brought typed letters of
resignation and obtained his signature to the said letters; by the said
letters of resignation he resigned from the Directorate of CCA and CMM. The
said resignation was according to plaintiff obtained from him by duress and
pressure exercised by the said Miller and defendant.

In paragraph 7 of the plaint the plaintiff states

"On the 26.1.69, shortly before he left for Katunayake to catch his plane to
U.K. the defendant and one Mallory Wijesinghe, both of whom were directors of
the said Company, carne to the plaintiff's residence while the plaintiff was
in the final stages of packing his baggage, produced certain transfer forms,
transferring his shares in the said two companies, several cheques and
receipts and informed the plaintiff that he should sign these documents and
thereby transfer his shares in the said two companies and represented to the
plaintiff that he was being paid a fair value for the said shares; when he
stated that he thought that the par value was much more the defendant and
Mallory Wijesinghe assured him that they had placed a fair value and thereby
induced the plaintiff by the exercise of duress, fraud, undue influence and
wilful misrepresentation, while the petitioner was in a weak state of mind and
health and when he was about to get into the car to proceed to Katunayake to
sign the said transfer documents and receive the said cheques.

At the time of the said transfer he was under severe mental stress and strain
and also was in a feeble state of health aid mind. Taking advantage of
plaintiff's state of mind and body the said Mallgry Wijesinghe and the
defendant obtained the said transfer by the exercise of duress and/or undue
influence and/or fraud and or wilful misrepresentation on the plaintiff."

**266**

By his answer the defendant denied in December 1968 and July 1969 the
plaintiff was suffering from any serious nervous breakdown; admitted that
plaintiff was not keeping in good health, and that the plaintiff was on
2.7.12.68 granted six months medical leave, to enable him to proceed overseas
for treatment. The defendant denied the allegations of duress and undue
influence, fraud and wilful misrepresentation made by the plaintiff and also
denied the averments relating to the value of, the shares purchased by him.

The case proceeded to trial on ten issues, covering the grounds of laesio
enormis and duress etc. After trial the District Judge answered the issues
relating to the cause of action based on laesio enormis in favour of the
plaintiff but found against the plaintiff's alternative cause of action based
on duress, fraud, undue influence and wilful misrepresentation. He accordingly
made order that the defendant should pay the plaintiff Rs. 99,857/- which
represented the difference between the purchase price and what he considered
to be the true Value of the shares. The District Judge made further order that
if this sum was not paid within six months the sale of the shares would stand
cancelled and the plaintiff return the purchase price to the defendant. He
held that a share in CMM and CCA was worth Rs. 97.90 and Rs. 57.69
respectively. The defendant preferred an appeal from the said judgment. At the
hearing of the appeal before the Court of Appeal, counsel for the plaintiff-
respondent contended that the finding of the trial Judge relating to the
exercise of undue influence was wrong and invited the court to reverse that
finding. Counsel for the defendant unsuccessfully objected to the plaintiff
being heard on the issue of undue influence as the trial Judge had found in
his favour on that issue, and the plaintiff had not filed any cross appeal as
required by Section 772 of the Civil Procedure Code.

Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent urged that on the totality of the
evidence accepted by the trial Judge, his finding on the issue of undue
influence was, unreasonable and untenable. He did not challenge the
correctness of the, finding of the Distirct Judge that duress,
misrepresentation and fraud had not been established. The Court of Appeal by
its Judgment set aside the finding of the trial Judge on the issue of undue
influence and directed that decree be entered setting aside the sale by the
plaintiff to the defendant of the shares in the two companies and ordered the
plaintiff to return to the defendant the consideration paid in respect of the
aforesaid shares. The defendant has preferred this appeal from the judgment of
the Court of Appeal.

**267**

At the outset of the hearing before this court, Mark Fernando, counsel for the
defendant-appellant referred to his preliminary objection that it was not open
to the plaintiff to canvass before the Court of Appeal the finding of the
trial Judge on the issue of undue influence against the plaintiff, as the
plaintiff had not filed any cross appeal in terms of section 772 of the Civil.
Procedure Code which provides that

Sec. 772

(1) Any respondent, though he may not have appealed against any part of the
decree may, upon the hearing, not only support the decree on any of the
grounds decided against him in court below, but take any objection to the
decree which he could have taken byway of appeal provided he has given to the
appellant or his Proctor seven days notice in writing of such objection.

(2) Such, objection shall be in the 'form prescribed in paragraph (1) of
section /58.

This section requires the respondent, if he had not filed a cross-appeal, to
give the appellant or his Proctor seven days notice in writing to entitle him
to object to the decree or any part of the decree, entered by the trial court.
Only if he had duly given the said notice, will he have a right to object to
the decree if he had failed to give such notice, he cannot claim, as a matter
of entitlement, the right to take any objection to the decree but the
provision does not bar the court, in the exercise of its powers to do complete
justice between the parties, permitting him to object to the decree, even
though he had, failed to give such notice. The Court of Appeal has inherent
jurisdiction to grant or refuse such permission in the interest of justice. If
however the respondent is not taking any objection to the decree, it is
competent to him without filing any cross objections to support the decree not
only on the grounds decided in his favour but also on the grounds decided
against him, by asserting that the points decided against him should have been
decided in his favour; he may thus challenge a finding against him although
the decree may be in his favour. But a respondent cannot attack the decree in
the appellant's favour without filing a cross-appeal or cross-objections under
this section.

In this case the, decree entered, in the trial court was founded on the
alternative cause of action based on the plea of laesio enormis and hence
there was the conditional order to pay the difference between the purchase
value and the true value.

**268**

Had the decree been entered on the main cause of action based on undue
influence. the decree would have declared the sale of shares void and the
plaintiff might have been better off.

Admittedly the plaintiff had not complied with the provisions of section 772
of the Civil Procedure Code to entitle him to agitate in appeal for a decree
avoiding the sale of the shares on the ground of exercise of undue influence.
But the Court of Appeal granted him permission to challenge the finding of the
trial Judge on the question of undue influence and heard him on that issue, as
it was of the view that -

"the main object of section 772 of the Civil Procedure Code was to prevent the
appellant from being taken by surprise at the hearing of the appeal and as the
appeal was heard over a long period of time and between the date on which
counsel for the plaintiff indicated to court that he was challenging the
finding of the trial Judge on the issue of undue influence and the date on
which counsel for the defendant replied to, the submission of counsel for the
plaintiff on that aspect of the case, a period of no Less than seven weeks
intervened and the court was satisfied that the defendant's counsel had an
opportunity of making his submissions fully on the question of undue
influence, both orally and in writing and as in the circumstances no prejudice
whatever was caused to the defendant by the failure on the part of the
plaintiff to file cross-objections in terms of section 772 of Civil Procedure
Code."

We cannot say that the Court of Appeal had in the circumstances, erred in
granting permission to counsel for plaintiff to canvass the finding on undue
influence. After granting that permission the court heard both parties and
revised the finding of the District Judge. On the appeal before us counsel for
both parties addressed us fully on the issue of undue influence and on the
findings on it by the court below.

The English law relating to undue influence is part of the Law of Ceylon, vide
Bridget Antony v. lmelda Weerasekera, (1)

A contract may be avoided or set aside at the instance of one of the parties
to it on the ground that his consent thereto was obtained by duress or undue
influence, where his consent had been obtained by some form of pressure which
the law regards as improper. Undue influence may be defined, for this purpose,
as the unconscientious use

**269**

by one person of power possessed by him over another in order to induce the
other to enter into a contract (Earl of Aylesford v. Morris (2) per Lord
Selbourne, LC).

The victim of such pressure may be entitled to relief under the common law of
duress or under the equitable doctrine of undue influence. Equity gives relief
where an agreement has been obtained by certain forms of improper pressure
which did not amount to duress at common, law because no element of violence
to the person was involved. For example, a promise to pay money can be set
aside if obtained by a, threat to prosecute the promiser or his close relative
Mutual Finance Ltd. v. Wetton (3).

Contracts which may be rescinded for undue influence fall into two categories.
Firstly, those where there is no special relationship between the parties;
secondly, those where a special relationship exists, In the first case,
influence must be proved as a fact, in the second it is presumed to exist. In
the first case, it must be affirmatively proved that one party in fact exerted
influence over the other and thus procured a contract that would otherwise not
have been made. Undue influence has been described as "some unfair and
improper conduct, some coercion from outside, some overreaching, some form of
cheating and generally though not always some personal advantage obtained by
the guilty party (Allcard v. Skinner (4) per, Lindley, L. J). The cases in
which this jurisdiction has been exercised are instances where dominion has
been exercised by one person over another, thereby precluding the exercise of
free and deliberate judgment. A leading case on the subject is William v.
Bayley (5) where the facts were as follows a son gave to his bank several
promissory notes upon which he had forged the endorsements of his father. At a
meeting between the three parties, the banker made it reasonably evident that
if some arrangement were not reached the son would be prosecuted. This
impression was conveyed in such expressions as "We have only. one course to
pursue; we cannot be parties to compounding a felony. this is a serious
matter, a case of transportation for life!". The effect of these expressions
upon the father is shown by his somewhat despairing words What be I to do? Now
can I help myself; You see these men will have their money." In the result the
father agreed in writing to make an equitable mortgage to the bank in
consideration of the return of the promissory notes. This agreement was held
to be invalid on the ground that undue pressure had been exerted. The bankers
had clearly exploited the fears of the

**270**

father for the safety of the son and had thus brought themselves within the
equitable principle that, where there is inequality between parties and one of
them by, taking an unfair advantage of the situation of the other forces an
agreement upon him, the transaction will be set aside-per Lord Chelmsford at
216. This is a case of actual coercion.

Undue influence connotes domination. Evidence of express influence must be
adduced by the party seeking to impeach the transaction. If it can be shown
that one party exercised such domination over the mind and will of the other,
that his independence of decision was substantially undermined, the party
whose will was overborne will be entitled to relief on the ground of undue
influence. There is no need for any special relationship, as in the second
case to exist between the parties The mere fact that domination was exercised
is sufficient, no abuse of confidence need be proved. The plaintiff will have
to prove that his mind was "a mere channel through which the will of the
defendant operated" (Tufton v. Sperni (6)), that there was actual, coercion by
the defendant or that the defendant exercised over the plaintiff's mind such a
degree of general domination or control that his independence of decision was
substantially undermined.

In the second case, if the parties were at the time of the transaction in a
particular relationship of confidence with each other, undue influence is
presumed. The onus is on the party taking the benefit to justify, that it was
free from undue influence. Where the donee stands in a fiduciary relation to
the donor, a presumption of undue influence arises which prevails unless
rebutted by the donee.

Lindley L. J., in Allcard v. Skinner (supra) sets out the principle on which
the court had proceeded to deal with cases of undue influence-

What then is the principle? Is it that it is right and expedient to save
persons from the consequences of their own folly? Or is it that A is right and
expedient to save them from being victimised by other people? In my opinion
the doctrine of undue influence is founded upon the second of these two
principles. Courts of equity have never set aside gifts on the ground of the
folly, imprudence or want of foresight on the part of donors. The courts have
always repudiated any such jurisdiction ....... . On the other hand, to
protect people from being forced, tricked or misled in any

**271**

way by others into parting with their property is one of the most legitimate
objects of all laws......The undue influence which courts of equity endeavour
to defeat is the undue influence of one person over another."

Lord Scarman with whom all the other Law Lords agreed, in National
Westminister Bank v. Morgan (7) approved the above enunciation of Lindley L.
J. and stressed that the principle justifying the court setting aside a
transaction for undue influence is of vague public policy but specifically,
the victimisation of one party by the other.

In Tufton v. Sperni (supra) Jenkin L. J., observed -

"There can be no doubt that the plaintiff was overreached by the defendant in
the transaction concerning No. 36 Doughty Street ...

But the mere fact that a simpleton in business has made an improvident, or
even ruinous, bargain with a person astute and unscrupulous enough to take
advantage of his simplicity does not of itself entitle the victim to relief at
all events, where, as here, the transaction has been completed. The court will
not intervene unless the case can be brought within some recognised exception
to the general rule that a person who in the eye of the law, is capable of
managing his own affairs is bound by a disposition he chooses to make however
damaging to himself it may be. A familiar exception to the general rule occurs
in cases where the bargain has been held to have been induced by fraudulent
representation, but that is not in question here. It is however, argued on the
part of the plaintiff that in the circumstances of the present case the
defendant stood in fiduciary relationship to the plaintiff, which he abused by
prevailing on the plaintiff, to purchase the defendant's own property on terms
outrageously favourable to the defendant, and that in such circumstances the
court can and should set aside the transaction. "

In Tufton v. Sperm (supra) the plainiff who was the purchaser of defendant's
house on terms grossly unfair to him, sought to have the transaction set aside
on the ground of undue influence. The trial Judge found that undue influence
the domination of the purchaser by the seller was not proved. The purchaser
appealed on the ground that the court of equity had a broad jurisdiction to
relieve a person from a, bargain made with another where that other person
stood in such a relation to the first person that he owed him a duty to make
full disclosure of all material facts. Held, allowing the appeal, that in all
the

**272**

circumstances of the case there was a fiduciary relationship between them and
that the purchaser reposed confidence in the seller which was abused. The
transaction was accordingly set aside. It is to be noted that when the
plaintiff set out to prove that the defendant had, by virtue of his
professional position and otherwise, acquired a complete control or domination
over the plaintiff, that the latter ceased in effect to be a free agent, and
his mind became a mere vehicle for defendant's schemes, the trial Judge held
that the plaintiff failed to discharge the onus of proof laid on him. But the
plaintiff succeeded in appeal on a fresh ground disclosed by the facts, namely
on the broad jurisdiction of the court of equity to relieve a party from a
bargain made with another where it is shown that the other stood in such a
relation to the first party that he owed him a duty of care and candour and
was bound to make to him full disclosure of all material facts. Sir R.
Evershed, M.R. correctly said at page 525

"In my judgment, the question is not of domination but of influence, well
short, no doubt of domination, based on and arising out of a particular,
association and an advisory capacity.... "

In that case, the Court of Appeal had held that a fiduciary relationship
existed between the parties which had the result that one reposed confidence
on the other.

"When this is so the person receiving and accepting the confidence is
inevitably so placed that he can exercise influence over the other. It would
seem to be but common- decency that personal profit should not then be gained
by exploiting the influence resulting from the confidence reposed and
acknowledged." Morris L. J. at 533.

The court set aside the transaction on the ground of undue influence flowing
not from domination by the defendant over the plaintiff but from the fiduciary
relationship between the plaintiff and defendent with the result that the
latter had the influence inevitably stemming therefrom. The court said that
the relation between the parties was such that, in such matters confidence was
reposed and influence was necessarily possessed. The jurisdiction of the court
to interfere is founded on the principle of correcting abuses of confidence.
Lord Chelmsford, L. C., stated the principle in Tate v. Williamson (8)

**273**

"Wherever two persons stand in such a relation that while it continues,
confidence is necessarily reposed by one and the influence which naturally
grows out of that confidence is possessed by the other, and this confidence is
abused or the influence is exerted to obtain an advantage at the expense of
the confiding party, the person so availing himself of the position will not
be permitted to retain the advantage, although the transaction could not have
been impeached if no such, confidential relation had existed.

In the present case, the plaintiff does not suggest the existence of any
special relationship between him and the defendant which attracts any
presumption of undue influence. Both plaintiff and defendant were business
men. Both regarded the impugned transaction as a business transaction and were
dealing with each other at arms length. They were both share holders in the
aforesaid two companies. But share holders are not trustees of one another.
True that plaintiff was a sick man preparing to leave for England for
treatment but there was not that fiduciary relationship between plaintiff and
defendant which resulted in confidence being reposed by plaintiff-on
defendant. There was no question of any confidential relationship existing
between the two, such as to give rise to the presumption of influence of one
over other. Hence, the plaintiff has to prove that defendant exerted
domination over him and by improper, pressure prevailed on him to consent to
the transaction that would otherwise not have been made. Did the defendant use
undue influence to procure the contract the entire onus was on plaintiff to
prove undue influence in the, sense of some coercion, some overreaching was
the sale of the shares obtained by any form of improper pressure on him?

As to what kind of influence can vitiate a contract between third parties,
Porter, J., quoted with approval in Mutual Finance Ltd. v. Wetton & Sons Ltd.
(supra) the following passage from Salmond and Winfield on Contracts (1927) at
page 259 :

Assuming, then, that the common law of duress has been thus superseded by the
equitable doctrine of undue influence, the question remains, what forms of
coercion, oppression or compulsion amount to undue influence invalidating a
contract as between strangers between whom there exists no fiduciary relation.
How, is this line to be now drawn between those forms of coercion or
persuasion which are permissible and those which the law

**274**

recognises as unlawful and as a ground of contractual invalidity? To this
question it is impossible as the authorities at present stand to give any
definite or confident reply. In the case already cited of Kaufman v. Gerson(9)
it is suggested that the line should be drawn by reference to general
considerations of public policy, the question in each case being; 'Is the
coercion or persuasion by which this contract was procured of such a nature
that the enforcement of a contract so obtained would be contrary to public
policy?' Just as a contract may be invalid because it is contrary to public
policy in its substance or its purposes, so it may be invalid because it is
contrary to public policy, in respect of the coercive method of its
procurement. Where the instrument of coercion is the doing or threatening of a
wilfully illegal act of any description., a contact so procured will in
general be held invalid. But even although the instrument of coercion is not
thus in itself illegal as in the case of a threat of prosecution, the
enforcement of a contract so procured may nevertheless be held in appropriate
cases to be contrary to public policy."

There is no rule defining inflexibly what kind or amount of compulsion shall
be sufficient ground for avoiding a transaction. The question to be decided in
each case is whether the party was a free and voluntary agent, whether there
was actual coercion by the other party, whether the latter exercised over the
mind of the other such a degree of general domination or control that. his
independence of decision was substantially undermined.

However damaging to himself the transaction may be the court will not
intervene unless the case can be brought within some recognised exception of
the general rule that a person who, in the eye of the law, is capable of
managing his own affairs is bound by the disposition he chooses to make. It is
not the case of the plaintiff that though he was a sick person, he was not at
the relevant time mentally capable of managing his affairs. His mental or
contractual. capacity to enter the transaction in question was not in issue.
He understood the nature of the transaction, though according to his doctor,
his judgment was impaired. Weakness of mind, short of mental disorder as
prevents a person understanding the nature of the transaction does not afford
per se ground for relief at law or in equity, although undue influence by the
other party may permit the transaction to be set aside as inequitable vide
Chitty on Contracts, Vol. I, 23rd Ed. para 381, page 183.

**275**

It was common ground between the plaintiff. and defendant that the plaintiff
was not in, good health since 1967. In 1968 the company had granted him three
months leave for reasons of health. Again the Company gave him six months
leave in December 1968 to proceed to London for medical treatment. He had been
treated by Dr. Sittampalam, a psychiatrist in 1967 and 1968. The particular
ailment from which the plaintiff was suffering is known as manic depression.
According to Dr. Rodrigo, Professor of Psychiatry in the Medical Faculty of
the Peradeniya Campus who had once seen the plaintiff before he left the
Island on 26th January 1969, a patient suffering from manic depression would
have his judgment fairly seriously impaired and that the depressed condition
would affect his judgment not merely in, regard to certain matters but
practically in regard to all matters,

The Court of Appeal after referring to the evidence of Dr. Sittampalam and
Professor Rodrigo, has concluded that.

"Thus, it is seen that on the medical evidence, it was clearly established
that the plaintiff had been suffering from a mental disorder known as manic
depression for a long time prior to January 1969. In January 1969, also he was
in a depressed state of mind, was under severe medication and was lacking in,
the power to concentrate... This then was the state of mind of the plaintiff
on the day he transferred the shares to the defendant, namely, on 26th January
1969."

The sequence of events during the period 220 to 26th January 1969, is relevant
to appreciate whether the plaintiff was the victim o any domination or,
pressure by the defendant causing the plaintiff to transfer his shares to the
defendant. In this context the important role played by Miller to whom both
plaintiff and defendant were grateful for having made them shareholders and
directors of the two companies, which he had established, in the transaction
in issue has to be kept in mind. No allegation has been made by plaintiff
against Miller that he was more interested in defendant than in the plaintiff
or that Miller had conspired with the defendant and other shareholders to
terminate his connection with the two companies or that what motivated Miller
to persuade. plaintiff, to part with his shares in the two companies was
anything other than the welfare and expansion of the two, companies.
Unfortunately the court does not have the benefit of Miller's evidence which
would have shown the transaction, complained of, in its true perspective.

**276**

Miller arrived in Ceylon on the 23rd or 24th of January 1969. He and defendant
met the plaintiff at about 3 p.m. on the evening of the 24th. According to
plaintiff, Miller and defendant told him at that meeting "You have been ill
periodically. We have nothing against you. This will be an impediment to the
expansion of the Company, we are intending to undertake, so it will be in the
company's interest if you call it a day" and they wanted him to resign from
the directorate and promised to compensate him adequately for the interests-
shareholdings he held in the companies; they mentioned a figure in the region
of 2 or 2 1/2 lakhs. The plaintiff continued-

"I was not agreeable. I wanted time to think it over and come back from leave
and decide. They knew that I was going to London on leave in two days time. I
had arranged to leave for London on 26th January. The defendant and Miller
were fully aware of that. I said that I will come back and decide on the
request. They kept on pestering. I said come and see me in my bungalow and I
left. That evening they were worrying me and they were pressing me to accept
these conditions and all sorts of things. As they kept worrying me, I said If
you want to meet me you come to my bungalow.... The defendant and Miller came
to my bungalow at about 7 o'clock. They kept worrying me. I could not take it
any longer and I just signed the resignation form the directorate... I just
wanted to get rid of the worry and I signed resigning from the directorate of
the two companies. Then they indulged in my hospitality. They said that they
will settle about my shares the next morning.... On 26th January when I was in
the final stage of packing and prior to half-an-hour of my leaving Mr. Mallory
Wijesinghe and Mr . Ratwatte (the defendant) came. They came with a whole
sheaf of papers, receipts, cheques, most of which l could not even familiarise
myself with collecting a whole heap of cheques and signing a receipt in full
and final settlement I signed several transfer forms and several receipts. I
put the cheques into my pocket and went to the airport. I stopped at Madras.
At Madras I examined the cheques. According to the cheques listed one cheque
for the purported value of the shares of C.C.A. was missing. I posted the
cheques from Madras to the Bank of Ceylon asking them to deposit it with John
Keel on fixed deposit. I got cheques to the total value of about Rs. 225,000.
I knew these were for the transfer of shares of both these companies." To the
question in examination in chief Did you at that time know, for what you were
selling the

**277**

shares? Plaintiff's reply was "All I told Mr. Mallory Wijesinghe and Kenneth
Ratwatte before I left was " I think you were doing me down." I also said "You
have not paid my Provident Fund." They said 'Don't worry, please go end get
well and come, we will look after you. They were good friends."

The plaintiff returned to Ceylon in good health in July 1969. He says that he
did not meet the defendant because 'I thought they had done me down.' But
plaintiff until he sent the letter of demand P23 dated 18.5.71 and filed this
action on 21 st January 1972, never protested to the defendant or to Mallory
Wijesinghe or to Miller or to anybody else, that his sale of the shares was
not voluntary though on 8th June 1970, in his letter to the Chief Accountant
CCA Ltd. (D 11) he had complained that he did not receive payment from
defendant for the 500 shares in CCA Ltd., and requested that a cheque for Rs.
5000 be sent to him. The delay in repudiating the sale of the shares is
significant. The trial judge had adverted to this delay and remarked "I am of
opinion that the delay to intimate a claim to the defendant is construable as
an affirmation of the transaction, assuming without so holding that there was
undue influence. As I have held that there is no undue influence, the question
of affirmation is irrelevant." The Court of Appeal has countered "the question
of affirmation of the transaction by delay or acquiescence was never put in
issue at the trial. The plaintiff had no opportunity of leading evidence on
this matter. In the absence of an issue, I am of the view that this finding is
unwarranted." In my view, the Court of Appeal has missed the significance of
the time lag relevantly referred to by the trial judge. Had the transfer of
the shares by the plaintiff been forced out of the plaintiff by undue
influence, and not been a voluntary one, would not the plaintiff have
complained of the undue influence and disowned the transaction as soon as he
returned, fully restored in health, to Ceylon in July 1969? The delay only
tends to show that there was no question of the plaintiff being compelled to
transfer the shares, that plaintiff never regarded himself as being coerced by
the defendant or by anybody else to transfer the shares. It was not a question
of affirmation of a transaction vitiated by undue influence, but evidence that
he was a consenting party. In my view, the plaintiff did not complain of any
undue influence for about two and a half years because he did not look upon
the transaction as one that had been forced out of him. It is to be noted that
in the aforesaid letter dated 8th June 1970 (D11) the plaintiff had called for
the sum of Rs.5000 which represented the

**278**

price of the five hundred shares in CCA Ltd. This request was made on the
basis that the transaction was a voluntary one. The Court of Appeal has
commented that "the suggestion was made, the decision was taken and it was
fully implemented between the afternoon of 24th January and the mid-day of the
26th January and it is clear that the suggestion that the plaintiff "should
resign and sell his shares was suddenly sprung upon him prior to his departure
to London for treatment and that too, for a mental ailment. From this hustling
one cannot spell coercion and rule out independent judgment on the part of
plaintiff.

The plaintiff and defendant are more or less agreed on. the times and dates
between 24th and 26th January in which they along with Mr. Miller and Mr.
Mallory Wijesinghe met and discussed the question of plaintiff's resignation
and the transfer of the shares. However while the plaintiff states that the
defendant and Miller kept on persisting, worrying and pestering him to agree
to their suggestion, the defendant asserts that the discussions were friendly
cordial and devoid of any antagonism. The trial judge has preferred to accept
the evidence of the defendant to that of the plaintiff. With regard to the
comparative veracity of Ratwatte and Gunasekera the plaintiff himself
complemented Ratwatte as not being as astute businessman. He did not, show a
flashing imagination of the type Gunasekera is endowed with and did not
display the ready wit. He spoke of the few significant events and incidents he
was called upon to depose to convincingly. He appeared to be not as clever as
Gunasekera in the witness box. I prefer to believe him.

The plaintiff's case is that he resigned . his directorship and transferred
the shares, not on his initiation but because Miller and defendant kept on
"persisting, worrying and pestering him when he was in a weak state of mind
and health to agree to their suggestion. It is this 'persisting, worrying and
pestering' indulged in by defendant and Miller that influenced him to agree to
their suggestion. It is very significant that the plaintiff does not anywhere
in his pleading or in his testimony, go so far as to state specifically that
he was pressurised or coerced to resign from his directorate and transfer the
shares. He not say that the defendant and Mallory Wijesinghe would not allow
him to depart to the airport until and unless he transferred the shares to
them. The trial Judge has found that "there is no evidence whatsoever that
there was a threat of any kind or the infusion of any fears for the future or
the present into Gunasekera's mind." Counsel

**279**

for the plaintiff did not challenge this finding. The Court of Appeal has
failed to address its mind to the ingredients of undue influence. The court's
finding that the defendant exercised undue influence is based on its
conclusion that the plaintiff to the knowledge of the defendant, suffered from
a serious mental ailment and that Miller and the defendant kept on worrying
and pestering him with their suggestion and this is indicative of the exercise
of undue influence. No authority has been cited for the proposition that
persistence or pestering by a person who is not in any fiduciary relationship
to the other is sufficient to qualify as undue influence. The defendant did
not possess at any stage, any power over the plaintiff and the plaintiff was
not in the power of the defendant or, of Miller or of Mallory Wijesinghe.
There was no question of the defendant or the others having a dominating
influence over the plaintiff. Pestering may annoy a person but is not
sufficient to compel or coerce him to do something against his will. The
classic case of undue influence is the victim's intentional submission arising
from the realisation that there is no other practical choice open to him where
the victim succumbs under pressure. There must be pressure, the practical
effect of which is compulsion or the absence of choice. The evidence of the
defendant does not show any such compulsion or pressure on the part of the
defendant. The repeated appeals to the plaintiff to resign from the two
companies and to sever all connections with those companies in view of his
ill-health and in the interest of the future development and expansion of
those companies were calculated to persuade the defendant to do the correct
thing by the companies. At the worst the appeals amounted only to pressure of
a kind which the law regards as legitimate, in a commercial transaction. The
backdrop in which the impugned transaction took place has been described by
the trial Judge as follows

"Gunasekera is a man weak in mind due to his illness. Miller is, so to say,
guardian angel of the commercial group of companies. Ratwatte is a shareholder
and director similar to Gunasekera but with his mind perhaps in a better
state, both keep on insisting that Gunasekera must give up his job as director
and his shares as a block at a price more than he paid for the sake of the
future of the company which had given him leave and passage money to go to
England. It must be noted that there is no other promise but payment of more
than he paid for the shares, six months leave, salary less the Provident Fund
contribution and ex gratia payment of Rs. 92,513.00."

**280**

The evidence further discloses that the discussions and decisions between the
several parties did not relate to a single transaction, involving the transfer
of shares between the plaintiff and defendant it was a complex transaction
involving not merely plaintiff as vendor and defendant as purchaser, but other
shareholders also as buyers and, the severance of all connection between the
plaintiff and the two companies; it was for this reason that the Board
meetings were necessary; the scheme involved transfer of shares not only to
the plaintiff but also to the three other shareholders of the two companies;
the scheme was evolved in the interest of the development and expansion of
those companies and as plaintiff had become a sick person and did not fit into
the scheme. Miller was impelled to persuade him to drop out, by resigning his
directorship and transferring his shares to the other shareholders of the
Companies. Pestering the plaintiff to co-operate with them in implementing the
scheme cannot be regarded as illegitimate pressure vitiating the consent of
the plaintiff to play his part. The Court of Appeal has failed to view the
impugned transaction in its proper perspective, and has erred in coming to the
conclusion that the defendant "by persisting, worrying and pestering" coerced
the plaintiff into the bargain. The plaintiff's consent to the contract did
not cease to be voluntary because he gave, into such worrying and chose to get
rid of the worrying by acceding to defendant's request. There was no coercion
of his will such as to vitiate his consent. The evidence discloses that the
plaintiff. has in accordance with the arrangement between him and the other
parties received on account of his, parting from the companies a sum of Rs.
227,487 from C.M.M. Ltd., (P12) and a sum of Rs. 92,513 being exgratia payment
plus a sum of Rs. 5;000, representing the price of the 500 shares held by
plaintiff in C.C.A. and Rs. 26:400 being six months leave salary less
Provident Fund contribution. It may be that the plaintiff might not have been
too happy about the transaction, but it cannot be said that the defendant
dominated him and imposed himself on him to bring about the transaction. It is
not plaintiff's case that he apprehended. some untoward consequences to
himself if he failed to comply with the request of the defendant and the
others and that was why he sold the shares at that price offered by the
defendant. The importuning on the part of the defendant and Miller, testified
to by the plaintiff does not measure up to undue influence in the eye of law
or equity and does not import improper pressure.

**281**

The Court of Appeal misconceived the nature of undue influence that would
permit a, party; to avoid a transaction to which he had apparently consented
The court was not justified on the evidence on record, in reversing the
finding of the trial Judge with regard to the issue of undue influence. In my
View the evidence does not show that the plaintiff was constrained to transfer
his shares in the two companies consequent to the exercise on him of any undue
influence by the defendant or his agents.

The trial Judge found in favour of the plaintiff on the. issue of laesio
enormis and has ordered the cancellation of the sale of the shares by
plaintiff to defendant, if defendant failed to pay the difference between the
purchase price and what according to him, was the true value. Counsel for the
defendent-appellant has-submitted that the District Judge has misdirected
himself in law in holding that the doctrine of laesio enormis applies in the
case of transfer of shares and has misdirected himself on the facts in
computing what was the true value of the said shares.

The Court of Appeal did not address itself, to the question of the
applicability of the doctrine of laesio enormis since it had held with the
plaintiff on the issue of undue influence. Since this court is holding against
the, plaintiff, that his transfer of the shares is not vitiated by undue
influence, it has become necessary to determine whether the doctrine of laesio
enormis applies to the sale of shares in a company limited by shares,
incorporated under. the provisions of the Company Law.

Wessels in his treatise on the Law of Contracts, Vol. 11, section 5081, (2nd
Ed.) says-

"There is hardly a proposition with regard to laesio enormis which has not
been the subject of considerable, controversy. In many cases we can ascertain
what the actual practice was in Holland in other cases the practice is not
clear. When the Dutch jurists discuss some of their commonest points regarding
the remedy of laesio enormis their views must often be taken as the
expressions of individual opinions rather, than as definite statements of law
as accepted in Holland."

Laesio enormis, as one of the grounds on which a contract can be rescinded in
Roman-Dutch Law is quite unknown to and contrary to the policy of English Law.
That doctrine is applied to have contracts

**282**

such as sale, lease set aside on the ground that the party who asks for
rescission has been damaged to the extent of more than half of the value of
the subject-matter of the contract. The tendency in South Africa is to
restrict the operation of rescission on the ground of laesio enormis: McGee v.
Mignon (10) Coetze v. Pretorius (11)

Wessels further states :- Sec. 5075 -

"According to the texts of the Roman Law, laesio enormis could only be
resorted to when land was sold at less than half its true value. The law of
Justinian probably did not extend the remedy to movable property. It has been
suggested that the doctrine was introduced in order to protect poor land
owners and Their children in times of stress. The remedy may, perhaps, also
have been limited to land, because land has always a more constant value than
movables."

Sec. 5077 - The Code of Justinian only speaks of the sale of land, but the
commentators extended the remedy to houses and then to movables of
considerable value.

Sec. 5079 - There has been much controversy as to the desirability of
-continuing this remedy. Thomasius denied that there was any natural equity in
'laesio enormis'. The compilers of the French Code Were divided in their
opinions though eventually they passed Article 1674 CC. as a compromise. They
restricted the operation of laesio enormis to the vendor and to immovable
property.

Sec. 5084 - "In order to set aside a sale on the ground of laesio enormis the
plaintiff, if a vendor, must prove that the true value of the article sold at
the time of the sale, and at the place where it was sold, was more than twice
the contract price -

Sec. 5097 - "(1) The remedy of laesio enormis only applies to cases where the
value of the subject matter of the sale is known and certain at the time of
the sale. If therefore the value of the thing sold cannot be determined at the
time of the sale, there cannot be laesio enormis:

If the, value of the thing sold was not, known at the time of the sale, either
because it could of be ascertained or because it was not known, the remedy
will not apply."

**283**

In Tjollo Ateljees Bpk v. Small (12) Schreiner, J.A. said at page 860 -
"laesio enormis is out of place in a modern world, with its highly complicated
commercial organisation and its ingenious selling devices." Hoexter A.J.A.,
observed at page 882, that "the doctrine of laesio enormis is obviously one
that does not accord with our modern ideas of 'contract'."

The doctrine should not be applied to ordinary commercial transactions for if
applied it would unduly hamper commerce. The doctrine should not be extended
to a case to which it is, not undisputably applicable such extension is not
suited to the conditions of today.

It was submitted by Counsel for the defendant that-the doctrine of laesio
enormis is applicable in Ceylon only to transfer of immovables and not that of
movables. He based his submission on the fact that all the case law in Ceylon
relating to the doctrine concerned immovable property: Gooneratne v. Don
Philip (13), Jayawardene v. Amerasekera (14), Punchirala v. Ahamat (15),
Sobana v. Meera Lebbe (16), Fernando v. Fernando (17), Wijesiriwardene v.
Gunasekera (18), Bodiga v. Nagoor (19), Ponnupillai v. Kurnaravelpillai (20),
Appuhamy v. Keerala(21), and there is no reported decision supporting the
applicability of the doctrine to movables. Every assuming that the doctrine
does apply to contracts of tangible movables the question arises whether it
applies to transfer of shares in limited liability companies. No reported
decision of any of the courts in South Africa or in Ceylon applying the
doctrine to such shares was cited to us and there does not appear to be any
such reported decision. A share in a limited liability company is certainly
not an immovable. It is a moot question whether it was a movable, as
understood by the Roman-Dutch Law jurists. The concept of shares in a limited
liability company was unknown to Roman Law or to the Roman-Dutch Law. It is
essentially an English Law concept. Section 63 of our Company's Ordinance 1939
provides that "shares shall be movable property and shall not be of the nature
of immovable property" Our Company's Ordinance is based on the English Company
Law. The English provision corresponding to the aforesaid section 63 is
section 182 (1) of the Companies Act of 1929 which provides that shares are
personal estate and not reality; shares are certainly not tangible chattels
and when our section 63 provides that shares shall be movable property, it
assigns shares to the category of movable

**284**

property for the purposes of the application of the, provisions of the
Companies Ordinance only and not for. purposes outside the province of Company
Law-

A share in a company is the expression of a proprietory relationship; the
share holder is the proportionate owner of the company but does not own the
company's assets which belong to the company as a separate and independent
legal entity. "Shareholders are not, in the eye of the law, part owners of the
undertaking" Per Evershed J., in Short v. Treasury Commissioners(22). A share
in a company does not represent the beneficial. ownership of a certain
proportion of the Company's property but represents the benefit of a contract
made by the shareholder with the company. In Barland's Trustee v. Steel Bros &
Co. Ltd. (23). Farwell, J., made clear the legal nature of shares

"A share is the interest of a shareholder in the company measured by a sum of
money for the purpose of liability in the first place and of interest, in the
second, but also consisting of a series of mutual covenants entered into by
all the shareholders inter se n accordance with section 16 of the Companies
Act 1862. The contract contained in the Articles of Association is one of the
original incidents of the share. A share is not a sum. of money settled in the
way suggested but is an interest measured by a sum of money and made up of
various rights contained in the contract, including the right to a sum of
money of a more or less amount."

Lord Greene in Re. G. M. Holdings Ltd.,(24) said

"A share is a chose in action. A chose in action implies the existence of some
person entitled to the rights, which are rights in action as distinct from
rights in possession."

A chose in action confers no right to possession of a physical thing.

Shares are objects of property which are bought, sold, mortgaged and
bequeathed. They are indeed the typical items of property of the modern
commercial era.

The distinction between movables and immovables is applicable to material
objects only. Yet the law applies it to rights also. Rights, no less than
things, are conceived by the law as either movable or immovable. It has
divided the whole sphere of proprietory Fights, by reference to this
distinction. The Roman law and Roman-Dutch law regarded aright as having the
same quality as its subject matter. All

**285**

rights over immovable things, whether rights in re propria or rights in re
aliena have themselves been classed as immovable property. Similarly all
rights over movables are bona mobilia themselves. The following incorporeaIs
are regarded as movables; actions in personam; actionsin rem for the recovery
of movables. A mortgage bond is a movable for its principal feature is a
personal obligation and the fight of security is merely accessory to it. But
shares are incorporeal rights which do not lend themselves to satisfactory
classification on the basis of mobility or immobility adopted by Roman or
Roman-Dutch Law. They forma distinct class of their own. A share is a bundle
of several rights and liabilities. The principal rights which a share may
carry are-

(1) the right to dividend, if while the Company is a going concern, a dividend
is duly declared;

(2) the right to vote at the meetings of members; and

(3) the right in the winding up of the company, after payment of the debts to
receive a proportionate part of the capital or otherwise to participate in the
distribution of assets of the company.

The principal duty of a shareholder, as far as the company is concerned, is to
pay what is due on the shares. The moneys payable on the share have to be paid
by the shareholder when a call for payment is made upon him by the company:

The holding of a share in a company limited by shares generally carries the
right to receive a proportion of the profits of the company and of its assets
in the winding up, and all other benefits of membership combined with an
obligation to contribute to its liabilities, all measured by a certain sum of
money which is the nominal value of the shares, and all subject to the
memorandum and articles of the company-Palmer's Company Law, Vol. I (23rd Ed.)
at page 385.

It is manifest that a share does not dovetail into the Roman or Roman-Dutch
Law categorisation of movables and immovables. To the jurists of those sytems
the concept of an incorporated company and the nature of a share with its
peculiar attributes was something inconceivable. Hence, it will be incongruent
to apply their doctrine of laesio enormis to a share which is neither a
movable nor an immovable as conceived by them. It is a matter of controversy
whether the doctrine applies to contracts relating to movables. Even assuming
that it does apply in Ceylon to movables. it does not follow that its

**286**

application can be extended to apply to transfer of shares in companies, as
shares do not fit into the Roman or Roman-Dutch Law classification of movables
or immovables. The legislature has stepped in to enact by section 63 that a
share is to be regarded as a movable but it does not follow that thereby the
legislature intended to import all the incidents of Roman or Roman-Dutch Law
relating to movables and make applicable the doctrine of laesio enormis to
commercial transactions relating to shares, as if they are movables according
to the concepts of Roman-Dutch Law jurists. Further the estimation of the
value of a share must be a matter of opinion and does not admit of precise
scientific or mathematical calculation and hence the requirements of the
remedy of laesio enormis that the value of the subject matter of the sale must
be known and certain at the time of the sale, cannot be satisfied in the case
of the sale of shares. These considerations militate against the application
of the remedy of laesio enormis to dealings in shares of incorporated
companies. Hence the District Judge misdirected himself in applying the
doctrine of laesio enormis and avoiding the sale of the said shares by
Plaintiff to Defendant. The doctrine does not apply to the sale of shares in
incorporated companies. Commercial realities militate against the adoption of
such a doctrine. In my view the doctrine instead of facilitating will be
obstructing commercial development. In view of my conclusion that the remedy
of laesio enormis is not available. to cancel the sale of shares in
incorporated companies, it is not necessary to examine the correctness of the
Judge's determination of the true value of the said shares even though counsel
for the defendant attacked the finding:

I allow the appeal, set aside the judgments of the Court of Appeal and of the
District Court and: dismiss plaintiff's action. In the special circumstances
of the case parties will bear their own costs in all the courts.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

  
**SENEVIRATNE, J.** \- I agree  
  
_Appeal allowed.  
_  
_Plaintiff's action dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/2.html_  

