##  Roshan Peiris v. Edirisinghe - SLR - 147, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986] LKSC 2;
(1986) 2 Sri LR 147 (3 April 1986)

**

147

ROSHAN PEIRIS  
v.  
EDIRISINGHE

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE, J. AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 20/85.  
C A APPEAL No. 182/80(F).  
D .C. COLOMBO No. 31 39 RE  
FEBRUARY 25, 1986.

_

Landlord and Tenant-Suit for ejectment on grounds of reasonable requirement-
Premises comprising two lots (Lot 1 and Lot 2)-Landlady at conclusion of trial
limiting relief claimed to Lot 2-Is there then an alteration of scope of
action?-S. 22 (1) (bb) of Rent Act No 7 of 1972 as amended by R' :'
(Amendment) Law No. 10 of 1977-Ss. 34 and 207 of Civil Procedure Code

_

**148**

RP sued her tenant PE to whom she had let premises: comprising two lots (Lot 1
annexe, lavatories; Lot 2: main house and kitchen) on the ground that she
reasonably required them for her own occupation after giving six months'
notice-the standard rent being less than Rs. 100 and the rent paid being Rs.
102/60 per month. A copy of the notice was sent to the Commissioner of
National Housing.

At the conclusion of the recording of evidence at the trial RP's counsel
submitted to court he was limiting the relief sought to ejectment of the
tenant only from Lot 2. The District Judge in answering the issue of
reasonable requirement held that Lot 2 is reasonably required by RP and the
members of her family for occupation as a residence and ordered that writ was
not to issue until the Commissioner of National Housing intimated to court
that alternate accommodation was available to PE who however appealed from the
judgment.

RP moved for writ of execution and at the inquiry agreed to hand over
possession of Lot 2 on or before 1.1.1985 without prejudice to his appeal.
Prior to 1.1.1985 (on 14.12.1984) the Court of Appeal taking the view that by
limiting the relief claimed to Lot 2 the plaintiff had altered the scope of
her action, set aside the judgment of the District Court and sent the case
back for fresh trial. On an appeal being preferred to the Supreme Court

**

Held

**

(1) There was here only a single contract of tenancy in respect of one
premises consisting of Lots 1 and 2

(2) After termination of the tenancy by notice the landlady was entitled to
sue her tenant in ejectment from the entirety of the premises and recover
possession thereof but there is no rule of law which obliges the landlady to
ask for and obtain an order of ejectment of the tenant from the whole of the
premises. Sections 34 and 207 of the Civil Procedure Code envisage a situation
where it is open to the landlady to restrict the claim for ejectment to a
portion of the premises. 8y this the-court was not being invited to decide the
issue of reasonable requirement on the basis that a portion and not the entire
premises was reasonably required. The basic issue is whether the premises in
suit (Lots 1 and 2 ) are reasonably required for the occupation of RP and her
children but the court is not inhibited from entering the decree of ejectment
for only a portion

(Lot 2)

(3) The facts show that the issue of reasonable requirement both on the basis
of financial considerations and family requirements had to be and was rightly
answered in favour of RP the plaintiff. Further eviction was not being sought
from the annexe occupied by PE and writ would issue only upon the Commissioner
of National Housing finding alternate accommodation. The law precludes the
tenant from canvassing the adequacy or suitability of the alternate
accommodation provided by the Commissioner.

**

APPEAL** _ from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P. C. with S. Mahenthiran_ for the appellant.

_

P. A. D. Samarasekera, P. C. with Gamini Jayasinghe and G. L. Geethananda _for
the respondent.

_

Cur adv. vult.

_

**149**

April 3, 1986. **  
ATUKORALE, J.

**

The appellant is the landlord and the respondent the tenant of residential
premises bearing assessment No. 11, 19th Lane, Colombo 7, to which the
provisions of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 apply. The premises consist of a main
house, a detached kitchen, an annexe (also detached) from the main house and
two lavatories together with the land appurtenant thereto. It is depicted as
Lots 1 and 2 in plan P3 and is of the extent of 27.40 perches. According to
the plan the main house and the kitchen fall within Lot 2 whilst the annexe
and the lavatories fall within Lot 1. There is nothing physical on the ground
to demarcate the common boundary between Lots 1 and 2. The main house contains
two bedrooms, a sitting room, a verandah and a bathroom but no lavatory. The
annexe contains one bedroom and a small room. The standard rent of the
premises does not exceed Rs. 100 per month, the actual rent paid by the
respondent to the appellant being Rs. 102/60 a month.

The appellant gave the respondent 6 months' notice to quit the premises on the
ground that she reburied the same for her own occupation. A copy of this
notice was sent to the Commissioner of National Housing. The respondent was
required to vacate the premises on or before 30.6.1978. He failed to do so. On
23.1 1 .1978 the appellant filed the present action in the District Court to
have the respondent ejected from the premises. In the plaint she pleaded,
inter alia, that she reasonably required the premises for her own and her
family's occupation as a residence in terms of s. 22 (1) (bb) of the Rent Act
as amended by the Rent (Amendment) Law, No.. 10 of 1977. If she succeeded in
establishing this ground to the satisfaction of court she was entitled to a
decree for ejectment of the respondent from the premises as prayed for by her
in her prayer to the plaint. I stress these words for the reason that although
she was entitled to an order of ejectment of the respondent from the entirety
of the premises, there is, in my view, no legal impediment to limiting her
claim for ejectment to a portion of the premises. However no writ of execution
of the decree could be issued by the court until after the Commissioner of
National Housing had notified court that he was able to provide alternate
accommodation to the respondent-s-22(1C) of the Rent Act as amended.

**150**

The respondent in his answer denied the various averments set out in the
plaint. At the trial only two issues were raised, both on behalf of the
appellant : -

1\. Are the premises in suit reasonably required for occupation as a residence
for the plaintiff (the appellant) and the members of her family?

2\. If issue 1 is answered in the affirmative, is the plaintiff (the
appellant) entitled to a decree for ejectment?

The appellant and the respondent gave evidence but called no witnesses. At the
conclusion of the evidence learned counsel appearing for the appellant in the
trial court stated to court that the appellant was seeking ejectment of the
respondent from Lot 2. In the course of his judgment the trial judge answered
the issues in the following manner: -

1\. Lot 2 in extent 13.50 perches depicted in plan P3 is reasonably required
for occupation as a residence for the appellant and the members of her family.

2\. Yes.

Upon this basis he entered judgment in ejectment of the respondent from Lot 2
"which is a portion of assessment No. 11, 19th Lane, Kollupitiya" and for
damages in a sum of Rs. 102/60 cts. from 1.1.1980 until vacant possession was
given. He directed that writ was not to issue until the Commissioner of
National Housing intimated to court that alternate accommodation was available
to the respondent.

The respondent appealed there from to the Court of Appeal. Pending the appeal,
an application was made by the appellant to execute the decree after the
Commissioner of National Housing notified the District Court that he was able
to provide alternate accommodation to the respondent. At the inquiry into this
application the respondent agreed to hand over possession of Lot 2 on or
before 1.1.1985 without, of course, prejudice to his rights in appeal. Prior
to that date, however, on 14.12.1984 the Court of Appeal after hearing the
appeal which was accelerated at the instance of the respondent made order
allowing the appeal, setting aside the judgment of the District Judge and
remitting the case to the District Court for a fresh trial. The Court of
Appeal seems to have taken the view that the statement made by

**151**

learned counsel for the appellant in the trial court at the conclusion of the
evidence showed that the appellant was "limiting the scope of the action to
one lot involved, that is Lot 2 in premises No. 11 ". The Court held that the
intimation to court by learned counsel appearing for the appellant that she
was seeking ejectment of the respondent only from Lot 2 was belated and would
have resulted in prejudice to the respondent in his defence. In remitting the
case to the District Court for a fresh trial the Court commented that at the
new trial one issue, amongst others, could be in regard to the question of the
reasonable requirement of Lot 2 for the occupation of the appellant and the
members of her family, subject to whatever defences the respondent may take
thereto. The Court, in conclusion desisted from making an order for costs
against the appellant `as the learned Judge has accepted that the reasonable
requirement of the plaintiff (the appellant) and her family for the occupation
of the premises is greater than that of the defendant (the respondent) and as
the plaintiff has shown that great hardship is caused to her by paying a high
rent to a flat in which she lives while having her own premises which she is
unable to get from the defendant". From the judgment of the Court of Appeal
the appellant has appealed to this court

It is clear that in the instant case there was a single contract of tenancy in
respect of one premises consisting of lots 1 and 2. Under the common law a
monthly tenancy could be terminated upon a month's notice. If on the
expiration of the period of the notice the tenant failed to vacate the
premises, the subject matter of the tenancy, the landlord is entitled to sue
the tenant in ejectment from the premises, i.e. the entirety of the premises
let to the tenant, and to recover possession thereof. But there is, in my
view, no rule of law either under the common law or under our substantive or
procedural law which obliges the landlord to ask for and obtain an order of
ejectment of the tenant from the whole of the premises. S. 34 and the
explanation to s.207 of our Civil Procedure Code seems to militate against
such a contention. It is open to the landlord in such a case to restrict his
claim for ejectment to a portion of the premises. Nor is there anything in
s.22 of the Rent Act as amended which is inconsistent with this legal
position. That section forbids the institution of and takes away the
jurisdiction of the court to entertain an action for the ejectment of a tenant
of a certain class of premises to which the Act applies except upon certain
grounds specified therein. Once the landlord establishes the existence of any
of those grounds he is entitled to a decree of ejectment of the tenant from
the premises. But

**152**

it does not affect or curb the right of the landlord to ask for and obtain
from court a decree of ejectment not from the whole but from a portion of the
premises let to the tenant. Whatever the consequences of restricting his claim
for ejectment may be to the landlord, the court is not inhibited from entering
a decree for a portion of the premises as prayed for by the landlord.

The statement made by counsel for the appellant in the trial court after the
conclusion of the evidence is that the appellant is seeking the ejectment of
the respondent from Lot 2. On the face of the statement it would appear that
the appellant was inviting the court, in answering the consequential issue No.
2' to restrict the order of ejectment to Lot No. 2. Prima facie there is
nothing in that statement to indicate that the appellant was asking the court
to decide the main issue (No. 1) upon the basis that Lot 2 and not the entire
premises was reasonably required for her and her family's occupation as a
residence. The answer given by the learned District Judge to issue No. 1
suggests that he construed the statement of learned counsel to mean that the
appellant was confining the issue of reasonable requirement to Lot 2 alone.
The Court of Appeal also appears to have placed the same construction on
learned counsel's statement. In my view this construction is unreasonable and
unwarranted. I hold that there has been no change in the scope of the action
as constituted.

The basic issue in this case is whether the premises in suit (both Lots 1 and
2) is reasonably required for the occupation of the appellant and her
children. As all the material necessary for a determination of this issue are
before us I will proceed to consider the submission of learned counsel for the
appellant that the appellant has established that her need of the premises
(Lots 1 and 2) is much greater and more urgent than that of the respondent. On
this point the learned District Judge seems to have had no hesitation in
accepting the evidence of the appellant and has come to a strong finding in
her favour. The Court of Appeal too has expressed the opinion that the
premises are reasonably required for the occupation of the appellant and her
family. There are thus concurrent findings of fact in favour of the appellant.
There is, in my view, ample evidence to support these findings of fact. The
appellant is a divorcee with two dependent children. She is employed as a
journalist and draws a salary of Rs. 1,100 per month. She also gets from her
husband a sum of Rs. 250 as maintenance for the two children, one of whom on
enrolment as an Attorney-at-Law will cease to get any maintenance. She is not

**153**

possessed of any other income. She pays a sum of Rs. 500 a month as rent for
the fiat she occupies with her children. She receives from the respondent a
sum of Rs. 102.60 cts. as rent for the premises in suit. With the costs of
living going up she manages with great difficulty. Sometimes she has to borrow
money from her employer. She states that her position is desperate. This sums
up her financial plight. The respondent is a government pensioner drawing
about Rs. 600 a month as pension. He has 4 grown-up children between 20 to 27
years of age. One is learning work and the other three are employed. The
aggregate monthly income of the respondent and his children is about Rs 2,422.
He pays a rent, of Rs. 102 60 cts. to the appellant. Financially the
respondent and the members of his family do not appear to be in want. The
other relevant factor pertaining to this issue is the one relating to
alternate accommodation for the respondent. The Rent (Amendment) Law, No 10 of
19 77, was enacted to assist landlords who are owners of one residential
premises to recover possession of same. According to the scheme of this
amending legislation once a decree is entered by the District Court for the
ejectment of the tenant on the ground of reasonable requirement in terms of s.
22 (1) (bb), the decree remains unexecutable until after the Commissioner of
National Housing notifies to court of his ability to provide the tenant with
alternate accommodation. The tenant is thus assured of alternate accommodation
before the execution of the decree. Moreover in the instant case the
respondent vis-a-vis the appellant could continue in occupation of the annexe
as the order for ejectment is confined to Lot 2 only. It has also to be noted
that the law precludes the tenant from canvassing the adequacy or, suitability
of the alternate accommodation provided by the Commissioner. There is thus
sufficient evidence to support the concurrent findings by the District Court
and the Court of Appeal on the first issue relating to reasonable requirement.
For the above reasons issue No. 1 is answered in the affirmative. Issue No 2
is also answered in the affirmative in so far as Lot 2 in plan P3 is concerned
so that the appellant will be entitled to an order of ejectment of the
respondent and those holding under him from Lot 2 She will, however, not be
entitled to an order of ejectment in respect of Lot 1 . The appellant will
also be entitled to damages at the rate of Rs 102.60 cts. per month from 1. 1
.1 980 until she is placed in possession of Lot 2. It is also directed that no
person other than the appellant or her two children (whose names will be
specified by the District Judge in the decree) shall enter into occupation of
Lot 2 upon the vacation thereof by the

**154**

respondent or upon his ejectment there from-vide s. 22 (3) of the Rent Act as
amended by the Rent (Amendment) Act, No. 55 of 1980. Writ of ejectment from
Lot 2 will not issue till 5.6.1986. It will issue on or at any time after
6.6.1986. The learned District Judge is directed to enter decree in the above
terms. The appeal is therefore allowed and the judgments of the Court of
Appeal and the District Court are set aside. The respondent will pay the
appellant a sum of Rs. 525 as costs of this appeal. The case is now remitted
to the District Court for decree to be entered in terms of this judgment.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J.** \- I agree.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. **\- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/2.html_  

