##  Philip Gordon James Benwell v. The Attorney General - SLR - 30, Vol 1 of
1986 [1985] LKSC 2; (1986) 1 Sri LR 30 (20 December 1985)

**

30

PHILIP GORDON JAMES BENWELL  
V.** **  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE, J. AND TAMBIAH, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 56/84.  
C.A. APPEAL No. 63/83 AND C.A. (REV.) APPLICATION No. 978/82.  
H.C. COLOMBO CASE No. EXTRADITION 1/1981.  
NOVEMBER 13, 14 AND 15, 1985.

_

Extradition - Extradition Law No. 8 of 1977 - Authentication of documents -
Revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal.

_

In extradition proceedings under our Extradition Law No. 8 of 1977 the High
Court Judge as a Judge of the Court of committal exercises a jurisdiction
conferred by the statute itself. Such proceedings are judicial proceedings and
cannot be regarded as wholly administrative process and they are amenable to
the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. The certificate appended
to the proceedings by the Stipendiary Magistrate of the State of New South
Wales constitutes due authentication although he did not certify separately
each page of the proceedings or the evidence of each witness.

The requisition for the appellants extradition to Australia where he was
wanted on charges of embezzlement and false pretence was correctly made to the
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

_Per_ Atukorale, J.

Our extradition law provides for the extradition of fugitives to and from
designated Commonwealth countries and foreign States (called treaty States).
Proceedings in extradition are founded on international obligations arising
out of mutual agreement between different countries. These obligations involve
a very high sense of responsibility and commitment on the part of such
countries. Extradition law is designed to prevent a fugitive who has committed
a crime in one country from seeking asylum in another to

**31**

which he has fled to avoid trial and punishment. It rests upon the plainest
principles of justice. It is a law which is of vital importance to the public
administration of criminal justice as well as to the security of different
countries.

**

Per Atukorale, J.

**

It is indeed in the rarest instance that a fugitive from justice can be heard
to complain of unjust opression and harassment from proceedings lawfully
commenced, though for a second time, for the purpose of determining whether he
should be extradited or not to his country which he has fled and which is so
anxious to secure his return in order to bring him to justice for the offences
he is accused of having committed therein.

**

Cases referred to

**_(1) Alles v. Palaniappa Chetty (1917) 19 NLR 334.

(2) Re. Ganapathipillai 21 NLR 48 1.

(3) Thompson v. Gould [19 10] AC 420.

(4)Rex v. Oakas (1959] 2 QB 350.

_ _

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with C. P. llangakoon (Jr.) and Miss Saumya de Silva
for the appellant.

Priyantha Perera, Deputy Solicitor-General with K. C. Kamalasabeyson, S. S.
C., Mervyr, Samarakoon, S. C. and T. G. Gooneratne, S. A. for the respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

December 20, 1985. **  
ATUKORALE, J.

**

The appellant is an Australian national residing in Sri Lanka. By a
requisition dated 14.4.1981 addressed to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, the
Attorney-General of Australia on behalf of, the Government of Australia, whit'
is a designated Commonwealth country for the purposes of the Extradition Law,
No. 8 of 1977, requested that the appellant, a person accused in the State of
New South Wales, of 18 offences of fraudulent misappropriation contrary to s.
178 A of the Crimes Act of 1900 (N.S.W.) and one offence of false pretence
contrary to s. 179 of the said Act, be returned to Australia. The appellant's
extradition was sought under the provisions of the aforesaid Extradition Law
of Sri Lanka, hereinafter referred to as the Law. In pursuance of this request
His Excellency the' President, who is the Minister in charge of the subject of
extradition, issued in terms of s. 8 (3) thereof an authority to proceed to
the High Court of Colombo which then issued a warrant for the arrest of the
appellant. After he was arrested and produced the High Court commenced
proceedings under s. 10 of the Law with a view to committing him to custody to
await extradition.

**32**

At the hearing evidence was led in support of the request for extradition. It
contained, inter alia, of exhibits E 1 to E352 and the depositions of
witnesses contained in pages 1 to 260 of part A of the proceedings before the
Stipendiary Magistrate of the State of New South Wales. At the conclusion of
the hearing the learned High Court Judge discharged the appellant from custody
upholding the main objection advanced on behalf of the appellant, namely, that
there was no due authentication as required by s. 14 of the Law of the
documents setting out the depositions and exhibits produced in evidence before
the Stipendiary Magistrate for the reason that the latter had failed to comply
with the provisions of s. 33A (2) of the Extradition (Commonwealth Countries)
Act, 1966, which required him, inter alia, to take the evidence on oath or
affirmation of each witness appearing before him and to cause the evidence to
be reduced to writing and to certify at the end of that writing that the
evidence was taken by him. The learned Judge held that as the Stipendiary
Magistrate had failed to make the requisite certificate either at the end of
the writing of the evidence of each witness or even at the end of the
recording of all the evidence, there had been no due authentication of the
said documents within the meaning of s. 14 of the Law. He therefore held that
the documents were inadmissible in evidence and discharged the appellant.

The Attorney-General of Sri Lanka, who is the present respondent and on whose
behalf evidence was led before the High Court, invoked the appellate as well
as the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to have this order set
aside. The Court of Appeal whilst upholding the objection of the appellant
that there was no right of appeal from an order of the High Court in
extradition proceedings overruled his further objection to the maintainability
of the revision application and held that the jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal extended to the revision of such an order. On the merits the Court held
that the High Court erred in determining the question of due authentication of
the relevant documents by reference to the provisions of s. 33A (3) of the
said Act of 1966 and ruled that that question should have been determined
having regard solely to the provisions of s. 14 (2) (a) of our Law. Acting in
revision the Court set aside the order of the High Court and remitted the case
to the High Court for an appropriate order on the basis that the documents in
question had been duly authenticated as required by our Law. The present
appeal is from this judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**33**

At the hearing before us learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the
Court of Appeal erred in holding that it had jurisdiction in revision in
matters appertaining to extradition. It was his contention that extradition
proceedings envisaged under our law, though conducted partly in the High Court
and also, in the sole instance of an application for a writ of habeas corpus,
in the Court of Appeal, are when regarded in their totality in the nature of
an administrative process to which the High Court is drawn as an instrument of
that process. Being an administrative process the only remedy, he submitted,
in respect of any matter arising out of such proceedings in the High Court is
by way of writ procedure to the Court of Appeal and that the revisionary
jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal did not lie. In support of his submission
that extradition proceedings are in the nature of an administrative process
learned counsel pointed out that no person could be dealt with under the law
‘except in pursuance of an Order of the Minister... issued in pursuance of a
request to a Minister by or on behalf of a Government' of the country or State
in which the person to be extradited is accused or was convicted ; that on
receipt of such a request 'the Minister may issue an authority to proceed
unless it appears to him that an order for extradition of the person concerned
could not lawfully be made in accordance with the provisions of the law' :
that if a High Court judge issues a provisional warrant for the arrest of a
fugitive person he must forthwith give notice of its issue to a Minister and
transmit to him the information and evidence upon which it was issued, upon
which communication the Minister ‘may in any case and shall if he decides not
to issue an authority to proceed' by order cancel the warrant and if the
person concerned has been arrested thereunder discharge him from custody; that
the High Court is only a court of committal and that in certain circumstances
the Minister may not order extradition despite the decision of the High Court
to commit. Learned counsel stressed that except in the case of a decision in
favour of the fugitive person by the High Court or by the Court of Appeal upon
an application to it for a writ of habeas corpus, it is the Minister who
eventually decides on the actual extradition, a decision which is dependent on
matters of policy and expediency. He submitted that our Extradition Law is a
self contained enactment subject to its own procedure and that it would offend
the very scheme of the law to hold that the revisionary jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal was available in the particular circumstance of this
particular type of proceeding.

**34**

The order of the High Court Judge which was sought to be revised in the Court.
of Appeal is one that was made in pursuance of the provisions of s. 10 (4) of
the Law. s. 10 (2) provides that for the purposes of proceedings under s. 10,
a court of committal (which is the High Court) shall have the like
jurisdiction and powers as though the proceedings were in respect of an
offence triable by that court. S. 10 (4) stipulates, inter alia, that where an
authority to proceed has been issued in respect of a person arrested and
produced before the court of committal and the court is satisfied, after
hearing evidence, that the offence to which the authority relates is an
extraditable offence and it is further satisfied, in the case of a person
accused of the offence, that the evidence would be sufficient to warrant his
trial for that offence if it had been committed within the jurisdiction of the
court, then the court shall, unless his committal is prohibited by any other
provisions of that law, commit him to custody to await his extradition
thereunder, But if the court is not so satisfied or if the committal of the
person is so prohibited, the court shall discharge him from custody. Whilst
subsection (2) of s. 10 in effect confers in so far as proceedings under that
section are concerned, the same jurisdiction and powers on a court of
committal as if it were a court of trial, subsection (4) mandates the making
of an order after hearing evidence either committing or discharging him. A
High Court judge as a judge of the court of committal is thus required to
exercise a jurisdiction conferred on him by the statute itself. The
proceedings that take place before him are judicial proceedings and the order
he makes is a judicial order. The submission of learned counsel for the
appellant that extradition proceedings under the Law are in their nature a
wholly administrative process cannot thus be sustained. The question that
arises next is whether such an order made in such proceedings is amenable to
the revisionary jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. The jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal to act, in revision is set out in Article 138 of the
Constitution. It enacts that the Court of Appeal shall have and exercise,
subject to the provisions of the Constitution or of any law, sole and
exclusive cognizance, by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in intergram
of all causes, suits, actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which a
court of first instance, tribunal or other institution may have taken
cognizance. The revisionary jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal by
this article is indeed very wide and general and clearly it has the right to
revise any order made by a court of first instance including the High Court.
There is nothing either in the Constitution or in the Extradition Law or any

**35**

other enactment which in any way limits or restricts the width and generality
of the powers of the Court of Appeal to revise an order made by the High Court
under s. 10(4) of the Law. The Court of Appeal was therefore correct in
holding that it had jurisdiction to revise the order of the learned High Court
Judge in the instant case. The view I have formed gains support from two
decisions of the Supreme Court - Alles v. Palaniappa Chetty (1) and in Re.
Ganapathipillai (2) - in both of which proceedings were taken under the
English Fugitive Offenders Act, 1881, which was then applicable to Sri Lanka.
In the former case the order of the Magistrate issuing a warrant for the
arrest of the fugitive was challenged by way of revision to the Supreme Court
whilst in the latter case the order of the Magistrate refusing to order the
fugitive to be returned to Kedah was sought to be revised. In both cases
objection was taken that the powers of revision which were then vested in the
Supreme Court were inapplicable to extradition proceedings under the Fugitive
Offenders Act which, as in our Law, contained no legal provision for appeals
or applications for revision of orders made there under. In both cases the
Supreme Court overruled the objection and held that the provisions of s. 21
(2), later s. 19 of the Courts Ordinance then in force were sufficiently wide
to confer on the Supreme Court the power to revise and correct proceedings
held by the Magistrate under the fugitive Offenders Act. It is significant to
note that the provisions of s. 21 (2) of the Courts Ordinance were
substantially the same as contained in Article 138 (1) of the Constitution in
so far as the jurisdiction in revision is concerned.

This brings me to the substantive question that was raised and argued in the
High Court and the Court of Appeal as well as before us, namely, whether the
exhibits E 1 to E 352 and the depositions contained in pages 1 to 260 of part
A of the proceedings held before the Stipendiary Magistrate of New South Wales
have or have not been duly authenticated as required by s. 14 (2) of our
Extradition Law, No. 8 of 1977. The High Court held that they were not, as
maintained by the appellant. The Court of Appeal reversed this finding and
held that they were duly authenticated, as maintained by the Attorney-General.
The relevant portion of s. 14 is as follows :

".(2) A document shall be deemed to be duly authenticated for the purposes of
this section -

**36**

(a) in the case of a document purporting to set out evidence given as
aforesaid, if the document purports to be certified by a judge or other
officer in or of the country or State in question to be the original document
containing or recording that evidence or a true copy of such document ;

(b) in the case of a document which purports to have been received in evidence
as aforesaid or to be a copy of a document so received, if the document
purports to be certified as aforesaid to have been, or to be a true copy of a
document which has been so received ;

(c) ... and in any such case the document is authenticated either by the oath
of a witness, or by the official seal of a Minister, of the designated
Commonwealth country or treaty State in question."

In construing the true meaning of this subsection I do not think it is
permissible to have recourse to the corresponding provisions of the Australian
law of extradition as was done by the learned High Court Judge. There is no
justification for doing so. It is imperative that the court should have regard
solely to the provisions of our law because what constitutes due
authentication of a document is set out in the above subsection. The material
portions of the certificate of the Stipendiary Magistrate read as follows

"I. Kevin Robert Webb, the undersigned, one of Her Majesty's Stipendiary
Magistrates ... hereby certify that on the third, fourth, fifth and sixth days
of February, in the year of Our Lord one thousand nine hundred and eighty one,
there appeared before me .... the persons hereinafter named who, being duly
severally sworn, gave evidence on oath consisting of testimony given orally
for transmission to the country of Sri Lanka ....."

And I further certify that I caused the said testimony of each of them to be
reduced to writing. which said writing is constituted in the documents annexed
hereto and numbered '1' to '260' inclusive. And I further certify that the
said documents annexed hereto and numbered '1' to '260' are the original
documents truly recording the evidence so given on oath in the Commonwealth of
Australia by the said persons and are a true record of the said testimony so
taken by me.

And I further certify that the documents annexed hereto and numbered as
exhibits ‘1' to '352' inclusive are true copies of the documents received in
evidence by me in the proceedings

**37**

conducted before me in the Commonwealth of Australia on the said days for
taking the said evidence and testimony.''

It is dated 12 .2. 1981 and signed by the Stipendiary Magistrate. There is
also another document signed by and bearing the official seal of the Attorney-
General of Australia, who is a Minister of the Government of Australia. It
reads as follows

GIVEN UNDER MY HAND and OFFICIAL SEAL affixed to the tape binding all the
annexed documents."

This is dated 14.4.1981. Hence there is only one certificate of the
Stipendiary Magistrate and a single affixation of the official seal of the
Minister. The certificate is to the effect that the depositions are the
original documents recording the evidence of witnesses given on oath before
him and that the exhibits are true copies of the documents received in
evidence by him at the proceedings conducted by him for taking evidence. S.
14(2)(a) of the Law; which relates to depositions, stipulates that a document
puporting to set out evidence given on oath shall be deemed to be duly
authenticated if it purports to be certified by the Judge to be the original
document containing or recording that evidence and if it is authenticated by
the official seal of a Minister. Similarly s. 14 (2) (b); which relates to
exhibits, stipulates that a true copy of a document purporting to have been
received in evidence shall be deemed to be duly authenticated if it purports
to be certified by a Judge as a true copy of the document which has been so
received in evidence by him and if it is authenticated by the official seal of
a Minister. In my view there has been full compliance by both the Stipendiary
Magistrate and the Attorney-General with the two-fold requirements of each of
the above two stipulations. The fact that the certificate of the Stipendiary
Magistrate and the authentication of the Attorney-General relate to the
entirety of the depositions and the exhibits does not in my view detract from
the validity of the certificate or the authentication. The certificate of the
Stipendiary Magistrate and the authentication of the Attorney-General of the
entire set sufficiently vouch for the genuineness of each of the documents
comprising the bundle. There is no mandatory requirement, as urged on behalf
of the appellent, that each deposition and each exhibit (or a true copy
thereof) should ex facie be individually and separately certified by the Judge
and seated by the official seal of the Attorney-General. To uphold the
contention of the appellant would do

**38**

violence to the ordinary and natural meaning of the clear and unequivocal
words of the subsection. A plain reading of the subsection shows that there is
nothing therein which bars one composite and all-embracing certificate of the
Judge given at the end of the proceeding before him or an authentication in a
similar way being given by the Minister. "it is a strong thing to read into an
Act of Parliament words which are not there, and, in the absence of clear
necessity, it is a wrong thing to do"" -per Lord Mersey in Thompson v. Gould
(3). "Where the literal reading of a statute ... produces an intelligible
result....there is no ground for reading in words according to what may be the
supposed intention of Parliament"- per Lord Parker, C.J. in Rex v: Oaken (4).
Where the language of an Act is clear and explicit, the courts must give
effect to it whatever may be the consequences for in that case the words of
the Statute speak the intention of the legislature-vide Craies on Statute Law,
11th Edition, p.64. Under the circumstances I reject the narrow and strict
interpretation that was sought to be placed on s.-14(2) by learned counsel for
the appellant and uphold the conclusion of the Court of Appeal that there has
been due authentication of the documents as required by that subsection.

It was also submitted on behalf of the appellant that the Court of Appeal
erred in exercising its revisionary powers in the special facts and
circumstances of this case. It was specifically stressed that the appellant
had already been put to the expense and harassment of contesting three
extradition proceedings, namely, the first application in which the High Court
committed him to custody in respect of 12 out of the present 19 charges, the
habeas corpus application made by him consequent thereon to the Court of
Appeal which made order discharging him on the ground of insufficiency of
evidence to warrant his trial on those charges and the proceedings in this
case. His counsel urged that it would be unjust and oppressive to put the
appellant in jeopardy of another proceeding for his extradition. Our
extradition law provides for the extradition of fugitives to and from
designated Commonwealth countries and foreign States (called treaty States).
Proceedings in extradition are founded on international obligations arising
out of mutual agreement between different countries. These obligations involve
a very high sense of responsibility and commitment on the part of such
countries. Extradition law is designed to prevent a fugitive who has committed
a crime in one country from seeking asylum in another to which he has fled to
avoid trial and punishment. It rests upon the plainest principles of justice.
It is a law which is of vital

**39**

importance to the public administration of criminal justice as well as to the
security of different countries. The instant proceedings commenced in
consequence of a second request made of the Sri Lankan Government by the
Government of Australia within whose territory the appellant is accused of
having committed grave crimes involving embezzlement and false pretence. His
discharge stemmed purely and solely out of a misconstruction of the law by the
Judge of the court of committal. It is indeed in the rarest instance that a
fugitive from justice can be heard to complain of unjust oppression and
harassment from proceedings lawfully commenced, though for a second time, of
the purpose of determining whether he should be extradited or not to his
country which he has fled and which is so anxious to secure his return in
order to bring him to justice for the offences he is accused of having
committed therein. Considering the totality of all the above circumstances
including those urged on behalf of the appellant I am of the view that the
interests of justice called for the intervention of the Court of Appeal by way
of revision.

Learned counsel for the appellant also submitted that the requisition for the
appellant's extradition was not made to the appropriate Minister in charge of
the subject of extradition but to the Minister of Foreign Affairs and that the
requisition was therefore bad in law. I cannot agree with this submission
either. As pointed out by the learned Deputy Solicitor-General, the Minister
of Foreign Affairs, according to international practice, is the intermediary
between one country and another and communications between countries are
chanelled through him. Moreover it is not the requisition of the Foreign
Minister but the authority to proceed issued by the appropriate Minister of
this country which empowers the Court of committal to commence proceedings for
the committal of the fugitive.

For the above reasons the order of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the
appeal is dismissed. I also direct the High Court to which this case must now
be remitted to hear and dispose of the matter as early as possible.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.** \- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J. **\- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/2.html_  

