##  Nanayakkara v. Navaratne - SLR - 35, Vol 1 of 1985 [1984] LKSC 2; (1985) 1
Sri LR 35 (22 October 1984)

**

35

NANAYAKKARA  
v.  
NAVARATNE

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WIMALARATNE, J., COLIN-THOME, J.- AND RODRIGO, J.  
S. C. APPEAL No. 55/81 - C. A. APPEAL No. 382/74 (F) - C. R. MATALE  
No. 16152.  
OCTOBER 1, 1984.

_

    Landlord and Tenant - Tenant evicted under partition decree from premises to which Rent Restriction Act applied -Right of. Tenant to sue for restoration. to possession - Actio Conducti - Civil Procedure Code, section 328.

_

The plaintiff, the tenant of one Davith Appuhamy occupied premises situated on
a land in respect of which a partition suit was filed. Davith Appuhamy who was
the 22nd defendant died during the pendency of the action and in his room
Agnes (the present

**36**

appellant), her sister and the sister's husband were substituted as 25th, 24th
and 23rd defendants respectively. The plaintiff treated Agnes as his landlady.
By the final decree, a lot in which was situated the house occupied by, the
plaintiff was alloted to Agnes,-her sister and the sister's husband. Although
the Rent Restriction Act applied to the premises occupied by the plaintiff,
Agnes, her sister and sister's husband took out writ under section 62 of the
Partition Act and had the plaintiff evicted. Thereafter they sold the premises
to a third party who installed his=: own tenant in the premises. The plaintiff
filed this, suit naming Agnes as defendant, to be restored to possession. The
District Judge dismissed the action as Agnes had parted with possession but
the Court of Appeal reversed this finding.

**

Held -

**

(1) Privity of contract had been established between the tenant (plaintiff)
and the new owner (Agnes)'

(2) Although the plaintiff failed to seek redress in the partition suit yet
the plaintiff was not debarred from invoking the provisions of s. 328 of the
Civil Procedure Code.

(3) One of the duties of a landlord is to guarantee to the tenant quiet
possession of the premises let and a personal bona fide: action the actio
conducti (not possessory action) is available to the tenant to claim the use
and occupation of the property let and the performance of the duties imposed
on the landlord. The action may be brought by the tenant or by any person who
succeeds him in his capacity of tenant and it lies against the landlord or any
person who succeeds him in his capacity of landlord.

**

APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

J _. W. Subasinghe, P. C. with Miss E. S, M. Edirisinghe for defendant-
appellant.

A. P. Niles with Lalith Gamlath for plaintiff-respondent.

_

_Cur. adv. vult.

_

October 22, 1984.

**WIMALARATNE, J.

**

The plaintiff-respondent was the monthly tenant of premises No. 12, Matale
Road, Rattota from about the year 1954. The premises were subject to the Rent
Restriction Act. The original landlord was one W. P. Davith Appuhamy, the
father of the defendant-appellant. An action (D. C. Matale case No. P263) was
instituted for the partition of the land in which the premises are situated,
and Davith Appuhamy was the 22nd defendant in that action ; the plaintiff-
respondent was however not a party. Davith Appuhamy died in 1965, during the
pendency of the partition action, and the defendant-appellant Agnes, her
sister and sister's husband were substituted as the 25th, 24th and 23rd
defendants respectively in the room of the 22nd defendant: It is common ground
that after the death of Davith Appuhamy, Agnes was

**37**

recognised as the landlady. Agnes had once sought to have the plaintiff
ejected, but without success that was after Davith Appuhamy's death, but
before final decree.

Final decree in the partition action was entered on 13.05.1969, and lot 1'1 in
partition plan No. 903C, in which lot the premises in question are situated,
was allotted to the 23rd, 24th and 25th defendants. On 09.03.1971 they made an
application under section 62 of the Partition Act (Cap. 69) for delivery of
possession of lot 11 to them. The fiscal effected delivery on 16.03.1971 by
ejecting the plaintiff and his family, and placing the defendants in
possession. Four days later, on 21.03.1971, the defendants sold and
transferred the premises to one Peiris on deed D9 and Peiris's tenant one
Samarasinghe went into occupation. The plaintiff instituted the present action
against Agnes on 22.03.1971 seeking that he be put, placed and quieted in
possession as tenant under her, and that an order for ejectment be entered
against her and her agents. He reserved the right to claim damages in a
separate action.

Although the learned trial Judge correctly held that the plaintiff's tenancy
rights were not wiped out by the final decree entered in the partition action,
he dismissed the plaintiff's action for the reason that the defendant had
divested herself of title the day before this action was instituted, and hence
no relief could be granted against her.

The Court of Appeal reversed this finding of the trial judge holding that the
defendant did not cease to be the landlord of the plaintiff on the mere sale
of the property, until privity of contract was established between the tenant
and the new owner. Answering another contention made on behalf of the
defendant, the Court of Appeal took the view that notwithstanding the failure
of the plaintiff to seek redress in the partition action itself by invoking
the provisions of section 328 of the Civil Procedure Code, yet the plaintiff
was not debarred from asking for a decree in a separate action for the
restoration of possession on the basis of the tenancy. Answering yet another
contention, that of the futility of a decree for possession against the
defendant who was out of possession and because such a decree can never be,
enforced against the defendants long as the tenant of the vendee is in
possession, the Court of Appeal took the view that that question does not
arise at this stage, and could only arise when the plaintiff seeks to enforce
the decree.

**38**

It seems to me that the Court of Appeal was correct, in its conclusion on all;
the above findings. Learned Counsel for -the defendant-appellant contended
before us that there-is no basis for the present action either on any
principle of the common law or on any statutory. provision. Learned Counsel
for the plaintiff-respondent argued that this is,- a: possessory action
instituted by a tenant in possession who had been,, ousted. I do not think so,
because a possessory action can be instituted only if a person in possession
has been dispossessed of immovable property otherwise than by, process of law.
Here the plaintiff-had been dispossessed as a result of an order for delivery
of possession entered under the Partition Act. The fact that the plaintiff's
rights were not wiped out by the partition decree is a different matter
altogether.

What then, is the basis for the present action ? Admittedly the defendant was
the plaintiff's landlord on the date-of ejectment. One of the duties of a
landlord is to guarantee to the tenant quiet enjoyment of the premises let.
The landlord is under a duty not to interfere with the tenant's occupation. He
commits a breach of that duty if he either dispossessed the -tenant or if he
disturbs him in his beneficial enjoyment. Dispossession Dispossession may take
the form of actual ejectment of the, tenant from the leased premises; or on
any conduct by the landlord having the same effect - Wille, Landlord & Tenant
in South Africa. (4th Edition) page The 'actio conducti' is the action
available to the tenant in claiming from the, landlord the use and occupation
of the property let, and the performance of the duties imposed on the
landlord. Wille, page 123 ; Voet .19.2.14. The action may be brought by the
tenant or by any person who succeeds him in his capacity of tenant and it lies
against the landlord or any person who succeeds him in his capacity of
landlord. The action is a personal bona fide action which is granted to the
lessee and to his heirs against the lessor and against his heirs - Voet -19.2.
14 Gane's translation Vol. 3 page 418).

The conduct of the landlord had the effect of dispossessing the tenant. The
landlord was: a party to the application for an order for delivery of
possession. She proceeded with the fiscal to execute that order. The fiscal
ejected the plaintiff and his family on that order. The fiscal thereupon
placed the landlord in possession. This was conduct amounting to dispossession
by the landlord himself, by abuse of the

**39**

process of Court. A cause of action therefore arose to the plaintiff to sue
the defendant to have himself restored to the possession of the premises as
well as for damages.

This Appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.

**

COLIN THOME, J.** \- I agree.

**

RODRIGO, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed with costs._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/2.html_  

