##  Gunawardena v. Pussadeniya, Commissioner of National Housing and Another -
SLR - 458, Vol 2 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 2; (1983) 2 Sri LR 458 (11 February 1983)

#  458

  **GUNAWARDENA**

**v.**

**PUSSADENIYA, COMMISSIONER OF NATIONAL HOUSING**

**AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C. J., VICTOR PERERA, J. AND

COLIN‑THOME, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 2/83

S.C. SPL. LA NO. 113/82

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 958/81

01 MARCH 1983



    Appeal -Special leave to appeal to Supreme Court -Failure to lodge written submissions in 14 days -Rules 12 and 35(e) of the Supreme Court Rules.



# Held ‑



The petitioner failed to lodge his written submissions within 14 days of the
grant of Special Leave to Appeal, This is a non‑compliance with a mandatory
requirement of Rule 35(e) of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978 and the appeal
will be dismissed.



**OBJECTIONS** to appeal being proceeded with after grant of Special Leave to
Appeal.



_Nimal Senanayake, S.A._ with _Miss S. M. Senaratne_ and _Tilak Balasuriya_
for appellant.



_H. L. de Silva, S.A._ with _L. C. Seneviratne_ for 2nd respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult_



16 March, 1983

  
VICTOR PERERA, J.



 The petitioner had made an application to the Court of Appeal for a Writ of
Prohibition and Mandamus. The Court of Appeal by its order dated 4th November
1982 dismissed the application. The petitioner on the 24th November 1982
lodged a petition in this Court for the grant of Special Leave to Appeal under
Article 128(2) of the Constitution. After notice on the respondents was served
and caveats lodged in terms of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978, the petitioner
was heard and order was made on 18th January 1983 granting Special Leave to
Appeal.



#  459

**  **

 The petitioner had failed to lodge his written submissions in Court within 14
days of the granting of Special Leave to Appeal by this Court. The 2nd
respondent thereupon, on the 3rd February 1983, after the expiry of the said
14 days, filed a motion that this matter be put up for an order of Court and
this came up before us on the 1st March 1983, after notice to the petitioner,
for disposal.



The petitioner, however, had after this motion was filed on 3.2.83 by the 2nd
repondent, lodged a fresh petition of appeal in terms of Rule 12(2) on 8.2.83
and tendered written submission on 11.2.83. The fresh petition of appeal and
the written submissions were thus filed after 14 days had expired after leave
was granted. It was contended on behalf of the petitioner that Rule 12(2)
enabled him to lodge a fresh petition of appeal after his earlier petition for
Special Leave had been allowed and that therefore he was entitled to file his
written submissions within 14 days of the lodging of the fresh petition of
appeal. On behalf of the 2nd respondent it was contended that Rule 12(2) which
enabled the lodging of a fresh petition of appeal did not absolve the
petitioner from complying with the mandatory provision of Rule 35(e) requiring
him to file his written submissions within 14 days of the granting of leave as
the application for leave was for all purposes now a "petition of appeal".



Rule 12 reads as follows :-



"12(1)  "Where an application for special leave to appeal has been allowed, it
shall not be necessary for the appellant to give notice of appeal or to lodge
a fresh petition of appeal, but the application for leave to appeal shall in
such case be _deemed_ to be the _petition of appeal,_ but in all other matters
he shall comply with the rules relating to appeals.



 (2)  Nothing contained in Sub‑rule (1) shall be deemed to preclude such
appellant from lodging a fresh petition of appeal, in which case, he shall
comply with the provisions of the Rules relating to appeals."



#  460

  
 It is clear from an examination of this Rule that the original application
for Special Leave dated 24th November 1983 was to be regarded as " the
petition of appeal " although the petitioner was permitted to lodge a fresh
petition of appeal. In all other matters the petitioner was obliged to comply
with the Rules relating to appeals.



Rules relating to applications for Special Leave to Appeal are contained in
Part I -Rules 2 to 18. Therefore this Rule 12 does not apply to appeals filed
in the Supreme Court for which provision is made in Part II -Rules 27 to 43.
However, in regard to the steps to be taken after " an application for Special
Leave to Appeal " which becomes for all purposes "a petition of appeal" filed
in the Supreme Court, the Rules in Part II apply.



Rule 35(e) provides as follows:



"35(e)  The appellant shall, as soon as may be, and in any case, within
fourteen days of the grant of special leave to appeal or the filing of an
appeal lodge his submissions, and forthwith give notice thereof to each
respondent serving on him a copy of such submissions.



The first limb of Rule 35(e) applies. But the second limb of Rule 35(e) cannot
apply as the date of the "filing of the appeal" will relate back to the date
of the application for Special Leave to Appeal and not to the date the fresh
petition of appeal was lodged in terms of Rule 12, the latter date not being
the date of the filing of the appeal.



The petitioner in this case had thus failed to lodge his written submissions
within 14 days of the grant of Special Leave to Appeal. As this is a
non‑compliance with a manadatory requirement of the Supreme Court Rules of
1978, the appeal stands dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 525/-payable by the
petitioner to the 2nd respondent.



**SAMARAKOON, C. J.** -I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J. **-I agree.



Appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/2.html_  

