##  Attorney General v. Silvan Silva - SLR - 364, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 2;
(1981) 1 Sri LR 364 (18 December 1981)

**364**

**THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL  
 v.  
SILVAN SILVA**

**SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL, J., WEERARATNE, J.,  
AND RATWATTE, J.,  
S.C. 48/80  
M. C. KANDY 155/26  
DECEMBER 7, 1981.  
**  
_Perjury by witness-S 188 Penal Code-S. 41(2) and 161(2) of the Administration
of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973  
_  
A witness should not be dealt with under s. 161 (2) of. the Administration of
Justice Law (substantially the same as s. 440(1) of the Criminal Procedure
Code \- cf. Oaths and Affirmations Ordinance) unless the evidence is
inherently or palpably false. The question of perjury must be determined on
certainties. In short a witness should not be dealt with under s. 161(2)
unless he is guilty under s. 188 of the Penal Code and then too the Court must
necessarily act in accordance with established legal principles as for
instance making known to the witness the gist of the accusation against him
and this must con­tain a statement of the facts constituting the alleged
offence, and he should be afforded the opportunity of being heard. The charge
cannot be based in a matter like this on depositions other than those in the
proceedings.  
  
The burden of proof which should be applied is proof beyond reasonable doubt.
The Judge must be 'clear beyond doubt' but it is not necessary that this very
language must be used.  
  
The false evidence need' not be on a material point in the case. The provision
cannot be availed of when there is a conflict of evidence of witnesses.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_(1) Kanthar Murugesu v. Kanthiah Sivaguru (1926)28 NLR 215.  
  
(2) In re Seemon (1945) 46 NL R 142.  
  
(3) Subramaniam v. The Queen (1956) 57 NLR 409 (P.C.).  
  
(4) Samaratunga v. The Queen (1958) 60 NLR 25 (P.C.)  
_  
**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P. S. C. de Silva Additional Solicitor-General with G. L. M. de Silva S. C.
for the State. Daya Guruge_ for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**365**

December 18, 1981  
**WEERARATNE, J.  
**  
This is an appeal by the Attorney-General from a judgment of the Court of
Appeal allowing the appeal of the witness-appellant who was summarily charged
and convicted in the High Court of Kandy for committing perjury by giving
false evidence within the meaning of section 188 of the Penal Code an offence
under Section 161(2) read with. Section 41(2) of the Administration of Justice
Law No. 44 of 1973.  
  
The main case from which this matter stems is one in which two accused were
indicted in the High Court for offences of robbery (Sections 380 and 383) of a
Postal Mail Bag containing Rs. 12,000/- in cash when it was in transit from
the Anuradhapura Post Office to the Maradankadawala Post Office.  
  
W. A. Silvan Silva, the respondent in the present appeal was at the relevant
time a peon attached to the Cashier's branch of the Anuradhapura Post Office.
It was at this section that bundles of currency notes were stacked into mail
bags by the relevant offi­cers. There was evidence that the respondent had
also helped in stacking bundles of notes into the mail bags as well as in
tying up and sealing the bags prior to despatch. Then on the morning of the
robbery the C. T. B. bus which usually carries the mail bags containing the
money was stopped by two masked and armed men. One of the robbers searching
for the bags. had mentioned "Maradankadawala," from which it was presumed that
he was in the process of selecting that particular bag.  
  
Postal Peon W. A. Silvan Silva the respondent in this appeal, was a witness
for the prosecution at the High Court trial referred to above. He is the
younger brother of the first accused W. A. Seemon Silva. It was a part of the
prosecution case that the first accused Seemon Silva would have known. from
his brother the respondent that on the 21st September morning a mail bag
con­taining Rs. 12,000/- would be conveyed by the C. T. B. Mail bus to
Maradankadawala.  
  
The learned High Court Judge noticed the respondent under Section 161(2) of
the Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973 to show cause why he should
not be dealt with for perjury for giving false evidence.  
  
"If any person giving evidence on any subject in open Court in any judicial
proceeding under this Law gives, in the opinion of the court before which the
judicial proceeding is held, false

**366**

evidence within the meaning of section 188 of the Penal Code, it shall be
lawful for the court summarily to punish such witness as for contempt of
court. Whenever the power given by this sec­tion is exercised, the Judge shall
record the reason for imposing. such punishment."  
  
The wording of section 161(2) is substantially the same as sec­tion 440 of the
Criminal Procedure Code, which was taken from the Oaths and Affirmations
Ordinance No. 9 of 1895, which in clause 1 provides a prompt punishment for
perjury by way. of sum­mary proceedings. It is implicit therefore that such
proceedings should be resorted to only when evidence is inherently or
pal­pably false. Hence the question of perjury must be determined on
certainties. In short a witness should not be dealt with under sec­tion 161(2)
unless guilty under section 188 of the Penal Code. However in exercising the
procedure described in Section 162(1), the Court must necessarily act in
accordance with established legal principles, as for instance that the court
must make known to the defendant the gist of the accusation against him, which
must con­tain a statement of the facts constituting the alleged offence, and
an opportunity to be heard. The burden of proof which would have to be applied
would be proof beyond. reasonable doubt. It is not open to Court to base
charges in a matter such as this on dispositions other than those in the
proceedings.  
  
There appears to be nothing in the record to indicate that these basic
principles just referred to have not been followed by the Judge of the High
Court nor has any comment been made by counsel for the respondent on this
aspect of the matter. A long line of authorities has established that the
provision cannot be availed of when there is a conflict of evidence of
witnesses. It is important to note that the false evidence need not be on a
mate­rial point in the case vide Kanthar Murugesu v. Kanthiah Sivaguru (1) .  
  
It would be convenient at this stage to deal with the facts rela­ting to the
charge of perjury against the respondent. The learned High Court Judge, as was
required of him, informed the respon­dent of the gist of the accusation which
formed part of his evi­dence, and in regard to which he formed the opinion
that it was false. When translated into English it reads as follows:-­  
  
"These money bags are tied and sealed also by the Cashier and the C.O. I do
not assist them in that matter. The Cashier and the C.O.. used to close the
room and put the money into bags and seal them. I do not go to that room. On
other days too I do not assist in packing or sealing the money. I am speaking
of

**367**

the position in 1972. Then I had no connection at all in putting the money
into the bags. I have no connection even now. Before September 20th I as the
Cashier's peon, have never assis­ted in packing or sealing the money."  
  
Learned Additional. Solicitor-General submitted that the trial judge did not
base his findings on the fact that the respondent had gone back on his
evidence. He stated that the item in regard to which the trial judge had found
the respondent guilty was on material relating to his duties in the Cashier's
branch, where he was the peon. It was further submitted that the respondent
tried to make out in his evidence that he had no knowledge of what occurred,
and what his duties were. In this connection we have the evidence of the
official witnesses. H. W. Paripurnam at the relevant time was serving as the
Post Master (Grade I) and was also in charge of cash. There was also in that
section on the 20th Septem­ber 1972 one S. Tharmalingam the Checking Officer.
The Cashier's peon W. A. Silvan Silva (the defendant) also helped Paripurnam
in regard to his duties. He helped Paripurnam when the latter coun­ted the
money and bundled them into bundles of Rs. 10,000/- and Rs. 12,000/-. The peon
tied the bags of money together, which are then kept on the Cashier's table
and sealed by the peon Silvan Silva. Paripurnam finally checks the seals, and
the checking officer initials it. This method is in accord with the Postal
Dept. Regulations. To a question in cross-examination Paripurnam denied that
the counting of the money and the sealing of the bags were done in a separate
room. P. Thangavelu was the Adminis­trative Officer working in the
Anuradhapura General Post Office. On the 20th Sept. 1972 he was on duty. He
stated in evidence that the respondent's work on the 20th and 21st September
'72 as the Cashier's peon was assisting the cashier. It was the duty of the
Cashier's peon, to tie the bags of money and seal them. He also helps the
Cashier to pack the money. This witness states that he was watching Silvan
Silva helping to seal the bag that contained the money. R. Shanmugalingam was
attached to the Anuradhapura Post Office. He states that the respondent was
the Cashier's peon. The Cashier's peon helps the Cashier to balance the
previous day's accounts, and to close the remittances to Post Offices. What he
means by "closing the remittances" is counting the money, bund­ling it and
getting the Cashier's peon to pit the bundles into the cash bag. All this is
done in front of the Cashier by his peon. He knows that the respondent was the
Cashier's peon in September 1972. In answer to a question whether it is
correct that the Cashier without giving the peon to handle the money, closes
the room with the help of his assistant and collects and bundles the money,
the witness. replied that the cashier's room has two sections.

**368**

It is difficult to keep the door closed always. There is a section which is
used to handle money. The witness stated that the duties of this peon from 3
to 4.30 p.m. is shown in the duty list as "assisting to close remittances."  
  
The witness was summoned to produce the "Official Instruc­tions Guide" marked
"Y" containing rules applicable to. all Post Office employees including peons.
It contains the duties of Cashier's peons, one of which is referred to as
"Assist Closing Remittances." The work of the Cashier's peon in closing
remittan­ces have been referred to in detail by this witness as well as
witness Paripurnam.  
  
 The evidence of Paripurnam is to my mind strongly corrobora­ted by the
Administrative Secretary Thangavelu who would have been fully aware of the
duties and the general practice of the Post Office, and the Cashier's
division. There is further corroboration by witness Shanmugalingam as well as
by the production of the document marked "Y" which refers to the duty of the
respon­dent as the Cashier's peon to "Assist Closing Remittances" details of
which are spoken to by the above mentioned witnesses. On the face of this
strong array of evidence we find the respondent states that it was not part of
his duties to attend to the work involved in assisting the closing of
remittances.  
  
At the inquiry it was open to this respondent to state what his duties were,
if they were not what the official witnesses in their evidence outlined as his
specific duties both by oral and documen­tary evidence.  
  
The Court of Appeal in setting aside the conviction of the appe­llant stated
that the learned -trial judge had dealt with the appellant using the
phraseology of Wijewardene, J. in the case of In re Seemon(2) where the
learned Judge stated that the petitioner had told the Court "deliberately
something different from what was recorded by him," and that he had reached
the decision that the petitioner had made a deliberate attempt to mislead the
Court, and gave false evidence within the meaning of Section 188 of the Penal
Code.  
  
In this connection the Court of Appeal stated that the trial judge had found
that the appellant had given false evidence based on the circumstances which
fall short of the overriding principle that the power given to a trial judge
is one which would only be used when the judge is "clear beyond doubt" in the
words of Lord Oaksey in the case of Subramaniam v. the Queen(3)

**369**

cited with approval in Samaratunga v. the Queen(4). The com­plaint of the
Court of Appeal is that "the learned trial judge has nowhere said that the
appellant's evidence is clear beyond doubt to be false evidence." In regard to
this point we find that the trial judge -has at the very outset set out in his
judgment that Peon Silvan Silva in giving evidence as a witness in the case
had admitted he was on duty at the Anuradhapura Post Office as the Cashier's
peon on 20th September 1972, which is the day on which the rele­vant postal
bag to Maradankadawala was packed with currency notes. He admitted that his
hours of work were from 8.30 a.m. to 4.30 p.m., but denied that he performed
any duties in connec­tion with the "closing of money remittances."  
    
I have earlier in this judgment referred in some detail to the evidence of the
officials of this post office, i.e. Paripurnam the Cashier,. Thangavelu the
Administrative Officer, and Shanmugalin­gam who produced the "Official
Instructions Guide," which sets out the duties of the employees, including
that of the Cashier's peon who has to "Assist Closing of Remittances," the
implication of which was explained to the court in detail. It would thus be
seen that the evidence of the Cashier Paripurnam is amply corro­borated by the
other two official witnesses as well as by the rele­vant documents referred to
earlier setting out the appellant's duties which requires him, inter-alia, to
stack the currency notes as well as tie and seal the bags containing the cash.
The trial judge clearly stated that he did not base his findings on the fact
that the appellant had gone back on his evidence. The item in regard to which
he found the appellant guilty was on material relating to his duties in the
Cashier's branch. As mentioned earlier the charge solely relates to the
appellant's duties as the Cashier's peon.  
    
Reverting to the Court of Appeal contention that the power given to a trial
judge in a matter such as this could only be exercised when the judge is,
"clear beyond doubt" does not, I am sure, mean that his order is vitiated if
he does not use those magic words. I am certain that all that the Judicial
Committee of the Privy Council intended when they used that expression is that
the evidence when examined intrinsically must lead to a irresistible
conclusion that the case against the accused is clear beyond doubt. That would
not mean that no other adequate language or expres­sion cannot be used. The
English language is possessed of a variety of words and phrases which convey
the same meaning. Hence when we find Wijewardene, J. stating that an appellant
has told the Court "deliberately something different from what was recorded by
him," and that he, has reached the decision that the petitioner made
deliberate attempt to mislead the court and gave

**370**

 false evidence, it would mean nothing more. than that Wijewar­dene, J. was
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt of the falsity of the evidence given by the
witness. By language such as this surely the judge has satisfied the burden of
proof required in a case of this nature when the question is whether the
witness was giving evi­dence falsely quite deliberately, in which event
section 161 states that he should be convicted as for a contempt of Court. In
the present matter the trial judge has adopted the language of Wijewardene, J.
which can well be regarded as acceptable.  
  
In fact when the trial judge adopting Wijewardene, J's language states that
the appellant had been "deliberately lying" would it not surely be a far
stronger expression of the guilt of the appellant than the expression "clear
beyond doubt." We disagree with the finding of the Court of Appeal on this
point.  
  
It would then be seen that the learned trial judge has adequately dealt with
the principles pertaining to the burden of proof in a case of this nature, as,
well as in regard to the criticism on the question of the lack of
corroboration of the witness Paripurnam who as shown by me earlier has his
evidence amply corroborated. The third reason given for setting aside the
conviction is that in this instance it cannot be said that the statutory power
has been safely exercised. In support of this contention the Court of Appeal ;
judgment sets out inter alia that :-  
  
(1) the witness is in the eyes of the judge an accomplice.  
  
(2 ) He is the brother of the accused and therefore under the double stress
of. loyalty to his brother and that of a shadow of guilt falling over himself.  
  
(3) All that the trial judge has really said which is alleged to be false
evidence is nothing more than a denial of. having assisted the Cashier in the
packing and sealing of mail bags.  
  
The judgment then sets out that "in a situation like that we do not think that
it is a correct exercise of discretion on the part of the trial judge to have
the witness tried for giving false evidence." It seems to us that reasons such
as these are irrelevant and do not bear scrutiny. They are indeed insufficient
to conclude that the statutory power has not been safely exercised by the
learned judge of the High Court.  
  
On the material placed before us it would appear that the res­pondent in order
to meet a possible point that the respondent's

**371**

brother (the 1st accused) got a tip off from the respondent, deli­berately
gave false evidence in regard to his official duties. Learned Counsel for the
respondent in making his submissions stated that the learned trial judge, in
the course of his judgment, states: that the accused-respondent had been the
informant to his own brother and that there was no evidence to support this
finding. We find that this was not the basis upon which the trial judge held
that the accused-respondent was deliberately. giving false evidence. It was
also submitted that the evidence of Thangavelu did not cons­titute
corroboration of "the evidence of Paripurnam: This submission is without merit
for the reason that Thangavelu, who was the Administrative Officer attached to
the Anuradhapura Post Office had, in answer to Court, clearly stated what the
duties of the accused-respondent were. In regard to this there can be no doubt
that his evidence. detailing the procedure confirms the evidence given by
Paripurnam, as shown by me earlier in the judgment. The learned trial judge
has in the course of his judgment carefully considered and detailed the
relevant principles governing this case. He correctly states, "Dealing with a
case of this nature is a very rare and well considered step taken by a Court."  
  
For the reasons stated we set aside the judgment and order of acquittal and
convict the accused of the charge. We accordingly allow the appeal of the
Attorney-General.  
  
In regard to sentence we have considered the fact that the respondent, a
public officer aged 32 years will lose his job, He has apparently had a good
record until this lapse occurred. In all the circumstances we sentence the
respondent to two years rigorous imprisonment suspended for an operational
period of five years. In addition we impose a fine of Rs. 500/- in default
three months rigours imprisonment. The High Court is directed to comply with
sub-sections 4 and 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979:  
  
**ISMAIL , J. - I agree.  
  
RATWATTE, J. - I agree.  
  
** _**Appeal allowed.  
Conviction by trial Judge approved.  
Sentence varied.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/2.html_  

