##  Ranasinghe Vs Rathnasiri and Others - SLR - 315, Vol 1 of 2005 [2005] LKSC
2; (2005) 1 Sri LR 315 (25 February 2005)

**315**

**RANASINGHE  
vs  
RATHNASIRI AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT,  
BANDARANAYAKE.J,  
DISSANAYAKE.J AND  
FERNANDO, J,  
S. C (FR) 638/2003  
15TH JULY, 30TH, AUGUST AND 16TH NOVEMBER, 2004  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Appointment of Registrar of Births and Deaths and
Registrar of Marriages - Article 12(1) of the Constitution \- Most eligible
candidate pointed - Appointment not vitiated - Insufficiency of evidence of
alleged infringement of fundamental rights.  
_  
The petitioner's father was Registrar of Births and Deaths, Uduwara and
Registrar of Marriages, Raigam Korala until his death on 06.11.2001.
Thereafter, the petitioner was appointed to act in these posts by monthly
extensions.  
  
By Gazette dated 03.05.2002, the 2nd respondent (the Registrar -General)
called for applications to fill the aforesaid vacancies. The Gazette
prescribed the eligibility criteria, including educational qualifications. Ten
applications were received. They were given to the 4th respondent (the
District Registrar) for consideration by an Interview Board and
recommendations. Next as required, the 2nd respondent submitted the
recommendations to the 6th respondent (the Minister) for decision, The Panel
of Members for interview of candidates recommended that seven of the
candidates had minimum eligibility. The 1st respondent had the best
educational qualifications, viz. in addition to more credits than others at
the G. C. E. (O/L) Examination (in one sitting) against two sittings specified
in the Gazette, she had also passed the G. C. E (A/L) for selection to the
Keianiya University, She was also a trained teacher until her retirement under
Circular 44/90 dated 18.10.1990. The 6th respondent Minister decided to
appoint her to both posts.  
  
The appointments were impeached under Article 12(1) of the Constitution on the
ground that firstly, the Interview Panel had given marks to the candidates
which was not required by the scheme of recruitment ; secondly that the 7th
respondent (Private Secretary to the Minister) had recommended to the 5th
"respondent (Senior Assistant Secretary) that the Minister had instructed the
appointment of the 1st respondent which was tantamount to political
intervention ;thirdly, that the 1st respondent had no right to be appointed a
"public officer" after retirement from Government Service.

**316**

The 2nd respondent (Registrar General) averred in his affidavit that (he
Minister had decided to appoint the candidate who was educationally the most
qualified candidate. The 2nd respondent made the appointment accordingly.  
  
**HELD:**

> (1) There was no legal objection against marks being given at the interview.  
>  
>  (2) The 2nd to. 6th respondents had a discretion in the matter. Hence the
> decision to appoint the 1st respondent in the circumstances could not be
> impeached on the ground of political intervention.  
>  
>  (3) As averred by the 2nd respondent, the candidate who had the best
> educational qualifications had been appointed.  
>  
>  (4) The Minister and other respondents did not act arbitrarily but acted on
> relevant considerations. Hence the evidence was insufficient to hold that
> there was an infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
>  
>  (5) The first respondent's appointment was not that of a "public officer"
> and as such the objection taken on that ground fails.

  
**Case referred to :  
**  
1\. Breen v Amalgamated Engineering Union (1971) 2 QB 175  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights  
  
_J. C. Weliamuna_ with _Viran Corea_ and _Sharmaine Gunaratne_ for petitioner.  
  
_Saliya Peiris_ with _Chamath Madanayake_ for 1st respondent.  
  
_M. Gopallawa,_ State Counsel for 2nd to 6th and 8th respondents.

_Cur.adv.vult_

February 25, 2005,  
**  
SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The petitioner, who was the Acting Registrar of Birth and Deaths of Uduwara
Division and the Acting Registrar of Marriages of Raigam Korale Division, for
a period of 2 years alleged that, the 2nd to 7th respondents have acted in
violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed in terms of
Article 12(1) of the Constitution by the appointment of the 1st respondent as
the Registrar of Births and Deaths of Uduwara Division and the Registrar of
Marriages of Raigam Korale Division.

**317**

This Court granted leave to proceed for the alleged infringement of
petitioner's fundamental rights in terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution  
  
The petitioner's grievance, albeit brief, is as follows:  
  
The petitioner submitted that his father was the Registrar of Births and
Deaths of Uduwara Division and the Registrar of Marriages of Raigam Korale
Division until his death on 06.11.2001. Thereafter the petitioner was acting
in the relevant post from 16.11.2001 (P1) which was extended on the completion
of every 30 days, Extensions were granted on this basis until November, 2003
and by letter dated 19.11.2003, the 3rd respondent had informed the petitioner
that his period of service was extended only for the period from 17th
November, 2003 to 30th November, 2003 (P12). The petitioner submitted that by
notification published in the Gazette No. 1235 dated 03.05.2002, the 2nd
respondent called for applications for the posts of Registrars of Births and
Deaths and Registrars of Marriages in several divisional secretariat areas in
the Kalutara District including Uduwara (P2). The petitioner submitted that
having possessed of the qualifications stated in the Gazette Notification
referred to earlier, he had applied for the relevant post and submitted his
application to the 4th respondent. Later the petitioner had become aware that
the 1st respondent has been appointed to the relevant post by letter dated
13.11.2003 sent by the 2nd respondent to the 4th respondent. On an inquiry, he
received a letter from the Additional District Secretary, Kalutara, riting on
behalf of the 4th respondent, informing him that the petitioner's services
will no longer be required from 30.11.2003 as the 1st respondent has been
appointed to the post in question with effect from 01,12.2003.  
  
The petitioner alleged that, according to the scheme of recruitment of
Registrars of Birth and Deaths, the 4th respondent is required to make his
recommendation to the 2nd respondent upon which the 2nd respondent has to
submit his observation together with the relevant documents as  well as the
interview notes to the 6th respondent, who is the Minister of the relevant
Ministry. Upon the 6th respondent granting his approval, the 2nd respondent is
required to make the appointment and that must be published in the Gazette
(P3). The petitioner alleged that the 7th respondent, who is the private
secretary of the 6th respondent Minister, by letter dated 24.06.2003 has
requested the 5th respondent to appoint the 1st respondent to the post in
question.

**318**

It is common ground that applications were called for the post of Registrar of
Birth and Deaths of Uduwara Division and the Registrar of Marriages (General)
of Raigam Korale Division by Gazette Notification dated 30.05.2002 . According
to the said Gazette Notification, the candidates should have possessed the
following qualifications.

> 1\. applicants should be permanent residents in the relevant divisions who
> possess sufficient assets and have acquired the respect of persons in that
> area ;  
>  
>  2\. applicants should be persons who are not less than 21 years and not
> more than 60 years of age ;  
>  
>  3\. applicants should be married ;  
>  
>  4\. applicants should possess the required educational and other
> qualifications stipulated in the notices displayed at the office of the
> District Secretary, Kalutara.  
>  

The notices calling for applications displayed at the said office at Kalutara
stipulated that the minimum educational qualification was six passes at the
GCE (Ordinary Level Examination) in not more than two sittings including
Sinhala/Tamil as a subject or an examination equivalent or higher to that
standard and the ability to work in a second language to meet the requirements
of the public of the area.  
  
The 2nd respondent averred that clause 18(c) of the scheme of recruitment (P3)
sets out the matters to be examined by the panel of members at the interview
and that clause 19 further provides that the said panel should select
candidates eligible for appointment based on the material submitted at the
interview. He further averred that the panel is expected to only indicate the
eligibility of a candidate and that there is no provision made according to
the scheme of recruitment for the allocation of marks at the interview.
Learned State Counsel correctly pointed out that the petitioner is not
entitled to challenge the scheme of recruitment at this stage.  
  
An examination of the Schedule of applicants for the post of Registrar of
Births and Deaths of Uduwara Division and the Registrar of Marriages of Raigam
Korale Division, reveals that there have been 10 applicants present at the
interview. Out of these 10, the panel of members at the interview had
recommended as suitable seven (7) applicants, which included the petitioner as
well as the 1st respondent (2R2). All seven applicants have satisfied the
minimum eligibility criteria. Except for the remark made stating suitable or
non suitable, no other comment was made by the panel.

**319**

At the conclusion of the interview, the 4th respondent, based on the findings
of the panel of members, had reported to the 2nd respondent and the 2nd
respondent had sent the details of the 7 applicants to the 6th respondent
informing him that the most suitable candidate out of the 7 eligible
candidates be appointed to the post of Registrar (2R3)  
  
According to the 2nd respondent, all the applicants including the petitioner
was made aware of the requirements to produce certificates relied upon by them
to establish their educational qualifications and this was even referred to in
the letter calling them for the interview (P4)  
  
Out of the petitioner and the 1st respondent, it is quite clear that the 1st
respondent possessed higher qualifications than the petitioner. Whilst the
petitioner had obtained six simple passes and one credit pass in two sittings
at the GCE (O/L), the 1st respondent had obtained five simple passes and three
credit passes in the GCE (O/L) examination in one sitting. Moreover the 1st
respondent had also passed the GCE (A/L) examination and the General Arts
Qualifying (GAQ) Examination from the University of Kelaniya. Furthermore, the
1st respondent had functioned as a Trained Teacher until his retirement in
terms of Public Administration Circular No. 44/90 dated 18.10.1990 (P5).  
  
The petitioner complained that, as the 1st respondent had retired from
Government Service in terms of clause 4 of Public Administration Circular No.
44/90 dated 08.10.1990, that he will not be entitled to be appointed to a
public post after such retirement. It is to be borne in mind that the
provisions of Public Administration Circular No. 44/90 (P5) prohibits re-
employment in the Public Service, Provincial Public Service, Statutory Bodies,
Public Corporations, State Owned Companies and Government owned Business
Undertakings. The posts of Registrar of Births and Deaths and Marriages do not
fall within the definition of the term 'Public Officer' as defined in the
Constitution and the Establishment Code and are not considered as constituting
posts in the Public Service. Moreover the provisions in Public Administration
Circular No. 44/90 have been amended and restrictions imposed on the re-
employment of officers who retired in terms of the said circular have been
varied by subsequent Public Administration Circulars such as Public
Administration Circular Nos. 44/90(iii) and Public Administration Circular No.
1/03. In the circumstances it would not be correct to say that the 1st
respondent is disqualified from being appointed as a Registrar of Births and
Deaths and a Registrar of

**320**

Marriages due to his optional retirement from the Public Service in terms of
Public Administration Circular No. 44/90.  
  
The petitioner has alleged that the 7th respondent who is the Private
Secretary to the Minister had informed the 5th respondent by letter dated
24.06.2003 that the 1st respondent should be appointed to the relevant post.
His allegation is that as the direction to the 5th respondent was given by the
7th respondent, there has been political intervention in the said appointment.
Admittedly, the letter in question was written by the 7th respondent, However,
he had written the letter in his capacity as the Private Secretary of the 6th
respondent Minister and the contents of the letter clearly indicate that he is
only conveying the decision of the Minister. The relevant portion of the said
letter is reproduced below :

  
  
In such circumstances, it is abundantly clear that the 7th respondent was only
carrying out the instructions of the 6th respondent Minister, which is within
the framework of duties allocated to him in his capacity as the Private
Secretary to the 6th respondent.  
  
The main allegation of the petitioner is that the 7th respondent had
arbitrarily issued the letter dated 24.06.2003 (P7) to the 5th respondent
informing her to appoint the 1st respondent to the post in question.  
  
The petitioner also alleges that there was no scheme of allocating marks to
the candidates at the interview and therefore there was no stipulated criteria
for the selection.  
  
Admittedly there had been no scheme of allocating marks at the interview and
the scheme of recruitment does not refer to any kind of guidelines, rules or
principles, which would govern the criteria for the selection. In such
circumstances, where no such guidelines for selection are laid down to be
followed, the officer concerned is bestowed with unrestricted discretion ; if
exercised without any fetters, such decision could become arbitrary negating
equal protection and discriminating persons who are similarly circumstanced.  
  
According to classical Constitutional Law, wide discretionary power, was
incompatible with the Rule of Law. (A. V. Dicey, Law of the Constitution, 9th
Edition, pg.202). Coke, described discretion as "scire per legem quod

**321**

sit justum"; it was a science or understanding to discern between falsity and
truth, between right and wrong, between shadows and substance, between equity
and colorable glosses and pretences and not to do according to their wills and
private affections (De Smith's Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 5th
Edition 1995, pg. 298). However, in today's context what the Rule of Law
demands is not to eliminate the wide discretionary power, but to see that the
law is able to control its exercise. This does not mean that utilizing
arbitrary power and having unfettered discretion in decision making process
can be countenanced. It is to be borne in mind that discretion should be
exercised by a statutory body strictly according to law and according to the
established procedure and, that means taking into account only the relevant
considerations. Having guidelines or principles according to which the
discretion is to be exercised would be a clear exhibition of how a public
authority has carried out the administrative authority vested in them.
Referring to the concept of discretion, Lord Denning, MR,in Breenv Amalgamated
Engineering Union.(1) stated that,  
  
"The discretion of a statutory body is never unfettered. It is a discretion
which is to be exercised according to law. That means at least this : the
statutory body must be guided by relevant considerations and not by
irrelevant"  
  
It is common ground that the 2nd to 6th respondents had unfettered discretion
with regard to the selection of a Registrar of Births and Deaths of Uduwara
Division and Registrar of Marriages of Raigam Korale Divis`on. However there
is no material to indicate that the said respondents had abused such
discretion given to them in making the said selection. Although there were no
guidelines laid down, instead of any abuse, it appears that they have taken
into consideration relevant criteria, in arriving at their decision. The sole
basis for their selection according to the material available before this
court is the qualifications obtained by the applicants. The 2nd respondent, in
his affidavit averred that,  
  
"......1 state that the 1st respondent is the most eligible candidate amongst
all applicants to be appointed to the advertised post of Registrar, whilst all
candidates satisfied eligibility requirements relating to residence, age,
character, mental status, income, office facilities, handwriting etc., the
educational qualifications of the 1st respondent are superior to the
petitioner and other applicants (emphasis added)"

**322**

It is thus apparent that although no guidelines were given with regard to the
selection of candidates in terms of the scheme of recruitment the 2nd to 6th
respondents had made the selection not taking into account any extraneous
considerations, but on the basis of assessment of educational qualifications
of the applicants. This is further established by the letter sent by the 7th
respondent to the 5th respondent on 24.06.2003 (P7) which is in the following
terms :

  
  
  
In the aforementioned circumstances, it cannot be said that the 2nd to 5th
respondents had acted arbitrarily abusing the discretion given to them for the
appointment of the Registrar of Births and Deaths for the Uduwara Division and
Registrar of Marriages for the Raigam Korale Division. When discretion is
exercised, taking into account all relevant considerations, then there cannot
be a situation where the said decision could be regarded as taken arbitrarily
and the said process will not fall into the category which negates equal
protection.  
  
On a consideration of the aforementioned circumstances, I hold that the
petitioner has not been successful in establishing that his fundamental right
guaranteed in terms of Article 12(1) of the Constitution was infringed by the
2nd to 7th respondents. This application is accordingly dismissed, but in all
the circumstances of this case, without any costs.  
  
**DISSANAYAKE, J.**         -    I    agree.  
  
**RAJA FERNANDO, J.     ** -    I    agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2005/2.html_  

