##  Ven. Omare Dhammapata Thero v. Rajapakshage Peiris and Others - SLR - 1,
Vol 1 of 2004 [2003] LKSC 2; (2004) 1 Sri LR 1 (17 September 2003)

**1**

**VEN. OMARE DHAMMAPALA THERO  
v.** **  
RAJAPAKSHAGE PEIRIS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
ISMAIL J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO 41/1999  
CA NO 321/88(F)  
D.C. TANGALLE CASE NO 1818/L  
20 JUNE, 11 JULY.13 NOVEMBER AND 03 DECEMBER, 2002 AND 04  
APRIL, 2003  
  
_Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law - Acquisition of property by a temple - Sangika
property, temple property and pudgalika property - Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance, sections 20 and 23.  
_  
The plaintiff instituted action in the District Court for a declaration of
title to the land in dispute viz, an undivided 2/3 of the land as the Trustee
of Sri Nagarama temple, Kandebedda and for the ejectment of the original 1st
defendant. The said and had been sold by a Crown Grant dated 06.02.1921 to the
then incumbent of the temple Medhankara Therunnanse in trust for the
Kandebedda temple. The original 1st defendant claimed the land by
prescription.  
  
By a deed dated 1.2.1923 Medhankara Therrunnanse sold the land to one Hanifa.
After getting the land planted with coconut, the said Hanifa sold it to
Owitigama Dhammananda Therunnanse by deed dated 06.01.1941.

  
The plaint was filed on the basis that the said land was temple property.
Section 20 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance ('the Ordinance") provides
that all property appertaining to or appropriated to the use of any temple and
all offerings made other than pudgalika properly offered to the exclusive use
of an individual Bhikku shall vest in the Trustee or controlling Viharadhpathi
for the time being, of such temple.

  
Section 23 of the Ordinance provides that pudgalika property if not alienated
by the owning Bhikku during his life time be deemed to be property of the
tem­ple to which and Bhikku belonged unless such property has been inherited
by such Bhikku.  
  
The District Judge dismissed the action on the ground that the land in suit
was not sangika property i.e. gifted after a ceremony according to Vinaya.

**2**

**Held:  
  
**1\. A temple could possess sangika property, pudgalika property and property
which is neither sangika nor pudgalika property but could be treated astemple
property.

  
2\. A temple is an institution sui generis which is capable in law of
receiving and holding property. It has the attributes of a corporation for the
purpose of acquiring and holding property.

  
3\. A temple could acquire property by the ordinary civil modes of acquisition
without a ceremony conducted according to Vinaya,.  
4\. The property in suit was in any event temple property purchased or granted
for and on behalf of the temple and the title to the said property devolved
and vested in the temple on the death of Owitigama Dhammananda.  
**  
Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Wickramasinghe v Unnanse_ (1921)23 NLR 236  
  
2\. _Wijewardane v Buddharakkita Thero_ (1957) 59 NLR 121  
  
3\. _Rev. Mapitigama Buddharakkita Thero v Wijewardane_ (1960) 62 NLR 49  
  
4\. _Kampane Gunaratne Thero v Mawadawila Pannasena Thero_ (1998) 2 Sri LR 196  
  
5\. _Rev. Oluwawatte Dharmakeerthi Thero v Rev. Keviitiyagala Jinasiri Thero_
(1978)79(2) NLR 86  
  
6\. _Charles v Appu_ (1914) 19 NLR 242  
  
7\. _Ratnapala Unnanse v Kevitigala Unnanse_ (1879) 2 SCC 29  
  
8\. _Sedhananda Therunnanse Sumanatissa_ (1934) 36 NLR 422  
  
9. _Pavisthinahamyv Akurala Seelawansa Thero_ (1985) 2 Sri LR 197  
  
10 _. Kosgoda Pangnaseela and Another v Gamage Pavisthinahamy_ (1986) 3 CALR
48  


  
APPEAL from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
P.A.D. Samarasekera.P.C. with J.C.Boange and Kumudini Wijetunga for appellant
LC.Seneviratne.P.C. with N.H.K.Wickramasinghe and A. Dharmaratne for 1st
substituted-respondent.  


_Cur.adv.vult_

**3**

September 17,2003  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 01
17.08.1998. By that judgment the Court of Appeal dismissed the appellant's
appeal and affirmed the judgment of the learned District Judge, Tangalle. The
appellant appealed to this Court and the Supreme Court granted special leave
to appeal on the following questions.

1\. Were the learned District Judge's answers to issues 2 and 6 erroneous?  
  
2\. Were the said answers inconsistent with his answer to issue No.1 ?  
  
3\. in any event is the property described in paragraph 2 of the plaint temple
property because -  
  
  
(a) it was property purchased or granted for and on behalf of the temple;  
  
(b) title to the said property devolved and vested in the tem­ple on the death
of Rev.Ovitigamuwe Dammanande.  
  
The facts of this case are briefly as follows:  
  
The plaintiff-appellant-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant)
instituted action in the District Court of Tangalle seeking for a declaration
of title to a 2/3 share of the land known as "Parahena" alias "Kekunahena" as
the Trustee of the Sri Nagarama Temple and the ejectment of the deceased 1st
defendant-respon­dent-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the 1st
respondent). The 1st respondent claimed prescriptive rights to the said land.
The appellant submitted that 2/3 shares of the land was obtained for the
Temple by the then Trustee of the Sri Nagarama Temple, Ven.Medhankara Thero
and the balance 1/3 share was given to one Dona Ciciliyana Abeywardane. The
2nd and 3rd defendants-respondents- respondents (hereinafter referred to as
the 2nd and 3rd respondents) are co-owners of the balance 1/3 share of the
land in suit and the 1st respondent and the appellant have no dis­pute with
the 2nd and 3rd respondents in respect of the undivided 1/3 share claimed by
them.

**4**

The 1st respondent submitted that the said 2/3 share claimed by the appellant
has been prescribed by him and that the appellant cannot have any claim on
that land. The appellant however based his case on the ground that the said
land was the property of the Sri Nagarama Viharaya of Kandabedda.

  
The question at issue therefore is whether the undivided 2/3 share of the said
land was temple property or 'pudgalika' property  (private property) as
claimed by the 1st respondent.

  
Learned District Judge dismissed the plaintiff's action on the ground that the
appellant had failed to prove that the said land was sanghika property. It
would appear that in the Court of Appeal, the appellant, for the first time
contended that the original deed P1 con­stituted a trust in respect of the
property in question and the Court of Appeal held that the question of whether
there was a trust creat­ed by the said deed P1 was a question of mixed fact
and law and cannot be raised for the first time in appeal and dismissed the
appellant's appeal. Admittedly, the claim of the appellant was based entirely
on a crown grant dated 06.02.1921 marked P1, which con­veyed a 2/3 share of
the property to Rev.Medhankara and the bal­ance 1/3 to one Dona Ciciliyana
Abeywardane Wickramasinghe. The said deed P1 clearly recited that,

  
"Whereas it has been represented to us by (1)Medhankara Therunnanse as
incumbent of Kandebedda Temple and (2) Dona Ciciliyana Abeywardane
Wickramasinghe both of Karumuldeniya that the said (1) Medhankara Therunnanse
and (2) Dona Ciciliyana Abeywardane Wickramasinghe areentitled to a grant in
the following shares and propor­tions, to wit the said, (1) Medhankara
Therunnanse in trust for Kandebedda Temple to an undivided 2/3 share and the
said Dona Ciciliyana Abeywardane Wickramasinghe to an undivided 1/3 share of
the prop­erty belonging to His Majesty..."  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the respondent contended that although there
is no dispute as to the purchase of the property from the crown, there is no
evidence that the said deed P1 was accom­panied by a sanghika dedication.
Moreover, learned President's

**5**

Counsel further contended that the said Medhankara Therunnanse by deed
No.16171 dated 01.02.1923(P7) had sold the said undi­vided 2/3 share of the
said land to one Mohommadu Hanifa. The said Mohammad Hanifa had given this
land to 3 persons for the purpose of planting coconut within a period of 9
years from the date of the agreement No.1679 dated 20.11.1930. However, in
1941, by deed No. 11770 dated 16.01.1941, Mohammad Hanifa sold the said
property to Ovitigamuwe Dhammananda Therunnanse. Referring to the
aforementioned events, relating to the land in question, learned President's
Counsel for the respondent submitted that it is important to examine the said
transfer deed marked as P7. According to the learned President's Counsel for
the respon­dent, there are 3 important points that should be taken into
consid­eration regarding the transfer deed P7. Firstly, the learned
President's Counsel submitted that, there is no reference to the said land
being subject to a trust and the endorsement made by the Notary in deed marked
as P7 is that the title of Medhankara Therunnanse to the said property has
been sold by deed No.16171 (P7). Secondly, in deed No.16171(P7) Medhankara
Therunnanse is described as "Viharavasi and not as "Viharadhipathi". Learned
President's Counsel further submitted that in this particular deed (P7), there
is specific mention that Medhankara Therunnanse or the temple did not become
entitled to the said property on the deed given by the crown dated 06.02.1921
(P1). Thirdly, and more impor­tantly, learned President's Counsel contended
that, the contents of the aforesaid deed (P7) indicate that Medhankara
Therunnanse had accepted the property and acted on the basis that the
proper­ty was not sanghika, but property that belonged to him.  
  
Considering the contention of the learned President's Counsel for the
respondent, the question at issue is that whether the undivided 2/3 share
given by the crown grant to Medhankara Therunnanse in 1921, is to be treated
as property belonging to the said temple or whether it was given to Medhankara
Therunnanse for his personal benefit. Learned President's Counsel for the
respondent took up the position that, it is necessary for the proper­ty to be
sanghika property, for it to become property belonging to the temple.

**6**

It is therefore relevant and necessary to examine firstly the con­cept of
sanghika property.  
  
During the course of hearing, learned President's Counsel for the appellant as
well as the learned President's Counsel for the respondent referred to temple
properly, and sanghika property. Whereas the learned President's Counsel for
the appellant con­tended that the plaint in this case had not used the word
'sanghi-ka', the learned President's Counsel for the respondent submitted that
the deeds clearly indicate that the property in question was not sanghika, but
property belonged to the priest (pudgalika property).

  
The concept of 'sanghika' property and 'gihi santhaka' (lay prop­erty) was
considered from the beginning of the 20th century in Wickramasinghe v
Unnanse(1) In this case it was decided that it is by a gift that a temple or
any other property can become sanghika and the very conception of a gift
requires that there should be an offering or dedication. Until a dedication
takes place, the temple property remains 'gihi santhaka'  (lay property). This
dedication may take the form of a writing or may be verbal, but in either case
it is a forma! act, accompanied by a solemn ceremony in the presence of four
or more priests who represent the 'sarva sangha', or the entire priesthood. A
dedication may be presumed in the case of a temple whose origin is lost in the
dim past. This view was accepted and fol­lowed in Wijewardane v Buddharakkita
Thero (2) where it was held that a Buddhist Vihara or temple is not a juristic
person and cannot therefore receive or hold property. Any property given to
the sang­ha must be dedicated in the manner prescribed in the Vinaya. Then and
then only can it become sanghika property. Although property can be given to
the sangha it would be done only as sanghika prop­erty and also in accordance
with the customary mode of dedication. In the Privy Council decision in
Rev.Mapitigama Buddharakkita Thero v Wijewardane (3), it was held that section
20 of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, which vests all property belonging
to a temple in the trustee or controlling Viharadhipathi of that temple,
applies only to sanghika property which has been dedicated to the priesthood
as a whole with all the ceremonies and forms necessary to effect dedication. A
similar view was taken in the case of Kampane Gunaratne Thero v Mawadawila
Pannasena Thero (4).

**7**

In that case the plaintiff sued the defendants for a declaration that he is
the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple known as Mahagama Rajaramaya, for
ejectment of the defendants from the temple premises and for recovery of
possession of the same. The temple was constituted on an allotment of crown
land which had been leased to the trustees of a Buddhist Association for the
purpose of constructing a Buddhist temple and dedicating it to the sangha
after which it was stipulated that the lessor will issue a fresh lease of the
land for 99 years in favour of the trustee or the controlling Viharadhipathi
of the temple. The temple was constructed and a deed "of dedication" was
executed with the approval of the Government Agent and the Commissioner of
Buddhist Affairs. The deed appointed the plaintiff as the Viharadhipathi of
the temple. It was held that the fact that a deed 'of dedication' was executed
with the full authority of the state did not by itself, render the temple a
sanghika viharaya which was the basis of the plaintiff's action. The Court
took the view that a mere claim to the office of Viharadhipathi independently
of the title to the temple and temporalities is untenable. Moreover it was
held that as the deed 'of dedication' had not been accompanied by a solemn
ceremony in the presence of four or more monks representing the 'sarva sangha'
or 'entire priest­ hood' as prescribed in Vinaya, the temple and its property
did not become sanghika property and that the title to the property remained
with the state. In other words the property remains 'gihi santhaka'. G.P.S. De
Silva, CJ. after considering the aforementioned aspects stated that,  
  
"The essence of a valid dedication is that the property must cease to be 'gihi
santhaka'. the dedication must be in terms of the vinaya".  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the respondent placed heavy reliance on the
decision in Rev. Oluwawatte Dharmakeerthi Thero v Rev.Kevitiyagala Jinasiri
Thero (5) where it was held that, the plain­tiff could not succeed in this
case unless he proved that the premis­es in question was sanghika as he could
not claim to be the Viharadhipathi of gihi santhaka lands. It was also held
that the ded­ication is a sine qua non for premises to become sanghika and the
180 mere fact that a temple has been given to the sangha does not make it
sanghika. It must be dedicated in the manner prescribed by

**8**

the Vinaya to become sanghika. Learned President's Counsel for the respondent
drew our attention to the fact that in this case the premises in question were
first acquired by one Suriyagoda Sonuththara Thero on a crown grant No.9503,
of 30th March 1883 for Rs.75/-.

  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that the discussion on
sanghika property had brought about confusion in this appeal. He submitted
that the plaint did not use the word sanghika, but went entirely on the basis
that it was property of the temple.

  
In support of his contention, learned President's Counsel for the respondent
drew our attention to the provisions in the BuddhistTemporalities Ordinance.
His contention was that, the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance did not make any
reference to sanghika property, but it refers only to temple property.
Learned President's Counsel submitted that the word sanghika refers to a
broader concept which includes property of all sangha from the times of Arahat
Sariputta and Moggallana and is virtually still continuing.  
  
The Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, which came into force in 1931 was an
Ordinance to amend and consolidate the law relating to Buddhist Temporalities
in Sri Lanka. Part III of the present Ordinance deals with the subject of
property. Section 20, which refers to all temple property and all offerings
reads as follows:  
  
"All property, movable and immovable, belonging or in anywise appertaining to
or appropriated to the use of any temple, together with all the issues, rents,
moneys and profits of the same, and all offerings made for the use of such
temple other than the pudgalika offerings which are offered for the exclusive
personal use of any individual bhikku, shall vest in the trustee or the
controlling Viharadhipathi for the time being of such temple, subject,
however, to any leases and other tenancies, charges and encumbrances already
affecting any such immovable property."  
  
A close examination of this section reveals that although refer­ence is made
to pudgalika property belonging to a bhikku, there is no mention of sanghika
property of a temple. Also it should be

**9**

noted that the said section refers to the property, movable and immovable
belonging or in anywise appertaining to or appropriated for the use of any
temple. In fact according to issue No.1 the ques­tion was whether the property
referred to in the plaint came under the administration of the trustee of the
temple.

  
  
It is to be noted that learned District Judge had answered this issue in the
affirmative,  
  
  
  
However, notwithstanding the said answer given to issue No.1, learned District
Judge had answered issue No.6, namely,  
  
  
  
in the negative, stating that there is no evidence to hold that the property
in question is sanghika property. On a consideration of the totality of the
aforementioned circumstances, I am of the view that, a temple could possess
sanghika property, pudglika property and property which is neither sanghika
nor pudgalika property, but could be termed as temple property for the
following reasons.

In Charles v Appu (6) the legal aspects pertaining to sanghika property was
discussed in detail. Discussing the position of sanghi­ka property, De
Sampayo, J. stated that,240  '"Sanghika property is inalienable in the sense
that the trustee has no power to dispose of it....'Sanghika' means no more
than property belonging to the entire priesthood, that is to say, to the
temple, as distinguished from the pri­vate property of the priestly incumbent.
In this connection it may be remembered that a temple is a corporation, and
often acquires property by the ordinary civil modes of acquisition, subject
only as regards immovables to a cer­tain rule of mortmain."

According to the Concise Oxford Dictionary mortmain means 250 "(condition of)
lands or tenements held inalienably by ecclesiastical or other corporation".  
  
Taking into consideration the meaning given to property in the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance and the position taken up by De

**10**

Sampayo, J., in Charles v Appu (supra) that " sanghika' means no more than
property belonging to the entire priesthood, that is to say, to the temple", I
am in agreement with the submission made by learned President's Counsel for
the appellant that a temple could acquire property by the ordinary civil modes
of acquisition.  
  
Considering the submissions made by both learned President's Counsel for the
appellant and the respondent it is apparent that the question to be decided
here is whether the 2/3 share given by a grant to Medhankara Therunnanse as
incumbent of Kandebedde Temple could be treated as sanghika property, temple
property or pudgalika property.  
  
in Wickremesinghe v Unnanse (supra), it was held that it is by a gift that a
temple or any other property can become sanghika, and the very conception of a
gift requires that there should be an offer­ing or dedication. Referring to
the decision in Wickremesinghe v Unnanse (supra) in Wijewardene v
Buddharakkita Thero (2) it was stated that,  
  
"it would appear from the case of Wickremesinghe v Unnanse that for a
dedication to the sangha there must be a donor, a donee, and a gift. There
must be an assem­bly of four or more bhikkus. The property must be shown; the
donor and donee must appear before the assembly and recite three times the
formula generally used in giv­ing property to the sangha with the necessary
variation accordingly as it is a gift to one or more. Water must be poured
into the hands of the donee or his representative. The sangha is entitled to
possess the property from that time onwards. No property can become sanghika
without such a ceremony."  
  
it was stated that the procedure laid down in Wickremesinghe's case for giving
property to the sangha is in accord with the Vinaya (Kullawagga, Sixth
Khandhaka sections 2,4 and 5).  
  
However, although repetitively it has been mentioned that, the property
acquired by a temple must be sanghika property and that essentially there
should be a dedication to the sangha with a cere­mony which included pouring
water, this ritual seems to be flawed in certain instances. Referring to such
instances, Dr.H.W.

**11**

Thambiah (Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law, Reprinted from the Journal of the
Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, New Series, Vol. VII, Part I
pp.82-83) stated that,  
  
"in the Sinhalese inscription at Periya Pulliyankulam a dedication to the
sangha is recorded. There is no mention of the ceremony of pouring water,
although it is men­tioned in later inscriptions, such as the one at
Dimbulagala, where King Abaya, grandson of the King Devanampiya Tissa
dedicated a canal to the sangha by pouring water from a golden vase....  
  
Much later, in the time of King Kirti Sri, the Asgiri Vihara, which is the
second largest of the Buddhist establish­ments in the Kandyan Kingdom, was
dedicated by the King and this dedication is inscribed on a stone. In 1766
Adigar Pilimatalawa dedicated the Parana Vihara in the Asgiri Vihare premises
to the priesthood and the inscrip­tion there sets out the ceremony that was
performed by the King, All that it says is that the King caused Ehelepola to
read the contents of an ola dedicating Kahawala and Udasgiri to the new vihara
and **he offered the writing by laying it on the table before the image. In
both these grants, there is no mention of the pouring of water at these
ceremonies.** Much earlier than that, the Mahavamsa records the ceremony of
planting a branch of the original Bo tree under which the Buddha sat and
achieved enlightenment, which is illustrated by a stone sculpture on the lower
and middle architraves of the East Gate of the Sanchi Tope. **The sculptures
do not depict, and the Mahawamsa does not refer to, the pouring of any
water,** (emphasis added)"  
  
The aforementioned description depicts that there are two meth­ods of making a
dedication to the sangha one with a ceremony which includes pouring of water
and the other without such a ceremony.  
  
It is also worthy of note that the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance refers to
pudgalika property belonging to a priest, which could later become the
property of the temple. Section 23 of the

**12**

Ordinance, which refers to pudgalika property acquired by a bhikku for own
use, reads as follows: 33  
  
"All pudgalika property that is acquired by any individual bhikku for his
exclusive personal use, shall, if not alienat­ed by such bhikku during his
lifetime, be deemed to be the property of the temple to which such bhikku
belonged unless such property had been inherited by such bhikku'.  
  
There is no reference made in the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, that the
pudgalika property, of a bhikku must be acquired, in terms of the Vinaya.  
  
This clearly enunciates the principle that the property dedicated with a
ceremony to make the offering 'sanghika' is not the only way for a temple to
acquire property.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the respondent strenuously argued that there
cannot be a category known as temple property as opposed to sanghika property
because that would reduce the concept of sanghika property to a nullity. On
the basis of that sub­mission it is necessary to examine, whether there is a
category of property known as 'temple property' which a temple can own
with­out such property being termed 'sanghika'. The contention of the [earned
President's Counsel for the respondent was that, a Buddhist temple is not a
juristic person that can receive or hold property and has no legal
personality. Several decisions dating from 1879 were cited to demonstrate that
although a Buddhist tem­ple may be an institution, that it cannot be regarded
as a juristic person. This position had been accepted by the Supreme Court for
over a hundred years and that now it is well settled law. [Ratnapala Unnanse v
Kewitigala Unnanse (7), Sedhananda Therunnanse v Sumanatissa (8), Wijewardane
v Buddharakkita Thero (supra) Buddharakkita Thero v Wijewardane (supra),
Pavisthinahamy v Akurala Seelawansa Thero (9).  
  
Much emphasis was placed on the decision in Kampane Gunaratne Thero v
Mawadawila Pannasena Thero (supra) by the learned President's Counsel for the
respondent to show that the decision in Kosgoda Pangnaseela and another v
Garhage Pavisthinahamy (10) was not followed by the Supreme Court in

**13**

Kampane Gunaratne Thero's case (supra). Learned President's Counsel contended
that the Supreme Court in the Kampane Gunaratne Thero's case expressly
rejected the submission that a temple can own property without a dedication as
prescribed in the Vinaya. In Kampane Gunaratna Thero's case the plaintiff sued
the defendants for a declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the
temple known as Mahagama Rajaramaya, for ejectment of the defendants from the
temple premises and for recovery of posses­sion of the same. The temple was
constructed on an allotment of crown land which had been leased to the
trustees of a Buddhist Association for the purpose of constructing a Buddhist
Temple and dedicating it to the sangha after which it was stipulated that the
lessor will issue a fresh lease of the land for 99 years in favour of the
trustee or the controlling Viharadhipathi of the temple. The tem­ple was
constructed and a deed 'of dedication' was executed with the approval of the
Government Agent and the Commissioner of  Buddhist Affairs. The deed appointed
the plaintiff as the Viharadhipathi of the temple. The Supreme Court held that
the fact that a deed :of dedication' was executed with the full authority of
the State did not by itself, render the temple a sanghika viharaya which was
the basis of the plaintiff's action and a mere claim to the office of
Viharadhipathi independently of the title to the temple and tem-proralities is
untenable. It also held that as the deed 'of dedication' had not been
accompanied by a solemn ceremony in the presence of four or more monks
representing the 'sarva sangha' or 'entire priesthood' as prescribed in
vinaya, the temple and its property did not become sanghika property.
Therefore, it was decided that the title to the property remained with the
State. In other words the property remained 'gihi santhaka'.  
  
The decision taken in Kampane Gunaratne Thero's case could be clearly
distinguished form the present appeal, for the following reasons. It is to be
noted that in Kampane Gunaratne Thero's case the land in which the temple was
built was on a lease agreement Where the lessees were to hold the property
until the dedication of the temple in the manner provided in clause 11 of the
6th schedule to the agreement. According to clause 14 of the lease agreement,
upon dedication of the temple in the manner provided in clause 11 the lessor
was to issue a fresh lease of the land for 99 years in

**14**

favour of the trustee or the controlling Viharadhipathi. in time for the
temple so dedicated. These clauses expressly disclose that the title to the
temple in question was to remain in the State. Furthermore, as described in
the preceding paragraphs, I am unable to agree with the view that the only
mode of dedicating a property to a temple is through the procedure described
in the Vinaya. I am there­fore, with respect, unable to subscribe to the view
taken in Kampane Gunaratne Thero's case that a temple can own property 410
only if such property is dedicated in the manner prescribed in the Vinaya. The
decision in Kosgoda Pangnaseeia and another v Gamage Pavisthinahamy (supra) on
the other hand, has clearly analysed the position with regard to a temple in
owning property. After an intensive examination of the past and present
enactments dealing with Buddhist Temporalities, the relevant provisions and
the decided cases with specific reference to the requisite capacity of a
temple to receive property, Atukorale, J. was of the view that,  
  
'There is therefore legislative sanction for the proposition that a temple can
acquire property otherwise than by way of a sanghika dedication. I am
therefore with respect, unable to subscribe to the view taken by the Privy
Council in Buddharakkita Thero v Wijewardene {62 NLR 49) that section 20 of
the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance (Cap. 318) deals only with sanghika
property, that is, property dedicated to the priesthood as a whole with the
custom­ary ceremonies appurtenant to such a dedication.  
  
Contrary to the position taken by the  learned President's Counsel for the
respondent, there are other decisions where there are certain dicta to the
effect that a temple is a corporation and can acquire property. If I may
reiterate, the position in Charles v Appu (supra), a case decided in 1914, De
Sampayo, J. stated that,

> _".... it may be remembered that a temple is a corporation, and often
> acquires property by the ordinary civil mode of acquisition."_

This view was cited with approval by Atukorale, J. in Kosgoda Pangnaseeia and
another v Gamage Pavisthinahamy (supra). In that case, it was further stated
that,

**15**

"On a consideration,... there appears to me.... that a Buddhist Vihara or
temple is an institution sui generis which is capable in law of receiving and
holding property. The view I have formed is that in the context of past
leg­islation the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance (Cap. 318) recognises a
Buddhist temple or vihara as an institution with the attributes of a
corporation for the purpose of acquiring and holding property, both movable
and immov­able".  
  
On a consideration of the totality of the material available, which includes
not only the case law, but the relevant past and present legislation, i am of
the view that the present Buddhist Temporalites Ordinance recognises a
Buddhist temple as an institution with the characteristics of a corporation
which **could acquire and hold movable and immovable property by the ordinary
civil modes of acquisition.  
**  
A temple, according to the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance, means a place of
Buddhist worship and would include the commu­nity of the sangha, viz. the
entire priesthood. As contended by learned President's Counsel for the
appellant, offerings to a temple could include a rupee coin put into a till
box or offerings such as bed sheets, plates, cups etc. for the use of the
priests. In each of these instances, the dedication may not be accompanied by
a solemn ceremony in the presence of four or more priests who represent the
'sarva sangha or entire priesthood with the ceremony of pouring water. Does
this mean that, purely because of the absence of such a ceremony, the
dedication to the temple by a devotee would remain as 'gihi santhaka',
depriving him of his devotion and acquir­ing the merits of his benefaction I
do not think so. Such an inter­pretation would deprive the good intentions of
a devotee who has no intention of retaining the ownership of what he has
already donated to the temple. In terms of section 20 of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance "all offerings made for the use of such temple....
Shall vest in the trustee or the controlling Viharadhipathi for the time being
of such temple". Furthermore, the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance provides
for situations where an individual bhikku could acquire property for his
exclusive personal use. However, as referred to earlier, section 23 of the
Ordinance pro-

**16**

vides that, such pudgalika property if not alienated by such bhikku during his
life time be deemed to be the property of the temple to which such bhikku
belonged unless such property has been inher­ited by such bhikku. In terms of
section 23 of the Ordinance, in a situation where an individual bhikku departs
from this world, with­out alienating his 'pudgalika property' acquired by him
during his life time, such property would deem to be the property of the
temple even though such property had been acquired without ceremony and
dedication in the manner prescribed in the Vinaya. Therefore it is a
conclusive surmise that in addition to sanghika and pudgalika property
belonging to a temple, there could be other property which belongs to the
temple, but acquired without a ceremony and a ded­ication in the manner
prescribed in the vinaya.  
  
In the present case, it is common ground that the land in question was
purchased on a crown grant dated 06.02.1921 which con­veyed a 2/3 share to
Medhankara Therunnanse. On a careful con­sideration of the said grant, it is
abundantly clear that the crown grant (P1) given to Rev.Medhankara is not a
personal grant allotted to him, but a grant given to him as the trustee of the
temple known as Kandebedde Viharaya. When this case is examined in the light
of the aforementioned facts and circumstances, it is clear that there is no
material to indicate that at the time the properly was pur­chased on behalf of
the temple, there was no such ceremony to dedicate the said property to the
'sarva sanghs according to the Vinaya. However, sanghika dedication is not the
only mode of acquisition of property by a temple. A temple could acquire
proper­ty by the ordinary civil modes of acquisition without a ceremony
conducted according to the Vinaya as happened in this case. On a consideration
of the circumstances of the instant case, the proper­ty in question becomes
temple property belonging to the temple known as Kandebedde Viharaya. Hence,
the questions on which special leave to appeal was granted should be answered
in the fol­lowing terms:  
  
(a) the answer of the learned District Judge to issue No.2 is erroneous and
the answer to issue No.6 is incomplete.  
  
(b) the answers of the learned District Judge to issues No.2 and 6 are
inconsistent with his answer to issue No.1.

**17**

(c) The property described in paragraph 2 of the plaint in any event is temple
property as it was property purchased or granted for and on behalf of the
temple and title to the said property devolved and vested in the temple on the
death of Rev.Ovitigamuve Dammananda.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons this appeal is allowed and the judgment of the
Court of Appeal dated 17.08.1998 and the judgment of the District Court dated
25.08.1988 are set aside. The District Court is directed to enter judgment in
favour of the appellant.  
  
On a consideration of the totality of the circumstances in this case, there
will be no costs in this Court.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. I agree.  
  
YAPA, J.  I agree.**

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/2.html_  

