##  Wickremasinghe v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others - SLR - 409, Vol
2 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 2; (2001) 2 Sri LR 409 (23 July 2001)

**409**

**WICKREMASINGHE  
v.  
CEYLON PETROLEUM CORPORATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, CJ.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO 304/98(FR)  
6TH DECEMBER, 2000  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Termination of dealership in petroleum products in terms
of the Dealership Agreement - Applicability of Public Law - Reasonableness on
objective basis for determining the Constitutional validity of the impugned
termination. - Article 12(1) of the Constitution - Relevance of the
classification doctrine.  
  
_The petitioner had been a dealer in petroleum products from 1949 at premises
No. 267 Galle Road, Colombo 4 when the said premises were with the British
owned Shell Company until the same vested with the 1st respondent Corporation
in 1964 under the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation Act after which the business
was continued on an Agreement with the Corporation. The Agreement of
Dealership could be terminated either without notice on the ground of defaults
on the part of the dealer or by either party giving 3 months notice to the
other party.  
  
There was no allegation of default against the petitioner who carried on the
business of selling petroleum and providing ancillary services including the
maintenance of a service station, at a well located site on the land side of
the Galle Road. The average monthly sales were about Rs. 12 million.  
  
The 1st respondent Corporation by its letter dated 25.4.1998(P4) terminated
the Agreement on the second ground namely, mutual notice and required the
petitioner to hand over vacant possession of the premises on or before
31.12.1998. P4 states that the dealership was being terminated since the land
on which the business is being conducted, being owned by the 1st respondent
Corporation was the most suitable site for the construction of a Head Office
Complex for the Corporation. A Committee which had considered nine locations
finally recommended the site occupied by the petitioner.

**410**

**Held :  
  
**1\. Since the termination of the Agreement is challenged on the basis of an
infringement of the right to equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution, the legality of the termination has to be reviewed not in the
light of the law of contract but in the domain of the Constitutional guarantee
of equality enshrined in Article 12.  
  
2\. The 1st respondent Corporation having the monopoly in relation to
petroleum products is an agency of the Government and its acts would
ordinarily come within the pale of executive or administrative action."  
  
3\. The question for decision is whether the impugned decision is reasonable
on an objective basis and not arbitrary, viz., whether such decision is fairly
and substantially related to the object of legislation.  
  
_Per_ S.N. Silva, CJ  
  
"The case of _Perera v. Jayawickrema_ (5) demonstrates the ineffectiveness of
the guarantee in Article 12(1) which results from the rigid application of the
requirement to prove that persons similarly circumstanced as the petitioner
were differently treated. Such an application of the guarantee under Article
12(1) ignores the essence of the basic standard which is to ensure reasonable
as opposed to arbitrariness **..........** "  
  
4\. The respondents erred in looking at the premises of established petrol
sheds in Colombo to site its proposed Head Office Complex. This course of
action cannot be fairly and substantially related to the objective of the
legislation which is to carry on the business of supplying and distributing
petroleum to motorists.  
  
5\. The impugned termination of the petitioner's dealership infringed his
rights under Article 12(1); hence such termination is invalid and of no force
in law.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Roberts and Another v. Ratnayake and Others_ (1986)2 SRI L.R. 36  
  
2. _Wickrematunga v. Ratwatte and Others_ (1998) 1 SRI L.R. 201  
  
3\. _Sangadasa Silva v. Ratwatte and Others_ (1998) 1 SRI L.R. 350

**411**

4\. _Royster Guano Co. v. Commonwealth of Virginia_ (1920) 253 US 412  
  
5\. _Perera v. Jayawickrema_ (1985) 1 SRI L.R. 285  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
E.D. Wickremanayake with A.M. Najeem for petitioner.  
  
P.A.D. Samarasekera, P.C. with Kushan de Alwis and B.C. Perera for 1st to 9th
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 23, 2001.  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, C.J.  
  
**The Petitioner has been granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged
infringement of the fundamental rights to equality guaranteed by Article 12(1)
and (2) of the Constitution.  
  
The Petitioner is a Dealer in petroleum products carrying on business at
premises No. 267, Galle Road, Colombo 4, which is popularly known as the
"Dickmans Road" petrol shed and service station. He commenced business when
the premises were with the British owned Shell Company and has continued after
the premises vested with the 1st Respondent Corporation in terms of the Ceylon
Petroleum Corporation Act in 1964. The Agreement with the Corporation in terms
of which the Petitioner becomes entitled to continue in business is dated
26.9.1964. (Dealership Agreement P1). The alleged infringement of the
Petitioner's fundament right to equality relates to the decision of the
Corporation to terminate the dealership, notified to the Petitioner by letter
dated 23.4.1998 (P4).  
  
The impugned decision to terminate the dealership has been made in terms of
clause 12B of the Agreement. This clause has broadly two parts. The first part
empowers the Corporation to terminate the Agreement, without notice on the
basis of what may be generally described as defaults on the part of the
dealer. The second part provides for a unilateral right to terminate,

**412**

that may be exercised at the option of either party i.e. by the Corporation or
the dealer, upon 3 months notice being given to the other party. In this
instance the termination has been effected in terms of the second part of
clause 12B and the letter P4 dated 25.4.1998 requires the Petitioner to hand
over vacant possession of the premises on or before 31.12.1998. In that
respect the termination of the Petitioners dealership is in compliance with
specific terms of the Agreement (P1) and the Petitioner may not be entitled to
any relief in respect of the termination under the law of contract and the
common law on the subject. But, that is from the perspective of the Private
Law. In these proceedings, the termination is challenged from the perspective
of Public Law on the basis of an alleged infringement of the fundamental right
to equality, guaranteed by Article 12(1) and (2) of the Constitution.  
  
Therefore the matters to be considered transcend the mere examination of the
terms of the Agreement and a review of the legality of the termination in the
light of the Law of Contract and enter the domain of the constitutional
guarantee of equality enshrined in Article 12.  
  
Article 126(2) of the Constitution vests the sole and exclusive jurisdiction
in this Court to hear and determine any question relating to the infringement
or imminent infringement by executive or administrative action of any
fundamental right or language right declared and recognized by Chapter III or
IV of the Constitution. Article 17 and 126(2) give a right to any person who
alleges any such infringement or imminent infringement to invoke the
jurisdiction of this Court in the manner provided therein. Therefore the
issues that come up for consideration are initially whether the impugned
action comes within the pale of executive or administrative action and if so
whether there has been an infringement of the Petitioner's rights to equality
guaranteed by Article 12(1) and (2) as alleged by him.  
  
There is little doubt as to the initial issue. The 1st Respondent is a Public
Corporation established by the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation Act No. 28 of
1961. It is vested with an exclusive right to import, export sell, supply or
distribute

**413**

petroleum in terms of Section 5C of the Act. A Public Corporation vested with
a monopoly in relation to a commodity vital to the community would undoubtedly
be an agency of the Government and its acts would ordinarily come within the
pale of executive or administrative action.  
  
In the case of _Roberts and another vs. Ratnayake and others_ (1) by a
majority decision it was held that where a statutory authority (a Municipal
Council) gives out premises on a lease, the constitutional guarantee of
equality applies only at the threshold stage of entering into the lease and
that subsequent action taken to terminate the lease for an alleged breach of
its terms should be considered as a matter of Private Law only; without
interposing the Public Law requirements of the guarantee of fundamental
rights. This decision had been departed from in later cases, in particular
_Wickrematunga vs. Ratwatte and others_ (2) and _Sangadasa Silva vs. Ratwatte
and others_ s where it was specifically held that the act of the Petroleum
Corporation in terminating a Dealership Agreement was in the nature of
executive or administrative action and would attract jurisdiction of the court
under Article 126 of the Constitution. Therefore the impugned termination of
the Dealership Agreement by P4, should be reviewed in these proceedings not
from the narrower perspective of only the terms of the Agreement but from
broader perspective of the exercise of executive or administrative action by
an agency of the Government and the constitutional guarantee of equality which
should guide the exercise of power under the Agreement.  
  
Article 12(1) guarantees to every person equality before the law and the equal
protection of the law. Since diversity is inherent amongst persons, from an
early time the United States Supreme Court applied the equal protection clause
as permitting classification of persons provided that such classification
satisfies a basic standard. This basic standard is set out in the often cited
judgment of the United States Supreme Court in the case of _Royster Guano Co.
vs. Commonwealth of Virginia_ (4) as

**414**

follows " **......** classification must be reasonable, not arbitrary, and
must rest upon some ground of difference having a fair and substantial
relation to the object of the legislation, so that all persons similarly
circumstanced shall be treated alike." (P.415)  
  
Although the objective is to ensure that all persons, similarly circumstanced
are treated alike, it is seen that the essence of this basic standard is to
ensure reasonableness being the positive connotation as opposed to
arbitrariness being the related negative connotation. The application of this
basic standard has been blurred in later cases due to an over emphasis on the
objective of ensuring that all persons similarly circumstanced shall be
treated alike. The case of _Perera vs. Jayawickrema_ (5) demonstrates the
ineffectiveness of the guarantee in Article 12(1) which results from the rigid
application of the requirement to prove that persons similarly circumstanced
as the Petitioner were differently treated. Such an application of the
guarantee under Article 12(1) ignores the essence of the basic standard which
is to ensure reasonableness as opposed to arbitrariness in the manner required
by the basic standard. If the legislation or the executive or administrative
action in question is thus reasonable and not arbitrary, it necessarily
follows that all persons similarly circumstanced will be treated alike, being
the end result of applying the guarantee of equality. As noted above, the
effectiveness of the guarantee would be minimized if there is insistence that
a failure of the end result should also be established to prove an
infringement of the guarantee. If however there is such evidence of
differential treatment that would indeed strengthen the case of a Petitioner
in establishing the unreasonableness of the impugned action.  
  
The next question, which is of particular significance to the facts of this
case, is the basis upon which the aspect of reasonableness of the impugned
action should be examined. It is submitted on behalf of the 1st to 9th
Respondents that the decision to terminate the dealership was taken bona fide
and that the reasons for it are contained in the letter of termination

**415**

itself P4 (dated 23.4.98). The letter states very clearly that the dealership
is being terminated since the land on which the petrol shed and the service
station is located, being owned by the 1st Respondent Corporation, is the most
suitable site for the construction of a Head Office Complex for the
Corporation. The Respondents have adduced evidence to establish that the
Corporation had to vacate its Head Office located at No. 113, Galle Road,
Colombo 3 (next to the official residence of the Prime Minister/President) due
to security reasons in 1995, and thereafter several departments of the Head
Office have been temporarily located at different premises that have been
leased paying high rents. That, efforts made to construct a new Head Office
complex on other sites, failed. At that stage a committee was appointed to
select a petrol filling station in Colombo, which could be used as the site
for the construction of the Head Office Complex. The committee in its report,
which has been produced, considered 9 locations and finally recommended the
site occupied by the Petitioner. The Board of Directors accepted the
recommendation and it was decided to terminate the dealership of the
Petitioner and obtain possession of the land to construct the Head Office
Complex.  
  
On the other hand the Petitioner submits that the petrol shed has been
operated at this well located site from 1949 and from the inception he has
been a model dealer and has carried out business without any complaints or
adverse reports from the Corporation. He has set out the full range of
facilities that is provided at the premises by way of supplying fuel and
ancillary services and relies on the several commendations received for the
services rendered. It is also submitted that this is the only petrol shed and
service station situated on the land side of the Galle Road, between the
petrol shed at Kollupitiya and the other at Dehiwala. Due to the bifurcation
of the Galle Road it serves a large number of motorists travelling on the land
side of the Galle Road. It is claimed that the average monthly sales is in the
region of Rs. 12 million. None of these matters are disputed by the
Respondents.

**416**

The question of reasonableness of the impugned action has to be judged in the
aforesaid state of facts. The claim of each party appears to have merit when
looked at from the particular standpoint of that party. But, resonableness,
particularly as the basic component of the guarantee of equality, has to be
judged on an objective basis which stands above the competing claims of
parties. In this context I find the basic standard laid down in the Royster
Guano case and cited above to be a useful guide. It has to be borne in mind
that the basic standard was laid in relation to a challenge of the validity of
State legislation granting a tax exemption to certain corporations and not
others.  
  
The protection of equality is primarily in respect of law, taken in its widest
sense and, extends to executive or administrative action referable to the
exercise of power vested in the Government, a minister, public officer or an
agency of the Government. However, the Court has to be cautious to ensure that
the application of the guarantee of equality does not finally produce
iniquitous consequences. A useful safeguard in this respect would be the
application of a basic standard or its elements, wherever applicable. The
principle element in the basic standard as stated above is reasonableness as
opposed to being arbitrary. In respect of legislation where the question would
be looked more in the abstract, one would look at the class of persons
affected by the law in relation to those left out. In respect of executive or
administrative action one would look at the person who is alleging the
infringement and the extent to which such person is affected or would be
effected. But, the test once again is one of being reasonable and not
arbitrary. Of particular significance to the fact of this case, the question
arises as to the perspective or standpoint from which such reasonableness
should be judged. It certainly cannot be judged only from a subjective basis
of hardship to one and benefit to the other. Executive or administrative
action may bring in its wake hardship to some, such as deprivation of property
through acquisition, taxes, disciplinary action and loss of employment. At the
same time it can bring benefits to others, such as employment, subsidies,
rebates, admission to universities,

**417**

schools and housing facilities. It necessarily follows that reasonableness
should be judged from an objective basis. In this respect the second element
of the basic standard would be a useful guide. That, the "classification
**......** must rest upon some ground having a fair and substantial relation
to the object of the legislation." When applied to the sphere of the executive
or the administration the second element of the basic standard would require
that the impugned action, is based on discernible grounds that have a fair and
substantial relation to the object of the legislation in terms of which the
action is taken or the manifest object of the power that is vested with the
particular authority.  
  
Therefore, when both elements of the basic standard are applied it requires
that the executive or administrative action in question be reasonable and
based on discernible grounds that are fairly and substantially related to the
object of the legislation in terms of which the action is taken or the
manifest object of the power that is vested with the particular authority. The
requirements of both elements merge. If the action at issue is based on
discernible grounds that are fairly and substantially related to the object of
the legislation or the manifest object of the power that is vested in the
authority, it would ordinarily follow that the action is reasonable. The
requirement to be reasonable as opposed to arbitrary would in this context
pertain to the process of ascertaining and evaluating these grounds in the
light of the extent of discretion vested in the authority.  
  
**Extra  
  
**On the basis of the foregoing analysis of the legal requirements relevant to
the guarantee of equality I would now revert to the facts of this case. The
Ceylon Petroleum Corporation was established by Act No. 28 of 1961. Its
principal object as stated in the long title of the Act and section 5(a) is to
"carry on business as an importer, exporter, seller, supplier or distributor
of petroleum." In terms of Section 5c(i) the Corporation has been vested an
exclusive right, in the nature of a monopoly to carry

**418**

on the said business. The business of the Petitioner as dealer is a vital link
between the Corporation and the end user such as motorists. When considered
from this objective of the legislation the action of the Corporation should be
fairly and substantially related to the maintenance and improvement of the
supply and distribution of petroleum to end users such as motorists. Any
action which detracts from or diminishes the supply and distribution of
petroleum would per se be devoid of a fair and substantial relation to the
objective of the legislation. In this instance the impugned decision is for
the closure of a vital petrol shed, which cannot be fairly and substantially
related to the objective of the legislation.  
  
The Respondents contention is that it is necessary to have a well located Head
Office complex to carry out the full range of its activities. This contention
cannot be basically faulted. It is further contended the premises at Galle
Road, Colombo 4, where the petrol shed in question is located is a good site
for the new Head Office complex. There may be merit in this contention, as
well. To add another virtue, the site being owned by the Corporation could be
secured without any additional cost. Further, the evaluation done by the
Committee in selecting the premises in question out of the petrol sheds in
Colombo, to site the Head Office Complex may be a seemingly reasonable
process. But in my view all these factors are negatived since the starting
point- is faulty. The Respondents erred in looking at the premises of
established petrol sheds in Colombo to site its proposed Head Office Complex.
This course of action cannot in any way be fairly and substantially related to
the objective of the legislation which is to carry on the business of
supplying and distributing petroleum. The maintenance of a centrally located
head office is subordinate to the maintenance an of efficient and effective
distribution points. The task of maintaining an efficient and effective
distribution point should get priority when related to the objective of the
legislation. Therefore I hold that the decision communicated by P4 to
terminate the dealership of the Petitioner infringes the fundamental right of
the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

**419**

Next, I have to consider the alleged infringement of Article 12(2) of the
Constitution. It is contended that the Petitioner has been a member of the
United National Party and in active politics on behalf of that Party for a
period of 22 years, particularly in the Kalutara District. On that basis it is
alleged that the Petitioner is discriminated against on the ground of
political opinion. However, the Petitioner has significantly failed to
disclose that he has been and continues without any disruption as a dealer of
the Corporation at the petrol shed situated at premises No. 878, Main Street,
Kalutara. The Respondents have produced marked R 11 the dealership agreement
in respect of that petrol shed. Furthermore the Petitioner has carried on
business at the petrol shed in question for almost 4 years after the change of
Government without any adverse reports or hindrance on the part of the 1st
Respondent. In fact two months prior to the impugned decision the 9th
Respondent who was a member of the committee that recommended that the petrol
shed in question was the most suited location for the Head Office Complex
issued a commendation in respect of the services rendered by the Petitioner as
a dealer. Whereas only 3 months notice should be given of the termination in
terms of clause 12B of the dealership agreement, the letter of termination P4
gives 8 months notice to Petitioner. The letter itself which sets out reason
for the termination is couched in temperate language and ends with virtually a
plea which states as follows :  
  
"We trust you would kindly extend your unstinted cooperation in handing over
the vacant and peaceful possession of the land building to our Area Manager."  
  
All these matters in my view negative the allegation of discrimination on the
basis of political opinion. It is clear that the Petitioner has included this
allegation merely to strengthen his case. The tendency to unnecessarily
present disputes upon divisions based on political colour is one that this
Court cannot view with favour. I hold that the Petitioner has failed to
establish any infringement of Article 12(2) of the Constitution.

**420**

Accordingly I allow the application and grant to the Petitioner a declaration
as prayed for in paragraph (b) of the prayer to the petition that his
fundamental right guaranteed by 12(1) of the Constitution has been infringed
by the 1st to 9th Respondents and declare the termination of the dealership
agreement effected by document P4 as invalid and of no force in law.
Considering the finding against the Petitioner in respect of the alleged
infringement of Article 12(2) of the Constitution, and the fact that he has
continued to operate the dealership, I would not award any compensation or
costs in his favour.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/2.html_  

