##  M. A. Razak &Co. Ltd. v. Lanka Walltiles Ltd. - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 2000
[1999] LKSC 2; (2000) 1 Sri LR 1 (8 December 1999)

**1**

**M. A. RAZAK & CO. LTD  
v.  
LANKA WALLTILES LTD**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 39/99  
CA NO. 316/88 (F)  
DC COLOMBO NO. 82984 M  
4th NOVEMBER, 1999  
  
Admiralty jurisdiction - Applicable law during the period 2.7.79 (corning into
force of the Judicature Act of 1978) and 31.10.83 (coming into force of the
Admiralty Jurisdiction Act of 1983) - Claim relating to carriage of goods in a
ship - Jurisdiction of the District Court - Section 19 of the Judicature Act,
No. 2 of 1978.  
  
The plaintiff - respondent (the plaintiff) was a manufacturer and exporter of
ceramic tiles and the defendant - appellant (the defendant) was the licensed
shipping agent of the vessel MV Falak. The defendant obtained from the Central
Freight Bureau shipping space for the plaintiff on the said vessel sailing in
July 1979 for approximately 340 metric tons of ceramic tiles. Thereafter, on
the invitation of the defendant, 333 - 31 metric tons of ceramic tiles
belonging to the plaintiff were loaded in MV Falak. Soon thereafter the
plaintiff became aware that the vessel was incapable of moving on its own
steam and was under arrest in consequence of an order made by the Admiralty
High Court of Colombo. The plaintiff promptly moved the High Court and in
consequence of an order. obtained from court, managed to get the cargo off
loaded from the vessel. The plaintiff claimed that the operation of off
loading cost him Rs. 333,310/=. The plaintiff alleged that at the time
accepted for loading the defendants were aware that the ship was under seizure
on a court order and that its agents and servants fraudulently or negligently
failed to notice that fact to the plaintiff. The plaintiff filed an action in
the District Court and obtained judgement for the recovery of the sum of Rs.
333,310/=. The action was filed on the 13th July 1979 after the Judicature
Act, No. 2 of 1978 came into force on 2.7.79 and before the Admiralty
Jurisdiction Act, No. 40 of 1983 was brought into operation on 1.11.83.

**2**

**Held:  
**  
1\. The High Court sitting in the Judicial Zone of Colombo had admiralty
jurisdiction during the period between 2.7.79 and 31.10.83 in terms of section
13 (1) of the Judicature Act read with section 3 (2) of the Administration of
Justice Law No. 44 of 1973 which had not been repealed by the AJL and which
kept in force the Admiralty Rules of 1883.  
  
2\. Section 13(1) of the Judicature Act does not confer exclusive jurisdiction
on the High Court in Admiralty matters. In England an aggrieved party may
institute proceedings in the Queens Bench Division in respect of certain
matters within admiralty jurisdiction. Similarly, the District Court had
concurrent jurisdiction to hear and determine the plaintiff s action which
entailed consideration of a contract of carriage of goods in a ship. This view
is supported by the wording of section 19 of the Judicature Act.  
Cases referred to  
  
1\. Antonis P Lemos (HL) 1985 (1) All E R 695  
  
2\. Mohamed Saleh Bawzir v. MV Ayesha EX Pardesi and another (C.A) (1986) 1
SriLR314  
  
3\. P. B. Umbichy Ltd. v. MV Shantha Rohan SC No. 32/91A SC minutes 27th July
1993.  
  
4\. The Government of United States of America v. The ship "Valiant
Enterprise" (1961)63 NLR 337 '  
  
5\. Snia Viscosa Societa Nazionale Industria Applicazioni Viscosa v. The Ship
Yuri Maru 1927 AC 906  
  
6\. Hendrik Appuhamy v. John Appuhamy (1966) 69 NLR 29  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal  
  
Sanjeewa Jayawardena for defendant - appellant.  
  
Bimal Rajapaksa with G.S.K. Hirimuthugoda and Ajith Anawatta for plaintiff -
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**3**

December 8, 1999  
**DHEERARATNE, J.**  
  
At the time material to this action the plaintiff - respondent (plaintiff) was
a manufacturer and an exporter of ceramic tiles and the defendant appellant
(defendant) was the licensed shipping agent of the vessel MV Falak. The
plaintiff requested the Central Freight Bureau (CFB) for allocation of
shipping space on a vessel calling on the ports of Doha and Quatar for
approximately 340 metric tons of ceramic tiles. On the strength of
representations made by the defendant to the CFB, the CFB informed the
plaintiff that shipping space was available on MV Falak sailing in July 1979.
The defendant through its servants or agents, too informed the plaintiff that
the said vessel was ready to accept cargo for shipping and to make available
the cargo for loading. Accordingly, 333-31 metric tons of ceramic tiles
belonging to the plaintiff were loaded on my Falak. Soon thereafter, the
plaintiff became aware that the vessel MV Falak was incapable of moving on its
own steam and was under arrest pursuant to an order made by the Admiralty High
Court of Colombo. The plaintiff promptly moved the High Court and in
consequence of an order obtained from Court, managed to get the cargo off
loaded from the vessel. According to the plaintiff, the operation of off
loading cost him a sum of Rs. 333,310/=. The plaintiff alleged that at the
time the cargo was accepted for loading, the defendant was fully aware that
the ship was under seizure by order of Court and that its servants and agents
fraudulently or negligently failed to notify that fact to the plaintiff. The
plaintiff thereafter filed this action against the defendant in the District
Court of Colombo seeking inter alia the recovery of the said sum of Rs.
333,310/=. The District Court gave judgment in favour of the plaintiff and on
appeal by the defendant, the Court of Appeal affirmed that judgment. The
defendant has now appealed to this Court. If one were to look at the nature of
the plaintiff's cause of action, it is a claim arising out of an agreement
relating to carriage of goods in a ship or to the use or hire of a ship, which
attracts admiralty law. An action founded on the law of delict could fall
within such a claim. See Antonis P Lemos (HL)(1).

**4**

The only matter, argued before us, quite rightly too, was the interesting
question as to whether the District Court had jurisdiction to hear and
determine the action of the plaintiff as an action based on delict or whether
the High Court of Admiralty had exclusive jurisdiction as an action relating
to admiralty law. It is material to observe in this connection, that the
action was filed on 13t' July 1979, before the Admiralty Jurisdiction Act of
1983, currently in force, came into operation, It is unnecessary for the
decision of this case to trace the history of the Admiralty jurisdiction of
this Island: that has been admirably done by the Court of Appeal in the case
of Mohamed Saleh Bawazir Vs. MV Ayesha Ex Pardesi and another(2). In order to
examine the state of admiralty law that was applicable to Sri Lanka, at the
time the present action was filed, namely on 131'' July 1979, some reference
to the legislation on the subject enacted earlier, becomes necessary.  
  
Rules were made by the Order in Council dated 23.8.1883 under the Vice
Admiralty Courts Act 1863 of the UK and were made applicable to this Island by
Government Gazette of 7.12.1883. Subsequently, the local Ceylon courts of
Admiralty Ordinance No. 2 of 1891 was enacted and by virtue of section 23 of
that Ordinance, the admiralty rules already promulgated were kept alive.
(These rules were later reproduced in Volume I of the 1956 Subsidiary
Legislation). The Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973 (AJL), by its
subsection 3 (1), repealed among several enactments, the Ceylon Courts of
Admiralty Ordinance, but by its subsection 3 (2), all rules in force relating
to the exercise of jurisdiction of Courts established under the several
enactments repealed by that Law, were kept in force. Section 54 of the AJL
defined "admiralty jurisdiction" to mean "unless otherwise provided for by
written law the admiralty jurisdiction for the time being of the High Court of
England." This provision attracted the application to Sri Lanka of the
Administration of Justice Act of 1956 of the United Kingdom (later substituted
by the Supreme

**5**

Court Act of 1981). The Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 of Sri Lanka, by its
section 62 repealed Chapter 1 of the AJL which contained section 54 but not
subsection 3 (2.) thus the admiralty rules of 1883 were kept in force. See the
case of Mohamed Saleh Bawazir (supra).  
  
The Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 is the source of the jurisdictions of the
several Courts of First Instance. Subsection 13 (1) reads "Admiralty
jurisdiction is hereby vested in the High Court and shall be ordinarily
exercised by a judge of the High Court sitting in the judicial zone of
Colombo" (Proviso is omitted). Subsection 13 (2) reads "The admiralty
jurisdiction vested in the High Court shall be as provided for by the law for
the time being in force". By the repeal of section 54 of the AJL, the
Judicature Act of 1956 of the United kingdom which specified "the admiralty
jurisdiction for the time being of the High Court of England", ceased to be
applicable to Sri Lanka; and until the Admiralty Act No. 40 of 1983 came into
force there was no law as "provided for by the law for the time being in
force" in terms of subsection 13 (2) of the Judicature Act of 1978\. Was there
any admiralty law in operation in Sri Lanka between the period 2.7.79 (coming
into force of the Judicature Act of 1978) and 31.10.83 (coming into force of
the Admiralty Jurisdiction Act No. 40 of 1983)?. This question was considered
by this Court in the case of P.B. Umbichy Ltd., Vs. MV Shantha Rohan(3) which
reversed the decision of the Court of Appeal reported in 1994 (3) SLR 54, the
latter of which held that there was no admiralty law applicable to Sri Lanka
during that period.  
  
In that case Mark Fernando J. stated "section 13(1) vested `admiralty
jurisdiction' in the High Court. That section, taken as a whole, is capable of
2 constructions. The first view is that admiralty jurisdiction is exhaustively
defined by sub section (2), ie. as being such jurisdiction and only such
jurisdiction, as is provided for by law for the time being in force; there
being no such law in force on 31.8.83, the High Court had no jurisdiction.
However, section 13(2) seems somewhat wider than the

**6**

usual (exhaustive) definition clause, which would have provided that admiralty
jurisdiction in section 13(1) 'means such jurisdiction as is conferred on [or
provided for] by the law of the time being in force.' Had there been a statute
which provided for admiralty jurisdiction, such statute would have applied,
even if section 13(2) had been omitted; to that extent section 13(2) is
superfluous. In any event, even if it be regarded as a definition clause, it
is more in the nature of an inclusive, rather than an exhaustive definition.  
  
The 2nd interpretation is that 'admiralty jurisdiction' in section 13(1) did
have a meaning, independently of subsection (2); namely, the ordinary meaning
of the phrase considered in the context of the preceding one hundred years;
the special characteristic of admiralty jurisdiction, as commonly understood,
was that it recognised an action in rem wherein a vessel could be arrested, or
seized, as security for the satisfaction of the claim if successful; and the
nature and extent of that jurisdiction could also be ascertained by a
consideration of the powers conferred or recognized by the Admiralty Rules.
That interpretation, however, renders section 13(2) superfluous, as even
without it Parliament could later have amended or added to the admiralty
jurisdiction of the High Court.  
  
I have therefore to choose between an interpretation which renders section
13(1) a futility, and another which renders section 13(2) superfluous.
Considered in isolation, the first interpretation seems more logical. But
considering the history of admiralty jurisdiction and the purpose of the
Judicature Act, one cannot discover a legislative intent to take away a
jurisdiction recognised for almost a century; and the fact that Admiralty
Rules were kept in force contradicts any such intention. The Judicature Act
was intended to ensure or regulate the smooth working of the judicial system,
and the alternative interpretation which will introduce uncertainty, friction
or confusion into the working of the system must be rejected (Shannon Realties
Ltd., Vs. Ville de St. Michel 1924 AC 185 192-3)... Had section 13(1) stood
alone, 'admiralty

**7**

jurisdiction' would have had to be given a meaning, and there is no doubt that
it would have included a claim for loss of or damage to the goods carried in a
ship or a claim arising out of any agreement relating to the carriage of goods
in a ship.  
  
I am in respectful agreement with the abovementioned dicta of Mark Fernando J.
However, I am inclined to think that the substantive English admiralty law was
applicable during the period in question also for a different reason. The
admiralty rules, as observed earlier were kept alive, which were mainly
procedural in nature. Section 2 of the Civil Law Ordinance No. 5 of 1852 (as
amended) reads: - "The law to be hereafter administered in Sri Lanka in
respect of all contracts of questions arising within the same relating to
ships and to the property therein, and to the owners thereof, the behaviour of
the master and mariners their respective rights, duties, and liabilities,
relating to the carriage of passengers and goods by ship, to stoppage in
transitu, to freight, demurrage, insurance, salvage, average, collision
between ships, to bills of lading, and generally to all maritime matters,
shall be the same in respect of the said matters as would be administered in
England in the like case at the corresponding period, if the contract had been
entered into or if the act in respect of which any such question shall have
arisen had been done in England, unless in any case other provision is or
shall be made by any enactment now in force in Sri Lanka or hereafter to be
enacted."  
  
I see no reason why, during this period where there was no substantive
enactment with regard to admiralty law, that on the application of the Civil
Law Ordinance, the corresponding English Law did not apply to Sri Lanka. I
find support for this view from the illuminating judgment of H. N. G. Fernando
J. (as he then was) in the case of The Government of United States of America
Vs. The ship ''Valiant Enterprise''(4) Rejecting the argument, that section 2
of the Civil Law Ordinance, which I have cited above, rendered inapplicable to
this Island, the

**8**

decision of the Privy Council in Snia Viscosa Societa Nazionale Industria
Applicazioni Viscosa Vs. The Ship Yuri Maru(5), H.N.G. Fernando J. at page 343
stated "That provision only means in my opinion that this Court must
administer the substantive law which would at the given time be administered
in the maritime matters by the High Court, provided of course that this Court
has aliunde the jurisdiction to entertain a suit in respect of the particular
matter involved." So much as regards the substantive law of admiralty
applicable during the period in question.  
  
The relevent part of section 19 of the Judicature Act which confers the
jurisdiction of the District Court states :- "Every District Court shall be a
court of record and shall within its district have unlimited original
jurisdiction in all civil, revenue, trust, insolvency and testamentary matters
except such of the aforesaid matters as are by this Act or any other written
law exclusively assigned byway of original jurisdiction to any other court or
vested in any other authority ...... (emphasis added) It could be observed
that section 13 does not seem to confer exclusive jurisdiction to the High
Court. Learned counsel for the defendant, quite forcefully contended, that we
should apply the ratio in the case of Hendrick Appuhamy V. John Appuhamy(6) He
submitted that where the legislature has provided for special machinery to
which a party should resort to in order to obtain relief, he cannot resort to
any other forum. In the instant case, one cannot contend that any new rights
have been created by admiralty law. As Sansoni CJ. observed in that case "it
seems clear that special rights have been conferred by the Act [Paddy Lands
Act] upon tenant cultivators and special liabilities have been imposed on
landlords, quite distinct from their common law rights and liabilities. ,The
Act make special provision for what is to happen in case of any breach of the
provisions. Most significant, for the purpose of this appeal are the special
rights conferred upon the tenant cultivators with regard to the quiet and
undisturbed possession of their extents of paddy land and their restoration

**9**

to possession if evicted. It is clear that since the Act was passed, the
landowner of a paddy land no longer has the freedom he previously enjoyed in
regard to the use and occupation of that land or the manner of dealing with
it. His common law rights have been considerably curtailed, no doubt in the
interest of good paddy cultivation and the country's food supply. " There is
no creation of such new rights and liabilities in the instant case and the
case of Hendrick Appuhamy has no application.  
  
It would appear that even in the United Kingdom, unless a party desires to
gain advantage of the procedure by way of obtaining an admiralty writ, he is
free to invoke the jurisdiction of the Queen's Bench Division to obtain
relief. British Shipping Laws - Admiralty Practise by Hewson, Colinvaux and Mc
Guffie Vol. 1(1964) page 43 states, "In cases where the plaintiff wishes to
sue the English defendant, the main question to be considered is whether,
assuming that the cause of action is within the list set out in section 1(1)
of the Administration of Justice Act, 1956, any advantage is obtainable by
issuing an Admiralty writ."  
  
I shall pause here to mention that section 1(1) enumerates the several
admiralty matters over which the Court has jurisdiction, one being "any claim
arising out of any agreement relating to the carriage of goods in a ship or to
the use or hire of a ship."  
  
The aforesaid authority continues "There are, of course, certain matters
within Admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court which must be assigned to the
Admiralty Division, these normally being (a) the actions which come under the
heading of "collision" and (b) limitation actions under section 504 of the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1894. The majority, however, of the various actions are
within the Admiralty jurisdiction in personam of the High Court could be tried
in the Queens Bench Division.

**10**

As will be observed later, there is no proceedure in an Admiralty action in
rem equivalent to that under Order 13, rule 1 et seq: for obtaining judgment
in default of appearance, or that under Order 19 rule 2 et seq: for obtaining
judgment in default of defence (nor it is possible in Admiralty to apply for
summary judgment under Order 14, and this applies whether the action is in rem
or in personam). The equivalent in an Admiralty action in rem is an
application by motion for judgment in default under Order 75, rule 20, which
must necessarily take longer. Consequently if urgency is important, it may be
better to institute the proceedings in the Queen's Bench Division, provided
that service of the writ can be effected and effected quickly, in order to
take advantage of the quicker default procedure where it is known that the
defendant has no defence and is unlikely to employ delaying tactics. On the
other hand, if the cause of action is one which could be taken in either
division and the defendant has a ship or other property (usually cargo or
freight) in this country which could be arrested, the plaintiff by suing in
rem has the advantage of being able to effect service of his writ without any
difficulty or delay and to obtain security for his claim at the very beginning
of the action. This, however, is subject to other considerations which will be
mentioned later.  
  
If the intended plaintiffs claim is one which will involve a consideration of
technicalities of the navigation of ships or the ownership or the mortgage of
ships, then quite clearly the plaintiffs choice would be the Admiralty
Division. If, however, the case is one involving a claim for loss of or damage
to cargo, or entails consideration of contracts of carriage of goods in a
ship, or concerns a claim to recover a general average contribution, then the
choice may be to institute proceedings in the Queen's Bench Division and
transfer to the Commercial List."  
  
I hold that the District Court had concurrent jurisdiction to hear and
determine the plaintiffs action. For the above

**11**

reasons I affirm the judgment of the District Court and dismiss the Appeal.
The appellant will pay the respondent a sum of Rs. 25,000/= as costs of this
Court.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
**  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/2.html_  

