##  Shelton De Silva Vs Shirani Helen Fernando - SLR - 108, Vol 1 of 2005
[2004] LKSC 20; (2005) 1 Sri LR 108 (19 October 2004)

**108**

**SHELTON DE SILVA  
vs  
SHIRANI HELEN FERNANDO**

SUPREME COURT  
WIGNESWARAN, J.  
DE SILVA, J. AND  
TILAKAWARDANE. J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 55/2003  
C. A. 750/90 (F)  
D. C. COLOMBO 6763/RE  
10th FEBRUARY, 2004  
  
_Landlord and Tenant - Classification of one house owner entitled to recover a
house under section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii) of the Rent Act, in the light of
section 22 (7) of the Act.  
  
_Special leave to appeal was granted upon the question whether in the
definition of "specified date" in section 22 (7) of the Rent Act "occupation"
means

**109**

occupation per se or is restricted to occupation as tenant of the lawful owner
of the premises.  
  
**Held :  
**  
_Per_ Wigneswaran, J  
  
" .............  Section 22 (7) seems to have contemplated in the case falling
within the ambit of section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii) only those cases where there
were transfers over the head" as it were of the tenant from one owner landlord
to another owner landlord ......... that no person shall be able to purchase a
property already in the ownership of an owner landlord over the head of a
tenant in order to oust such tenant. When the interpretation of "specified
date" in section 22 (7) refers to "came in to occupation of such premises" the
word "premises" must be interpreted as premises where the present owner
landlord purchased or inherited or received as gift from a previous owner
landlord. Where there was no such purchase, inheritance or gift the tenancy in
respect of the premises though it was continued as far as the tenant and the
premises are concerned it would not prevent the new single house owner
landlord from ejecting the tenant by depositing five years rent subject to
such notices, etc, being given. In other words the prohibition in section 22
(7) would not apply where there was no nexus in respect of ownership between
the previous landlord and the present landlord. It is the single house
ownership that gives the new owner landlord the right of ejectment.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Nandadeva v Gulamhussain_ (1994) Part II BASLJ page 12  
  
2\. _Sumanasekara v Peiris_ (1993) 3 Sri LR 281  
  
3\. _Imbuldeniya v D. De de Silva_ (1987) I Sri LR 367  
  
4\. _Sriani Peiris v Mohamed_ (1986) 2 Sri LR 384  
  
5\. _Devarajah and Another v Ariyatunga_ (1995)2 Sri LR 34.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P. Vimalachandran_ with _A. P. Niles_ for substituted defendant - respondent
-petitioner  
  
_N, S. A. Gunatillaka, P. C._ with _N. Mahendra_ for substituted plaintiff -
appellant - respondent

_Cur. adv. vult._

**110**

October 19,2004  
  
**WIGNESWARAN J.  
**  
This appeal centres around the interpretation of the phrase "specified date"
in Section 22 (7) of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972 read with its amendments, in
relation to occupation by a tenant. Special leave to appeal in this regard was
granted on 06.08.2003.  
  
In order to so interpret the phrase, in its context, it is essential to start
from the beginning setting out the relevant facts of this case.  
One Shelton de Silva, husband of the original Defendant Sybil de Silva, was
tenant of premises bearing No. 67, Kanatta Road (later D. S. Senanayake
Mawatha) Borella from 1938 under one Idris Zadoon (vide P 8 & P9).  
  
While the contract of tenancy between Shelton de Silva and Zadoon was in
effect, Partition Case No. 3747/P in the District Court of Colombo, to which
Zadoon was not a party, conferred ownership over the premises above mentioned,
on the original Plaintiff of this case, viz. W. Irene Fernando, by Certificate
of Sale No. 661 dated 23.09.1959.  
  
After the purchase Shelton de Silva became the tenant of the original
Plaintiff, W. Irene Fernando. This position is not disputed.  
  
Shelton de Silva died on 30.06.1961. Thereafter his widow Sybil de Silva
became the tenant as from 01.07.1961. The plaint dated 23.01.1987 accepted the
said Sybil de Silva, the original Defendant, as the tenant of the original
Plaintiff, W. Irene Fernando.  
  
The original Plaintiff filed this action on the basis that she had deposited
with the Commissioner of National Housing the equivalent of 5 years' rent (at
the rate of Rs. 165.66 per month) and had sent notice to quit in terms of the
proviso to Section 22 (6), requiring the premises back in terms of Section 22
(2) (bb) (ii), since she had no other residential premises.  
  
The original Defendant denied that the original Plaintiff was entitled to file
this action since the latter had acquired the ownership of the premises,
occupied by the original Defendant, on 23.09.1959 which was after the
specified date as contemplated by Section 22 (7) of the Rent Act.

**111**

The District Judge by judgment dated 05.12..1990 upheld the argument of the
original Defendant and dismissed the original Plaintiff's action. The original
Plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeal. While it was pending before that
Court, both the original Plaintiff and the original Defendant died, and
substitutions were effected. The Court of Appeal reversed the order of the
District Judge and entered judgment in favour of the substituted Plaintiff-
Appellant after setting aside the judgment of the District Judge.  
  
The substituted Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner has appealed to this Court.  
  
Basically the question of law to be examined is the meaning of "occupation" in
the definition of "specified date" in terms of Section 22 (7) of the Rent Act.  
  
Let us first examine the relevant Sections.  
  
Section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii), under which this action was filed reads thus-  
  
"Notwithstanding anything in any other law, no action or proceedings for the
ejectment of the tenant of any residential premises the standard rent
(determined under Section 4) of which for a month exceeds one hundred rupees
shall be instituted in or entertained by any Court unless where in the case of
premises let to a tenant whether before or after the date of commencement of
this Act and where the landlord is the owner of not more than one residential
premises the landlord of such premises has deposited prior to the institution
of such action or proceedings a sum equivalent to five years' rent with the
Commissioner for National Housing for payment to the tenant".  
  
The notice was given under the proviso to Section 22 (6) which reads thus:  
  
"Provided that the landlord of any premises referred to in paragraph (bb) of
subsection (1) or paragraph (bb) of subsection (2) may institute an action or
proceedings for the ejectment of the tenant of such premises if such landlord
has given to such tenant six month's notice in writing of the termination of
the tenancy".  
  
The relevant part of Section 22 (7) which needs consideration by this Court
reads as follows:-

**112**

"Notwithstanding anything in the preceding provisions of this section, no
action or proceedings for the ejectment of the tenant of any premises referred
to in subsection 2 (i) shall be instituted (a) (b) where the landlord is the
owner of not more than one residentil premises on the ground that (i) (ii) the
landlord of such premises has deposited prior to the institution of such
action or proceedings a sum equivalent to five years' rent with the
Commissioner for National Housing for payment to the tenant, where the
ownership of such premises was  acquired by the landlord on a date subsequent
to the specified date by purchase or by inheritance or gift other than
inheritance or gift from a parent or spouse who had acquired ownership of such
premises on a date prior to the specified date "  
  
"In this subsection "specified date" means the date on which the tenant for
the time being of the premises or the tenant upon whose death the tenant for
the time being succeeded to the tenancy under Section 36 of this Act or
Section 18 of the Rent Restriction Act (No, 29 of 1948) came into occupation
of the premises".  
  
Six months' notice in terms of the provision to Section 22 (6) had been given
and five years' rent in terms of Section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii) had been
deposited prior to the 'institution of this action. That the standard rent
exceeds Rs. 100 per month is not disputed. Thus the question that remains to
be answered is whether the bar for the recovery of possession in terms of
Section 22 (7) would apply to the substituted Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent
or not.  
  
The substituted Defendant-Respondent-Petitioner's position is that what have
to be examined in terms of Section 22 (7) are -  
  
(i) When did the plaintiff become the owner of the premises in suit?  
  
(ii) When did the defendant come into occupation?  
  
Since in this case the original Defendant came into occupation as the wife of
the original tenant in 1938 and the original Plaintiff became owner only in
1959, the bar in terms of Section 22 (7) it was argued, must apply. It was
further argued that in any event the original Defendant succeeded to the
tenancy of her husband who had continued as a tenant from 1938, after his
death in 1961, and therefore the bar would still apply.

**113**

The arguments of the substituted Plaintiff-Appellant- Respondent were :  
  
(i) that the only contract of tenancy which existed between the original
Plaintiff and the original Defendant was that which came into existence after
the death of Shelton de Silva as held by the Supreme Court in S. C. Case No.
329/70 9F) (D. C. Colombo Case No. 11925/L)  
  
(ii) that the original Plaintiff purchased this property on 23.09.1959. The
original Defendant had succeeded to tenancy as per judgment in Case No. S. C.
329/70 F only on 01.07.1961. Thus the tenant had come into occupation after
23.09.1959.  
  
(iii) According to the judgment in Senerath Nandadeva Vs. Gulamhussain
'""specified date" in Section 22 (7) can only mean the date on which the
tenant for the time being came into occupation "qua tenant".  
  
(iv) My judgment in Sumanasekera Vs. Peiris (2) at page 288 in favour of the
Plaintiff in a similar case was also mentioned.  
  
All these submissions would now be considered.  
  
Quite advisedly the Supreme Court recorded the question of law in issue on
06.08.2003 as follows:  
  
"Special leave to appeal is granted upon the question whether in the
definition of" specified date" in Section 22 (7) of the Rent Act "occupation"
means occupation per se or is restricted to occupation as tenant of the lawful
owner of the premises.  
  
It is important to remember that tenancy under the Rent Act does not arise
only between the owner of a house and a person to whom the house has been let
by such owner. For the purposes of the Rent Act a landlord need not be an
owner. In fact Section 48 interprets a "landlord" as follows-  
  
"Landlord in relation to any premises means the person for the time being
entitled to receive the rent of such premises and includes any tenant who lets
the premises or any part thereof to any subtenant".  
  
The word "tenant" finds no place for interpretation in Section 48.

**114**

Section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii) mentioned above speaks of a landlord being an
owner. It says "where the landlord is the owner of not more than one
residential premises", the person who could deposit five years' rent with the
Commissioner of National Housing must necessarily therefore be an owner. It is
only an owner landlord who is the owner of not more than one residential
premises who is contemplated in the said Section. Thus the landlord prior to
23.09.59 viz. Idris Zadoon, under the present law could not have deposited
five years' rent and prayed for ejectment because he was not an owner
landlord.  
  
Under Section 22 (6) too, the landlord referred to therein must necessarily be
an owner landlord, since it is the landlord mentioned in Section 22 (2) (i)
who is referred to in the said Section.  
  
Thus when we examine the bar under Section 22 (7) we must be mindful of the
said Sections referring to an owner landlord and not a landlord who is "for
the time being entitled to receive the rent of such premises". The bar applies
to owner landlords whose ownership was acquired on a date subsequent to the
date on which the tenant came into occupation. That is, the bar applies to
those owner landlords who had purchased the premises over the head, as it
were, of the existing tenant. This pre-supposes a prior ownership by the
previous landlord and such ownership passing over to the new owner landlord
from the earlier owner landlord. But in this case the previous landlord was
Idris Zadoon who had no ownership and was not a party to the partition case.
The partition case No. 3747/P gave ownership to the original Plaintiff (in
this case) and the husband of the original Defendant became the tenant of the.
owner landlord only after 23.09.59 though his tenancy under Idris Zadoon had
continued from 1938. In this case the husband of the original Defendant was
not a tenant under an owner landlord until after 23.09.59. There was no
transfer of ownership from Idris Zadoon to the original Plaintiff. Idris
Zadoon was not a party to the Partition Case in which the original Plaintiff
obtained her Certificate of Sale.  
  
But Section 22 (7) does not refer to the nature of transfer. It only refers to
ownership being acquired by the landlord. Therefore it might be argued that a
transfer however acquired by the new landlord owner, falls within the ambit of
Section 22 (7). But a careful consideration of the entire section would bring
out the fact that what is referred to by the Section is a transfer

**115**

from an owner landlord to another person who would become an owner landlord
himself or herself. The relevant portion of the Section is as follows:  
  
" where the ownership of such premises was acquired by the landlord on a date
subsequent to the specified date by purchase or by inheritance or gift other
than inheritance or gift from a parent or spouse who had acquired ownership of
such premises on a date prior to the specified date  ..............  ". The
proviso pertaining to inheritance or gift from a parent or spouse applies only
if such parent or spouse had acquired ownership prior to the specified date.
That is, if from a date anterior to the time the tenant came into occupation
of the premises the parent or spouse was the owner of the premises and had
thereafter gifted or by his or her demise the property devolved on a plaintiff
then such proviso to Section 22 (7) would apply. This reference in respect of
parent or spouse in respect of inheritance or gift should explain the nature
of purchase or inheritance or gift referred to in the Section. Because Section
22 (7) seems to have contemplated in the context of cases falling within the
ambit of Section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii) only those cases where there were
transfers" over the head", as it were, of the tenant from one owner landlord
to another owner landlord. As such the ownership of the previous landlord
which gets transferred to the present landlord seems to be the basis of the
effect of Section 22 (7) on Section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii). That is, no person
should be able to purchase a property already in the ownership of an owner
landlord over the head of a tenant in order to evict such tenant. When the
interpretation of "specified date" in Section 22 (7) refers to 'came into
occupation of the premises" the word "premises" must be interpreted as
premises where the present owner landlord purchased or inherited or received
as gift from a previous owner landlord. Where there was no such purchase,
inheritance or gift, the tenancy in respect of the premises though it has
continued as far as the tenant and the premises are concerned it would not
prevent or prohibit the new single house owner landlord from ejecting the
tenant by depositing five years' rent subject to such notices etc. being
given. In other words the prohibition under Section 22 (7) would not apply
where there was no nexus in respect of ownership between the previous landlord
and present landlord. It is the single house ownership that gives the new
owner landlord the right of ejectment. Thus occupation by the original
Defendant's husband prior to the purchase by the original Plaintiff under a
non - owner landlord was not a bar under Section 22 (7) of the Rent Act to
institute action under Section 22 (2) (i) (bb) (ii) of the said Act. Section
22(2) (i)(bb)(ii) read with Section 22 (7) of the Rent Act deals

**116**

with a special class of cases where in addition to the basic requirements
pertaining to standard rent, notice, deposit of five years' rent and single
ownership, the current owner landlord must not have purchased, inherited or
received in gift the premises in suit from a previous owner landlord who
himself owned the premises when the tenant came into occupation. If the nexus
of owner landlordship between the previous landlord and the later landlord was
missing the provisions of Section 22 (7) would not preclude the institution of
action against the tenant because the tenancy under the new owner landlord
must be deemed to have been a fresh contract of tenancy. In other words,
tenancy under a owner landlord which is the basis of an action under Section
22(2)(i) (bb) (ii) came into being for the first time under the new single
house owner landlord. Thus even though the tenancy of the original tenant in
this case continued from 1938, its character changed as soon as an owner
landlord took over from a non -owner landlord. This change of character gave
the new owner landlord the right to accept the original tenant in occupation,
as a tenant afresh, consider him as a new tenant and file action under Section
22(2)(i)(bb)(ii) if the other ingredients were fulfilled. This would not have
been possible if the previous landlord was himself an owner landlord, in which
event the nexus on the basis of ownership between both of them would have
precluded the new owner landlord from admitting the tenant on a new contract
of tenancy. Section 22 (7) would then have barred the new owner landlord from
bringing an action under Section 22(2)(i)(bb)(ii).  
  
Section 22(1 )(bb), Section 22(2)(bb) of the Rent Act must be distinguished.
The question of ownership does not come into reckoning in a case falling under
Section 22(1 )(bb). Premises let to the tenant prior to 01.03.1972 reasonably
required by the landlord for occupation is what is relevant under Section 22(1
)(bb). On the other hand under Section 22(2)(bb) there are two limbs viz (i)
premises reasonably required and (ii) premises in respect of which five years'
rent has been deposited with the Commissioner of National Housing. In both
cases the landlord must be the owner of not more than one residential premises
and the premises may have been let prior to or after 01.03.1972.  
  
Section 22 (7) refers to cases falling under Section 22(1) and Section
22(2)(i). The above said interpretation with regard to the provisions of
Section 22 (7) in respect of ownership by the landlord applies to only that
small category falling within Section 22(2)(i)(bb) and may not apply to other

**117**

cases. Therefore the interpretation of "specified date" in Section 22 (7) must
take into consideration such special category of cases where single owner
landlords have been given the right of ejectment. Such single owner landlords
should not have been persons who had purchased or inherited or received as
gift from other owner landlords their properties" over the head" of the
tenant. If the previous landlord was not an owner landlord, for the purposes
of Section 22(2)(i)(bb)(ii) read with Section 22(7) the tenancy of the person
continuing in occupation of the premises would get faulted in that the new
owner landlord would bring into being a new tenancy. The tenancy under the
non-owner landlord would cease to be while a new tenancy under the owner
landlord would then come into being for the purposes enumerated in Section
22(2)(i) (bb)(ii). This is because of the fact that ownership of the new
landlord is the basis for ejectment under Section 22(2)(i)(bb)(ii) and that
qualification he did not receive from the previous landlord.  
  
In Imbuldeniya Vs. D. de Silva (3) a Full Bench of 5 Judges of the Supreme
Court held as follows:  
  
"A person without any title to a particular piece of property may grant a
tenancy thereof to another person. Such a tenancy is valid between the
landlord and tenant but is not binding on the true owner. It is not a valid
letting and is ineffectual against him". (Chief Justice Sharvananda at page
371).  
  
In the present case tenancy before 23.09.1959 was a tenancy under a landlord
who had no title. That contract of tenancy though binding as between that
landlord and tenant was not binding on the true owner/ owners or any
successor/successors of the true owner/owners. The original Plaintiff in this
case was not a successor in title to the previous landlord. She did not step
into the shoes of the previous landlord.  
  
It is in the light of the above said interpretations and comments that the
matters set out by the learned Counsel for the Substituted Defendant-
Respondent- Petitioner have to be viewed.  
  
The original Plaintiff no doubt became owner of premises in suit only on
23.909.59 and the husband of the original Defendant had come into occupation
as far back as in 1938. But on the original Plaintiff becoming

**118**

owner of the premises by virtue of the Certificate of Sale dated 23.09.59 the
husband of the original Defendant was per force brought into a new tenancy. It
was a tenancy under the new owner landlord whose owner landlordship did not
come about on account of a transfer, inheritance nor gift from the previous
landlord. Thus the tenancy of the late husband of the late original Defendant
must be deemed to have started after 23.09.1959.  
  
There is no doubt that in the definition of the expression "specified date"
the words"the date on which the tenant for the time being came into occupation
of the premises" can only mean the date on which the tenant for the time being
came into occupation qua tenant and not mere occupation (Vide W. B. C. Senerat
Nandadewa Vs. Z. N. Gulamhussein (Supra). The phrase "tenant for the time
being came into occupation" must be understood to mean a tenant and not a
person claiming tenancy subsequently.  
  
The question whether the original Defendant was occupying the premises in suit
as from 1938 continuously even before and after 23.09.1959, is irrelevant
since her late husband's tenancy started anew as from 23.09.1959, as stated
above. On the death of Shelton de Silva on 30.06.1961 the original Defendant
succeeded to the tenancy of her late husband in terms of Section 18 of the
Rent Restriction Act, as from 01.07.1961. She succeeded to the rights and
liabilities of her late husband. Since her late husband was not entitled to
plead the bar under Section 22(7) the original Defendant too could not have
pleaded such bar. The Supreme Court in any event in S. C. Case No. 329/70 F
(D. C. Colombo Case No. 11925/L) had confirmed that the only contract of
tenancy which existed between the original Plaintiff and original Defendant
was that which came into existence after the death of Shelton de Silva and
such contract of tenancy only from 01.07.1961 (vide also Sriani Pieris Vs.
Mohamed (4) and Devarajah and another Vs. Ariyatunga (5). The occupation of
the original Defendant as an occupier of the premises as from 1938 therefore
does not come into focus in interpreting the provisions of Section 22(7) of
the Rent Act. Therefore I would hold that the husband of the original
Defendant started a new tenancy after 23.09.1959 and the Supreme Court has
held that on his death a fresh contract of tenancy with the original Defendant
came into existence as from 01.07.1961. Thus the bar under Section 22 (7)
would not apply to the facts of this case.

**119**

I would therefore conclude that even though the Court of Appeal had not dealt
with the question as to whether the occupation by the original Defendant's
late husband prior to 23.09.59 as from 1938 would preclude the operation of
Section 22(2)(i)(bb)(ii) in the light of the provisions of Section 22 (7), yet
the conclusion of the Court of Appeal must be accepted as correct. We dismiss
the appeal. Parties shall bear their own costs.  
  
**DE SILVA, J**.- I agree.  
  
**TILAKAWARDANE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/20.html_  

