##  Weliwitigoda v. U.D.B. De Silva, and Others - SLR - 51, Vol 1 of 1997
[1995] LKSC 20; (1997) 1 Sri LR 51 (24 March 1995)

51

WELIWITIGODA

v.

**U. D. B. DE SILVA AND OTHERS**  



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 31/94.

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 190/93 (MISC).

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 4857/ZL AND NO. 3642 SPL.

FEBRUARY 2, 1995.

_ _

_Civil Procedure Code - Powers of Fiscal in executing a writ - Resistance to
execution - Inquiry into dispossession of bona fide claimant in execution -
Section 324, 325 and 328 of the Civil Procedure Code._

_ _

**Held:**

** **

(1) On a proper construction of the proviso to Section 324 of the Civil
Procedure Code, a mere claim of tenancy which is not supported by facts will
not ipso facto bar the Fiscal giving vacant possession to the Judgment-
Creditor in terms of the enacting part of that section. Such a claimant may
become liable to removal as an Agent, servant or other person bound by the
decree subject, however, to his right to make an application under section 328
of the Code. He has no "right" to resist execution and require the Fiscal to
only give symbolic possession or to report resistance to court, under Section
325. A claim under the proviso to section 324 cannot be entertained unless it
is prima facie tenable.

**52**



(2) If, after the Fiscal has duly delivered possession to the 'Judgment-
Creditor' after removing an occupant bound by the Decree the occupant re-
enters the property, the judgment creditor is entitled to proceedings under
Section 325 on the strength of the Writ of Execution. That right should not be
prejudiced by setting aside the writ in revision without a proper
consideration of the facts.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal. _  
  
A.K. Premadasa, P.C. _with _C. E. de Silva_ for Appellant.  
_  
S. Mahenthiran_ for 1st Respondent.  
_  
Miss N. Abeyratne _for 2nd Respondent  
_  
_ 3rd Respondent absent and unrepresented.

_Cur adv. vult_



March 24, 1995.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

The appellant who is the plaintiff in D.C. Colombo Case No. 4857/ZL appeals to
this Court against the judgment of the Court of Appeal (in revision) directing
that the writ of execution issued in the said action for the delivery of
possession of premises No. 53, C.W.W. Kannangara Mawatha (formerly Alexandra
Place) Colombo 7 be set aside.



The above action which was filed against the 2nd respondent, seeking a
declaration of title and ejectment in respect of the premises in suit, was
settled on 26.05.87. In terms of the said settlement the defendant
acknowledged the appellant's title to the premises in suit and agreed to
vacate the same on condition of the deposit of a sum of Rs. 200000/- by the
appellant, to be drawn by the defendant. The issue of writ of ejectment was
postponed until 31.12.92 (Exhibit P3).



On 18.12.92 the 1st respondent filed D.C. Colombo case No. 3642/Spl. against
the appellant and the 2nd respondent. The 1st respondent claimed that he had
been a tenant of some of the buildings situated on the aforesaid premises No.
53, under the 2nd respondent. He prayed for a declaration that he was not
liable to be ejected there from in terms of the decree in case No. 4857/ZL to
which he was not a party. He also sought an interim injunction to

**53**



restrain the appellant from ejecting him and for an enjoining order to the
same effect (Exhibit P5). On 28.12.92 the Court issued an enjoining order
(Exhibit P8). Thereafter the appellant filed papers for vacation of the
enjoining order and objections to the application for an interim injunction.
After inquiry, the District Judge by his order dated 12.02.93 vacated the
enjoining order and refused the application for an interim injunction. The
Court observed that it was not possible in that action to adjudicate on the
alleged tenancy; and that the 1st respondent should make his claim if any, in
execution proceedings (Exhibit P15).



After the aforesaid order in case No. 3642/Spl., the appellant obtained writ
of execution in case No. 4857/ZL on 16.02.93 (Exhibit P16). Thereafter, on
09.03.93 the Fiscal visited the premises with two police constables and
executed the writ. As per his report (Exhibit P17), the 1st respondent claimed
the right to remain in occupation of the premises and produced the proceedings
in case No. 3642/Spl. in support. However, the appellant produced the order
made therein refusing the interim injunction, whereupon the Fiscal removed the
1st respondent and delivered vacant possession of the premises to the
appellant. It is to be noted that the 1st respondent did not produce any
evidence, documentary or otherwise, in support of his claim of tenancy.



On 10.03.93 the 1st respondent submitted an affidavit to the President, Court
of Appeal complaining that despite his resistance, the fiscal purported to
execute the writ, without reporting to Court the fact of such resistence. He
claimed the right to remain in possess on of the premises as tenant and sought
an order quashing the purported execution proceedings. He also prayed that the
Court specially deal with the 3rd respondent, Fiscal Officer. In his
affidavit, the 1st respondent gives his address as 229/3, Mahawatte Road,
Colombo 14 (Exhibit P21). On the same day, the Court heard Counsel for the 1st
respondent and made order, ex parte, staying all proceedings in the District
Court and directing the 3rd respondent to appear on 23.03.93 (Exhibit P22).



The appellant alleges that, after the delivery of possession of premises to
him; the 1st respondent re-entered the property on

**54**



10.03.93 at about 8.00 p.m., along with some thugs and ousted him and his
security officers. The next day the appellant made a complaint to the Cinnamon
Gardens Police (Exhibit P19). P19 shows that the appellant was evicted with
the assistance of police officers who visited the premises and arrested the
appellant's son and 5 of his men. They were detained at the Police Stations
after which the police ordered the appellant not to enter the premises.
Consequently, he left the premises.



On 22.03.93 the appellant intervened in the proceedings before the Court of
Appeal and filed his objections to the 1st respondent's application (Exhibit
P22).



On 23.03.93, the appellant, obtained a variation of the stay order issued by
the Court of Appeal and obtained permission to institute proceedings before
the District Court under S.325 of the Civil Procedure Code (Exhibit P28).
Thereafter, he made a complaint in terms of S.325 that he had been ousted from
possession on 10.03.93 (Exhibit P30). The said proceedings were thwarted when
on 11.05.93 the Court of Appeal, on an ex parte application by Counsel for the
1st respondent, once again stayed "all proceedings" in the District Court
(Exhibit P35). Consequently, all proceedings remained stayed until 08.10.93
when, after hearing the submissions of Counsel for the appellant, the Court
permitted the District Judge to proceed with the 3.325 application (Exhibit
P36).



On 15.11.93 the Court of Appeal heard submissions of Counsel and held that the
1st respondent had failed to report resistance to execution of the writ. The
Court directed that "the writ of execution be set aside" and further directed
that "writ cannot lie" against the 1st respondent until other proceedings are
taken on the basis of his resistance. The Court warned and discharged the 3rd
respondent.



It was the position of the 1st respondent that the fiscal could only have
given the appellant "symbolic possession" of the premises. Alternatively, the
Fiscal should have reported resistance to Court for steps under S.325 of the
Code. The appellant's position was that as

**55**



far as he was concerned, the Fiscal had delivered vacant possession; and if
the 1st respondent complained that he was a bona fide claimant on his own
account, his remedy was to have made an application for relief under S.328 of
the Code.



The powers of Fiscal in executing a writ are set out in S.324 of the Code
which requires him to deliver possession of the property to the judgment
creditor "if need be by removing any person bound by the decree who refuses to
vacate the property". However, if there is a tenant or other person "
**entitled** to occupy the same as against the judgment - debtor, and not
bound by the decree to relinquish such occupancy" the Fiscal can only give
symbolic possession viz. by affixing a copy of the writ on the property and
taking other steps, required by the proviso to S.324.



As regards the requirement to give symbolic possession, it does not appear
that the Fiscal is bound to do so on the basis of a mere claim of tenancy,
which is not in any way supported by facts. Such a claimant may become liable
to removal as an agent, servant or other person, bound by the decree. The 1st
respondent was not residing on the premises in dispute. His claim was that he
was a sub-tenant under the judgment debtor and in that capacity used some of
the buildings on the premises to conduct a school. However, he has not placed
any material before the Fiscal to support that claim. If so, he became liable
to be removed, in view of his empty claim subject, however, to his right to
make an application under S.328 of the Code.



It seems to me that the 1st respondent acted in the belief that if he merely
claimed to be a tenant the Fiscal was ipso facto barred from giving the
appellant vacant possession of the property; and that if the Fiscals then
attempted to remove him, he was entitled to resist , whereupon the Fiscal
ought to have reported such resistance to Court. If this were the law and the
occupants have such a "right" to resist execution, effective execution of
writs would indeed be impeded. I am of the view that a claim under the proviso
to S.324 cannot be entertained unless it is prima facie tenable.

**56**



The evidence shows that after the 1st respondent was removed by the Fiscal, he
re-entered the property under the cover of the stay order issued by the Court
of Appeal and with the assistance of the police. The judgment of the Court of
Appeal which does not appear to have taken these facts into consideration gave
sanctity to the acts of the 1st respondent. What is more, the Court directed
that the writ of execution itself which the appellant had lawfully obtained be
set aside. This has prejudiced the appellant's rights in proceedings under
S.325.



If there was misconduct on the part of the 3rd respondent, the 1st respondent
could have complained to the District Judge and made an application under
S.328, if so advised. As far as the trial court was concerned there was no
decision which called for the intervention of the Court of Appeal. As regards
the complaint against the 3rd respondent's conduct, the proper procedure would
have been to make no order therein. The parties should have been left to their
remedies before the trial Court.



For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of
the Court of Appeal. The 1st respondent is directed to pay the appellant costs
in a sum of Rs. 5000/- (Rupees Five Thousand).



**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.** \- I agree.

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/20.html_  

