##  Haji Omar v. Bodhidasa - SLR - 191, Vol 2 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 20; (1994) 2
Sri LR 191 (6 December 1994)

###  191

### HAJI OMAR

**v.**

**BODHIDASA**

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.,

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

DHEERARATNE, J.

S.C. 48/93.

C.A. 1280/85.

D.C. COLOMBO 739 RE.

SEPTEMBER 27 AND OCTOBER 11, 1994.



Civil Procedure ‑ Execution of decree for rent and ejectment ‑ Civil Procedure
Code ss. 217, 337 ‑ Amending Act, No. 53 of 1980 ‑Interpretation Ordinance s.
6(3) ‑ Procedural legislation ‑ Retrospectivity ‑ Existing Rights and Vested
Rights.

_  _

_Ex parte_ decree for rent and ejectment was entered but owing to the death of
the judgment creditor and later of wife, the execution and delays caused
_inter alia_ by loss of the record and difficulties in tracing the defendant,
nearly a quarter century had lapsed. The substituted judgment creditors
applied for execution.



**Held :**



Section 337 of the Civil Procedure Code which applied was amended by Act No.
53 of 1980. The words "payment of money or delivery of other property" in
section 337(1) before amendment should be read _ejusdem_ as they are referable
to items A (decree to pay money) and B (decree to deliver movable property) of
the classification of decrees mentioned in section 217. Item C in the
classification

**192**  

refers to decrees "to **yield** up possession of immovable property". The word
'delivery' is appropriate to movable property.



At the time he obtained judgment in his favour, the judgment ‑ creditor was
not inhibited by any period of time to apply for execution of a decree
commanding the judgment ‑ debtor to yield up possession of immovable property.



Under the amended section 337(1) no application to execute a decree shall be
granted after the expiration of ten years from the date of the decree subject
to certain exceptions.



The presumption of retrospectivity, could be legally attracted to an "existing
right" as opposed to a 'vested right'. The general principle is that a statute
is presumed not to operate retrospectively so as to affect a vested right. A
statute is retrospective if it takes away or impairs a vested right acquired
under existing laws, or creates a new obligation, or imposes a new duty, or
attaches a new disability in regard to events already past. There is however
said to be an exception in case of a statute which is purely procedural
because no person has a vested right in the rules for the conduct of an action
for the time being prescribed. Again a statute which is retrospective in
relation to one aspect of a case (e.g. because it applies to a pre­-statute
cause of action) may at the same time be prospective in relation to another
aspect of the same case (e.g. because it applies only to the post‑statute
commencement of proceedings to enforce that cause of action).



The Amendment Act No. 53 of 1980 cannot be regarded as purely procedural
legislation insofar as it purports to affect (or rather to destroy) the vested
right of the judgment‑creditor. The amendment is not restrospective.



The decree entered in favour of the judgment‑debtor is divisible. As far as
that part of the decree to yield up possession of immovable property is
concerned, the substituted plaintiffs are entitled to obtain its execution
forthwith. As regards the other part of the decree, for payment of money, the
original section 337(1) (as it does after the amendment) inhibited granting a
subsequent application for writ after expiration of ten years from the date of
the decree. Relief will not be granted to the substituted plaintiffs by way of
damages for the failure on the part of the judgment‑debtor to yield up
possession and execution of this part of the decree will not be granted.



**Per Dheeraratne J:**



"It appears to me where there was a period of time within which a
judgment‑creditor was permitted to apply for writ of execution and within the
unexpired time amending legislation abridged that period, yet leaving time for
a judgment‑creditor to apply for writ of execution, such legislation would in
all probability be termed procedural and

**193**  

the judgment‑creditor would have to proceed in terms of the amending
legislation to prosecute his relief on the principle that he had no vested
right in the rules of conduct of the action for the time being prescribed. But
where there was a time limit or no time limit to apply for execution, and
amending legislation abridged or limited that time so as to deprive or destroy
the judgment‑creditor's right of enforcement such amending legislation could
hardly be called procedural as it would affect a substantive right and the
presumption of retrospectivity normally attached to procedural legislation
will have no application. The right affected in the present case is a vested
right inasmuch as it is free from contingencies; it is not a mere hope
contingent on the happening of some other event."



**Quaere:           ** Whether the judgment‑creditor's right was an acquired
right under the repealed law within the meaning of section 6(3) (b) of the
Interpretation Ordinance.



**Cases referred to :**



1\.         _Charles Singho v. Jinadasa Appuhamy_ (1960) LV 111 CLW 83.



2.         _Martin Silva v. Mahasoon_ (1967) 70 NLR 06.



3.         _Abeysinghe v. Gunasekera_ (1962) 64 NLR 427.



4\.         _Ponnamma v. Arumugam_ (1905) 8 NLR 223.



5.         _Salt v. Cooper_ (1880) 16 Ch. Div. 554.



6\.         _Saravanamuttu v. Solamuttu_ (1924) 26 NLR 385.



7.         _Suppramaniam Chettiar v. Ward_ (1956) 58 NLR 140, 144.



8\.         _Blyth v. Blyth_ (1966) AC 643, 666.



9\.         _Ran Banda v._ _River Valleys Development Board_ (1967) 71 NLR 24,
28.



10\.       _Re Edmondson 's Estate_ (1868) LR 5 Eq. 389, 396‑7.



11\.       _West v. Gwynne_ 1911 ‑ Ch. 1, 12.



12.       _Yew Bon Tew v. Kenderaan Bas Mara_ (Privy Council) (1982) 3 AER 833.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_H. L. de Silva P.C._ with _D. M. Alahakoon_ for defendant‑appellant.



_P. A. D. Samarasekera_ _P.C._ with _R. Manikkavasagam_ for substituted
plaintiff‑ respondents.



_Cur. adv vult._  

**194**

December 06, 1994.

DHEERARATNE, J.



# Facts



This appeal relates to an application for execution of a decree made on
22.6.84 by the substituted plaintiff‑respondents against the
defendant‑appellant for recovery of premises called the ground floor section
‘A' of premises bearing assessment No. 214, Bandaranayake Mawatha, Colombo,
together with damages from 1.12.66 to 31.10.85 amounting to a sum of Rs.
2,27,000. These proceedings have a chequered history spanning about a quarter
of a century, a variety of causes having contributed to their prolongation.
_Ex parte_ decree was entered against the defendant for ejectment and damages
on 11.7.68 and on 13.1.69 the original plaintiff, who was at that time about
75 years of age, applied for execution of the decree. No steps were taken
pursuant to that application as the original plaintiff was ailing; he died on
2.8.70. Testamentary proceedings No. 44 T were instituted in respect of his
estate and his widow was appointed executrix. She too died on 9.5.72. Her last
will was admitted to probate and the substituted plaintiffs were appointed
executors of her estate. The substituted plaintiffs were then appointed in
these proceedings in place of the original plaintiff after an inquiry into
objections taken by the defendant against such substitution. On 2.4.81 the
substituted plaintiffs applied for issue of writ. Upon certain objections
taken by the defendant, the application for issue of writ was dismissed
granting the substituted plaintiffs liberty to make a fresh application. The
record of this case was then missing from the District Court and it had to be
reconstructed with the aid of documents in the possession of the substituted
plaintiffs' lawyer. Considerable time appears to have been lost thereafter too
by the unavailability of the defendant to serve notice as he was said to have
left to Pakistan. Ultimately, when it was discovered that the defendant's son
held the defendant's power of attorney, notice was served on him and that too
by way of substituted service after several unsuccessful attempts. The present
application for execution of the writ was made on 22.6.84 and after
consideration of the objections raised by the defendant, the District Court
made order on 21.10.85 allowing the application for writ of execution. The
defendant

**195**  

appealed from that order but the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal; the
present appeal by the defendant is the sequel.



**The law relating to applications for execution of writs**



Before the Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act No. 53 of 1980 came into operation
on 11.12.1980, section 337 of the principal enactment read as follows:



(1)        _Where an application to execute a decree for the payment of money
or delivery of other property has been made under this chapter and granted, no
subsequent application to execute the same decree shall be granted unless the
court is satisfied that on the last preceding application due diligence was
used to procure complete satisfaction of the decree, or that execution was
stayed by the decree ‑holder at the request of the judgment‑debtor. Also no
such subsequent application shall be granted after the expiration of ten years
from any of the following dates, namely ‑_



(a) _        the date of the decree sought to be enforced, or of the decree,
if any, on appeal affirming the same; or_



(b) _        where the decree or any subsequent order directs the payment of
money or the delivery of property to be made at a specified date ‑the date of
the default in making the payment or delivering the property in respect of
which the applicant seeks to enforce the decree._



(2) _         Nothing in this section shall prevent the court from granting an
application for execution of a decree after the expiration of the said term of
ten years, where the judgment ‑ debtor has by fraud or force prevented the
execution of the decree at sometime within ten years immediately before the
date of the application._



The above section as amended by Act No. 53 of 1980 reads as follows:‑



(1) _        No application (whether it be the first or a subsequent
application) **to execute a decree,** not being a decree granting an
injunction , shall be granted after the expiration of ten years from ‑_

**196**  

[except for a minor change the rest of the subsection (1) reads as before;
subsection (2) remains unamended; and a further subsection was added]



(3)        _Subject to the provision contained in subsection (2) a writ of
execution, if unexecuted, shall remain in force for one year only from its
issue, but ‑_



(a) _        such writ may at any time before its expiration, be renewed by
the judgment‑creditor for one year from the date of such renewal and so on
from time to time; or_



(b) _        a fresh writ may at any time after the expiration of an earlier
writ be issued, till satisfaction of the decree is obtained._



**Interpretation of the original section 337(1)**



Our attention was invited to the case of _Charles Singho v. Jinadasa Appuhamy_
(1) __ (Basnayake CJ. with Sansoni J. agreeing) wherein it was held that in
the context of section 337, the words other property mean other property
_ejusdem generis_ with money and therefore, mean other movable property;
section 337 therefore does not apply to a decree commanding any person to
yield up possession of immovable property. Although at first blush we
entertained some doubts regarding the correctness of that interpretation, a
closer examination of the context in which the repealed section 337 appeared
in the Civil Procedure Code, dispelled our doubts. Chapter XXII of the Code is
titled "OF EXECUTION" and contains sections 217 to 354. Section 217 classifies
the nature of decrees the court may enter, namely decrees‑



(A)       to pay money;

(B)       to **deliver** movable property;

(C)       to **yield up possession** of immovable property;

(D)       to grant, convey, or otherwise pass from himself any right to, or
interest in, any property;

(E)       to do any act not falling under the foregoing heads;

(F)       not to do a specified act, or to abstain from specified conduct or
behaviour;

(G)       which declare a right or status.

**197**  

Section 217 further adds that the method or procedure to be followed in order
to enforce satisfaction or execution of decree by the judgment ‑ creditor
against the judgment‑debtor, is that which is next specified "according to the
above distinguishing heads". Sections 217 to 335 are grouped under those same
heads. Under the head "(A) Execution of decree to pay money" appear sections
218 to 319; under the head "(B) Decrees for delivery of movable property"
appear sections 320 to 322; under the head "(C) Decrees for possession of
immovable property" appear sections 323 to 330; under the head "(D) Decree for
execution of conveyance or transfer of property" appear sections 331 to
333(A); and under the head "(E) & (F) Mandatory and restraining decrees"
appear sections 334 to 335. Then comes the head "General Provisions" under
which sections 336 to 354 appear. In the context of this legislative framework
I find ample justification for the conclusion Basnayake CJ. reached that the
words "payment of money or delivery of other property" should be read
_ejusdem generis_ as they are referable to items A and B of the classification
of decrees mentioned in section 217. It is significant to observe that item
'C' in that classification refers to a decree "to yield up possession of
immovable property." The word "delivery" is thus appropriate to movable
property.



In view of this aspect of the matter, it is right to conclude that at the time
he obtained judgment in his favour, the judgment‑creditor was not inhibited by
any period of time to apply for execution of a decree commanding the
judgment‑debtor to yield up possession, of immovable property.



**Application of Amendment Act No. 53 of 1980**



Learned counsel for the substituted plaintiffs contended that if the
provisions of amendment Act No. 53 of 1980 are applicable to the present
application, in terms of subsection 3 of section 337, a writ of execution may
be issued at any time until satisfaction of decree is obtained and therefore
there is no time constraint for such application. This submission commended
itself to the Court of Appeal. I am unable to justify such an interpretation
because the amended section 337(1) states that no application to execute a

decree shall be granted after the expiration of ten years from the date of the
decree, and it is clear that what is stated in subsection (3) must be read
subject to that general provision contained in subsection (1) as regards the
time frame. Besides, the opening words of subsection (3) "subject to the
provisions contained in subsection (2)" would itself

**198**  

attract the limitation of ten years specified in that subsection. But, the
pivotal question, it seems to me, is whether the amended section 337 applies
at all to the present application in view of section 6(3) of the
Interpretation Ordinance.



**Section 6(3) of the interpretation Ordinance**



Section 6(3) reads as follows:‑



_Whenever any written law repeals either in whole or part a former written
law, such repeal shall not, in the absence of any express provision to that
effect, affect or deemed to have affected: ‑_



(a) _        the past operation of anything duly done or suffered under the
repealed law;_



(b) _        any offence committed, any right, liberty, or penalty acquired or
incurred under the repealed law;_



(c) _        any action, proceeding, or thing pending or incompleted when the
repealing written law comes into operation, but every such action, proceeding,
or thing may be carried on and completed as if there had been no such repeal._



The amending Act No. 53 of 1980 contains no express provision regarding
pending actions. It is contended on behalf of the substituted plaintiffs that
within the meaning of subsection 6(3) (c) the action against the defendant was
still **pending or incomplete** when the amending Act No. 53 of 1980 came into
operation inasmuch as the decree in favour of the judgment creditor had still
to be satisfied. This position is tenable and amply supported by decided
authorities. See _Martin Silva v. Mahasoon_ (2); _Abeysinghe v. Gunesekera_
(3); _Ponnamma v. Arumugam_ (4); _Salt v. Cooper_ (5); _Saravanamuttu v.
Solamuttu_ (6); _Suppramaniam Chettiar v. Wahid_ (7).



**Is amended section 337 of the CPC procedural and therefore presumed to be
retrospective in operation?**



The decision of this case would have rested there if not for the formidable
argument advanced by learned counsel for the appellant regarding
inapplicability of the provisions of section 6(3) (c) of the Interpretation
Ordinance. It was contended that it is a well

**199**  

established rule of interpretation that changes in procedure have
retrospective effect in the absence of provisions to the contrary. (Maxwell on
Interpretation of Statutes 7th edition 222; Craies on Statute Law 7th edition
401). As stated by Lord Denning in the case _of_ _Blyth v. Blyth_ (8).



_" The rule that an Act of Parliament is not given retrospective effect only
applies to statutes which affect vested rights. It does not apply to statutes
which only alter the form of procedure, or the admissibility of evidence, or
the effect which the courts give to evidence."_



This leads to an investigation as to whether the amendment to section 337 is
procedural as contended on behalf of the appellant. In the case of _Ran Banda
v. River Valleys Development Board_ (9), Weeramantry, J. observed _" there is
no general principle which affords a test for deciding whether a given rule
belongs to the realm of substantive law or to the realm of procedure, but it
is important to look to substance and real effect rather than to form in
determining the question. The fact that a rule appears in form to be
procedural does not necessarily make it so, for what may be procedural in
appearance may well be substantive in effect. Thus Salmond (Jurisprudence 12th
Ed. p462) observes that although the distinction between substantive law and
procedure is sharply drawn in theory, there are many rules of procedure which,
in practical operation, are wholly or substantially equivalent to rules of
substantive law. Rules relating to limitation are among categories cited by
the same authority as being wholly or substantially equivalent to rules of
substantive law"._



What is the substance and real effect of the amendment to section 337 as far
as it affects the action filed by the judgment‑creditor? The object of an
action is the redress of a wrong. (see section 5 of the CPC for definitions of
"action" and "cause of action"). The judgment­-creditor was not circumscribed
by any temporal limitation to apply for execution of the decree but, the
amending law, if applicable, imposes a time limitation reducing the decree
obtained by him to an empty shell; he is totally denied the fruits of his
successful litigation.



Presumption of retrospectivity could be legally attracted to an "existing
right" as opposed to a "vested right". The general principle is that a statute
is presumed not to operate retrospectively so as to affect a vested right and
that a Court would always lean in favour of the interpretation which leaves a
vested right unaffected. On this

**200**  

distinction between an existing right and a vested right, in _Ran Banda v.
River Valleys Development Board (supra)_ Weeramantry J. expressed himself as
follows:



_" The word 'vested' would appear to have a legal meaning which is understood
as being 'free from all contingencies' (Re Edmondson's Estate _(10) _and the
distinction between such right and existing right has been well explained by
Buckley LJ. in West v. Gwynne_ (11) _in these terms. "Suppose that by contract
between A and B there is an event to arise a debt from B to A and suppose that
an Act provides that in respect of such a contract no debt shall arise. As an
illustration take the case of a contract to pay money upon the event of a
wager or the case of an insurance against a risk which an Act subsequently
declares to be one in respect of which the assured shall not have an insurable
interest. In such a case, if that event has happened before the Act was
passed, so that at the moment when the Act comes into operation a debt exists,
an investigation whether the transaction is struck at by the Act involves an
investigation whether the Act is retrospective ... but if at the date of the
passing of the Act the event has not happened, then the operation of the Act
in forbidding the subsequent coming into existence of a debt is not a
retrospective operation, but is an interference with existing rights in that
it destroys A's rights in an event to become creditor of B. It was held that
there was nothing in the language of the new enactment excluding from its
scope contracts entered prior to its date of operation. The rights affected
were merely existing rights and there was no presumption against interference
with existing rights. "_



A useful discussion of this aspect of the matter in relation to a cause of
action is found in the more recent case of _Yew Bon Tew v. Kenderaan Bas Mara_
(12). Lord Brightman observed at page 836 :‑



_"Apart from the provisions of the interpretation of statutes, there is at
common law a prima facie rule of construction that a statute should not be
interpreted retrospectively so as to impair an existing right or obligation
unless that result is unavoidable on the language used. A statute is_
retrospective _if it takes away or impairs a vested right acquired under
existing laws, or creates a new obligation, or imposes a new duty, or attaches
a new disability, in regard to events already past. There is however said to
be an exception in case of a statute which is purely procedural, because no
person has a vested right in the rules for the conduct of an action for the
time being prescribed._ _ _

**201**  

_But these expressions ‘retrospective' and 'procedural', though useful in a
particular context, are equivocal and therefore can be misleading. A statute
which is retrospective in relation to one aspect of a case (e.g. because it
applies to a pre ‑statute cause of action) may at the same time be prospective
in relation to another aspect of the same case (e.g. because it applies only
to the post‑statute commencement of proceedings to enforce that cause of
action); _**and an Act which is procedural in one sense may in particular
circumstances do far more than regulate the course of proceedings, because it
may, on one interpretation, revive or destroy the cause of action itself.**
(emphasis added)



It appears to me that where there was a period of time within which a
judgment‑creditor was permitted to apply for writ of execution and within the
unexpired time amending legislation abridged that period, yet leaving time for
a judgment‑creditor to apply for writ of execution, such legislation would in
all probability be termed procedural and the judgment‑creditor would have to
proceed in terms of the amending legislation to prosecute his relief on the
principle that he had not vested right in the rules of conduct of the action
for the time being prescribed. But where there was a time limit or no time
limit to apply for execution, and amending legislation abridged or limited
that time so as to deprive or destroy the judgment‑creditor's right of
enforcement such amending legislation could hardly be called procedural as it
would affect a substantive right and the presumption of retrospectivity
normally attached to procedural legislation will have no application. The
right affected in the present case is a vested right inasmuch as it is free
from contingencies; it is not a mere hope contingent on the happening of some
other event.



I feel fortified in the view I have taken by the judgment of T. S. Fernando,
J. in _Suppramaniam Chettiar v. Wahid (supra)_ where consideration of an
analogous situation arose. It was held in that case that the amendment of
section 218(m) of the CPC, by Act No. 20 of 1954 exempting from seizure in
execution of a decree to pay money, the salary and allowances of an employee
in a shop or office, if such salary and allowances do not exceed Rs. 500 per
mensem, does not have any retrospective operation so as to deprive a
judgment‑creditor, who had obtained a decree in his favour before

**202**  

the date on which the amending Act came into force (viz. 17th March 1954) of
his right to seize the salary and allowances payable to his judgment‑debtor
even after the date of the amendment. At page 144 T. S. Fernando, J. said :‑



_" A decree might for all practical purposes be an empty decree if all that it
permits its holder to do is to seize such sums of money as are in existence at
the date of entering the decree. It cannot be doubted that at the date on
which the decree in the present case was entered viz. 21st May 1953, the
judgment ‑ creditor had aright to seize all sums of money falling due even
after the date of decree until the decree in his favour was satisfied. **Such
a right is truly a vested right. What is there in the Amendment Act of 1954 to
compel one to conclude that the legislature intended to take away that vested
right?"**_ (emphasis added)



For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the Amendment Act No. 53 of 1980 cannot
be regarded as purely procedural legislation insofar as it purports to affect
(or rather to destroy) the vested right of the judgment‑creditor. The
contention of learned counsel for the appellant that the amendment is
retrospective fails. In view of this conclusion I have reached, consideration
of the further question as to whether the judgment‑creditor's right was an
"acquired right under the repealed law" within the meaning of section 6(3)(b)
of the Interpretation Ordinance does not arise.



**Conclusion**



The decree entered in favour of the judgment‑creditor is divisible. As far as
that part of the decree to yield up possession of immovable property is
concerned, I hold that the substituted plaintiffs are entitled to obtain its
execution forthwith. As regards the other part of the decree, for payment of
money, the original section 337(1) (as it does after the amendment) inhibited
granting a subsequent application for writ after expiration of ten years from
the date of the decree. Our attention was not drawn to any basis upon which we
could grant relief to the substituted plaintiffs by way of damages for the
failure on the part of the judgment‑debtor to yield up possession. The
substituted

**203**  

plaintiffs will therefore not be entitled to obtain execution of that part of
the decree. However, the substituted plaintiffs will be entitled to recover
costs in connection with the writ application in the District Court, costs in
the Court of Appeal, and costs of this court fixed at Rs. 10,000. Subject to
what is stated above the appeal is dismissed.



**FERNANDO, J.** ‑ I agree.



**AMERASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Writ of execution of the part of the decree for yield up possession of the
immovable property allowed._



_Writ of execution of the part of the decree for payment of money and damages
refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/20.html_  

