##  Perera and Another v. Cyril Ranatunga, Secretary Defence and Others - SLR
- 39, Vol 1 of 1993 [1992] LKSC 20; (1993) 1 Sri LR 39 (27 May 1992)

**39**

**PERERA AND ANOTHER** **  
v.** **  
CYRIL RANATUNGA, SECRETARY DEFENCE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO J. KULATUNGA J. AND WADUGODAPITIYA J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 121/91.  
MARCH 13th, 19th AND 24th, 1992.

_     Fundamental Rights - Scheme of promotion - Seniority and merit -
Criteria applicable - Publicity for scheme of promotion - Article 12(1) of the
Constitution._

The promotion of authorised officers of the Department of Immigration and
Emigration was purported to be done on the basis of seniority and merit. The
actual appointments were made by the 2nd respondent who was the Controller of
Immigration and Emigration upon the recommendation of an Interview Board after
a viva voce interview. The criteria and heads of assessment were as follows:

(a) Seniority ....... 15 marks

(b) Personality ...... 10 marks

(c) Work performance based on number of detections ........ 30 marks

(d) Knowledge of Immigration & Emigration Law and practice ...... 25 marks

(e) Capacity to make instant decisions on problems ...... 20 marks

**Held**

(1) There were deficiencies in the criteria and heads of assessment.
Performance, including "work, attendance and conduct", efficiency,
conscientiousness, commendations, "attitude to the reputation of the service",
and "the interests of the Department" found no place in the scheme of marking.

(2) Although "Work Performance" was the most significant criterion only
'detections' over the preceding 5 year period were considered without
consideration for opportunities for detection during the preceding 5 years.

(3) Another deficiency was in the weightage given to seniority. Obviously the
weightage given to seniority vis-a-vis merit can vary. Less weight may
legitimately be given where the post involves onerous responsibilities and
requires special skills and aptitudes and, correspondingly, greater weightage
given to "positive" merit, and the candidates skills and aptitudes. However,
in a promotional scheme based on "seniority and merit", in relation to the
second lowest rung of the service, with restricted scope for promotion, 15%
weightage for seniority is plainly unreasonable, and is tantamount to ignoring
seniority.

(4) In the absence of proof of "substantial demerit" against senior officers
or considerations of special skills or aptitudes justifying the appointment of
junior officers over their seniors, the test for selection should be the
existence of the minimum competence in a candidate to discharge the duties of
the higher post; and any officer having such competence would be entitled to
appointment, in order of seniority.

40

(5) The ad hoc procedure adopted by the Board was arbitrary, unpredictable and
unguided by any rule or principle known in advance. It is very desirable that
all the criteria relevant to promotions should be publicized in advance so
that all candidates have equal opportunities of advancing their claims; the
more complex the scheme, the greater the need for such publicity.

(6) Material from the files of the officers or reports of the supervising
officers or the individual assessments of the members of the Interview Board
were not before Court.

(7) The impugned promotions have been influenced by subjective criteria.

(8) The petitioners have been denied the equal protection of the law and have
been unequally treated on a basis which cannot be rationally justified.

Per Kulatunga, J.

"........................ the right to equality of opportunity in matters of
public employment (which Article 16(1) of the Indian Constitution expressly
provides for) is implicit in our Article 12"

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Buddhan Choudhry v. State of Bihar AIR 1955 S.C. 191._  
  
_2\. Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar AIR 1958 S.C. 538.  
_  
_3\. Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema (1985) 1 Sri LR 285, 321.  
_  
_4\. Eheliyagoda v. J.E.D.B. and others F.R.D. Vol. 1 p. 243, 246._

_5\. Jaisinghani v. Union of India AIR 1967 S.C. 1427, 1431, 1434._  
  
_6\. State of Mysore v. S.R. Jayaram AIR 1968 S.C. 346.  
_  
_7\. State of Mysore v. Krishna Murthy AIR 1973 S.C. 1147, 1150._

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R.K.W. Goonesekera with L.C.M. Swarnadhipathi and J.C. Weliamuna for
petitioners.  
_  
_A.S.M. Perera, D.S.G. for 1, 2, And 7 respondents._  
  
No appearance for 3 to 6 respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 27, 1992\.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

I have had the advantage of studying the judgment of my brother Kulatunga, and
while agreeing with his conclusion, declaration and order, I wish to set out
my views on the important questions that arise for decision in this case.

41

The Department of Immigration and Emigration consists of the Controller, 4
Deputy Controllers, 32 Assistant Controllers, 20 Senior Authorised Officers,
and 106 Authorised Officers. Senior Authorised officers are appointed by
promoting Authorised Officers who have ten years of service (inclusive of
service in a temporary or acting capacity). Assistant Controllers are
appointed by promoting Senior Authorised Officers or from among S.L.A.S.
Officers from outside; but at any given time not more than six of the 32
Assistant Controllers shall be promoted Senior Authorised Officers. The
Controller and Deputy Controller are always S.L.A.S. Officers. It is therefore
a relevant consideration that Authorised Officers have limited prospects of
promotion as Senior Authorised Officers, and have little chance of being
appointed as Assistant Controllers.

It is common ground that the promotion of Authorised Officers as Senior
Authorised Officers should have been on the basis of "seniority and merit",
the actual appointments being made by the 2nd Respondent, the Controller of
Immigration and Emigration, upon the recommendation of an Interview Board
after a viva voce interview. The contention of learned Counsel for the
Petitioners gave rise to the following questions:

1\. What does "merit" mean in the context of "seniority and merit";

2(a) Whether the scheme of marking (namely, the criteria and the weightage for
each criterion) adopted by the Interview Board for the purpose of assessing
the candidates was a bona fide application of the "seniority and merit"
principle,. or was discriminatory ;

2(b) Even if the scheme itself was valid and non-discriminatory, whether it
was adequately publicised in advance, and duly and fairly applied at the
interview.

**1. "MERIT" **

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner contended that in the public service both
principle and practice required that a senior officer be preferred to a junior
officer, unless there was "substantial demerit"; upon joining the public
service, an officer had definite expectations in respect of security of
tenure, retirement, and promotion; his "merit" was

42

constantly and continuously assessed throughout his career, in that increments
were granted not as a matter of course but only if they were "earned', as
evidenced by a superior officer's certificate in regard to the diligent
discharge of his duties; and efficiency was periodically tested by appropriate
examinations; censures and adverse comments had to be recorded in his personal
file. Reference was made to the Establishments Code, Chap. 2, paras 10.1,
15.1, 15.2, and Chap 6. His submission was that one officer even marginally
senior to another had necessarily to be preferred, if there was no
"substantial demerit" in his case, even if the junior officer was
unquestionably superior to "positive" merit i.e. from the point of view of
qualifications, performance, ability, and the like. He gave the example of the
senior officer approaching retirement age as against a junior officer with
many more years to go the promotion of the latter, on the basis of "positive"
merit, would result in the frustration of the life-long hopes and expectations
of a senior officer with an unblemished record. That, he said, was never done.
He added, however, that "positive" merit could be taken into account after
promotion if, for instance, there were two vacancies, and both officers were
promoted, the junior officer could be placed over the senior officer in the
new post or grade, if superior on the basis of "positive" merit.

I do not think that the interpretation of the "seniority and merit" principle
depends on, or should be influenced by, such examples. Every such example can
be countered by another. The first example can be contrasted with the case of
a senior officer, younger than a junior officer, the latter being
overwhelmingly superior in qualifications, performance and ability. Would the
failure to promote the junior officer not only frustrate his expectations that
outstanding service would be recognised, but even act as a disincentive to
others as well? Apart from the expectations of public officers, would service
to the public be improved or impaired by the failure to reward meritorious
performance? The submission that "positive" merit can be recognised
immediately after, but not for, promotion, results in anomalies; "positive"
merit would not be recognised if there is only one vacancy; but it will be
recognised if there are two or more vacancies, for then the more meritorious
junior officer will be placed ahead of the senior officer. If there are two
vacancies not occurring simultaneously, but within a few days of each other,
if each vacancy is filled separately, the mediocre senior officer would retain
seniority: but if the vacancies are considered together the meritorious junior

43

officer would become senior. While subjective considerations are not
irrelevant, the application of the "seniority and merit" principle cannot
depend wholly or mainly on subjective factors and fortuitous circumstances.

The plain meaning of "merit" is the quality of deserving well, excellence, or
worth; it is derived from the Latin "mereri", meaning to earn, or to deserve.
In my opinion, "merit" must be considered in relation to the individual
officer, as well as the requirements of the post to which he seeks promotion.
In relation to the individual officer, there is a negative and a positive
aspect: whether there is demerit, e.g. incompetence and poor performance in
his present post, and whether there is "positive" merit, such as a high degree
of competence and excellent performance. It would also be legitimate to
consider the suitability of the officer for the post, having regard to the
aptitudes and skills required for the efficient discharge of the functions of
that post, and the service to be rendered. By way of example, an officer who
has performed well at a "desk" job, involving little contact with the public,
may lack the qualities required for a post in the "field", or involving
constant contact with the public, whereas a junior officer whose performance
was only average at the "desk" job, may have all the aptitudes and skills
required for duties in the field, or involving the public. To ignore the
requirements of the post and the needs of the public would be to permit the
unrestricted application of the "Peter principle" that in a hierarchy a person
will continue to be promoted until he reaches a level at which he is quite
incompetent. "Merit" thus has many facets, and the relative importance or
weight to be attached to each of these facets, and to merit in relation to
seniority, would vary with the post and its functions, duties and
responsibilities.

**2\. THE SCHEME OF MARKING, AND ITS APPLICATION**

There is no material as to the scheme of marking adopted in previous years. It
is very likely that this particular scheme was adopted for the first time for
the 1991 interviews and promotions. It was not publicised in advance. I set
out below the scheme of marking, as well as the marks obtained by the
Petitioners and the eight officers who were promoted (four senior, and four
junior, to the Petitioners):

44



|

Seniority 15 marks

|

Personality 10 marks

|

Work Performance (No. of detections) 30 marks

|

Knowledge of Immigration & Emigration Law and Practice 25 marks

|

Capability of solving problems instantly 20 marks

|

total  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
1.

|

13

|

4

|

(62) 15

|

8

|

10

|

50  
  
2.

|

13

|

5

|

(40) 10

|

14

|

10

|

52  
  
3.

|

13

|

5

|

(20) 5

|

11

|

16

|

50  
  
4.

|

13

|

5

|

(96) 24

|

6

|

3

|

51  
  
5\. 1st petitioner

|

12

|

4

|

(50) 12

|

8

|

4

|

40  
  
6\. 2nd Petitioner

|

12

|

6

|

(48) 12

|

8

|

4

|

42  
  
7\. 3rd Respondent

|

12

|

6

|

(85) 21

|

10

|

5

|

54  
  
8\. 4th Respondent

|

11

|

6

|

(158) 30

|

5

|

8

|

60  
  
9\. 5th Respondent

|

11

|

5

|

(120) 25

|

7

|

5

|

53  
  
10\. 6th Respondent

|

11

|

5

|

(150) 25

|

9

|

8

|

58  
  
 The 15 marks given for "Seniority" appear to have been allocated at the rate
of one mark for each year of service after confirmation as Authorised
Officers. "Work Performance" was thus the most important factor, and was based
exclusively on the number of detections made during the preceding 5 years.
Although not stated by the Respondents, it would appear that one mark was
given for every four detections, subject to a maximum of 30. However, there
are two computational errors: on this basis the 5th and 6th Respondent should
each have received 30 marks (and not 25 marks). If, as my brother Kulatunga
thinks, a greater number of detections were required from some junior
officers, this would have been arbitrary.

45

By letter dated 14.6.91 the Controller informed the Secretary, Defence, that
in assessing the- candidates, personality, work, attendance and conduct,
conscientiousness and detections during the preceding five years, and
commendations in their personal files, were given special consideration. These
factors were taken into account at the interviews in assessing their
respective merits, and seniority was also considered. In another letter dated
18.7.91 to the 1st Petitioner, the Controller stated that promotions cannot be
made solely on seniority; merit, conscientiousness, efficiency, and the
attitude of candidates to the reputation of the service and the discharge of
their duties, had also to be considered; in addition, the interests of the
Department were also given special consideration.

The Controller stated in his affidavit that

"at the interview held the candidates are subject to a penetrating analysis as
to the ability and command in the enforcement of various laws and circulars
issued by the Department and how they would react and cope in a given
situation. Their personal files are made available to the members of the
interview board and the detections they have made and/or commendations they
have received are taken into account. Also the majority of the members who
constituted the interview board consist of Senior Officers of the Department
who are aware of the performances of these candidates during the relevant
period."

The Petitioners in their counter-affidavits averred that 15 candidates were
interviewed within a period of 1 1/2 hours, and that each candidate was
interviewed for approximately 3 minutes. Further, the questions asked did not
relate to knowledge of the relevant law and practice, or the ability to solve
problems; at the hearing before us it was not disputed that the interviews
took only a few minutes, and did not involve these aspects. It was urged,
however, that as three of the four members of the Interview Board were senior
officers of the Department, they would have become quite familiar with these
aspects of the candidates knowledge and capabilities, in the course of their
normal work.

The criteria actually adopted for the 1991 interviews do not reflect many of
these factors. Performance, including "work, attendance and conduct",
efficiency, conscientiousness, commendations, "attitude to the reputation of
the service", and "the interests of the Department"

46

found no place in the scheme of marking ; although "Work, Performance" was the
most significant criterion, with a weightage of 30%, only "detections" were
considered thereunder.

A second deficiency in the scheme of marking is in regard to the weightage
given to seniority. Obviously, the weightage given to seniority vis-a-vis
merit can vary. Less weight may legitimately be given where the post involves
onerous responsibilities and requires special skills and aptitudes and,
correspondingly, greater weightage given to "positive" merit, and the
candidates skills and aptitudes. However, in a promotional scheme based on
"seniority and merit", in relation to the second lowest rung of the service,
with restricted scope for promotion, 15% weightage for seniority is plainly
unreasonable, and is tantamount to ignoring seniority. The arbitrariness of
the scheme in this respect is manifest the 3rd Respondent was one year junior
to the first promotee, but 23 additional detections over a five year period
(carrying six extra marks), completely outweighed the latter's advantage based
on seniority.

In fact eight extra detections were sufficient to displace and to reverse the
effect of one year's seniority. Similarly, two extra marks earned for
"personality" were sufficient to counter balance two years seniority as
between the first promotee and the 4th Respondent. The principle of "seniority
and merit" implies that seniority will be given more or less equal
consideration as merit, unless there was very good reason for giving
significantly higher weightage for "merit". The weightage in fact given seems
appropriate only in a scheme of promotion "based on merit, regard also being
had to seniority".

It was argued on behalf of the Respondents that even if equal weightage had
been given, the Petitioners would not have been promoted. It was suggested
that the marks given for seniority be multiplied by six, so that seniority
would receive 90 marks out of a total of 175. Each petitioner would thereby
obtain 60 additional marks, bringing their total to 100 and 102 respectively.
The first four promotees would obtain 65 additional marks, the fifth 60
additional marks, and the last three 55 additional marks, and all eight would
yet have more marks than the Petitioners. However, this ignores the effect of
the other defects in the scheme and its implementation. "Work Performance"
gave no place to factors other than detections; even commendations were not
explicitly recognised; there was no evidence, and no averment, that all
candidates had reasonably similar

47

opportunities of making detections during the preceding 5 years. Even assuming
that the weightage given to the other two criteria (relevant legal knowledge,
and problem-solving capacity) was fair and the material placed before the
court makes it clear that this was not assessed by viva voce interview. I am
not satisfied that the candidates records were duly examined in regard to this
aspect. The Respondents have also furnished material in regard to the
linguistic and sporting abilities of the 3rd to 6th Respondents; this was in
reply to the Petitioners claim that they were graduates, while the 3rd to 5th
Respondents had only G.C.E. (O./L.)qualifications, and the 6th Respondent a
G.C.E. (A./L.) qualification. These are not matters referred to in the scheme.
While they have some relevance, particularly if all other things are equal, it
is very desirable that all the criteria relevant to promotion should be
publicised in advance so that all candidates have equal opportunities of
advancing their claims; the more complex the scheme, the greater the need for
such publicity.

It appears to me that the scheme of promotion was a bona fide attempt to give
due recognition to merit. However, it was seriously deficient in respect of
the criteria, and the weightage given to each criterion; the application of
the scheme; and the lack of adequate advance publicity. The Petitioners have
therefore been denied the equal protection of the law, and have been unequally
treated, on a basis which cannot be rationally justified.

The Petitioners expressly stated that they did not question the selection of
the first four promotees; they were not made respondents, and were therefore
unrepresented at the hearing. No stay order was requested or made in respect
of their appointments.

For these reasons I agree that the fundamental rights of the Petitioners under
Article 12 have been infringed, and that the appointments of the 3rd to 6th
Respondents must be set aside, the 1st and 2nd Respondents being free to make
fresh appointments after formulating a proper scheme of promotion consistent
with Article 12.

**KULATUNGA, J.**

The two petitioners are Authorised Officers in the Department of Immigration
and Emigration. They complain that in the year 1991 they were overlooked for
promotion to the post of Senior Authorised Officer

48

as against the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th respondents (Authorised Officers) all of
whom though junior in service and with less experience in the Department, have
been promoted and appointed to the higher post. The position of the 2nd
respondent (the Controller of Immigration & Emigration) is that promotion of
officers are effected not on the basis of seniority alone but on seniority and
merit and that the impugned appointments have been made accordingly. The
petitioners challenge the validity of the selection of the said respondents
for appointment on the ground of discrimination inter alia, for the reason
that such selection has been made on the basis of subjective criteria ; and
the petitioners urge that such selection is violative of their rights under
Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The learned Counsel for the petitioners submitted that in terms of the normal
conditions of service of public officers which are recognised by the
provisions contained in the Establishments Code the benefits of a public
officer include the opportunity of advancement in the service and that in the
normal course promotions should be made on the basis of seniority ; and that
if it is sought to deviate from this principle on considerations of merit in
making promotions, it should not be done on the basis of vague criteria but on
a scheme known in advance or which can stand the scrutiny of Court if
selections are challenged.

It was also submitted that the cadre composition in the department also
requires that the petitioners should not have been overlooked for promotion
disregarding their seniority. Thus the department consists of 1 Controller, 4
Deputy Controllers, 32 Assistant Controllers (of which 6 posts are filled by
promotion of Senior Authorised Officers, the other posts being reserved for
the Sri Lanka Administrative Service), 20 Senior Authorised Officers and 106
Authorised Officers. So that if the petitioners are denied promotion to the
rank of Senior Authorised Officer they may have to retire without reaching the
position of Assistant Controller which is the highest rung they may aspire to
reach. At this point it is relevant to note that the petitioners had been
overlooked for promotion in 1990 also, along with several other Senior
Officers (who however have been selected for promotion in 1991) resulting in
the petitioners having to lag behind for the second - time. Each of them is 48
years of age and has served in the department for 19 years as temporary
Authorised Officer from 1972-1978 and in the permanent post of Authorised
Officer from 1978.

49

The learned Counsel for the petitioners initially submitted that in making
promotions seniority should be followed in the absence of substantial demerit
appearing in the record of an officer's service. When we indicated that this
formulation of the merit principle is not acceptable having regard to the
general interests of the public service, learned Counsel did not press his
submission but was content for the purposes of this case to accept that
seniority" alone is not the test and that promotions may be made on the basis
of seniority and merit. He also conceded that the concept of seniority and
merit may vary from department to department. However, he maintained that the
scheme for selection should be known and not left to the subjective
determination of the interview board.

According to the scheme of recruitment (P1) Authorised Officers who have
completed 10 years of satisfactory service and who have passed the first
Efficiency Bar Examination are eligible to apply for promotion to the post of
Senior Authorised Officer. Service as a Temporary Authorised Officer is
reckoned for the purpose of computing the ten year period. Candidates are
interviewed by a board chaired by the 2nd respondent and appointed on the
recommendations of the Board.

The petitioners state that in 1987 there were 7 vacancies and that in 1989
there was one vacancy in the post of Senior Authorised Officer which vacancies
were filled by promoting Authorised Officers according to seniority. This is
not denied by the 2nd respondent except that he states that appointments are
made according to seniority and merit. However, in 1990 when 5 vacancies were
filled only one of them was filled according to seniority. The balance 4
vacancies were filled by appointing junior officers overlooking officers who
were senior to them. There were 19 applicants of whom 2 officers numbered 14
and 15 in the schedule of applicants marked 2R5 (arranged according to
seniority) were absent. The petitioners appeared as Nos. 10 and 12. On the
basis of marks given at the interview (the breakdown of which is not shown)
the applicants Nos. 1, 3, 11, 13 and 16 were appointed as Senior Authorised
Officers.

The Authorised Officers Union by its letter addressed to the 2nd respondent
(P4) protested against the said appointments made in derogation of seniority
and requested an interview to discuss the matter. The 2nd respondent replied
stating that appointments are

50

 made on the basis of seniority and merit and added that no discussion of this
subject was called for (P5). The petitioners state that they did not pursue
the matter in view of the fact that further vacancies were due to arise in a
few months.

In 1991, 16 Authorised Officers including the officers who had been overlooked
for promotion in 1990 applied for appointment as Senior Authorised Officers.
They were interviewed by a board chaired by the 2nd respondent, the other
members of the board being a Deputy Controller of Immigration and Emigration,
Senior Assistant Controller of Immigration and Emigration and an Assistant
Secretary/Ministry of Defence. In the schedule of applicants marked 2R6
(arranged according to seniority), Nos. 1 to 8 were the officers who had been
overlooked in 1990. Of them No. 5 was absent. No. 6 had an order against him
stopping his increment for two years. The petitioners appear as Nos. 7 and 8.
On the basis of marks given at the interview, the board recommended for
promotion Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 12 and 13 and they were appointed. In the
result the petitioners have been overlooked again and 4 officers junior to
them (3rd, 4th and 6th respondents) have been appointed over them.

The petitioners do not object to the appointment of Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 in 2R6
who are senior to the petitioners but object to the appointment of officers
who are junior to the petitioners on the ground that such appointment is
discriminatory. The 2nd respondent states that on a correct assessment of
seniority and merit, appointments have been lawfully made. The learned Deputy
Solicitor General for the respondents submitted on the basis of the 2nd
respondent's affidavit that the impugned appointments have been made on an
assessment of the suitability of the applicants by senior officers in the
department who were acquainted with their competence and their knowledge of
the law and practice pertaining to their office; that the board has adopted a
scheme of marking, and the applicants have been selected for promotion on the
basis of marks given to them and other considerations enumerated in the
affidavit of the 2nd respondent; and that as such the appointments cannot be
challenged as being discriminatory. He contends that the petitioners are in
effect inviting this Court to review the said appointments on their merits
which is not the function of the Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction
under Article 126.

51

The question is whether the 3rd to 6th respondents have been selected for
promotion over the petitioners upon a reasonable classification. The test of
permissible classification is that it must be founded upon an intelligible
differentia having a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.
_Buddhan Choudhry v. State of Bihar_ (1); _Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice
Tendolkar_ (2). It is the petitioners case that they and the said respondents
were all officers of the same class, eligible for promotion and were similarly
circumstanced; and that the selection of the said respondents for preferential
treatment on the ground of merit is invalid. A determination on this question
can be made by applying the legal principles on discrimination to the facts of
this case.

In _Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema_ (3) Sharvananda, CJ said -

"The principle of equality before the law embodied in Article 12 is a
necessary corollary to the high concept of the Rule of Law underlying the
Constitution".

He explained that the Rule of Law means, inter alia (a) that everything must
be done according to law (b) that government should be conducted within the
framework of recognised rules and principles which restrict discriminatory
power. He added that the Supreme Court is empowered to review and strike down
any exercise of discretion by the Executive which exhibits discrimination and
for that purpose has jurisdiction to invalidate any rule which would enable an
authority to discriminate or act arbitrarily.

In _Eheliyagoda v. J.E.D.B. and Others_ (4) this Court invalidated a scheme
for the reorganisation of service under the respondent Board which was
discriminatory and adversely affected the petitioners as employees of the
Board. After making due allowance for the need to reorganise the existing
administrative structure, Wanasundera J. said -

"......We are not satisfied that the determinations relating to the
petitioners are based on just and reasonable criteria. The discretion that has
been exercised in these cases is one that is unfettered, unregulated and
without guidelines. There is also nothing in the material to show that the
cases of the petitioners were considered

52

on their merits and how their cases compared with those of the others who
obtained appointments and vice versa" (p. 247).

He also observed (p. 246) that when the material placed before the Court is
sufficient to establish a prima facie case of discrimination, the respondents
must make an adequate disclosure of all materials which would justify the
impugned act. In making its determination, the Court derived assistance from
several decisions of the Indian Supreme Court on Articles 14 (right to
equality) and 16(1) (right to equality in matters of public employment) in the
Indian Constitution.

In _Jaisinghani v. Union of India_ (5) the Court examined the validity of
Income Tax Officers Service Recruitment Rules which provided for recruitment
to Class I Grade II of the service by direct recruitment through a competitive
examination and promotion from Class II Grade III in the proportion to be
fixed by the government. The rules also laid down the principle for
determining the relative seniority of officers so recruited, the promotees
being at an advantage. The Court upheld the scheme for recruitment from two
sources. The reason for the classification was the objective of filling the
higher echelons of the Income Tax Service by experienced officers possessing
not only a high degree of ability but also first rate experience. The Court
observed -

53

"The concept of equality in the matter of promotion can be predicated only
when the promotees are drawn from the same source. If the preferential
treatment of one source in relation to the other is based on the differences
between the said two sources, and the said differences have a reasonable
relation to the nature of the office or offices to which recruitment is made,
the said recruitment can legitimately be sustained on the basis of a valid
classification" (p. 1431).

The Court, however, struck down the recruitments by promotion made in excess
of the quota fixed under the rules as being violative of Article 16(1) holding
that the quota rule is linked up with the seniority rule and should be
strictly observed. Once the government fixed the quota under the rule it had
no discretion to after it according to the exigencies of the situation at its
own will and pleasure. The Court also observed -

"In this context it is important to emphasize that the absence of arbitrary
power is the first essential of the rule of law upon which our whole
constitutional system is based. In a system governed by rule of law,
discretion, when conferred upon executive authorities, must be confined within
clearly defined limits. The rule of law from this point of view means that
decisions should be made by application of known principles and rules and, in
general, such decisions should be predictable and the citizen should know
where he is. If a decision is taken without any principle or without any rule
it is unpredictable and such a decision is the antithesis of a decision taken
in accordance with the rule of law" (p. 1434)

In _State of Mysore v. S.R. Jayaram_ (6) the Court considered the validity of
a rule relating to recruitment of officers to the Civil Service by an open
competitive examination. Rule 9(2) of the Recruitment Rules relied upon by the
government read -

"While calling for applications the candidates will be asked to indicate their
preferences as to the cadres they wished to join. The government however,
reserves the right of appointing to any particular cadre, any candidate whom
it considers to be more suitable for such cadre".

The petitioner who was placed fourth in the order of merit at the examination
indicated a preference for the post of Assistant Commissioner in the
Administrative service which had better prospects than the other available
post namely, Assistant Controller in the State Accounts Service. The
government, however, assigned him to the latter post. The Court struck down
the last part of Rule 9 (2) which gave a discretion to the government to
appoint a candidate to a particular cadre regardless of his preference and
merits. The Court observed that Rules 1-8, 9 (1) and the first part of Rule 9
(2) aimed at ensuring the equality of opportunity in the matter of employment
and obtaining the service of the most meritorious candidates ; and that once a
candidate is selected by examination as being suitable for all the cadres, the
government cannot, in the absence of specific provision or other material,
arrogate to itself an arbitrary power to decide his suitability for a
particular cadre in derogation of his just claims for recruitment to offices
under the State.

54

In _State of Mysore v. Krishna Murthy_ (7) the question related to the
validity of a rule relating to a division into two classes of members of the
same service belonging to the same cadre for purposes of their promotion upon
a reorganization of the service. In striking down the inpugned rule the Court
said -

".....inequality of opportunity of promotion, though not unconstitutional per
se, must be justified on the strength of rational criteria correlated to the
object for which the difference is made. In the case of government servants,
the object of such difference must be presumed to be a selection of the most
competent from amongst those possessing qualifications and backgrounds
entitling them to be considered as members of one class. ........if the facts
of a particular case disclose no such rational distinction between members of
what is found to be really a single class no class distinction can be made in
selecting the best". (p. 1150)

The learned Counsel for the petitioners draw our attention to certain
provisions contained in chapters 11, VI and VII of the Establishments Code
Vol. 1 (1985) issued under the authority of the Cabinet of Ministers (by
virtue of Article 55(4) of the Constitution). He submitted that these
provisions are aimed at ensuring fairness in matters relating to public
officers and preclude the exercise of wide discretionary power in such
matters. He further submitted that all such provisions including those
relating to promotion encompass the spectrum of a public officer's rights. The
said provisions relate to subjects such as the procedure for appointment and
promotion, confirmation in appointment, seniority, Efficiency Bar,
departmental examinations including for promotion, confidential reports,
salary (including increment, and the suspension, stoppage and deferment
thereof) etc...

Article 55(4) of the Constitution states -

"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Cabinet of Ministers shall
provide for and determine all matters relating to public officers, including
the formulation of schemes of recruitment and codes of conduct for public
officers, the principles to be followed in making promotions and transfers,
and the procedure for the exercise and the delegation of the powers of
appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers".

55

This is a constitutional recognition of the concept of the Rule of law, in
particular, that government should be conducted within the framework of
recognized rules and principles and that, in general, decisions should be
predictable and the citizen should know where he is which in turn restricts
arbitrary action or discrimination. The relevant provisions of the
Establishments Code are in conformity with this concept and through Article
55(4) are made complementary to Article 12. In this context it would be true
to state that the right to equality of opportunity in matters of public
employment (which Article 16(1) of the Indian Constitution expressly provides
for) is implicit in our Article 12.

It should not be understood from the above discussion that the rule of law
requires that every decision must be supported on the basis of a written rule.
Thus there are (unwritten) discretionary powers which are implicit in the
process of government to which no constitutional objection may be taken
provided, however, that such exercise is fair, predictable and free from
arbitrariness or discrimination. Thus notwithstanding the absence of express
provision for promoting public officers on the basis of seniority and merit,
promotion on that principle is indeed lawful provided, however, that the power
to make such promotion is exercised without discrimination violative of
Article 12 of the Constitution. This is supported by dicta contained in the
judicial decisions cited above.

It is common ground that the petitioners and the 4 respondents who were
promoted over them were all eligible for promotion under the scheme P1. This
would mean that each of them being an Authorised Officer had -

(a) completed 10 years of satisfactory service (for the computation of which
any period of service as a temporary Authorised Officer is reckonable) ; (b)
passed the first E.B. Examination.

As for the method of selection for promotion, all that the scheme states is
that the applicants will be subjected to an interview by a board ,chaired by
the 2nd respondent and on the recommendation of the board the appointments
will be made. There.. is no rule specifying the criteria for selecting
officers for appointment when there are more applicants than vacancies (as
happened in 1991) there

56

being 16 applicants for the filling of 08 vacancies. Of them, 15 attended the
interview. These applicants were all drawn from the same source and the
petitioners contend that they (the petitioners) and the respondents who were
promoted over them were similarly circumstanced; that the selection of the
said respondents who were junior to the petitioners was not based on rational
criteria; that in the normal course the petitioners should have been appointed
Senior Authorised Officers over the said respondents, on the basis of
seniority and merit, and that their exclusion constitutes an exercise of
arbitrary power in subjective terms, without sufficient safeguards.

The petitioners state that the 1st petitioner holds the Degree of Bachelor of
Arts from the University of Ceylon (Colombo) and the 2nd petitioner holds a
Special Degree in Public Administration from the Vidyodaya University whereas
the highest educational qualification of the 3rd, 4th and 5th respondent is
G.C.E. (O.L.) Examination and the highest educational qualification of the 6th
respondent is G.C.E. (A.L.) Examination ; that each of the petitioners had 19
years of eligible service for promotion whilst the 3rd and the 4th respondents
had 17 years and the 5th and the 6th respondents had 12 years only at the time
of their appointment ; and that the petitioners have no adverse entries in
their personal files and have earned their salary increments regularly. All
these averments are admitted by the 2nd respondent except that on the question
of service he makes a point of the fact that the petitioners had been
initially appointed temporary Authorised Officers and were made permanent only
in 1978. This fact does not help the 3rd to the 6th respondents because a part
of their period of eligible service too had been spent as temporary Authorised
Officers. On these facts it is the petitioners claim that they had the
superior claim for promotion over the said respondents on grounds of
seniority, educational qualifications and experience.

The position of the 2nd respondent is that at the interview the applicants
were subjected to a penetrating analysis on the relevant laws and departmental
circulars and their competence. The board also had their personal files which
contain a record of their work and commendations. On the basis of the
performance of the applicants at the interview, marks were assigned to each
candidate and the final selection was made on the basis of such marks. The
petitioners filed counter affidavits stating that each candidate was
questioned for 3 or 4 minutes only and that from the type of questions asked
it was

57

not possible for the board to have made a penetrating analysis of the
competence of the applicants as claimed by the 2nd respondent. Learned Deputy
Solicitor General very properly did not contest this position. He, however,
emphasized the fact that the interview board consisted of very senior officers
of the department who knew the relative merits of the applicants on the basis
of their performance over the years; and that the impugned appointments have
been made in the best interests of the department and hence the selections
made by the board should be accepted by this Court.

Particularly in view of the fact that no mala rides have been alleged, I am
prepared to accept the submission that the board may well have believed that
the impugned appointments were in the best interests of the department. But
the question we have to decide is not merely whether the appointments made
were in the best interests of the department but whether the selection of
officers for that purpose was free from discrimination in the light of the
legal principles which I have set out above. This would require a closer
examination of the procedure followed by the board.

In examining the procedure followed by the board, I have taken into
consideration the following matters :

(i) It has not been alleged that the petitioners were overlooked on the ground
of substantial demerit e.g. censures or adverse comments recorded in their
personal files.

(ii) No material has been placed before us to establish :

(a) that the functions in the post of Senior Authorised Officer are such as to
require it being filled by experienced officers possessing a high degree of
ability and first rate experience ; Vide jaisinghani's case (supra) ; or

(b) That there is any special consideration, in the light of which, the 3rd to
the 6th respondents were selected for promotion over the petitioners e.g. that
as against the petitioners the said respondents possess some special
competence or aptitude which is indispensable for the efficient performance of
the functions in the higher post.

58

It is my view that if it can be established that senior officers are adversely
affected by any such consideration as indicated above, junior officers who are
not so affected and possessing the requisite qualifications, competence or
aptitudes, may constitute a class for purposes of promotion, to the exclusion
of their seniors. If not, the test for selection should be the existence of
the minimum competence in a candidate to discharge the duties of the higher
post; and any officer having such competence would be entitled to appointment,
in order of seniority.

In the instant case, we are told that the selection was effected on the basis
of marks. The scheme of recruitment does not provide for this; nor is the
marking according to any approved rule or principle. It has been done on an ad
hoc scheme adopted by the Board. In the schedule for 1990 (2R5) only the total
marks earned by each candidate is shown without a break down. In the schedule
for 1991 (2R6) totals as well as the basis of marking are shown. The principle
which has been consistently followed is that only the candidates who had
obtained 50 marks and over were selected for promotion. On that basis, 5
appointments were made in 1990 overlooking 9 officers including the
petitioners who were senior to the officers selected for promotion. In 1991, 8
appointments were made including 4 of the seniors who had been overlooked in
the previous year; but once again 3 senior officers including the petitioners
were overlooked for promotion.

The allocation of marks in 1991 was made on the basis of 100 marks for a
candidate made up as follows :

(a) Seniority 15

(b) Personality 10

(c) Work performance based on the number of detections 30

(d) Knowledge of Immigration & Emigration Law & Practice 25

(e) Capacity to make instant decisions on problems 20

At the interview, marks were given only for the detections made during the 5
years immediately preceding the date of the interview. Marks for detections
appear to have been assigned on the formula of 1 mark for 4-6 detections
depending on the seniority of the candidate. Marks for seniority appear to
have been assigned on the formula

59

of 1 mark for each year of permanent service. On this basis, the maximum marks
earned by any candidate on account of seniority was 3\. The candidates earned
5-30 marks each on account of detections, the 2nd and the 3rd candidates who
were selected for promotion receiving only 10 and 05 marks, respectively on
that account. They were able to secure a pass for selection in view of the
high marks given to them for their knowledge of law and practice and the
capacity to make instant decisions on problems. The 3rd to the 6th respondents
received the bulk of their pass marks on account of detections. They earned
very poor marks for their knowledge of law and practice and the capacity to
make instant decisions on problems.

Each of the petitioners earned 12 marks for seniority and 12 marks for
detections. However, they were not given sufficient marks in other respects
and were therefore unsuccessful. They earned more marks for their knowledge of
law and practice than the 4th and the 5th respondents who (according to the
marks) were very poor in that subject as well as in their capacity to take
instant decisions on problems.

The 2nd respondent seeking to justify the impugned appointments states that
the 3rd to the 6th respondents had many more detections to their credit than
the petitioners and that the overall performance of the said respondents was
better than that of the petitioners.

He also states that the 3rd and 4th respondents are outstanding sportsmen and
speak English very fluently and that the 5th respondent has " a pleasing
personality" and is "a dedicated worker" whilst the 6th respondent "has a very
commanding ability and a pleasing personality". In this connection it is
relevant to note that the maximum marks obtained by the successful candidates
for personality are in the range of 4-6 marks (out of 100) and the 5th and the
6th respondents obtained 5 marks each on that account whilst the 1st and the
2nd petitioners obtained 4 and 6 marks respectively.

The above facts are self explanatory on the question whether the petitioners
have been overlooked for promotion on the basis of a reasonable
classification. Firstly, the weightage given to seniority at the interview was
15% which is woefully inadequate and would make the concept of seniority in
service meaningless when it comes to

60

promotion. Secondly, the ad hoc procedure adopted by the Board was arbitrary,
unpredictable and unguided by any rule or principle known in advance. Thirdly,
no material has been placed before us either from the personal files of the
petitioners or from supervising officers who had the opportunity of monitoring
their progress in the department in support of the allegation that their
knowledge of law and practice and the capacity to take instant decisions on
problems were poor. It is also not known how individual members of the board
assessed each of these candidates. Finally, the available evidence supports
the criticism that the impugned promotions have been influenced by subjective
criteria.

In effecting promotions, the State is entitled to take into consideration
seniority and merit but without violating the right to equal protection of the
law. The service of most public officers is life-time and the guarantee of
fair treatment to them enshrined in Article 12 (1) of the Constitution would,
if properly enforced, also help in maintaining a contented public service
which is vital for its efficient functioning. I determine that on the facts of
this case, the rights of the petitioners under Article 12(1) have been
infringed by reason of the impugned promotions and grant them a declaration
accordingly.

On the basis of my finding that the procedure adopted by the board for
effecting promotions was discriminatory, I would ordinarily have set aside all
the appointments made in 1991 as being invalid. However, the petitioners have
averred that they are not questioning the appointments of Messrs Sivuratne,
Thalgaspitiya, Rajapakse and Ratnayake who were the most senior officers among
the candidates. Consequently, the petitioners have not made the said officers
parties to these proceedings ; and no interim order has been granted by this
Court staying the operation of the appointments which have been effected. In
these circumstances, I set aside the appointments of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and the
6th respondents only and direct the 1st and 2nd respondents to take steps
afresh for making appointments to the posts of Senior Authorised Officers in
the department, according to law. I also direct the State to pay each of the
petitioners a sum of Rs. 2500/- (Rupees Two Thousand Five Hundred) as costs.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/20.html_  

