##  Juwanis v. Lathiff, Police Inspector, Special Task Force, and Others - SLR
- 185, Vol 2 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 20; (1988) 2 Sri LR 185 (23 August 1988)

**

185

JUWANIS  
v.  
LATHIFF, POLICE INSPECTOR, SPECIAL TASK FORCE, AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
SENEVIRATNE J., G. P. S: DE SILVA. J., AND  
FERNANDO, J.  
S. C. REFERENCE NO. 3/88  
C. A. APPLICATION  
(H. C. A.) NO. 19/88  
JULY 26, 1988.

_

Writ of habeas corpus -Article 141 of the Constitution - Denial of custody
-Inquiry by. Court, of First Instance.

_

Petitioner filed this application for. a Writ of Habeas Corpus in the Court of
Appeal alleging that on or about .12.11.1987 the 1st Respondent (Chief
Inspector of Police and Officer Commanding 'Special- Task Force Camp,
Morayaya) with some of his officers came in a jeep and removed the 4th
respondent (petitioner's brother) on the instructions- of the 2nd 'respondent
(I: G. P.) and was holding him in unlawful and illegal detention. The 1st and
2nd respondents filed affidavits denying that the 4th respondent had been
taken into custody. When the matter was taken up in the Court of Appeal.
Counsel for the petitioner moved that the matter be referred to' a Court of
First Instance for inquiry. The Additional Solicitor-General objected on the,
ground that under Article 141 of the Constitution the' Court had no
jurisdiction to direct an inquiry unless the "Court is satisfied that the
corpus is in the custody of or within the control of the respondents'. The
Court of Appeal being of the view that an interpretation of the Constitution
was involved referred' the matter to the Supreme Court on two questions for
determination.

**

Held:

**

(1) It is only if the detention is not proved to be lawful that the writ is
issued. The practice of 'our Courts has been to issue the writ as the final
step in the proceedings.

(2) The writ of habeas corpus is a prerogative writ of right which issues ex
debit justitiae when the applicant has satisfied the Court at the conclusion
of the inquiry that' the detention is unlawful. But exceptionally it may be
issued at an earlier stage if there is a likelihood that delay may defeat
justice or where the facts and law are clear.

(3) An (interim) order for the production of the corpus is not an essential
step in the. procedure prior to the final decision. Article 141 does not make
an order for production mandatory either at the stage of the issue of notice
or at any

**186**

other stage. An order to bring up the corpus is not an essential pre-condition
to the exercise of the powers of the Court of Appeal. The Article places no
restriction on the discretion of the Court of Appeal.

(4) The fact that the respondents deny having custody or control of custody is
admittedly not a bar to inquiry by the Court of Appeal. There is nothing to
suggest that such a denial would be a bar to a direction by the Court of
Appeal that an inquiry be held by a Court of First Instance.

(5) There is no requirement that the Court of Appeal should first inquire into
the question of custody (where it is denied) before proceeding further.

(6) The Court of Appeal can direct a judge of a Court of first instance to
inquire into the alleged imprisonment or detention of the corpus and make its
report despite respondents' denial of custody or control of the corpus.

(7) It is not necessary for the Court of Appeal to satisfy itself that the
corpus is within the, custody or control of the respondents before the matter
is referred to a judge of a Court of first Instance for, inquiry and report.

**

Cases referred to

** _

1\. Re Bracegirdle 39 NLR 193

2\. Thamboo v Superintendent of Prisons, 59 NLR 573

3\. Jobu Nadar v. Grey 58 NLR 85

4.. Assary v. Vanden Dreesen 54 NLR 66, 69 5.

5.Carus Wilson's Case (1845) 72B984

6\. . Rasammah v. Perera (1982) 1 Sri LR 30

7 John G., Stern & Co. Ltd. v. O'Hanlon (1965) 1 all ER 547, 550

_

REFERENCE to the Supreme Court by Court of Appeal under Article 125 of the

_

R. K W. Goonesekera with Prins Gunasekera, Mrs. Suriya Wickremasinghe and K.
Abeypala for petitioner.

Sunil de Silva, Additional Solicitor-General with N. G. Amaratunga S.S.C. .for
the Attorney -General.

_

_Cur. adv. vult_

**187**

August 23,1988

**

FERNANDO, J.

**

The Petitioner made an application to the Court of Appeal, under and in terms
of Article 141 of the Constitution. For the grant and issue of an order in the
nature of a writ of Habeas Corpus, in respect of his brother, the 4th
Respondent (Chief Inspector of Police and Officer Commanding Special Task
Force Camp. Morayaya ) and some of his officers came in a jeep to the
residence of the 4th Respondent and on the instructions of the 2nd Respondent
(the Inspector-General of Police) took the 4th Respondent into custody at
about 4p.m. that he is unaware of the present whereabouts of the 4th
Respondent that the 4th Respondent had not been produced in any Court; and
that the 4th Respondent's detention in the custody of subordinates of the 2nd
Respondent is illegal and unwarranted.

On notice being issued, the 1st and 2nd Respondents filed affidavits, denying
that the 4th Respondent had been taken into custody on 12.11.1987 or any other
date, by the 1st Respondent or any officer attached to the S. T. F. Camp at
Morayaya, and asserting that the 4th Respondent is not in Police custody, at
that Camp or elsewhere.

On 19. 5.88 when that application was taken up in, the Court of Appeal
(S.N.Silva, J.), Counsel for the Petitioner Moved that the matter be referred
for inquiry by a Court of First Instance in terms the first proviso to:
Article 141. The Additional Solicitor- that (the Court of Appeal) has no
General appearing: for the Respondents objected, "on the basis jurisdiction to
direct an inquiry in terms of the proviso unless the Court is satisfied that
the corpus is in the cu of, or within the control of, the Respondents." Being
of the view that these submissions -raised questions of interpretation of
Article 141  of the Constitution, Silva, J., referred the follow questions to
this Court for a determination in terms of Article 125:

(i) Whether the Court of Appeal has jurisdiction, in terms of the proviso to
Article 141 of the Constitution, to direct a Judge of a Court of First
Instance to inquire into the

**188**

alleged imprisonment or detention of the corpus, and to -make report thereon.
in a case where the deny having taken into custody or detained, or having
their control, the corpus?

(2) Whether 'in 'a situation where the- Respondents deny control, the corpus
as aforesaid, it is necessary, for the Court of Appeal to satisfy itself in
the first instance, after, hearing, that the corpus is within the custody of
or detained by, or in the control of, the Respondent before Instance for
Inquiry?

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner and the learned Additional Solicitor-
General are agreed that such a denial by the Respondents is not conclusive the
application does not have to be dismissed ipso facto, and the Court of Appeal
has the undoubted jurisdiction to inquire into and determine whether the
Respondents have custody or control of the corpus. The only matter in dispute,
and for determination by us, is whether the Court of Appeal can exercise its
power under the first proviso **only** if it is first "satisfied" that the
corpus is in the custody or control of the Respondents. In the course of his
submissions, the learned Additional Solicitor-General made two qualifications,
or refinements, to this contention: firstly, that it is sufficient if the
Court of Appeal is "satisfied **or at least prima facie satisfied " **and
secondly, that it is sufficient if the Court of Appeal is "satisfied" that the
corpus had been at some stage in the custody or control of the Respondents.

The relevant Portions of Article 141 may conveniently be analysed as follows:

The Court of Appeal may grant issue orders in the nature of writs of habeas
corpus to bring up before such Court-

(a) the body of any person to be dealt with according to law; or

**189**

(b) the body of any person illegally or improperly detained in public or
private custody.

and to discharge or: remand any person so brought up or otherwise deal with
such person according to law:

Provided :that it shall be lawful for the Court of Appeal to require the, body
of: such-person to be brought up before the most convenient Court of First
Instance and to direct the judge of such court :

to inquire into and report upon the acts of the alleged imprisonment or
detention and to make such provision for the interim custody. of the body
-produced as to such court shall seem-right;

and the' Court of Appeal shall upon the receipt -of: such report; make order
to discharge or 'remand the' person so alleged to be imprisoned or detained or
otherwise deal with such person according to - law; and the Court of First
instance shall conform to, and carry into immediate effect, the order so
pronounced or made by the Court of Appeal."

In support of his contention the learned. Additional Solicitor-General
submitted, firstly, that an order for the production of the corpus is a sine
qua non for the' exercise of the power under the proviso; relying particularly
on the phraseology of Article 141 in Sinhala, he contended that the selection
of the Court of First Instance depends on' the. convenience of production of
the corpus; since it is "such" court which may be directed to inquire and
report, he argued; the power to direct such inquiry is dependent on an' order
for production of the corpus; as it is only such an order which will' enable
the identification and selection of the court of` inquiry.-Secondly, he
contended that an-order, made under the proviso, for the production of the
corpus before the Court of First Instance, is part of, the writ of habeas
corpus itself; 'since the writ has to be directed to the person having

**190**

custody of the corpus; it is, an essential pre-condition to the making of such
order that the Court of Appeal should be satisfied that the corpus is in the
custody of such person; the Court ought not to stultify itself by making such
an order, without. being so satisfied. as it- would be'-open to the
Respondents to disobey such order with impunity on the ground that the corpus
is not in their custody or control: Finally, he submitted that under Article
141 the jurisdiction, power and duty to inquire into an application is cast,
primarily; on the Court of Appeal; that the power to delegate, as it were,
part of that inquiry is by way of an alternative, or even an exception, and
accordingly that power cannot be exercised unless the Court was satisfied that
an order 'for the production of the corpus should be made.

The practice of the Court having jurisdiction in respect. of habeas 'corpus
applications has generally been 'to issue; in the first instance, only notice
of the application; our attention was draw to the Bracegirdle case (1) in
which a Rule nisi was issued, in response to which the corpus was produced
before the Court. (Also, _Thamboo v. Superintendent of_ _Prison (2)_ ; _Jobu
Nadar v. Grey (3)_ aid in _Asary,v. Vanden Dreesen (4)_ the notice issued was
treated as an order nisi). As in that case, orders-have sometimes been made
for the production of the corpus pending the final determination of such
applications, but there appears to be no precedent in which such an order was
made where detention was denied. It is only if the detention is not proved to
be lawful .that the writ is issued. Thus, the practice, of our Courts has been
to issue the writ as-the final step in the proceedings.

Reference to the, history of the writ in. England shows that it, is a
prerogative writ, but not a "writ of course", and therefore cannot be had for,
the asking proper cause must be shown to the satisfaction of a court; it is,
however, not discretionary, in that it is right which issues ex debito
justitiae when the applicant has satisfied the court that his detention was
unlawful smith; Judicial Review of; Administrative Action (1959) pp ; 253 -
258. (2) Although it appears that in early times the writ issued, in the fist
instance, even prior to final adjudication, calling upon person by whom the
prisoner is alleged to be kept in confinement to bring such :prisoner before
the court - see for

**191**

instance the example cited by Dicey: Law of the Constitution 9th Ed. (1956) p.
214 citing _Carus Wilson's Case (5)_ such orders are now made only in,
exceptional circumstances: Wade: Administrative Law. 5th Ed. p. 542, refers-
thus to the present procedure in England:

"The procedure is governed by special rules of court .... The writ may be
applied for ex paste,'. i.e. without notice to: the custodian, with the
support of an affidavit made by or on behalf of the prisoner; the court, will
then normally adjourn the case for argument between the parties, with or
without requiring the prisoner to be brought before it: The modern practice is
not to require. the production of the prisoner unless there are special
circumstances, but to order his release if the imprisonment is found to be
unlawful, _whereupon the writ of habeas corpus is issued."_

Our practice appears to correspond to the modern practice in England. The
**writ** is only issued at' the conclusion of the proceedings if the
imprisonment is held to be unlawful; it may, exceptionally, be issued at an
earlier stage if there is a likelihood that delay may defeat justice or where
the facts and law are clear; an (interim) order for the production of-the'
corpus is not an essential step in the procedure prior to the final decision.
It is unfortunate that the determination of this Court in _Rasammah v. Perera
(6)_ was not cited in the course of the argument before us, for it was there
settled that when a prima facie case is made out by an applicant for habeas
corpus, there is no mandatory requirement that a writ should be issued
requiring the corpus to be produced prior to inquiry into the legality of the
detention; that the customary procedure was the issue of notice ' upon an ex
paste application, an order for the production of the corpus on the notice
returnable date not being mandatory. Indeed, in a case where the Respondent
denies custody, such an (interim) order for production of the corpus would
amount to pre-judging the Respondent's case.

Consideration of the submissions of the learned Additional Solicitor-General
must thus begin on that basic premise.

**192**

Does the language of the proviso make a drastic change in the nature of the
inquiry into the facts of a habeas corpus application? Where custody is
denied, more complex questions of fact are likely to arise than where custody
is admitted;. such cases would therefore seem to be more appropriate for
inquiry into the facts by a Court of First Instance. Learned Counsel for the
Petitioner referred to a significant change in the language of, Article 141,
namely, the substitution of the phrase "acts of the alleged imprisonment" for
the phrase ' **'cause** of the alleged imprisonment" which occurred in section
45 of the Courts Ordinance and in section 12 of the. Administration of Justice
Law No. 44 of 1973, had there been any doubt as to the scope of the phrase
previously used, the present-formulation- appears to me clearly to permit an
inquiry into the facts where detention is denied.

I must refer to three aspects of the proviso, which lend some support to the
learned Additional Solicitor-General's contention. Prima facie, the first two
clauses of the proviso are conjunctive, further, the direction "to make
provision for interim custody" also appears to be conjunctive; finally, the
order of the Court of Appeal is-one which the Court of First Instance must
-'"conform to and carry into immediate effect", and this appears to suggest
that in every case in which an inquiry, is held under the proviso an order for
interim custody: would have been made in respect of the corpus.

Although the word ''such" in the second clause of the proviso is' undoubtedly
used to refer to the "convenient"\- court specified in the first clause, it
does not necessarily follow that an order under the first clause is a
condition precedent to a direction under the second: I incline to the view
that the proviso confers a discretion on the Court of Appeal, to delegate part
of the inquiry into. a habeas-corpus application - namely, the ascertainment
of the relevant facts; in a case in which the Court decides to exercise that
discretion, the Court has a further discretion, namely to require the corpus
to be produced before the Court of First Instance. Where the Court of. Appeal,
is of the view that prod, action of the corpus is unnecessary or undesirable,
it would not exercise the power to require the corpus to be produced

**193**

before the Court of Appeal: it must follow (except perhaps in some very
extraordinary situation which cannot now be; easily visualized) that, in such
a case if the Court delegates part of the inquiry in terms of the proviso, the
Court will, or at least may, refrain from exercising its further discretion to
require the production of the corpus before the Court of First Instance.'

It is not difficult to conceive of cases where the circumstances of the
detention, considerations of security and the safety and health of the corpus,
all converge to require production, in any **Court** totally unnecessary and
undesirable; a full and fair inquiry, convenient to all concerned, may
necessarily have to be in a Court of First Instance; an interpretation of the
proviso, which prevents delegation in such a situation, unless accompanied-by
an order for production of the corpus, would` be unreasonable, and must be
avoided in the absence of compelling language.

The use of the word "and" in the proviso-is not congou conjunctive, so as to
require that both powers be exercised. Although ''and'' is normally
conjunctive, disjunctive use is by no means unusual:

_Stein v Hanson (7),_ in which Lord Reid remarked that the symbol "and / or"
is not yet part of the English language. It was held that the word ".'and" was
used to indicate that one or `the other of two specified acts, or both, should
be done, likewise, "and" occurring in two places. in the proviso ("and to
direct" as well as "and to make provision"') has been used to indicate that
either or both the specified powers may be exercised.

The previous determination (6) of this Court, with which I see no reason to
disagree, is that the words "to bring up before (the) Court" in the opening
clause of Article 141 do not make an order for production mandatory, either at
the stage of the issue of notice or at any other stage. These words do no more
than echo the formal parts of the ancient writ - have the body brought up .
before the Court. The language of the first clause of the proviso -."require
the body of such person to be brought up before the . . Court" \- is in
substance the same as the opening words - of Article 141, and cannot have a
contrary meaning. I am therefore of the view that an order to bring up the
corpus before

**194**

a Court is not an essential pre-condition to the exercise of the powers of the
Court of Appeal either under the first part of Article 141 or 'under the
proviso:

Article 141 places no restriction on the discretion of the Court of Appeal
under the proviso; no decision of this Court, or of the Court of Appeal, was
cited tending to suggest that there was any such restriction.

The fact that the Respondents deny having custody or control of the corpus is
admittedly not a bar to inquiry by the Court of Appeal; there is nothing in
Article 141 to suggest that such a denial would be a bar to a direction that
an inquiry be held by a Court of First Instance. The proviso cannot be
interpreted so as to introduce an exception or qualification, e.g., "except
where the Respondent denies that such person is, or has at any time been, in
his custody or control".

Where an application is heard and determined by the Court of Appeal, there is
no -requirement that it should first inquire into the question of custody
before proceeding further; exercise of power under the proviso is not made
conditional on a prior decision on the question of custody: A restriction
that' "where ,it is satisfied (or prima facie satisfied) that such person is,
or has at any time been,: in the custody or control 'of the. Respondent",
cannot be introduced into the proviso by interpretation.

Thus the powers conferred on the Court of Appeal are not subject to any such
implied condition or restriction. Being a constitutional provision intended to
safeguard the liberty of the citizen, the proviso must receive a liberal
construction therefore, determine the questions for determination as

(1) The Court of Appeal has jurisdiction, in terms of the proviso to Article
141 of the Constitution, to direct a 'Judge of. a Court of First Instance to
require into the alleged imprisonment or detention of the corpus,` and to make
report thereon, despite the' Respondents denial of having taken the corpus
into custody or detention; or of having the corpus in their custody or
control.

**195**

(2) Where the Respondents deny having taken the corpus into custody or,
detention, or deny having the corpus in their. custody or control, it is not
necessary for the Court of Appeal to satisfy itself in the fist, instance,
after hearing, that the corpus is within the custody of, or detained by, or in
the control of, the Respondents, before the matter is referred to a Judge of a
Court of First Instance for inquiry and report in terms of the proviso to
Article 141.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.** \- I agree.

**

G. P. S. DE SILVA, J**. - I agree

_Case sent back with determination of Supreme Court._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/20.html_  

