##  Benwell v. The Attorney General and Another - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 1988
[1987] LKSC 20; (1988) 1 Sri LR 1 (17 September 1987)

**

1

BENWELL  
V.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE. J. AND  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 45/87; C.A. REV. APPLICATION 54/87;  
H. C. COLOMBO EXTRADITION CASE No. 1 OF 1981.  
AUGUST 27, 1987.

_

Extradition-Bail-Committal under Extradition Law No. 8 of 1977 s. 10
(4)-Jurisdiction of High Court to grant bail after committal-Extradition Law
No. 8 of 1977 s. 10(2) -Code of Criminal Procedure Act, Sections 402, 403, 404
and 438-Power of Court of Appeal to release on bail.

_

Once the High Court has made its order of committal it has no further
jurisdiction to make any order impinging on the order of committal to custody.
The power of the court of committal to release on bail is exercisable only for
the "purpose of proceedings under section 10 of the Extradition Law" and does
not extend to other purposes or stages after the proceedings under that
section have terminated with the committal of the person subject to
extradition proceedings.

Independent of s. 10(2), the Court does not have any inherent jurisdiction to
release on bail The Court of Appeal has no power to release on bail under s.
404 of the Co de n. Criminal Procedure Act. The power under s. 404 to release
on bail is referable only to cases falling under sections 402 and 403. The
appellant's case is not covered by sections 402 and 403. Further s. 438
provides that jurisdiction relating to fugitive persons shall be exercised in
accordance with the. Law in force for the time being relating to fugitive
persons and their extradition. The Extradition Law is the only law that
governs proceedings relating to fugitive persons and their extradition in Sri
Lanka.

**

Case referred to :

**

(1) _In re Ganapathipillai_ (1920) 21 NLR 461, 492.

**

APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal.

_

J. W. Subasinghe P. C,_ with _Miss Chandrani Jayawardene, D. J. C. Nilanduwa
and Miss Saman Seneviratne_ for petitioners.

_

K. C. Kamalasabayson SSC with K M. Parakrama Karunaratne S. C. _ for
respondents.

September 17, 1987.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

This is an appeal from the order of the Court of Appeal declining to revise
the order of the High Court Judge refusing bail to the appellant who was
committed to custody in terms of section 10(4) of the

**2**

Extradition Law No. 8 of 1977 (herein referred to as the Law) to await his
extradition. The question that arises in. this appeal is whether the High
Court Judge has jurisdiction to release. the person on bail after the court
had committed him to custody to await his extradition.

On 12.01.1987 after the order of committal was made by the High Court of
Colombo, Counsel for the appellant made an application to that court that the
appellant be enlarged, on bail. State Counsel appearing for the Attorney-
General opposed the application and submitted that the court after committal
had no jurisdiction to grant bail. The High Court Judge upheld the objection
of the State Counsel and refused the application for bail. This order
disallowing the application for bail was affirmed by the Court of Appeal.

Counsel for the appellant based his application for bail on the provision of
section 10(2) of the Extradition Law which is the only section providing for
bail in the entire scheme of the Law. It reads:

" For the purposes of proceedings under this section, a court of committal
shall have the like jurisdiction and, powers, including Mower to remand in
custody or to release on bail as though Lit e proceedings were in respect of
an offence triable by' that court."

The above sub-section adimittedly vests jurisdiction in the court of committal
to release the suspect on bail pending proceedings for this committal. But
this jurisdiction to release on bail is vested in the High Court, which is the
court of committal, in terms of section 10 (1) of the Law, for the purposes
only of proceedings under Section 10 of the Law-this purpose controls the
'wide ambit of the jurisdiction and powers referred to therein. The
proceeding's under the section terminate either in the discharge of the person
from custody or in his committal to custody to await his extradition (section
10(4)).. With the order of the committal under sub-section 4 of that section
the proceedings come to an end. The court has no further jurisdiction to make
any order impinging on the order of committal to custody.

Counsel for the Appellant contended that by virtue of section 10(2) of the
Law, the provisions of sections 333(3), 402, 403 and 404 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 relating to the power of the High Court
to grant bait could be invoked by the appellant in support of his application
for bail, after his committal under section 10(4) of the Law. But his
contention overlooks the fact that the power

**3**

of the court of committal to release on bail is exercisable only for the
"purpose of proceedings" under section 10 of the Law and does not extend to
other purposes or stages after the proceedings under that section have
terminated with the committal of the person subject to extradition
proceedings.

The court of committal does not, independent of section 10(2), have any
inherent jurisdiction to release on bail. Its power to do so is spelt only by
section 10(2) of the Law (vide in re Ganapathipillai, (1) Counsel made
reference to section 404 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979
which inter alia, provides that "'notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
this code or any other law the court of appeal may in any case direct that any
person in custody be admitted to bait." It was urged that in any event, the
court of appeal, had powers under this section to admit the appellant to bail.
In my view, this section does not support Counsel's submissions. The
expression in any rasp" can only refer to the cases referred to in the two
previous sections, viz. 402 and 403 of the Code, and is not of general
application. The Court of Appeal is empowered in the exercise of its appellate
jurisdiction to admit any person in custody to bail in the cases referred to
in sections 402 and 403. I agree with what Dias A.J., said on this point in
the above case at page 492. The Appellant's case under the Extradition Law is
not a case covered by the said sections 402 and 403. Hence section 404 does
not give jurisdiction to the Court of Appeal to admit the appellant to bail.

Counsel for the appellant referred to the parallel provisions ,of the English
Extradition and Fugitive Offenders Acts. But they have different orientations
and are not safe guides. Further section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act No. 15 of 19 7 9 provides that.

"Jurisdiction relating to fugitive persons shall be exercised in accordance
with the law in force for the time being relating to fugitive persons and
their extradition."

This section does not permit the importation of any provisions or concepts of
English Law other than the provisions of the Extradition Law No. 8 of 1977, in
any matter relating to the exercise or regulation of jurisdiction relating to
fugitive persons.

The Extradition Law is the only law that governs the proceedings relating to
fugitive persons and their extradition in Sri Lanka.

**4**

I agree with the Court of Appeal that the High Court has no power to grant
bail after it had, at the conclusion of proceedings under section 10 before
it; made order committing the appellant to custody to await his extradition.

The appeal fails and is dismissed.

**

ATUKORALE, J. -** l agree.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J**. - I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/20.html_  

