##  Attanayake v. Ramyawathie - SLR - 401, Vol 1 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 20;
(2003) 1 Sri LR 401 (19 June 2003)

**401**

**ATTANAYAKE** ****

**v.** ****

**RAMYAWATHIE** ****

 SUPREME COURT

S.N.SILVA, CJ.

BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND

YAPA, J.

S.C. APPEAL 18/2001

C.A. APPEAL 308/93(F)

D.C. BADULLACASE NO. 3154/L

3RD FEBRUARY, 3RD MARCH AND 26TH MAY 2003



_Vindicatory action - Co-owner's right to declaration of title to co-owners
property - Requirement that such owner should establish his title to the
extent claimed._

_ _

The original plaintiff sued the defendant for a declaration of title to the
land in suit and ejectment. The plaintiff did not refer to herself being a co-
owner of the land in dispute. The defendant too claimed title to the same
land. The evidence showed that the title to the allotment of land in suit was
to be divided among seven persons. The plaintiff failed to prove exclusive
(prescriptive) title to the larger land she claimed; nor was any issue
suggested at the trial or in appeal in respect of the larger land.



**Held :**



Although the plaintiff might have been entitled to a declaration of title to a
portion of the land as co-owner of the entire land, she failed to adduce
evidence of ownership for a portion or the larger land claimed by her by
prescription or ouster. In the circumstances of the case, the plaintiff was
not entitled to the relief of a declaration of title.



**_Cases referred to:_**

_ _

_1\. Hewavitarana v Dungan Rubber Company Ltd. (1913) 17 NLR 49_

_2\. Meera Lebbe Casy Lebbe Marker v Kalavilage Baba (1885) 7 SCC 97_

_3\. Harriette v Pathmasiri (1996) 1 Sri LR 358_

_4\. Government Agent Kalutara v Gunaratne (1968) 71 NLR 58 at 60_

_5\. Jayawickrama v Amarasinghe (1918) 20 NLR 289_

_6\. Peiris v Municipal Council, Galle (1963) 65 NLR 555_

_7\. Allis v Seneviratne (1989) 2 Sri LR 335_

_8\. Bernards Fernando (1913) 16 NLR 438_



**402**



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal

_S.F.A. Cooray_ with _Chithrananda Liyanage_ and _Muditha Premachandra_ for
**** sub­stituted plaintiff- appellant.

_Hemantha Situge_ for defendant-respondent.

# Cur. adv. vult

June 19,2003

**SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 25.07.2001.
By that judgment the Court of Appeal dismissed the appeal made by the
plaintiff-appellant-appellant (hereinafter referred to as the appellant) on
the basis that the appellant had failed to lead evi­dence to establish her
claim for a declaration of title to the land. The appellant appealed from the
judgment of the Court of Appeal and this court granted special leave to
appeal.



The deceased original plaintiff (appellant) instituted action against the
defendant-respondent (hereinafter referred to as the respondent) for a
declaration of title to the land described morefully in the schedule B to the
plaint for ejectment of the respondent therefrom and for damages and costs
(P1). Schedule B describes a land which is about one acre in extent and this
schedule states that the land con­tained therein is a part of a larger land
described in Schedule A to the plaint. Schedule A to the plaint contains lots
63 and 64 in Plan No. S. 13800 which is in extent 1 Acre 2 Roods and 14
Perches. The appel­lant, after setting out her claim of title averred that the
land in suit was given to her under the Land Settlement Ordinance and further
plead­ed that the respondent who is in occupation of a building in the
premis­es, is a licensee under her and that the respondent is now disputing
the appellant's title to the said land. The respondent in her answer denied
this position and pleaded that the land in suit is owned and pos­sessed by her
on her own right and set out a separate chain of title to the said land (P2).
Learned District Judge dismissed the appellant's action and on appeal it was
also dismissed by the Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal was of the view
that the appellant could claim only 1/4th share of land on the settlement
order and that therefore the

403



appellant who claimed the entirety of the land in Schedule A (lots 63 and 64)
has failed to prove her title to the land which she had described in Schedule
B to the plaint.



It was agreed by both counsel at the hearing, that the only issue that has to
be gone into is whether a co-owner of a land who sues a trespasser for a
declaration of title and ejectment is entitled to maintain the action if he
instituted action as the sole owner of the premises.



Learned counsel for the appellant relied on _Hewavitarana_ v. _Dungan Rubber
Company Ltd.(1)_ and _Meera Lebbe Casy Lebbe Mark­_ _er_ v. _Kalavilage
Babd(2)_ to establish that one out of several co-owners may without joining
any other co-owner in the action could sue a tres­passer for a declaration of
his undivided share, ejectment and dam­ages is a well-established principle.
There is no doubt that the owner of an undivided share of land is entitled to
sue a trespasser. In the process he could claim to have his title to the
undivided share declared and could eject the trespasser from the whole land.
Wood Renton ACJ, and Perera, J. adopted this principle in the case of
_Hewavitharana_ v. _Dungan Rubber Company Ltd. (supra)._ In fact in
_Harriette_ v. _Pathmasiri(3),_ Sarath N. Silva J. (as he then was) cited this
principle, which was adopted in _Hewavitharana's case,_ with approval.

In the instant case it is common ground that the appellant is only a co-owner.
Co-owned property could be defined as undivided shares owned by more than one
person and an important feature in such property is that specific portions are
not separately assigned to differ­ent co-owners. Accordingly it could be said
that there is no division of the co-owned property, and a co-owner is entitled
to the entirety of property making him entitled to every inch and of every
grain of sand in the co-owned land in proportion to the extent of his
undivided share. Prof. G.L. Peiris in his work on the _Law of Property in Sri
Lanka_ (Volume I, page 981) refers to the use and exploitation of the co-owned
property. Discussing the basic principles governing the co-owner on the above
premise, Prof. Peiris is of the view that,

  
(a) Any act of a co-owner rests for its legality on the consent of the
remaining co-owner, either express or implied _(Government_ _Agent, Kalutara
v.Gunaratne(4)._  


The exception to this rule is that even if the co-owner may not have the
consent of the other co-owners, he is entitled to use

404



the common land reasonably for the common advantage, pro­portionate to his
share.



(b) The second principle which had been formulated by Voet, cited in Prof.
Peiris's book on _Law of Property (supra)_ is that the joint property cannot
be converted to purposes, other than those for which it is intended.



The underlining principle therefore is that the co-owner, although is entitled
to use and enjoy the common property in a manner, which is natural in the
circumstances, cannot be entitled to enjoy a share more than his legal
entitlement. In other words, a co-owner has not got exclusive rights over a
property, but only limited rights over the share he owns.



Learned counsel for the appellant took up two basic positions in his oral as
well as in his written submissions that this court should con­sider in
arriving at a decision. They are,

(a)        that the court should consider the position of a plaintiff who had
pleaded that he has more title than he in fact had, is not kept out, but is
given a declaration in terms of the title he had proved that he is entitled
to;

(b)        that it is the policy of the law in a civil action that the trial
court must see that the proper issues are framed in a civil action and if the
trial judge finds that proper issues are not framed the trial judge should
frame the proper issues even at the stage of judg­ment and proceed with the
case.



Learned counsel for the appellant cited several cases to show that this court
has the power to amend the issues or frame additional issues as this court
'thinks fit'. He cited the Privy Council decision in _Jayawickrama_ v
_Amarasinghe_ (5) where Lord Atkinson framed the requited issues in the Privy
Council and granted relief to the plaintiff. He also cited the decision in
_Peiris_ v _Municipal Council, Galld(6)_ in which Tambiah, J. having set aside
the judgment of the trial judge sent the case back for trial on the issue
which arose on the evidence on unjust enrichment.

Although these appear to be important issues that should have been taken up at
the trial of the instant case, it should be borne in mind that the learned
counsel for the petitioner has not raised them in the

405



petition and affidavit to this court nor at the time special leave to appeal
was granted.

In paragraph 5 of the petition dated 18.04.2002, the appellant stated as
follows:

"After trial the learned trial judge by judgment dated 01.07.1993, dismissed
the plaintiff's action without costs for the reasons stated therein without
answering the issues raised at the trial". However, these issues had not been
raised by the appellant at any stage prior to the hearing of this appeal. In
such circumstances it is not feasible to enter into a new arena of issues,
which was not the subject matter in the District Court, Court of Appeal or
even at the stage of special leave to appeal in the Supreme Court.  


The appellant in her plaint, dated 19.11.1962, has not referred to herself
being a co-owner of the land in dispute. She had taken the posi­tion that she
purchased the land in question on 18.12.1927 from one Punchi Menike by deed
No. 14776 attested by A.J.S. Seneviratne, Notary Public. It was further stated
that the said land was brought under the Land Settlement Ordinance and was
settled on the appel­lant. The respondent in her answer stated that the land
in question, which is known as 'Kamathgodewatte', originally belonged to her
father and upon deed of transfer No. 5922 dated 15.02.1957 attested by D.E.S.
Perera, Notary Public had sold the land to the respondent. The appellant gave
evidence and stated that, under the settlement order (P4) the land which,
belonged to one William Perera Malhamy and the appellant in common was divided
amicably. She further stated that her portion of the land is in the middle and
the lands on either side are owned by two others. Under cross-examination the
appellant had stat­ed that she is claiming for a declaration with regard to
both lots Nos. 63 and 64.



The final order made under the provisions of the Land Settle­ment Ordinance
was produced before court (P4). It states that lots 63 and 64 are settled in
undivided shares of one-fourth each to one, two and seventh and one fourth to
(3), (4), (5) and (6) claimants. The appel­lant is the first in the said list
of claimants and therefore it is evident, that she was entitled for a 1/4
share from lot 63 and a further 1/4 share from lot 64. It is also to be noted
that in addition to the appellant there are 2 others who are entitled to a 1/4
share each and 4 others who are

406



jointly entitled to another 1/4 share in each lot. This clarifies the
posi­tion that the appellant was only a co-owner of the land in question. It
is also to be noted, as pointed out by the Court of Appeal, that the two
documents the appellant relied on for her title describe different shares of
allotment. The deed marked P1 refers to 1/3 share of three bushels of
_Kurakkan_ sowing in extent and the settlement order (P4) refers to a 1/4
share of each in lots 63 and lot 64. In her plaint the appellant had sought
for a declaration of title in respect of the land described in Schedule 'B' to
the plaint, which is one acre in extent. However, in giv­ing evidence she
claimed the entirety of lots 63 and 64 on the settle­ment order. This clearly
points out that the appellant has failed to prove her title to the land she
was claiming.  


The only remaining question that has to be decided is whether the co-owner of
a land who sues a trespasser for a declaration of title and ejectment is
entitled to maintain the action if he institutes action as the sole owner of
the premises.

  
In _Harriette_ v _Pathmasiri (supra)_ the plaintiff pleaded that she possessed
the land described in Schedule 2 for and _in lieu_ of her undi­vided share and
sought the ejectment of the defendant from that land. Sarath N. Silva, J, (as
he then was) was of the view that the case for the plaintiff cannot stop at
adducing evidence of paper title to an undi­vided share and stated that (supra
at pg. 363)  


"It was her burden to adduce evidence of exclusive possession and the
acquisition of prescriptive title by ouster in respect of the smaller land
described in Schedule 2".

  
The facts in the present case are very much similar to that of _Harriette's
case._ As referred to earlier in the instant case the appellant (the original
plaintiff) had instituted action in the District Court for a dec­laration of
title and for ejectment from the land morefully described in the Schedule B to
the plaint of the respondent therefrom. Schedule B to the plaint is as follows
:-  


"A position of the land described in the Schedule A hereof and bounded on the
North by lot 55 and reservation along Kirklees Road East by lots 192, 194, 191
and 60 in BSVP 445 South by lot 62 in BSVP 445 and ela and West by reservation
along Kirklees Road and containing in extent about one acre.

 407

The Schedule A referred to above is in the following terms :-  


"An allotment of land called "Kamathgodawatta", situated at Kumarapattiya
village, Yatipalate Korale, Badulla District of the Province of Uva, and
bounded on the North by lots 65,66,54 and 55, East by lots 192, 194, 191 and
60 South by lots 61 and 62, West by lots 66 and 65 according to Plan No.
S/13800 in extent A1 R2 P14 ....63+64 - BSV Q 445 dated 27.04.1946 (P3).

  
According to plan No. S/13800 the allotment of land called "Kamathgodawatta",
which is in extent 1A2R 14P consists of 2 blocks known as lot 64 and lot 63.
These 2 lots are divided by a road reser­vation which runs from south west to
north east of the land.  


It appears that the Schedule B refers to lot 63 depicted in Plan No. 13800.
Another Plan drawn in July 1964, (P2) indicates that lot No. 63 is now made up
of 3 parts of which lot 1 being the alleged encroach­ment by the respondent.
The survey plan also shows that the said lot 1 contains 1R and 33P.



According to the Land Settlement Ordinance referred to above, lot 63 which is
in extent of 3R 39P and depicted in Plan No. 13800 was situated in undivided
shares of one fourth each to claimants No. 1,2,7 and the balance one-fourth to
claimants No. 3,4,5 and 6.

  
The appellant is thus praying for a declaration of title to Sched­ule B which
comprises of lot 63, that was to be divided among 7 per­sons. However, as
stated in _Harriette's case (supra)_ the appellant has not adduced any
evidence as referred to earlier in this judgment regard to exclusive
possession to the land described in Schedule B (lot 64).  


Learned counsel for the appellant relied on several cases to state that in
_Harriette_ v. _Pathmasiri (supra)_ the view taken was different and out of
line with the established _cursus curiae._ He referred to _Meera_ _Lebbe Cassy
Lebbe Marker_ v. _Kalawilage Baba (supra)_ and _Allis_ v. _Seneviratne(7)_ to
emphasise that if the plaintiff can establish his rights even to less than
what he claims, he may have a judgment for that reduced share, which means
that the fact that an appellant has asked for a greater relief than he is
entitled to should not prevent him from getting the lesser relief which he is
entitled to. Learned counsel for the appellant also cited _Bernard_ v.
_Fernando (8)_ In this case, the plaintiff had purchased two divided portions,
lots A and D, which had been

408



allotted to his vendors by a partition decree in 1905. He sued the defendant
to eject him on the basis that he was the sole owner. District Court held that
the plaintiff was the sole owner of those two lots. However, plaintiff's
vendor had earlier transferred an undivided 1/5 share of the whole land to the
defendant, in appeal De Sampayo, J. held that,  


"in my opinion the judgment appealed from should be varied by declaring the
plaintiff entitled only to an undivided 4/5 share of the lots A and D and
putting him in possession thereof."

It is however to be noted that all these authorities cited by learned counsel
for the appellant are factually different from the pre­sent case. The only
authority other than _Harriette's case_ which has cer­tain similarities is the
case of _Hewavitarana_ v. _Dungan Rubber_ _Company Ltd. (supra)._ In this
case, the plaintiffs claimed a declaration of title to the lands in suit, the
ejectment of the first added party there­from and damages. Perera, J., after
discussing the evidence stated that;



"It appears that as regards the Naidepanguwas and Uyanwatte, the plaintiffs
are entitled to only certain shares of the lands com­prised in them. The
appellant's counsel attempted to make a strong point of this fact in favour of
his clients, but the mere fact that the plaintiffs are entitled, as regards
some of the lands claimed, to an undivided share does not necessarily defeat
the action. As regards the rights of owners of undivided shares of land to sue
trespassers, I have always understood the law, both before and the coming into
operation of the Civil Procedure Code, to be that the owner of an undivided
share of land might sue a tres­passer to have his title to the undivided share
declared and for ejectment of the trespasser from the whole land, the reason
for this latter right being that the owner of the undivided share has an
interest in every part and position of the entire land."



As stated earlier the facts in the instant case also has distinct similarities
to the facts in the case of _Harriette_ v _Pathmasiri (supra),_ in which the
plaintiff having acquired paper title to certain undivided shares was
attempting to dispossess the defendant who had been in occupation from about
1963\. The court held that it was the burden of



409



the plaintiff to adduce evidence of exclusive possession and the acqui­sition
of prescriptive title by ouster.



However, unlike in _Hewavitarana's case (supra)_ and _Haniete's_ _case
(supra)_ the appellant in the present case asserted that the respondent had
come to the land as a licensee and was occupying the house which was on the
land. In paragraph 7 of the plaint dated 19.11.1962 she stated that;

The defendant above named who was permitted by the plaintiff to occupy the
building on a portion of the land about four years ago, that is from about May
1962 disputing the plaintiffs title to the said portion of land."



I am of the firm view that, if an appellant had asked for a greater relief
than he is entitled to, the mere claim for a greater share in the land should
not prevent him, having a judgment in his favour for a less­er share in the
land. A claim for a greater relief than entitled to should not prevent an
appellant from getting a lesser relief. However, it is nec­essary that the
appellant adduces evidence of ownership for the por­tion of land he is
claiming for a declaration of title. It is amply clear that the appellant in
the instant case has not been able to adduce such evi­dence.



In such circumstances the question raised by the counsel for the appellant is
answered in the following terms. A co-owner of a land who sues a trespasser
for a declaration of title and ejectment is entitled to maintain the action
even if he instituted the action as the sole owner of the land and premises.
The fact that an appellant has asked for greater relief than he is entitled
to, should not prevent him from getting the less­er relief which he is
entitled to. However, in such a situation, there is a burden on such person
who makes the claim, to adduce evidence of ownership to the allotment of land.

It is to be noted that the appellant had made no statement that she had
terminated the licence which was given to the respondent. Moreover, she has
also failed to state in her evidence that after per­mitting the respondent to
occupy the land, she had thereafter termi­nated such licence. In such
circumstances the respondent remains as a licensee who had entered the land in
question with specific leave and licence from the appellant.

410

For the aforementioned reasons this appeal is dismissed and the judgment of
the Court of Appeal dated 25.07.2001 is affirmed. In all the circumstances of
this case, there will be no costs.

**S. N. SILVA, C. J.** ** -** I agree.

**YAPA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/20.html_  

