##  Abeywardene v. Ariya Bulegoda and Two Others - SLR - 86, Vol 1 of 1985
[1985] LKSC 20; (1985) 1 Sri LR 86 (14 February 1985)

**

86

ABEYWARDENE  
v.  
ARIYA BULEGODA AND TWO OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WIMALARATNE, J., ABDUL CADER, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. ELECTION PETITION APPEAL No. 3/84.  
ELECTION PETITION No. 2/83.  
JANUARY 21 & 22, 1985.

_

    Election Petition - General intimidation - Undue influence - Security- Rule 12 (2) of the Parliamentary Election Petition Rules 1946 as amended by Act No. 9 of 1970-Are full particulars necessary where general intimidation is the ground of avoidance ? - S. 77 (a) - Non -joinder - Should affidavit accompany petition to support charge of general intimidation ? Sections 80 B (c), 80 B (d), 80 C (2), 80 A (1) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council as amended.

_

The petitioner sought to have the election of the 1st respondent-appellant to
Parliament set aside on two grounds

(1) By reason of general intimidation the majority of the electors were or may
have been prevented from voting for the candidate whom they preferred. -s. 77
(a) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council, 1946, as
amended. A concise statement of facts relied on for this charge was set out in
paragraph 4 (a) to (h) of the petition.

**87**

(2) The corrupt practice of undue influence was committed by the 2nd and 3rd
respondents as agents of the 1st respondent-appellant (s. 77 (c) read with (s.
56 (1) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order-in-Council, 1946, as
amended). Particulars of the corrupt practice were set out in paragraphs 5 and
6 of the petition.

The petitioner had deposited Rs. 15,000 as security in terms of Rule 12 of the
Parliamentary Election Petition Rules 1946 as amended by Act No: 9 of 1970.

Objections regarding the quantum of security, failure to set out full
particulars regarding intimidation, non-joinder of parties and inadequacy of
the affidavit were overruled by the Election Judge.

In appeal to the Supreme Court -

**

Held -

**

General intimidation is concerned not with the intention with which the acts
are committed but with the result. Did the acts taken cumulatively have the
effect of perverting the electoral process ? In an allegation of general
intimidation a number of acts of intimidation or other acts of undue influence
will necessarily have to be relied upon by the petitioner. Any one of such
acts may not constitute a charge. It is the acts taken together and their
cumulative effect of preventing a free election that amounts to the ground of
avoidance termed 'general intimidation" and which will be the subject of a
"charge' for the purpose of attracting security. Such acts taken individually
or incidents taken individually will not constitute separate charges for the
purpose of attracting security once they have already cumulatively attracted
security on the charge of general intimidation.

General intimidation although not brought home to a candidate or his agent
will avoid an election. It is different from "statutory intimidation' that is,
the corrupt practice of undue influence as, contemplated by the statute of
which the candidate or agent may be found guilty.

Paragraph 4 of the petition sets out only a single charge and attracts
security in a sum of Rs. 5,000 and no more.

Paragraph 5 of the petition contains a first charge on a distinct ground of
avoidance, namely, the corrupt practice of undue influence, and attracts Rs.
5,000 as security. Paragraph 6 of the petition as it contains an additional
charge on the same distinct ground as in paragraph 5, will attract Rs. 2,500
as security.

The total security being thus Rs. 12,500, the security deposited was adequate.

There is a distinction between the "concise statement of material facts"
required to be given in respect of a charge of general intimidation and "full
particulars' required to be given in respect of a charge of a "corrupt
practice"-s. 80 B (c) and (d). As the sub-paragraphs of paragraph 4 constitute
one ground of avoidance and one charge full particulars need not be given. The
petitioner has sufficiently complied with the requirements of setting out the
material facts in the concise statement in his petition. The petitioner has
also given full particulars of the corrupt practices alleged and complied with
this requirement too.

**88**

If the respondents required further particulars it was open to them to have
invoked the provisions of section 80 C (1) and sought an order from the Judge
directing the petition to be amplified appropriately so to ensure a fair or
effective trial. There does not seem to be any provision for the dismissal of
an election petition for failure to furnish particulars. The filing of
interlocutory appeals from orders overruling objections based on the
insufficiency of particulars will make it well nigh impossible for any
election judge to comply with s. 80 C (2).

As the inclusion of several acts of intimidation or violence or threats did
not have the effect of converting a single ground of avoidance into several
charges and as there is no corrupt practice alleged in paragraph 4 the need to
add as respondents the thugs (if known) or the supporters (if known) did not
arise. Hence the objection re non- joinder fails.

No affidavit need accompany the petition to support the charge set out in
paragraph 4 where only one ground of avoidance, namely, general intimidation
is set out. Hence the objection to the affidavit also fails.

**

Cases referred to

**

_

  1. Durham Election Petition (No. 2) 31 Law Times Reports 383, 384.  


  2. Pelpola v. Gunawardena (1948) 49 NLR 407.  


  3. Wijewardene v. Senanayake (1971) 74 NLR 97, 100.

_

INTERLOCUTORY **APPEAL** from order of Election Judge.

_

G. Candappa, P.C., with Mark Fernando P.C., Daya Pelpola, Mrs. N. Walawage, B.
Balaraman and Mr. Chandrasiri de Alwis for 1st respondent-appellant.

K. Shanmugalingam with Morris Rajapakse and Nimal de Silva for petitioner-
respondent.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 14, 1985.

**

WIMALARATNE, J.

**

At a By-Election for the Hakmana Electorate held on 18.5.83 the 1st
respondent-appellant Abeywardena Mahinda Yapa polled 23,336 votes whilst the
petitioner-respondent Ariya Bulegoda polled 21,002 ' votes. Two other
candidates polled 1291 and 103 votes respectively.

**89**

The petitioner-respondent filed an election petition seeking to have the
election of the 1st respondent-appellant set aside on the following two
grounds :

(a) That by reason of general intimidation the majority of the electors were
or may have been prevented from voting for the candidate whom they preferred,
a ground stipulated in section 77(a) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections)
Order-in-Council, 1946, as a mended. A concise statement of facts on which the
petitioner relied in respect of the charge was set out in paragraph 4 of the
petition under items (a) to (h).

(b) That the corrupt practice of undue influence was committed by the 2nd and
the 3rd respondents, as agents of the 1st respondent-appellant, particulars of
which corrupt practice were set out in paragraphs 5 and 6 of the petition, a
ground of avoidance stipulated in section 77(c) read with section 56(1).

The 1st respondent-appellant took the following preliminary objections to the
petition :

(i) That the sum of Rs. 15,000 deposited by the petitioner as security for
costs was insufficient.

(ii) The petition was bad in law in that -

(a) it did not contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the
petitioner relied, in terms of section 80 B (c) of the Order-in-Council;

(b) it did not set forth full particulars of the several corrupt practices
alleged in the petition, in terms of section 80 B (d)

(c) it was not accompanied by an affidavit in support of the several
allegations of the corrupt practices pleaded, also in terms of section 80 B
(d) ;

(d) the petitioner has failed to join as respondents the persons against whom
allegations of corrupt practice have been made in the petition, in terms of
section 80 A(1) (b);

(e) the petitioner has joined as 2nd respondent a fictitious or non existent
person.

**90**

The 1st respondent moved for a dismissal of the petition.

The learned Election Judge having heard arguments of Counsel, made order
overruling all these preliminary objections except (II) (e) in respect of
which he reserved order till the conclusion of the trial. Hence this
interlocutory appeal.

**Security**.

The quantum of security that an election petitioner is required to deposit is
governed by Rule 12 (2) of the Parliamentary Election Petition Rules, 1946, as
amended by Act No. 9 of 1970 ; it reads as follows :

"(2) The security shall be an amount of not less than five thousand rupees in
respect of the first charge constituting a distinct ground on which the
petitioner relies, and a further amount of not less than two thousand five
hundred rupees in respect of each additional charge constituting any such
ground. The security required by this rule shall be given by a deposit of
money".

The Election Judge has held that the sum total of security that the petitioner
was required to deposit was Rs. 12,500 computed as follows :

(1) In respect of the distinct ground of  avoidance viz. the prevention of the
exercise of free voting as a result of general intimidation as set out in the
concise statement of material facts under sub-paragraphs (a) to (h) of
paragraph 4 of the petition.

| Rs. 5,000  
---|---  
(2) In respect of the first charge constituting another distinct ground of
avoidance viz. the corrupt practice of undue influence, as set out. with
particulars in paragraph 5 of the petition. | Rs. 5,000  
(3) In respect of the additional charge on the  same distinct ground of
avoidance viz. the corrupt practice of undue influence as set out with
particulars in paragraph 6 of the - petition. | Rs. 2,500  
  
**91**

As the petitioner had deposited a sum of Rs. 15,000 as security the learned
Judge overruled this first objection.

It has been contended before us by learned Counsel for the 1st respondent-
appellant that paragraph 4 of the petition contains not one but three distinct
grounds of avoidance, namely (1) the prevention of free voting as a result of
"general intimidation"" (2) the prevention of free voting as a result of
"other misconduct" ; and (3) commission of the corrupt practice of undue
influence by the 2nd and 3rd respondents acting as agents of the 1st
respondent or with his knowledge or consent, as well as by his supporters and
other thugs.

The contention of learned Counsel for the petitioner-respondent is that
paragraph 4 contains only one charge on the distinct ground avoidance, that
is, of general intimidation, and therefore attracts security in a sum of Rs.
5,000 only.

An election petitioner is required by section 80 B(c) to include in the
petition a concise statement of the material facts on which he relies. In
compliance with that section, the petition contains in sub-paragraph (a) to
(h) of paragraph 4 eight incidents, the cumulative effect of which acts
constitute the ground of avoidance which is "general intimidation". Sub-para
(a) refers to an attack by a band of thugs on the jeep belonging to the
petitioner and the robbery of valuables belonging to its occupants. Sub-para
(b) refers to the wrongful confinement of the petitioner on election day by a
gang of thugs near a named polling station. Sub-para (c) alleges that the 2nd
and 3rd respondents. acting as agents of the respondent, with a gang of thugs
prevented voters from voting at a polling station by blocking access roads and
by the use of thuggery. Sub-para (d) also alleges forcible prevention of
voting by voters at a certain polling station by thugs. Sub-para (e) refers to
the explosion of a bomb at the residence of the 1st respondent on the day
before polling day which had the effect of intimidating voters. Sub-para (f)
alleges intimidation on polling day of voters of four named grama sevaka
divisions by supporters of the 1st respondent. Sub-para (g) alleges that
voters of a state plantation were intimidated and threatened by supporters of
the 1st respondent. Sub-para (h) states that voters of a named polling station
were driven away by thugs and also that the polling agents of the petitioner
and of another candidate were prevented from performing their duties at that
polling station. There are, in the above allegations, according to learned
Counsel for the 1st respondent-appellant, several charges

**92**

constituting the corrupt practice of undue influence, and according to his
computation they attract security in a sum of Rs. 5,000 on the first charge
set forth in sub-para (a) and Rs. 2,500 on each of the 14 additional charges
of the corrupt practice of undue influence set forth in paras (b) to (h)
making a total of Rs. 40,000.

Special emphasis has been placed by Mr. Candappa on the averment in sub-
paragraph (c) of paragraph 4 which is directed against the 2nd and 3rd
respondents who, acting as agents or with the knowledge and/or consent of the
1st respondent, are alleged to have committed the corrupt practice of undue
influence. Mr. Candappa points out that just as much as paragraphs 5 and 6
aver the same corrupt practice against the 2nd and 3rd respondents but
committed throughout polling day, sub-paragraph (c) of paragraph 4 alleges the
same corrupt practice at different intervals of time by the 2nd and 3rd
respondents - so that in any event paragraph 4 (c) has alleged at least two
classes of corrupt practice which must necessarily attract security.

Besides according to Counsel for the appellant, sub-paras (a) & (b) of
paragraph 4 allege that the authorities either failed or were reluctant to
investigate the offences specified therein or were. unable to deal with the
situation, and such failure or inability had the effect of intimidating voters
who supported the petitioner. Learned Counsel contends that such failure or
inability of the authorities to control the situation constitutes "other
misconduct" which is one of the grounds on which an election may be avoided
under section 77 (a). There being two charges on that distinct ground, they
would attract security in a sum of Rs. 7;500.

Thus, according to Counsel for the 1st respondent-appellant -

(a) The prevention of free voting as a result of "general intimidation"
pleaded generally in paragraph 4 attracts as security a sum of Rs. 5,000 1

(b) The prevention of free voting as a result of "other circumstances" pleaded
in paragraphs 4 (a). & (b) attracts as security a sum of Rs. 7,500 ;

(c) The several corrupt practices pleaded in all the sub-paragraphs of
paragraph 4 attracts a sum of Rs. 40,000 ; making a grand total of Rs. 52,000
in respect of paragraph 4.

**93**

Mr. Shanmugalingam's reply to this contention is that the law draws a clear
distinction between "general intimidation" and "undue influence". When general
intimidation is pleaded several incidents of intimidation or use of violence
or threats are relied upon, committed not necessarily by known persons. When
undue influence is pleaded, the acts of intimidation or use of violence or
threats are attributed to specified or named persons. General intimidation is
concerned not with the intention with which the acts are committed but with
the result ; did the acts taken cumulatively have the effect of perverting the
electoral process ? In his submission paragraph 4 (c) is only a summation of
paragraphs 5 and 6 and when individual acts of undue influence which form the
subject of separate charges are summarised in the concise statement of
material facts relied upon by a petitioner to establish a charge of general
intimidation, those individual acts of undue influence do not attract
security.

An election petitioner is also required by section 80 B (d) to set forth in
the petition full particulars of any corrupt practice the petitioner alleges,
including as full a statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged
to have committed them and the date and place of such commission. In
compliance with this section the petitioner alleged in paragraph 5 that
between 10 and 11.30 a.m. on polling date at or near a named polling station
the 2nd respondent as agent of the 1 st respondent with a gang of unknown
thugs prevented voters from voting by blocking all access roads to the polling
station as well as by the use of force or violence and threats of use of force
or violence. Mr. Candappa contends that each of these acts, namely the
blocking of access roads, the use of force or violence and the threat each
being an additional charge of corrupt practice attracts as security Rs. 2,500
and that the three acts together attract Rs. 7,500. A similar argument has
been put forward as regards the charge of the corrupt practices committed by
the 3rd respondent and set forth in paragraph 6.

The fallacy in Mr. Candappa's argument as regards paragraph 4 is that it
overlooks the imperative need, when an allegation of general intimidation is
made, to specify the nature of that intimidation in a concise statement of
material facts. In an allegation of general intimidation, a number of acts of
intimidation or other acts of undue influence will necessarily have to be
relied upon by the petitioner. Any. one of such acts may not constitute a
charge. It is' the acts taken together and their cumulative effect of
preventing a free election that

**94**

amounts to the ground of avoidance termed "general intimidation" and which
will be the subject of a "charge" for the purpose of attracting security. In
sub-paragraph (a) for example, there is an allegation of an attack by a band
of thugs and the robbery of valuables from the petitioner's jeep. on 9th May.
Proof of that allegation alone may not suffice to avoid the election on the
ground that there was prevention of free election as a result of general
intimidation. In order to succeed on a charge of general intimidation the
petitioner has to prove that there was widespread violence, so much so that
people of average courage may have been prevented from voting, and that the
majority of the voters may have been prevented from voting for the candidate
of their choice. It is in order to achieve that degree of persuasion that the
petitioner is obliged to give a concise statement of the material facts on
which he relies ; otherwise the respondent will be taken by surprise at the
trial. But those several acts or incidents taken individually will not
constitute separate charges for the purpose of attracting security, once they
have cumulatively already attracted security on the charge of general
intimidation.

"Freedom of election is at common law essential to the validity of an
election. If this freedom is by any means prevented generally, the election is
void at common law. Therefore, general intimidation although not brought home
to a candidate or his agent, will avoid an election" Rogers on Elections (19th
Edition) Vol. 2 p. 521.

The distinction between "general intimidation" at common law and ""statutory
intimidation" defined in section 2 of the Corrupt and Illegal Practices
Prevention Act, 1883 (which is identical with the definition of "undue
influence" in section 56 (1) of our Elections Order in Council) has best been
stated by Bramwell B in the Durham Election Petition (No. 2) Case (1) as
follows :

"First of all there is the statutory intimidation, if one may use such an
expression, that is intimidation contemplated by the statute, which avoids the
seat - that is where a candidate or his agent, is guilty of it. But besides
that there is another intimidation that has been called a common law
intimidation, or intimidation at common law and it applies to a case where the
intimidation is of such a character, or general and extensive in its
operation, that it cannot be said that the polling was a fair representation
of the opinion of the constituency in which the intimidation took place" The
Law Times Reports Vol. XXXI p. 383 at 384.

**95**

In Pelpola v. Gunawardena (2) the respondent defeated the petitioner by the
comparatively narrow margin of 387 votes. In a petition seeking to set aside
the election of the respondent the petitioner relied upon two grounds of
avoidance. The first was general intimidation, the particulars being that on
polling day, at a number of places in the electorate, certain groups of people
intimidated other groups from going to the polling station, by use and threats
of force, with the result that the majority of the electors were or may have
been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred. The second
ground, as in the instant case, was based on the same incidents that formed
the subject matter of the first ground, but considered as individual acts of
undue influence committed against individuals by other individuals alleged to
be agents of the respondent. Although the question of the quantum of security
does not appear to have arisen in that case, I have referred to it in order to
illustrate that in stating the material facts of general intimidation a
petitioner has necessarily to rely on, and also include in his petition
numerous acts of intimidation, threats and the like. If each such incident
were to attract security under Rule 12, then the quantum of security a
petitioner would be called upon to deposit may reach the billion rupee mark !!
It seems to me that it was with a view to avoid such a drastic consequence
that the legislature introduced the amendments to Rule 12 in 1970.

The statement in certain sub-paragraphs of the petition that the reluctance or
incapacity of the Authorities to take necessary action may have resulted in
the intimidation of voters was clearly not intended to be an allegation or
charge of "misconduct" on the part of the authorities. They have been given as
a reason why people feared to go to the polling station. I cannot for a moment
agree to the proposition that by such inclusion in the concise statement the
petitioner has introduced another ground of avoidance or another charge which
attracts security.

Paragraph 4 in my view sets out only a single charge on one ground of
avoidance, namely the prevention of free voting as a result of general
intimidation. It therefore attracts security in a sum of Rs. 5,000 and no
more.

Paragraphs 5 & 6 of the petition allege that the corrupt practice of undue
influence was exercised by the 2nd and 3rd :respondents respectively acting as
agents of the 1 st respondent or with his

**96**

knowledge and consent at a certain polling station on polling day, but at
different times. Learned Counsel for the Appellants' contention, as I have
stated earlier, is that each of those paragraphs contains three charges. The
blocking of all access roads, it has been submitted, constitutes one act of
undue influence ; the use of force or violence another ; and the threats of
use of force or violence yet another. If counsel's submission is pushed to its
logical conclusion, then there would be as many offences committed as there
are access roads to the polling station ! Besides, the argument derives no
support whatsoever from the definition of "undue influence" contained in
section 56 (1) in terms of which "every person who directly or indirectly, by
himself or by any other person on his behalf, makes, uses or threatens to make
use of any force or violence or restraint ..... in order to compel such person
to refrain from voting .... shall be guilty of the offence of undue
influence". The use of force or violence, the threat of the use of force or
violence, or the use of restraint, if committed in the course of 'one and the
same transaction will constitute but one offence for which there could be but
one charge. I am therefore of the view that paragraph 5 contains a first
charge on the distinct ground of avoidance, namely the corrupt practice of
undue influence, and attracts Rs. 5,000 as security. Paragraph 6, as it
contains an additional charge on the same distinct ground as in paragraph 5
will attract Rs. 2,500 as security.

Paragraphs 4, 5, & 6 together attract a sum of Rs. 12,500 as security. The
Election Judge was therefore right in. overruling the preliminary objection
relating to the adequacy of security. His administration is in accord with the
decision of the Divisional Bench in Election Petition Appeals Nos. 1. & 2 of
1977 and No. 3 of 1978 -(S.C. Minutes of 7.8.78). ;

The concise Statement of material facts on which the petitioner relies in
support of the allegation of general intimidation is given in sub-paragraphs
(a) to (h) of paragraph 4. Mr. Candappa's complaint is that his concise
statement is not what is contemplated in section 80 (B) (d). He has referred
us to the changes brought about in 1970 in the law relating to election
petitions. The. purpose of these amendments was to enable a respondent to
know, immediately on a petition being filed, the particulars of the
allegations he has to meet. In the words of H. N. G. Fernando, C.J. the
changes in the law were "intended to secure that a respondent will know from
the petition itself what facts the petitioner proposes to prove in order to
avoid the

**97**

election, and will thus have a proper opportunity to prepare for the trial" \-
Wijewardena v. Senanayake at p. 100 (3). The Chief Justice went on to state
that "the petitioner must specify at the least the nature of the alleged
intimidation ; whether it consisted of actual violence, or of threats of
violence, or of some other kind of intimidation, and when and where such
intimidation is alleged to have occurred. A petitioner cannot be permitted
merely to specify a ground of general intimidation in an election petition
with the hope that he can substantiate it with evidence subsequently secured".
also at p. 100.

Mr. Candappa argued that particulars of the offences given in paragraph 4
should be given in full detail, so that the respondent would not be obliged to
make an investigation himself. By way of illustration he argued that in sub-
paragraph (a) the names of the occupants of the jeep and the names of the
persons who were robbed of cash and a gold chain should be given, so that he
could lead evidence, if possible, to establish that such persons were
elsewhere at the time of the alleged incident. And so in respect of each sub-
paragraph more details ought to have been given. He argued, however, that
there is a distinction between the "concise statement of material facts"
required to be given in respect of a charge of "general intimidation" and
"full particulars" required to be given in respect of a charge of a "corrupt
practice". He agreed that if we rejected his argument that paragraph 4 in all
its sub-paragraphs constituted not several but one ground of avoidance, and
not several but one charge, full particulars will not be required to be given.

It seems to me that there has been sufficient compliance by the petitioner in
setting out material facts in the concise statement. The nature of the alleged
intimidation, the dates and places at which they occurred and the effect of
such intimidation, have been specified in much detail. Obviously the
respondent cannot be taken by surprise at the trial as a result of such
details as the names of thugs not being disclosed. The proviso to section 80 B
makes it clear that nothing in that section requiring a concise statement
should be deemed or constructed to require evidence to be stated in the
petition. The election judge has therefore correctly overruled this objection.

Full particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges has to be
set forth in the petition, including as full a statement as possible of the
names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt

**98**

practice and the date and place of the commission of such practice. An
affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of such corrupt
practice has to accompany the petition - Section 80 B (d).

The petitioner has set forth the particulars of the corrupt practice of undue
influence committed by the 2nd and 3rd respondents, acting as agents or with
the knowledge and consent of the 1st respondent, in paragraphs 5 & 6 of the
petition. The election judge has held that the petitioner has complied with
this requirement. It seems to me that the judge is correct, because the
petitioner has set forth a statement containing the names of the parties (ie.
the 2nd and 3rd respondents), the places of the commission of the offences,
the dates and even the times at which the offences were alleged to have been
committed.

If the respondents required further particulars it was open to them to have
invoked the provisions of section 80 C (1) and sought an order from the Judge
directing the petition to be amplified in such manner, as may be necessary to
ensure a fair or effective trial of the petition. Section 80 C (2) requires
the Judge to try and conclude an election petition as expeditiously as
possible and to make every endeavour to conclude the trial within a period of
six months after the date of presentation of the petition. There does not
appear to me to be any provision for the dismissal of an election petition for
failure to furnish as full a statement as possible of the particulars a
petitioner is required to furnish in compliance with section 80 B (d). The
filing of interlocutory appeals from the orders of election Judges overruling
objections based on the insufficiency of particulars, would make it well nigh
impossible for any election judge to comply with the salutary provisions of
section 80 C (2).

**Non-joinder**

Section 80 A (1) provides that a petitioner shall join as respondents to his
election petition any other candidate or person against whom allegations of
any corrupt or illegal practice are made in his petition. The allegations of
corrupt practice have been made in paragraphs 5 & 6 against the 1 st, 2nd &
3rd respondents, and they have been made parties. Mr. Candappa"s contention is
that paragraph 4, although the ground of avoidance contained therein is
general intimidation, also contains allegations of the commission of the
corrupt practice of undue influence, by gangs of thugs as well as by
supporters of the 1 st respondent. In dealing with the question of the quantum
of security I

**99**

have taken the view that the inclusion of several acts of intimidation or.
violence or threats do not have the effect of converting that single ground of
avoidance into several charges. Therefore there is no charge of corrupt
practice alleged in paragraph 4 and the need to make the thugs- (if known) or
the supporters (if known) respondents did not arise. As regards paragraphs 5 &
6 and 2nd and 3rd respondents are alleged to have committed undue influence
with "a gang of thugs, unknown to the petitioner". It is thus difficult to see
how these unknown thugs could have been made parties. The election Judge was
therefore correct in overruling the objection re non joinder.

An objection was also taken before the election-Judge that the 2nd respondent
is a non existent or fictitious person. The learned election Judge ruled that
he could not make an order on that objection at this preliminary stage and
reserved it for decision at the conclusion of the trial after recording
evidence. Learned Counsel did not press that objection before us.

The affidavit accompanying the petition in paragraph 8 reads thus

'I affirm to the contents of paragraph 5 above (which corresponds to paragraph
4 of the petition) partly of my personal knowledge and partly on information
given to me. But with regard to the rest of the averments in this affidavit I
declare and affirm that they are of my personal knowledge'

An affidavit is required to accompany and support the petition only if the
petition alleges, the commission of a corrupt or illegal practice. No
affidavit is required in support where the petitioner alleges general
intimidation. As I have already held, paragraph 4 -of the petition contains
only one ground of avoidance, which is general intimidation. Therefore no
affidavit need accompany the petition supporting the allegation in paragraph 4
of the petition. The complaint that as the averment in support of the
allegation in paragraph 4 of the petition is not spoken to entirely of the
petitioner's personal knowledge there is no proper affidavit is therefore not
one that merits consideration. The allegations in paragraphs 5 & 6 of the
petition are supported by paragraphs 5 & 6 of the accompanying affidavit and
have been made of the petitioner's personal knowledge. The objection to the
affidavit has also been correctly overruled.

**100**

I would accordingly dismiss this appeal, with costs fixed at Rs. 2000 payable
by the 1st respondent-appellant to the petitioner-respondent.

**

ABDUL CADER, J.** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/20.html_  

