##  Ceylon Mercantile Union v. Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation - SLR - 401, Vol
1 of 1985 [1984] LKSC 20; (1985) 1 Sri LR 401 (6 August 1984)

**

401

CEYLON MERCANTILE UNION  
v.  
CEYLON FERTILIZER CORPORATION

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SAMARAKOON, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND WIMALARATNE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 10/83.  
S.C. SPL. (L/A) No. 129/82 - S.C. No. 123/77.  
L.T. No. 1/12804-TO 1/13305/75.  
JULY 16 AND 17, 1984.

_

    Contract - Contract of employment - Industrial Disputes Act, s. 48 - Definition of "employer" \- Factors creating a contract of service_.

The Ceylon Mercantile Union (appellant) made an application to the Labour
Tribunal on behalf of 502 of its members alleging that the Ceylon Fertilizer
Corporation (1st respondent) had unjustly terminated the services of the said
502 workers and asked for their reinstatement with back wages. or in the
alternative compensation and gratuity. The applicant Union named the
Hunupitiya Labour Co-operative Society as the 2nd respondent as it alleged
that wages were paid to the workmen by the it respondent through the 2nd
respondent. The crucial question was whether the Fertilizer Corporation (the
1st respondent was the employer of these workmen? The President of the Labour.
Tribunal held that the 2nd respondent had acted as, agent for the supply of
labour and that the workmen were employees of the 1st respondent corporation
and ordered their reinstatement together with 6 months' wages or in lieu one
year's wages. The Court of Appeal, on an appeal being preferred to it, held
that the respondent was not the employer of the workmen. The applicant Union
appealed to the Supreme Court.

**

Held** (Samarakoon, CJ dissenting).

Although there was a written contract between the 2nd respondent Society and
the 1st respondent Corporation for the supply of labour services in practice
the Society acted as a mere conduit for the transmission of the payment of
wages to. the workmen. This was the only nexus between the Society and the
workmen.

Not a single workman was a member of-the 2nd respondent Society. The workmen
had much greater contact and involvement with the 1st respondent Corporation
than with the 2nd. respondent Society. It is unlikely that any respectable
enterprise would have depended on casual labour for its essential work
involving such a large number of employees without having some permanent
arrangement. It was the first respondent who calculated and determined the
wages and advances of the. workmen, assigned the work and supervised and
controlled its execution. These factors are sufficient to-spell a contract of
service between the workmen and the 1st respondent. The test of control and
the test of integration the workmen being'- intrinsic to the working of the
Corporation, support this conclusion.

**402**

**

Cases referred to :

**_

(1) Carson Cumberbatch & Co. Ltd. v. Nandasena (1973) 77 NLR 73.

(2) Shaw Wallace & Hedges Ltd. v. Palmerston Tea Co Ltd. 1 Sriskantha's LR 14.

(3) Ready Mixed Concrete (South East) Ltd. v. Minister of Pensions and
National Insurance [1968] I- All ER 433, 499

(4) Short v. J. & W Henderson Ltd. (1945-1946) 62 T. LA 427, 429.

(5) Construction Industry Training Bard V Labour Force Ltd. [1970] 3 All E42_"

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal

_

Faiz Mustapaha with N. M. Saheed for applicant-respondent-appellant.

Mark Fernando for 1st respondent-appellant-respondent.

Cur. adv. vult

_

August 6, 1984

**

SAMARAKOON, C.J

**

The Ceylon Mercantile Union - (hereinafter referred to as appellant) made an
application to the Labour -applies Tribunal on behalf of 502 of its members
alleging that the Ceylon. Fertilizer Corporation (hereinafter referred to a&.
respondent) had unjustly terminated the services of the said 502 Workers and
asked for their reinstatement With back wages of in the alternative
compensation and gratuity. There respondent denied that it was the employer of
the workmen. The President, Labour Tribunal ordered their reinstatement
together with 6 months wages to each workman or in lieu thereof one year's
wages to each workman. The respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal. That
Court upheld the contention of the respondent that it was not the employer of
the workmen and therefore . allowed the- appeal. The appellant has appealed to
this Court on being granted, Special Leave to appeal by this Court.

The contention of the respondent is that it is not an "employer" as defined by
section 48 of the Industrial Disputes Act (Cap. 131). That definitions as
follows :

''employer'' means any person who employes or on whose behalf arty other
Person employs any workman and includes'-a' body' employers (whether such body
is a firm, company, corporation or trade union) and any 06 'who on behalf of
any other person ers employs workman.

**403**

This deals with three types of persons.:-

(i) any persons who` employs a workman,

(ii) any person on whose behalf any other person employs any workman, and

(iii) any person who on behalf of any other person employs any workman.

This definition read with the definition of "workman" in the same section
postulates a contract. It is now settled law that an applicant must establish
a contract of service with the employer. Carson Cumberbatch & Co., Ltd. v.
Nandasena (1) and Shaw Wallace & Hedges td., v. Palmerston Tea Co Ltd. (2)
Counsel for the appellant based his case entirely on the first limb set out
above. What is a contract of service ?Various tests have been formulated and
applied to discover a contract- of service. In Ready Mixed Concrete (South
East) Ltd. v. Minister of Pensions and National Insurance (3) McKenna, J,:
stated that- a contract of, service exists -if. the following conditions are
fulfilled:-

(i) The servant agrees that in consideration of a wage or other remuneration
he will provide his. own work and skill in the performance of some service for
his master.

(ii) he agrees expressly or impliedly that in the performance of that service
he will 'be subject to the other's control in a sufficient degree to make the
other the master.

(iii) The other provisions of-the contract are consistent with its being a
contract of service."

Lord Tankerton who delivered the -judgment -judgment of the House of Lords in
Short v. J. & W. Henderson Ltd (4) recapitulated the four indicia of a
contract of service as follows

(a) The master's power of selection of his servant

(b) The payment of wages or other remuneration.

(c) The master's right to control the method of doing the work.

(d) The master's right of suspension' or dismissal.

**404**

These are by no means conclusive:' Condition (iii) set out by McKenna, J.
indicates that they are not even definitive. Other factors not named can
affect the issue and it is well to keep in mind that in-the vast field of
industrial relations such factors can vary from industry to industry and be of
such diversity that it is not possible to make the list of conditions
exhaustive. In-this context. Justice Rodrigo's quotation from the judgment of
Fisher, J. (who in turn quoted P. S. Atiyah, Vicarious Liability in the Law of
Torts 1967, p. 38) bears repetition :

"In my judgment, it is. really not possible; in Mr. Atiyah's words to lay down

". . . a number of conditions which are both necessary to; . and sufficient
:for, the existence of ... (a contract, of service). The most that `can
profitably be done is to examine all the' possible factors which have been
referred to in these cases as bearing on the nature of the relationship
between the parties concerned. Clearly not all. of these factors will be
relevant in all cases, or have the same weight in all cases. Equally clearly
no magic formula can be propounded for determining which factors should, in
any given case, be treated as the determining ones. The plain fact is that in
a large number of cases the court can only perform a balancing operation,
weighing up the factors which point in one direction and balancing them
against those pointing in t he opposite direction. In the nature of things it
is not to be expected that this operation can be performed with scientific
accuracy.' "

I now turn to the facts of this case. The Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation
(respondent) came into existence in the year 1964. Its main function has been
to import raw materials, make the appropriate mixture of fertilizer, bag such
mixture and sell them to the consumers in various parts of the island. At the
commencement it produced three to four thousand tons 'of fertilizer. In the
year 1975 its output had reached fifty thousand tons. It then operated from
warehouses at Hunupitiya, Meethotamulla and Ja-Ela. Conveyors and :heavy
machinery had been installed in 1972 for mixing, weighing and bagging. It also
possessed a fleet of vehicles for transporting raw materials and distributing
fertilizer to consumers throughout the island. It had a permanent staff

**405**

as well as casual labour. The former consisted of the clerical staff, skilled
workers and a few unskilled workers. The latter category consisted of casual
labour: They were of two kinds check roll labour and those paid on a piece
rate basis. The 502 persons on `whose behalf the claims are made comprised
casual labour, some on the check roll and some paid at the piece rate.

The mode of engaging casual labour was on a contract basis. They are commonly
known as contract labour They were workers supplied by labour contractors.
From 1967 to 1969 one Somapala was the labour contractor and from 1970 to 1972
one Silva was the labour contractor. In August 1972 the second respondent, the
Hunupitiya Labour Co-operative Society Ltd. (hereinafter called the Society)
obtained the contract to supply labour. The Society entered into a written
agreement with the appellant dated 21st August, 1972, (agreement marked R 6)
for the supply of labour for 22.8.1972 to 31st December 1973. The President,
Labour Tribunal has ignored this document in his order perhaps because he was
of the view that this was a subterfuge by the appellant who was thereby
''guilty of the exercise of an unfair labour practice-'of the worst order".
Suffice it to state that this is an unwarranted' and unjustified stricture' on
the appellant and its business methods. Labour contracts have been known in
the agricultural field for decades. The Kangany of the estate.. supplied the'
labour in return for a payment then known as "pence money. This practice has
ceased. Labour contracts were well, known in, stevedoring in the ports of Sri
Lanka. This practice still persists in some of the minor ports Labour
contracts are still prevalent in the Industrial field and it is that practice
that the appellant has adopted. propose to start with an examination of the
agreement R 6 as this is the genesis of the transaction.

By a notice dated 1st November, 1971, the appellant called for tenders for the
supply of General Labour Services at fertilizer loading and unloading points
at Meetotamulla Hunupitiya for a period of one year commencing 1st January,
1972, to 31st December, 1972. The prospective tenderer was informed that he
must be ready to supply sufficient labour at short notice at all points for a
total daily tonnage 1000-1500 tons, but during certain days there may be no
handling at all. The Society tendered stipulating their rates. The
negotiations seem to have extended beyond 1st January, 1972. By letter dated
1-5.7.72

**406**

(R 3) the Society raised its rates by 10 cents. By letter dated 2.8.7 2 (R 4)
the Society accepted the tender and the agreement R 6 was signed by both
parties. It recited that the contractor was an independent. contractor and
that the appellant vv as in no way bound to provide regular work or any work
whatsoever The :contractor undertook to supply labour-at short notice (2
hours' notice). and be liable in damages if the appellant was compelled on
account of, the contractor's failure to supply labour, to engage other labour
at higher rates. The schedule-to the agreement sets out the rates. of.
payments agreed upon payable :to. The contractor. They were rates for loading
and unloading and piece rates:' The "rate for a casual labourer was Rs.6 per
eight-hour shift. These were not the rates paid by the contractor to the
labourers. They were different-and lower in rate, the difference being the
Society's profit. In terms of the -agreement R.6 the contractor was obliged to
supply toy the appellant within one week of the commencement, of, work a ,
list of the rates paid by,, him to the labourers. After the contract :period
expired the contract was not renewed in writing but it is accepted that, the
period was extended by mutual agreement and these terms and conditions mutatis
mutandis were operative thereafter at the dates relevant to this dispute.' On
the 22nd April 1975 the appellant 'stopped the work of one 'of the checkroll
labourers and these 502 labourers then went on strike.` They chose to report
for work again on 4th June, 1975 but the appellant refused to give them work.
The Union (respondent) claims that the appellant thereby unjustly terminated
their services.

I will now consider whether the necessary conditions have been satisfied to
establish a contract of service. The first condition is the payment of a wage
agreed to between employer and worker. There is no such agreement: On the
other hand the agreement by the appellant is to pay the Society the scheduled
rate. The Society pays the labour a lower rate keeping a rake off for' itself.
This is in pursuance of an agreement between the Society and the labourer.
Furthermore this contractor agreed not only to pay a stipulated sum to the
welfare fund in respect "of each employee of 'the'! Contractor" but also to
comply With all laws, rules and regulations relating to employment of labour
The first condition has not been satisfied

**407**

Counsel for the appellant made much of the element of control which is the
second condition: "Control by itself is not always conclusive" (Atiyah ibid p.
38). There is no doubt that the respondent assigned the work to the labourers
and stipulated the proportions for mixing and aIso indicated the mode of
distribution. This had necessarily to be done if its business was to be
properly conducted. Apart from this the respondent could' do nothing else.
Disciplinary action was in the hands of 'the Society. When a labourer was
inefficient the Society was asked not to send the particular labourer for
work. In case of misconduct the Society was asked to take action: The letter R
16 to the Society is revealing. It states that some labourers had been
detected demanding gratification in respect of loading of lorries it' states
"several complaints have been received of not only demanding of such
gratification but threats made to owners of lorries so (sic) do not agree to
make such gratifications. I have brought this to your notice by my letter of
9.4.1974 and on several other occasions. But I regret to state that this
matter has not been rectified by the Corporation (sic). I would therefore
request that steps betaken-to safeguard the good name, of the Corporation by
seeing that the service to-the clients of the Corporation be carried. out
without disruption." Clearly disciplinary control was not in the hands of the
respondent. It could not take action necessary to safeguard its own
reputation. It had to look to the Society for such action. When labourers
refused to work "half way and 'gone back" it was the Society that was
surcharged the loss incurred by way of warehouse charges (R 10). Allotment of
labour for various ships was done by the Society and not the respondent (R
11). The Society appointed its own' Supervisors who kept a record of the
labour supplied. It was the Society that chose the labourers to be sent for
work. Overall control especially disciplinary, control was in the Society and
not the respondent.

There are other factors which militate against a finding that this was a
contract of service with the respondents. A fund for-the welfare of the
labourers was maintained by the Society. This was a term of the contract and
money for this purpose was paid by the respondent to the Society is respect of
each labourer. All negotiations on behalf of the labour were conducted, and
all claims for enhancement of rates were made, by the Society with the
respondent. Two labourers were put on the check roll by the. respondent's
Manager but they were accounted in the check roll as the Society's labourers.
The Society

**408**

was so informed and their rates were paid direct to the Society in terms of
the agreement. Furthermore there is no guarantee of employment or continuity
of work.

In view of the above l am of the opinion that there was no contract of service
with the respondent. Rodrigo, J. has cited the case of Construction Industry
Training Board y. Labour Force Ltd. (5). That case decided that there was no
contract of service between the worker and the Construction Industry Training
Board. Cooke, J. added - "I think` that there is much to be said for the view
that, where A contracts with B to render services exclusively to C, the
contract is not a contract for services, but a contract sui generis, a
different type of contract from either of the familiar two." (p.. 225).

We are not considering such a situation in this case. Two other matters need
comment. The President, Labour Tribunal expressed the view that these 502
labourers were "intrinsic to the working"' of the Corporation and therefore an
"integral part of the organisation''. I can only repeat the comment of
McKenna, J. in reference to the dictum of Denning, L. J. who said that the
test of being a servant "depends-on whether. the person is part and parcel of
the organisation. His comment was as follows :

"This raises more questions than l know how to answer. What is meant by being
part and parcel of an organisation'? Are all persons who answer this
description servants ? If only some are servants what distinguishes them from
the others if it is not their submission to orders ? Though I cannot answer
these questions I can at least invoke the dictum to support my opinion that
control is not everything.

The President, Labour Tribunal also observed that the only conclusion he can
come to is that the Society acted more as an agent for the supply of labour
and not as an- independent contractor It is not question of pore or less. It
is a question as to whether it was or was not. An agent merely brings the two
together and leaves all the

**409**

other terms of the contract to the two - the labourer and the would be
employer. He collects h agency commission and-that is ail. His part of the
work ends there The position in this case is just the contrary. The Society
far from being passive, actively engaged in working and putting into practice
the terms of its contract R 6. I am therefore unable to agree that the Society
was merely an agent.

I dismiss the appeal with costs.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.

**

The applicant union made this application to the Labour Tribunal on behalf of
502 of its members, alleging that the 1st respondent, the Fertilizer
Corporation their employer, had unjustly terminated the services of these
workmen. It asked for their reinstatement with back wages or in the
alternative compensation and the payment of a gratuity. The applicant had
named the Hunupitiya Labour Co-operative Society as the 2nd respondent, as it
alleged that wages were paid to the workmen by the 1st respondent through the
2nd respondent.

The 1st respondent-corporation in its answer stated that the 2nd respondent
Co-operative Society had entered into a contract with the 1st respondent
whereby the 2nd respondent became a contractor to supply labour services to
the 1st respondent. The members of the applicant-union, though they did work
for the 1st respondent under the above-mentioned contract were however never
employees of the 1st respondent. They were employed by the 2nd respondent. The
2nd respondent Co-operative Society neither filled answer nor took part in the
proceedings.

The crucial question in this case is. Was the Fertilizer Corporation, the 1st
respondent, the employer of these workmen ? The President of the Labour
Tribunal, after a full inquiry in a carefully considered order, stated that
the only conclusion he could come to was that the 2nd respondent. Had acted as
an agent for the supply of labour Applying the generally accepted criteria, he
concluded that the evidence clearly pointed to. The existence of an employer-
employee relationship between the workmen and the 1st respondent.

**410**

In appeal the Court of Appeal reversed the findings of the Labour Tribunal.
The Court of Appeal said that the President; when he applied the generally
accepted criteria for determining the relationship between employer and
employee, had not adequately considered the oral and documentary evidence,
which indicated a contrary state of affairs. The Court of Appeal added that
the control or supervision test applied by the President was not relevant in
this case; as none of the workers had been interviewed nor a letter of
appointment given to them by the 1 st respondent. Their names were also not
found in the books relating to the permanent staff, of the 1st respondent. Mr.
Mustapha for the appellant has canvassed these views before us.

The Judgment of the Court of Appeal had discussed at length both the oral and
documentary evidence relating to the contract R6 between the 1 st respondent
and the 2nd respondent. "for the supply of labour services". Undoubtedly this
contract embodies features consistent with a contract to supply labour
services. But evidence had been adduced before the President, without
objection, showing that in actual practice the 1 st respondent had dealt with
these workmen in a way inconsistent with and at variance with the tenor of
this agreement. The complaint against the 1st respondent is that it had.
tried, as far as it was possible, to distance itself from its employees by
formulating a contract in-this form to evade its due responsibilities and
liabilities, under the labour laws of the country.

While due regard should be given to R 6, its terms and conditions cannot be.
conclusive of this matter. For, in the case before us, the fact in issue is
not so much the interpretation of R6 or the relationship between the
Fertilizer Corporation and the Labour Co-operative Society, which no doubt are
relevant to our inquiry, but primarily the relationship of the members of the
applicant Union to the' Corporation. We are here called upon to examine not a
bilateral agreement but a tripartite situation.

Now these workmen-using the word in a neutral sense-were not signatories to
R6, nor was. any of them a, member of the Labour Co-operative Society. They
are therefore entitled to claim that they be considered as an independent
third party in this matter. The evidence shows that their only nexus with the
Labour Co-operative Society was that 'the payments due to the them from the
Fertilizer Corporation were paid to them through the Labour Co-operative
Society Apart

**411**

from that, they do not appear to have any other connection With the Labour Co-
operative Society. The evidence :also' shows that the Labour Co-operative
Society has not claimed them as its workers but had sought to disown them at
every stage. Two of the workmen have stated that, when, they. had 'approached
the Labour Co-operative Society, for advances and increase in salary, the Co-
operative Society had denied responsibility for them and directed them to the
Fertilizer Corporation for relief. 'The 2nd respondent on the other hand;
while exercising a real control and supervision over these workmen; 'had taken
pains to see that its acts in relation on them- were given the appearance; of
being in conformity to R 6. The, Labour Co-operative Society, the. 2nd
respondent, has also declined to participate in these proceedings and has
chosen not to have its position ``clarified or explained either in relation to
the workers or the Fertilizer Corporation'.

Let us now turn to the relationship of the workers with the Fertilizer
Corporation., The President, Labour Tribunal, found as a fact that
notwithstanding the contract (R6), most of the workers had been working for
the 1st respondent prior to the formation of the Labour Co-operative' Society,
the 2nd Respondent, and since then there have been-even some instances of
direct recruitment of some workmen by the 1st respondent. Such recruits have
not even been members of. the 2nd respondent at that time, but; after
recruitment the 1st respondent would inform the 2nd respondent of such,
recruitment. The President also found that the 1 st respondent had exercised
the right of determination of wages, the assignment of work, the exercise of
supervision and control in the execution of work, disciplinary control, and
the payment of advances and compensation. Even the final termination of their
services, it is alleged, was by the 1st respondent and the 2nd respondent had
no hand in the matter.

Clearly the manner in which the 1st respondent has dealt with the workmen is
more in line, as the President says, with, the Labour Co-operative Society
being in the nature of a mere agent to supply labour, while the 1st respondent
itself became the employer of such labour: Two other factors reinforce this
view, namely, that not a single workman- concerned in this case' is a' member
of this Labour Co-operative Society and the only nexus between these workmen
and the Labour Co-operative Society was the making of payments by the 1st
respondent to the" workmen through the Labour Co-operative

**412**

Society. It would appear that these workmen ; had much greater contact and
involvement with the 1st respondent 'than with the 2nd respondent.

The other factor is that these 'workmen were intrinsic to the functioning of
the Corporation and would have normally constituted its work force. When. this
Corporation began work in :1964 its turn over had been about -3 - 4 tons of
fertilizer. From about the beginning of 1970 its work expanded rapidly and in
1975 it was handling about 50,000 tons of 'fertilizer. Its main work involved
loading, unloading, mixing, bagging, and the distribution of the fertilizer:
This was hard physical work involving unskilled labour. The permanent staff
consisted of only 161 employees, of whom about 100 consisted of the drivers,
welders, turners, motor-mechanics, electricians etc., and there remained only,
a handful' of permanent employees to do the large amount of unskilled physical
`labour. More than 300 labourers are required daily for such work. It is
therefore unlikely that any respectable industrial enterprise would normally
have depended on casual labour for; any -appreciable period of time for this
type of essential work involving such a large number' of employees without
having some permanent arrangement.

Mr. Mark Fernando's main submission was that the President had wrongly applied
the 'control test, because such a test should not' be applied. unless there is
a contract in existence between the parties. He relied on the judgment of
Tennakoon, J., in Carson Cumberbatch & Co., Ltd. v. Nandasena (supra). If Mr.
Fernando means that the control test should only be applied where a prior
contractual relationship of employer and employee between the parties is
already in, existence, then this would be to beg the, question. Such an
argument; apart from being tautologous, also ignores the implications
contained in. the definition of. the word workman' which refers to a contract
"in any capacity expressed or implied, oral or in writing leaving it open to
imply a contract from- the circumstances of a, case need for an, antecedent
agreement therefore would have the effect-of nullifying this definition.

**413**

The case of Carson Cumberbatch & Co., L td. v. Nandasena (supra), relied on by
counsel, dealt with an entirely different situation. In that case the
applicant who was the Manager of a Farm had been appointed to that post by a
letter-signed jointly by a principal and its agent. The applicant, while
admitting that principal was his employer sought to make the agent also liable
as employ he sought to give an artificial and extended meaning to the word
'employee' so` as to include the agent. It is in this context that Tennakoon,
J sad Have g regard to the factual context in which the question of who is or
are the employers of the 2nd respondent arises in this case, it must be noted
that the definition of the word employer contains no reference to control or
supervision or management exercised by one person over another, so that it
certainly does not have the effect of including cases in which a person not
the contractual employer, may by reason of the control, supervision or
management exercised over a `workman give only the appearance of being the
employer."

Even if we were to assume that Mr. Fernando's argument is correct on this
point namely the need for a. prior contractual relationship between the
parties, his submission is not supported by the findings of both the Labour
Tribunal and the Court of Appeal which have admitted the existence. of a
contractual relationship between the workmen and the 2nd respondent.. On this
matter the Court of Appeal said .. the facts in the present case do not point
to a contract of service between the appellant and the workmen. The kind of
arrangement referred to under which these workmen had worked for the
Corporation appears to me to be a contract suite hen's vise a vis the
Corporation. As for the, arrangement under which the . workmen worked for the
Society, the Society apart from paying the workmen when sent for work appears
to have had no control over the work done by them in the Corporation
warehouses. The evidence is not satisfactory as to the terms of any contract
they had

**414**

with the Society. Though in the Agreement there is a reference to the workmen
as, servants of the Society; the `Agreement is one between the, Society and
the Corporation and the workmen were not parties to the Agreement. They were
not even members of the Society. All that is: clear is that the workmen had
some kind of arrangement with the Society to do work for a third party, the
Corporation. It is not a question of, the Society lending the services of its
employees to the .Corporation, because the workmen, according to the evidence,
had not rendered their services to the Society. Since the sot issue for
determination is whether the appellant is the employer of these workmen we
need not pronounce on the character of the relationship of the workmen
involved with the Society in all the circumstances of the case."

This passage is in line with Cooke, J' s analysis of the facts in 'the
Construction industry Training Board d v. Labour Force Ltd. (supra) referred
to- in the judgment. That -case also dealt with a tripartite situation In'"
that case the respondents were plying construction industry. When building
contractors require labour, the respondents agreed with the contractors to
supply workmen at certain rates payable ,-by, the. contractors to the
respondents. The workmen were- paid by the respondents on the basis of
information relating to]' the times worked provided by "the` contractors, but
the respondents had no cont role over the work called out by the workmen for
the contractors and the contractors had the right to terminate' any workmen's
engagement. On being allotted to particular contractors, the workmen received
from the respondents an Information Card' containing grins and conditions of
employment, on the back of which was a declaration made by the workmen, which
y certify that A am engaged by' (the respondents) on a responsible for my
employees' P.A.Y.E., Income Tax HAW, National Insurance Contributions and
Holiday with Pay payments or stamps.

**415**

The court held that the respondents did not act as at employment agency
because the worker had a written agreement with the respondents to work for
them and to be paid for it The Court said it is plain that when the workman
agreed to work on a particular site at a particular rate of pay, he was
agreeing so to, do with the respondents as principals. That in my judgment is
sufficient to dispose of the view that the respondents were merely acting 'for
the workman as an employment agency:' They were contracting with the workmen
as principals.'"

The court also held that the workman was paid by the respondents at the rate
agreed between him and them, and the profits of the respondents were derived
from the difference between the sums they paid to the workman and the sums
which they received from the contractor.

In the case before us the position is materially different. The workman had
the most tenuous contact with the 2nd respondent and in truth and in fact it
was the 1st respondent who calculated- and determined the wages and advances
to the workmen and not the 2nd respondent which acted as a mere conduit for
the transmission of the payment. The 2nd respondent, as the President says,
had merely undertaken to supply labour and not to perform any specific
services. It is in this context that the President compared the work of the
Labour Co-operative Society to the old Kangany system and held that the 2nd
respondent functioned only, as an agent for the supply of labour. Further, in
the Labour Force Case, it was specifically agreed between the parties that the
workman was engaged by the-Labour Force. There was a certificate signed by the
workman to the effect that he was engaged by the Labour Force on a Sub-
Contract Basis. That was a most significant item of evidence and we have
nothing like hat in the present case. In the light of these facts, the limited
supervision that was enjoyed by the contractor in that case was found
insufficient to spell a contract of service between the workmen and the
contractor. But in the case before us the governing factors are quite
different:

**416**

In that case the Court faced the situation of being confronted with :the
express terms of contract. That did not preclude the Court from inquiring into
the true nature of the- contract This is how the Court approached the matter:

''The tribunal was asked, to consider the nature of the contracts entered into
by a large and indeterminate group of workmen in the industry. It Was entitled
as J seems to me, to use its own knowledge of, the undoubted fact that. many
of the workmen in the industry are self-employed. The tribunal referred to the
declaration signed by the workman in which he purports to certify that he is
employed on a sub-contract basis. Quite rightly, in my judgment, the tribunal
held that this did not preclude it from enquiring into the true nature of the
contractual relationship.,"

Later the Court Said :

"In my view, the fact that the parties have in express terms sought to make a
contract of a particular kind, while it does not bind the courts to hold that
they have succeeded, is a factor which can be considered in determining the
true nature of the contract:.

Both for the above reasons and in view of the existence of contractual
relations of the workmen with both the 1st respondent and the 2nd respondent,
I think the President was right in examining all possible factors, including
the control test as bearing on the relationship between the parties.

The Court of Appeal has examined the material and has sought to come to its
own independent conclusion which is at variance with the findings of the
President. The Court of Appeal give the following justification for this
exercise.

"The generally accepted criteria for determining the relationship of employer
and workman as mentioned in the passage referred to earlier in the order of
the President has not been balanced against oral evidence indicating the
contrary or against the documentary evidence referred to or considered in
their totality notwithstanding a bare statement in the order that the totality
of evidence was being considered.

**417**

The balancing operation contemplated by the Court of Appeal is the balancing
of all the possible factors that may have a bearing in resolving the issue of
employment. The Court of Appeal in the above passage was no doubt having in
mind the following expert from Fisher, J's judgement in the Labour Force Case
which it quoted with approval :

"In my judgement, it is really not possible, in Mr. Atiyah's words to lay down
:

‘............................a number of conditions which are both necessary
to, and sufficient for the existence of ...............(a contract of
service). The most that can profitably be done is to examine all the possible
factors which have been referred to in these cases as bearing on the nature of
the 'relationship between the parties concerned. Clearly not: all of these
factors will be -relevant" in all cases, or have the same weight in all cases.
Equally clearly no magic formula can be propounded for determining which
factors should, in any given case; be treated as the determining ones. The
plain fact is that in a large number of cases the Court can only perform a
balancing operation; weighing up the factors which point in one direction and
balancing them against those pointing in the opposite direction. In the nature
of things it is not to be expected that this operation can be performed with
scientific accuracy.

There is nothing in the order of the President to show that he has not
considered all the relevant factors -pro and con,' nor in any way failed to
evaluate the documentary evidence. On the other hand, what the Court of Appeal
has done is to give undue stress to the provisions of the bilateral agreement
R6 to which these' workmen ere not parties while ignoring the actual conduct
of the 1st respondent in its relations with the workmen.

I am unable to say that the President has been, unreasonable either in` the
approach he had adopted or in regard to his findings on what are essentially
questions of fact. The two other matters the question of termination and the
computation of, compensation \- mentioned by Mr. Fernando had not been in
issue between the parties at any stage until it was mentioned before us. We do
not think that they could be raised at this stage.

**418**

In the result, I would allow this appeal with Costs both here and in the Court
of Appeal and restore the order. of -the President,. labour Tribunal: The
-workmen could be entitled, to back wages until- the date of reinstatement .or
!in the alternative until the date of payment of compensation.

**WIMALARATNE** , **J.**

I have had the benefit of reading the judgments prepared by the Chief Justice
and by Wanasundera, J., where the facts are set out.

Wanasundera, J. after discussing the manner in which the workmen have been
dealt with by the Fertilizer Corporation concludes that the function. of the,
Hunupitiya Labour Society was to act; as mere agents to supply, labour to the
Corporation, whilst the Corporation became the employer of the labour so
supplied.

The Chief Justice, is unable Jo agree that the-Society was merely an agent for
the reason that the Society was actively enagaged in working and putting into
practice the terms of its contract R6 with the Corporation. Implicit in the
judgment of the Chief Justice is the conclusion that the Society and not the
Corporation is the employer of these workmen.

The instant case is similar to a situation where a contractor regularly brings
labour to the employer's workplace to perform work in the regular course of
the business of the employer, and the employer directs how the work is to be
performed and even calls upon the contractor not to employ particular persons
from among the workforce. In that situation my view is that there is no
contract of employment between the contractor and the workmen. This situation
is different to one where a person enters into a contract with another to
construct a building and that other (the contractor) employs labour for the
purpose. In that case it may not be difficult to establish the employer-
employee relationship between the contractor and the workmen, since the
employment of the workmen is on behalf of the contractor, and not on behalf of
the person with whom the contractor and contracted to build.

**419**

On the question as to whether a contract of service exists between the
Corporation and the workmen, the chief Justice takes the view that, the
evidence hows that there is no. such contract; mainly because-(a) q f; the
absence of any agreement regarding the payment of wages between the
Corporation and the workmen whilst there is on the other hand, an agreement
between the Corporation and the Society as embodied in document R6 ; and (b)
the overall control, especially disciplinary control, was not in the hands of
the Corporation, but in the hands of the Society.

Wanasundera, J. takes the view that on the facts of this case the relationship
of employer and employee between the Corporation and the workmen has been
established not only by an application of the test of "control", but also by
the test of "integration", that is that the workmen were intrinsic to the
working of the Corporation.

I am in agreement with the views of Wanasundera, J. The payment of wages by
the Society was only, a physical act of handing over the wages in the capacity
of agent of the Corporation. One . has to remember that it was the
Corporation, and not the Society that determined the wages of each category of
workers - check roll as well as piece-rate workers. As regards control of
work, even the Chief Justice has no doubt that it was the Corporation that
assigned the work, stipulated the proportions of mixing and indicated the mode
of distribution. What appears to have influenced the Chief Justice is that
disciplinary control was in the hands of the Society. There is, however a
strong finding of fact by the President that "it is absolutely clear that the
supervision and control of the workmen were exercised not by the 2nd
respondent (the Society) but by the 1st respondent (the Corporation)." I
cannot see sufficient reason to disturb that finding of fact.

The Court of Appeal has erred, in my view, on two other matters. They are :

(a) that too much reliance has been placed on the agreement R6, which was an
agreement between the Corporation and the Society, to which the workmen were
not parties. It is doubtful whether they were even aware of the existence of
R6. The existence of such an agreement cannot act to their detriment if the
facts establish a relationship of employer and employee between the
Corporation and themselves.

**420**

(b) the fact that "none of the workmen had been interviewed prior to
appointment, nor was a letter of appointment given to them or the name of any
person entered- in the Corporation books -permanent staff''. A common law
contract of maintained for the service can to be implied even without any or
111 of these circumstances.

For these reasons I agree to the order proposed by

**

WANASUNDERA, J. -** I agree.

****

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/20.html_  

