##  Ceylon Bank Employees Union v. State Mortgage Investment Bank - SLR - 403,
Vol 1 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 20; (1983) 1 Sri LR 403 (29 August 1983)

# 403

**CEYLON BANK EMPLOYEES' UNION**

**v.**

**STATE MORTGAGE INVESTMENT BANK**

  
SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C.J., WANASUDERA, J.,

AND SOZA, J.

S.C. APPEAL No. 32/82.

C.A. APPEALS NOS. 315/80 TO 380/80.

L.T. NO. 1/5812/78 AND OTHERS.

JULY 19TH AND 20TH, 1983.

  
_Unjustifiable Termination of Services Whether the Services provided by the
State Mortgage Investment Bank constituted essential services under section
2(9) and (10) 1 Services Order NO ‑10 Of 1972 ‑ Definition of the Essential of
the rule "ejusdem generis" in construing "any other Bank"‑ Regulations 2(1)9
3(2) and 38(1) of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and powers)
Regulation No. 20/5 of 15.8.72 declared under section 5 of the Public Security
Ordinance._



A Number of employees of the state mortgage Investment Bank represented by the
Ceylon Bank employees' Union (Appellant), claimed that their Employees' Union
(Appellant), Claimed that their employment had been unjustifiably terminated
by the Bank (Respondent) and therefore they had asked for gratuity and
compensation respectively. The Bank pleaded that these employees were deemed
to have vacated their employment in. terms of Regulation 38(1)(a) of the
Regulation No.8 of 1972\. the Bank also claimed inter alia to be a
"corporation" within the meaning of Essential‑Services Regulation

# 404

  
2(9) and therefore exempt from liability‑ Thou the President, Labour Tribunal
rejected th submission the court of Appeal has held that t State Mortgage Bank
is a "Bank" within the meaning of the expression 'any other bank' engaged in
transaction of commercial or financial business paragraph 2(10) of the same
order.



The two points for decision are:‑



(1) Whether the Essential Services Order 1972, bad in law.



(2) Whether the services provided by the state Mortgage Bank constituted an
Essential Service mortgage Bank terms of the Essential Services order, 1972.  
  
Held -

  
That the State Mortgage Bank is not a "Bank" within the meaning of the words
"any other Bank" in  regulation 2(l0), and in view of this finding it is not
necessary to consider the legal  validity of the regulations.



**Cases referred to ‑**

  
_(1) United Towns Electric Co. Ltd. v. Attorney General of Newfounland(1939) 1
All E.R. 423, 428.  
 _

_(2) S. Magnihild   (owners) v. McIntyre Brothers and Company (1920) 2 K.B.
321\.  
 _

_(3) R. V. Edmonton (1859) 28 L.J. MC 213, 218.  
 _

_(4) United Dominions Trust v. Kirkwood (1966 All E.R . 968.  
 _

_Appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
 _

_H.L. de Silva, Senior Attorney ‑at‑law with Gomis Dayasiri and P. Samararatne
for Applicant . Respondent-Appellant. _

_  _

_Mark Fernando with M.A.Bastians for Employer Appellant ‑ Respondent._

# 405

  
August 29,1983. **  
  
SAMARAKOON, C.J.**



This appeal arises out of a dispute between the State Mortgage Bank
(Respondent) and its em­ployees represented by the Ceylon Bank Employees Union
(Appellant). The dispute was first adjudi­cated upon by the President, Labour
Tribunal (1) who made an award in favour of the employees. The Bank appealed
against it to the Court of Appeal and Tambiah J. allowed the appeal and set
aside the order of the Labour Tribunal. Hence this appeal.



The facts relevant to the dispute are these. The Union was at all relevant
times a registered Trade Union. In the year 1972 it had about 7100 members and
a number of Branch Unions which were represented on the governing body of the
Parent Union. The State Mortgage Bank Branch was one of these Branches and it
had 71 members. From about August 1971 the Union made several demands on
be­half of its members which related to their emolu­ments and conditions of
work. The State Mortgage Bank was also presented a set of demands. A joint
negotiating Committee of Banks was set up by the then Minister of Finance to
negotiate on these demands. The State Mortgage Bank rejected the demands
of‑its own employees and did; not partici­pate in these negotiations on the
plea that it was not a profit making concern like the other Commer­cial Banks
which were participating in‑the negotia­tions. The negotiations failed and the
Union gave notice of strike action. The strike continued for a period of 108
days commencing 31‑8‑72 and ending on 17‑12‑72.



This strike was staged during a period of emergency declared by the President
of the Republic under the provisions of the Public Security Ordi­nance
(Cap.40). Acting under the provisions‑ of

#  406



section 5 of that Ordinance the President, made,  on 11 15‑8‑72, a series of
regulations captioned the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers)
Regulations No.8 of 1972. They were published in the Government Gazette
(Extraordinary) No.20/5 of 15‑8‑72\. The two that are relevant for the
purposes of this case read as follows:‑



Regulation 2(1) ‑  


" Essential Services' means any service which is declared by order of the
President  to be of public utility or to be essential for the public safety or
to the life of the community, and includes any Department of Government or
branch thereof which is so declared to be such a service."



Regulation 38(1) -  


"Where any service is declared by order mad, by the President, under
regulation 9 to be essential service, any person who, on or after August 15,
1972, was engaged or employed, any work in connection with that service, fails
or refuses, after the lapse of one day from the date of such order, to attend
at his place of work or employment or such other place as may from time to
time be designated  by his employer or a person acting under t. authority of
his employer, or who fails or refuses, after the lapse of one day from the
date of such order, to perform such work as he may be directed, by his
employer or a person acting under the authority of his employer perform, he
shall, notwithstanding that he failed or refused to so attend or to so in
furtherance of a strike ‑  
  
(a) be deemed for all purposes to have forthwith terminated or vacated his
employment  notwithstanding anything to the contrary any other law or the
terms or conditions of



**407**



any contract governing his employment; and



(b) in addition, be guilty of an offence."



At the same time he made the Essential Services. Order of 1972 which was
published in the same Gazette. Among the several services declared essential
two concerned corporations and Banks and read thus ‑



2 (9) -  "The services provided by any Government Corporation or branch
thereof."



2 (10) - "The services provided by the Central Bank of Ceylon and any other
Bank engaged in the transac­tion of commercial or financial business."



"Government Corporation" was defined by Regulation 3(ii) to mean a corporation
the capital of which is wholly or partly subscribed by the Government.



On 18‑12‑72 the employees of the Banks numbering 71 persons reported for duty
but the Respondent Bank refused them entry into the premises. Their entry was
barred by two policemen who guarded the entran­ce to the Bank. The Union then
filed application in the Labour Tribunal on behalf of these 71 employ­ees;
five of which were later withdrawn. The Union claimed that the employment of
its members (save four who had in the meantime reached retiring age) had been
unjustifiably terminated. Subsequently by negotiation with the Government a
majority of these employees were engaged by the Bank of Ceylon while a few
secured employment in the public sector. Those employed by the Bank of Ceylon
were placed at the same point of salary they were paid by the Res­pondent Bank
at the time of termination of service, but their past services were not
recognised in their new employment. In respect of these employees the Union
asked for gratuity and compensation. The

# 408



Bank denied that it terminated the employment of these employees and pleaded
that the employees were deemed to have vacated their employment in terms of
Regulation 38(l)(a) of the Regulations No.8 of 1972. At the inquiry before the
Labour Tribunal the Bank claimed _inter alia_ to be a  "corporation" within
the meaning of Essential Services Regulation 2(9) and therefore exempt from
liability. The President Labour Tribunal rejected this submission. This
decision was not canvassed before the Court Appeal and does not therefore
arise for decision this Court. The two points for‑ decision are follows:‑  


(1) Whether the Essential Services Order, 1972, was bad in law.  


(2) Whether the services provided by the State Mortgage Bank constituted an
essential Services Order, 1972.



The Court of Appeal has held that the State Mortgage "Bank" within the meaning
of gage Bank is a "Bank" within the meaning of the expression "any other bank
engaged in the transaction of commercial or financial business "in paragraph
2(10) of the Essential Services Order1972. This conclusion was influenced by
the submission Counsel for the Bank which commended itself to Tambiah, J. ,
viz., "that the common quality the specified institutions possess which bring
under a genus is that the 'Central Bank' and the Bank of Ceylon' are both
institutions known as banks under the law." banks under in this judgment



The Court of  Appeal invoked the _ejusdem generis_ rule in construing the
words 'any other Bank'. Counsel for both parties before us argued their
respective cases on the basis that this issue _Ejusdem generis_ is a rule of
construction and not a rule of law. "To invoke the application of the ejusdem
generis rule voke the application of the _ejusdem generis_ rule

#  
409



there must be a distinct genus or category" (Craies on Statute Law Edn. 7
p.181) a single species does not create a genus or category and the rule
cannot therefore apply. _United Town Electric Co. Ltd. vs. A.G. of
Newfoundland_ (1939, 1 A.E.R. 423 at p.428). In this case the United Towns
Electric Co. Ltd was incorporated by a Public Act in 1902 known as the United
Towns Electrical Company Act. Section 30 of it said as follows:‑



"The Company shall be liable for water rates on all lands and buildings owned
by it in the aforesaid towns,, but otherwise the Company shall be exempt from
taxation."



The Supreme Court of Newfoundland held that the term "taxation" was limited to
taxes _ejusdem gener­is_ with water rates and did not include the revenue of
the colony such as income tax. The Privy Council rejected this construction as
it found "no room for the application of the principle of  _ejusdem generis_
in the absence of any mention of a genus, since the mention of a single
species ‑ for example water rates ‑ does not constitute a genus ...... "  "The
specific words must apply not to different objects of a widely differing
character but to something which can be called a class or kind of objects."
(Craies on Statute Law Edn.7 p.181). These are the guide lines for the
application of the rule of _ejusdem generis_. The Court of Appeal searched for
a "common quality the specified institutions possess which bring them under a
_genus_ " and found it in their birth. The Central Bank was begat by the­
Monetary Law Act (Cap.422) and the Bank of Ceylon by the Bank of Ceylon
Ordinance (Cap.397). They are "both institutions known as bankers under the
law", states the Court of Appeal, being creatures of statute. This constitutes
them a genus. The State Mortgage Bank Ordinance (Cap.398) begat the State
Mortgage Bank and it is therefore a creature of



#  410  


statute like the other two. In the result the ejusdem generis rule applies to
constitute the State Mortgage Bank a Bank within the ambit of Regulation
2(10). I am unable to agree with this reasoning based on creation. This
classification would exclude many Commercial Banks existing in this country
that are not creatures of statute but yet recognised by the common law of the
country as Banks. All of them render immense and varied services to the
country and the community. It is these services that Regulation 2(10) seeks to
preserve for the life of the community.  
  
McCardie J. in the case of SS. Magnhild (Owners) vs. Mclntyre Brothers and
Company (1920, 3 K.B. 321) stated that in deciding whether an unspecified
thing was ejusdem generis with the specified things two questions must be
answered. They are -  
  
1\. What common quality do the specified things possess which constitutes them
a genus?  
  
and  
  
2.Does the unspecified thing possess that same Quality ?  
  
Quality here refers to their kind and character which make them a class or
category. McCardie J. (at page 330) suggested a test for the ascertainment of
a genus - Do the 'specified things possess some Common and dominant feature?
Their origin is of no consequence. If they are of widely differing character
they cannot constitute a class or category. "I accede", said Lord Campbell in
R. vs. Edmundon (1859, 28 L.J. MC 213 at 218) "to the principle that where
there are general words following particular and specific words, the general
words must be confined to things of the same kind as those specified." They
must be similar in character to the specified things. "It is really question
of the assumed intention of the statute"  


**411  
 **

(Craies on Statute Law Edn 7 p.179). What then is this common character of the
two specified Banks which constitute them a genus? This question must
necessarily be answered in reference to the services rendered by each because
it is these services that the Regulation seeks to preserve in the interests of
the life of the community. One common character stands out  they are both
engaged in the Banking business and render Banking services necessary for the
life of the community. They are both Banks in the accepted sense of the
business and commercial world and the common law of the land.  
  
The Central Bank is a Bank of a special kind established by the Monetary Law
Act (Cap.422). It is the watch dog of the Island's monetary system and for
that purpose it supervises and controls ail Banking institutions in the
country. The Act also imposes certain duties and obligations in respect of
Banking institutions in the Island. It determines the national monetary policy
and tenders advice to the Government on monetary and fiscal policy. It
controls the sale and purchase of foreign exchange by Commercial Banks.
Although it is not a Commercial bank it is the Banker and Fiscal Agent of the
Government and its agencies and institutions (section 106 of the Act). It is
the sole official depository of the Government and its agencies (section 107
of the Act). The Monetary Board may however appoint one or more Commercial
Banks as its agents to accept government deposits. As a Bank its services to
other Banks, the Government, and the country, are so immense and so varied
that the life of the community will be seriously disrupted if its services are
not available or are hampered.  
  
The Bank of Ceylon is one of those Commercial Banks established by statute -
the Bank of Ceylon Ordinance (Cap.397). Its counterpart is the People's Bank,
also established by statute of the Legislature. On the other hand there are
many Banks which have not been established by statute of the

# 412



Country's Legislature but are still functioning as Banks registered under the
law of the land and have been so functioning for many years ‑ some over 50
years. They are part of the vast network of Commercial Banks which handle the
bulk of the Banking in this country. Banks such as the Grindlays Bank,
Hongkong and Shanghai Bank the Imperial Bank of India (now the State Bank of
India), the Habib Bank are some of the old Banks whose services are vital to
the community. Indeed a stoppage of work in the network of Commercial banks
paralyses the trade of the country, business comes to near standstill, and the
life of the community is seriously affected. They are all Banks well known and
accepted as such in the business world. The world "Bank" it is not defined in
any statute in this country. What then  is a Bank? At the risk of being trite
I would say a Bank is a place or institution in which Bankers d­o banking
business. But that is not the entire question will then be asked ‑ who are
"Bankers" and what is "Banking". The history of banking and the
characteristics of Bankers today were considered in the case of _United
Dominions Trust vs. Kirkwood_ (1966)(1 A.E.R.968) Lord Denning M.R referred to
the characteristics of a banker the 18th century thus ‑



"In the eighteenth century before cheques came into common use, the principal
characteristics were that the banker accepted the money others on the terms
that the persons deposited it could have it back again from banker when they
asked for it, sometimes demand, at other times on notice, according to the
stipulation made at the time of deposit; and meanwhile the banker was at
liberty make use of the money by lending it out interest or investing it on
mortgage or other­wise."



At that time cheques were  not used and current



#  413  


accounts were not kept. Only deposit receipts were issued repayable on notice,
or pass books were issued for deposit accounts and withdrawals were permitted
on demand, subject to limits, on produc­tion of such pass books. This was the
method adop­ted by the Ceylon Savings Bank (established under the Ceylon
savings Bank Ordinance (Cap.399)and the Post Office Savings Bank (established
under the Post Office Savings Banks (Cap.191)) both of which have now been
absorbed by the National Savings Bank which also issue a pass book for
deposits. This is no longer considered banking in law. "The March of time has
taken us far beyond those cases of fifty years ago. Money is now paid and
received by cheque to such-an extent that no person can be considered a banker
unless he handles cheques as freely as cash. A customer nowadays who wishes to
pay money into his bank takes with him his cash and the cheques, crossed and
uncrossed, payable to him. Where­as in the old days it was a characteristic of
a banker that he should receive money for deposit, it is nowadays a
characteristic that he should receive cheques for collection on behalf of his
customer. How otherwise is the customer to pay his money into the bank? It is
the only practicable means, parti­cularly in the case of crossed cheques.
Next, when a customer wishes to withdraw the money which he has deposited or
to pay his creditors with it, he does it in most cases by drawing a cheque on
the bank. Occasionally he does it by a draft on the bank or a written order.
Whereas in the old days he might withdraw it on production of a passbook and
no cheque, it is nowadays a characteristic of a bank that the customer should
be able to withdraw it by cheque, draft or order. This view has gra­dually
gained acceptance." (per Denning, M.R. at page 975.) Bankers today have‑three
characteristics:-



(i) They accept money from, and collect che­ques for, their customers and
place them to their credit.

# 414  



(ii) They honour cheques orders drawn on them their customers presentment and
debit them by their customers on presentment and debit them accordingly  in
their account.



(iii) They keep an account, called a current account, in which the credits and
debits are entered.



Diplock L.J. agreed with these propositions. He stated thus ‑



"What makes a person a banker is not what he does with the money of which he
obtains the use, as for instance by lending it at interest as mentioned by
Holmes, J., and Isaacs, J.) by investing it, by discounting bills  Folmes, J
and Isaacs,J‑), by investing it , by discounting bills, etc., but the terms on
which he obtains from other persons, his banking customers, loans of money
which he can use as he thinks fit. What I think is common to all modern
definitions and essential to the business of banking is that the banker should
accept from his customers loans of money on " deposit", that is to say, loans
an indefinite period on running account, repayable as to the whole or any part
thereof on demand by the customer either without notice or on an agreed period
of notice."  



Accordingly it is, in my view, essential to the business of banking that a
banker should accept money from his customers on a running account into which
sums of money are from time to time paid by the customer and from time to time
paid by the customer and and from time to time withdrawn by him by cheque,
draft or order. I am inclined to agree with Lord Denning, M.R., and the author
of the current edition of Paget on Banking(6th  Edn.) that to constitute the
business of banking today the banker must also undertake to pay cheques drawn
on himself (the banker) by his customers in favour of  

**  415 **



 third parties up to the amount standing to their credit in their "current
accounts" and to collect cheques for his customers and credit the proceeds to
their current accounts. This view of he essential characteristics of the
business of banking today is supported by the evidence of the witnesses who
were unquestionably bankers who gave expert evidence in the present case."



These are the essential characteristics of the business of banking which is
conducted by a bank. The Bank of Ceylon and all Commercial Banks have these
characteristics. The Central Bank also possesses these essential
characteristics. No doubt it has only one depositor but that depositor is
probably the largest depositor in the country. My finding therefore is that
the "Central Bank" and the "Bank of Ceylon" referred to in Regulation(210)
form a _genus_.



 The next question is whether the State Mort­gage Bank belongs to that same
_genus_? It does not essential characteristics of a Bank referred to above. It
is not engaged in the business of Banking. Its only claim to that status is
that the Ordinance has chosen to call it a Bank. But the name cannot and does
not make it a Bank. Its essential characteristic is that of a money lender
with mortgages securing the money lent. That is its sole financial business.
Such business is done by all finance companies and the well known Chettiars of
Sea Street. If the State Mortgage Bank is a Bank doing banking business then
these Compa­nies and Chettiars can also lay claim to that title. Neither the
law nor the business world would s. The Agricultural and Indus‑ accept them as
Bank larger volume trial Credit Corporation did a much of business similar if
not identical with, that of the Respondent but the law incorporating it did
not choose to call it a Bank. The Development Finance



#  416



Corporation, by far the largest lending institu­tion, also does not bear the
name "Bank". I am of opinion, that the State Mortgage Bank is not a "Bank" in
Regulation 2(10). I therefore allow the appeal and set aside the order of the
Court of Appeal. In view of this finding it is not necesary to consider the
other point of law regarding the legal validity of the regulations.



The Appellant will be entitled to costs of this appeal and the proceedings in
the Court of Appeal.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree  


**SOZA, J.** \- I agree



_**Appeal Allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/20.html_  

