##  Malalgoda v. Attorney General - SLR - 777, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 20;
(1982) 2 Sri LR 777 (2 December 1982)

#  777

**  MALALGODA**

**v.**

## ATTORNEY‑GENERAL AND ANOTHER

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., COLIN‑THOME, J., AND SOZA, J.

S.C , APPLICATION NO. 95/82

NOVEMBER 10 AND 12, 1982.



    Fundamental Rights ‑ Constitution, Articles 14 and 15(2) ‑ Freedom of speech ‑Freedom of publication ‑Restriction on freedom of publication of defamatory material.



The applicant, a writer and poet of 40 years standing and author of several
books caused to be published on 17.9.1982 an anthology of poems under the
title Nuthana Devadaththa. This anthology was full of diatribes defamatory of
not only the President and the Prime Minister but also of members of the
public.



On or about 24th September 1982 the Police seized all the publications.



The applicant contended that as a result of this seizure his fundamental right
of freedom of speech was violated though it was guaranteed in the
Constitution.



# Held -



(1) The fundamental right to freedom of speech is subject to such restrictions
as the law may impose under the heads mentioned in Article 15(2) of the
Constitution.



(2) Freedom of publication means that the applicant may publish whatever will
not expose him to a prosecution or a civil action for defamation. The freedom
of publication does not include the licence to defame and vilify others.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Cohen v. California 29 U, S. Supreme Court Decisions Lawyer's Ed. ‑
Annotated 2nd Ed. 248_

  
(2) _Schenck v. United States (1919) 249 U.S. 47, 52_



**778**



(3) _Terminiello v. Chicago (1949) 337 U.S. 1,36, 37_



(4) _Bowman v. Secular Society Ltd. (1917) A. C. 406, 466, 467_



(5) _Babulal Parate v. Maharashtra (1961) A.I.R. SC 884_



(6) _Jang Bahadur v. Principal, Mohindra College (1951) A.I.R. Pep 59_



(7) _Akistan Apena of Iporo v. Akinwande Thomas (1950) A. C. 227, 234_



(8) _Smith v. London Transport Executive (1951) A. C. 555_



**APPLICATION** alleging infringement of fundamental rights.



_V.S.A. Pullenayagam_ with _Desmond Fernando_ and _Miss. D. Wijesundera,_ for
applicant.



_Sunil de Silva, Addl. S.G._ with _Suri Ratnapala S.S.C._ for  respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._

December 2, 1982

#  
SOZA, J



The applicant in this case invokes the jurisdiction vested in this Court by
Article 126 of the Constitution to hear and determine a question relating to
the alleged infringement by the Police of his fundamental right of freedom of
speech and expression including publication guaranteed to him by Article 14(1)
_(a)_ of the Constitution.



The applicant claims he is a writer and poet of over 40 years' standing and
the author of several works of literature. He has been the Secretary of the
All Ceylon Sinhala Poets Union for the last twenty‑five years. On 17th
September 1982 he caused to be published an anthology of his poems under the
title' "Nuthana Devadaththa" a copy of which marked A he has annexed to his
application. He has named the Attorney‑General as the first respondent and the
Inspector General of Police as the 2nd respondent to his application. A
perusal of the book A shows that the text has been printed at the Piliyandala
Kaviya Printing Press and the cover at the Veyangoda Press. The book carries a
foreword written by one Srilal‑Kodikara Gunapala Senasinghe and is dedicated
to Rev. Henpitagedera Gnanaseeha. For the purpose of sale the applicant
distributed six hundred copies of this anthology to Messrs. Godage Brothers of
Maradana Road, Colombo 11 and four hundred copies to McCallum Book Depot. On
or about 24th September 1982 police officers of the Criminal Investigation
Department had seized the only two remaining



#### **779**



copies from the Veyangoda Press. On the next day the applicant was
interrogated at the fifth floor of Police Headquarters and, a lengthy
statement by him was recorded. In the meantime the Police led by Inspector
Mohan Jayasuriya seized and. removed the copies that were with the booksellers
and even the copy presented to the writer of the foreword. The applicant
requested the return of the books but Inspector Mohan Jayasuriya refused. The
applicant then requested the Inspector‑General of Police the 2nd respondent to
return the books but he too neither returned the books nor gave any reason for
failing to return them. The applicant further states that the 2nd respondent
has acted in this manner with the intention of interfering with the free and
impartial conduct of the Presidential elections and to further the candidature
of Mr. J.R. Jayewardene at the Presidential Elections thus contravening
Article 93 of the Cons­titution. The petitioner complains that the action of
the 2nd respondent and his subordinates constitutes a violation of his
fundamental right to freedom of speech and expression including publication
guaranteed to him by Article 14 (1) _(a)_ of the Constitution.



The publication Nuthana Devadaththa is replete with scurrilous diatribes
defamatory of the President and the Prime Minister and several other public
men. Even the winners of the Presidential literary awards have not been spared
the barbs of vitriolic invective.



At the hearing before us it is important to observe it was not sought to
dispute that the publication is defamatory. The main contention of the
applicant however is that the right to think as you will, write as you think
and publish what you write is a fundamental freedom guaranteed by the
Constitution and cannot be abridged by restraints upon publication. The
argument follows to some distance the famous Blackstonian exposition in regard
to the freedom of the press:



"The liberty of the press is indeed essential to the nature of a, free state:
but this consists in laying no previous restraints upon publications, and not
in freedom from censure for criminal matter when published. Every freeman has
an undoubted right to lay what sentiments he pleases before the public: to
forbid this, is to destroy the freedom of the press: but if he publishes what
is improper, mischievous, or illegal, he must take the consequence of his own
temerity. _" Bl. Comm. _IV pp 151, 152.



#  780



            Blackstone however drew the line where legitimate suppression begins chronologically at the time of publication. But the argument put forward by learned Counsel for the applicant goes even further. The book cannot be seized even after publication though the offence of defamation, if it has been committed, can be punished. To seize and impound the literature which a citizen prints and publishes would be to muzzle the basic freedom of speech and expression including publication entrenched in the Constitution. The publication cannot be barred but if the publication is defamatory the law will take its course and punish the offence.



Learned Counsel for the applicant sought to derive support for his proposition
from the American case of _Cohen v California_ (1). In this case the defendant
Cohen was seen wearing a jacket imprinted with the words "F‑k the draft," in
the corridor of the Los Angeles County Courthouse. This was Cohen's way of
condemning the Selective Service System in the context of the Vietnam war. He
was convicted by a California municipal court for disturbing the peace by
offensive conduct. The California Court of Appeal affirmed the conviction and
rejected defendant's contention that the conviction violated his federal
constitutional right to free speech. The California Supreme Court declined
review. By a majority decision the United States Supreme Court reversed the
conviction.



Justice Harlan who delivered the majority opinion held that one of the
prerogatives of the American citizen is the right to criticize public men and
measures and that meant not only informed and responsible criticism but the
freedom even to speak foolishly and without moderation. The State had no right
to cleanse public debate to the point where it would not offend the
susceptibilities of the genteel. Although the particular vulgar expression
used by the defendant was more distasteful than others of its genre yet it is
often true that one man's vulgarity is another man's lyric. So long as there
was no exhibition of an intent to incite disobedience to or disruption of the
draft, Cohen could not be punished for asserting the inutility or immorality
of the draft on his jacket. The State was free to ban the use of fighting
words" inherently likely to provoke violent reaction. But though the
four‑letter word displayed by Cohen in relation to the draft was not
uncommonly employed in a personally provocative fashion, in this instance it
was not clearly directed to the person of the hearer. No one who saw Cohen was
violently aroused.



# 781



But a close examination of the facts of this case shows that when Cohen
entered the courtroom itself he removed his jacket and stood with it folded
over his arm. The State could not consistently with the Constitution make the
simple public display of the single four‑letter expletive a criminal offence.
Justice Harlan, it is worth mentioning, added the caution that the
Constitution did not give absolute protection to every individual to speak
whenever or wherever he pleases or to use any form of address in any
circumstances that he chooses. And it must be borne in mind in considering
this and other decisions that the Constitutional provisions in regard to
freedom of speech in America are couched in terms very different from ours.
Hence the American decisions afford very limited guidance to us.



It would not be inapposite to examine the American provisions in view of the
reliance on _Cohen's_ case. The American Constitutional provisions in regard
to freedom of speech are found mainly in the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States of America. The first Amendment was in a
package of ten Amendments passed in 1791 and commonly referred to as the Bill
of Rights. The First Amendment reads as follows:



"Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or
of the. press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to
petition the Government for a redress of grievances."



Blackstone's statement of the law is thought by many to have influenced the
First Amendment. This Amendment enacts an absolute prohibition. It sets out no
restrictions. It was left to the Courts to evolve them. It became evident that
if freedom of speech meant liberty to calumniate others, liberty to subvert
law and order, liberty to undermine the very foundations of the State, then
these very freedoms could become a means to encompass their own destruction.
The line had to be drawn somewhere. Holmes J., earlier an exponent of
Blackstone's view, drew it in the case of _Schenck v United Sta­tes_ (2) in a
famous pronouncement:



"The most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in
falsely shouting fire in a theatre and causing a panic..... The question in
every case is whether the words used are used in such circumstances and are of
such a nature as to



# 782



create a clear and present danger that they will bring about the substantive
evils that Congress has a right to prevent. It is a question of proximity and
degree. When a nation is at war many things that might be said in time of
peace are such a hindrance to its effort that their utterance will not be
endured so long as men fight and that no Court could regard them as protected
by any constitutional right."



The "clear and present danger" test formulated by Holmes, J. was accepted by
many American Judges but Jackson, J. felt this limiting test did not go far
enough. In a notable dissent in the case of _Terminiello v Chicago_ ,(3) he
pointed out that:



"Invocation of constitutional liberties as part of the strategy for
overthrowing them presents a dilemma to a free people which may not be soluble
by constitutional logic alone,"



and "no liberty is made more secure by holding that its abuses are inseparable
from its enjoyment."



He then went on to conclude as follows:



"This court has gone far toward accepting the doctrine that civil liberty
means the removal of all restraints from these crowds and that all local
attempts to maintain order are impairments of the liberty of the citizen. The
choice is not between order and liberty. It is between liberty with order and
anarchy without either. There is danger that, if the Court does not temper its
doctrinaire logic with a little practical wisdom, it will convert the
constitutional Bill of Rights into a suicide pact."



Later constitution makers profited from the American experience. In many
modern Constitutions like the Indian and Sri Lankan Constitutions, fundamental
rights are entrenched but with appropriate restrictions. In the Indian
Constitution one whole Part comprising Articles 12 to 35 is devoted to
Fundamental Rights. Article 19(1) _(a)_ of the Indian Constitution provides
inter alia "that all citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and
expression." Sub‑Article (2) of Article 19 as retrospectively amended by the
Constitution



#  783



(First Amendment) Act 1951 provides as follows:



"Nothing in sub‑clause _(a)_ of clause (1) shall affect the operation of, any
existing law, or prevent the State from making any law in so far as such law
imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the
said sub‑clause in the interests of the security of the State, friendly
relations with foreign State, public order, decency or morality, or in
relation to contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to an offence.



It will be seen that the Indian constitutional provisions in regard to freedom
of speech are subject to such reasonable restrictions as the law may have
imposed or may impose under the sub‑heads spelt out in Article 19(2). The
limiting provision of "reasonable restrictions" was probably inspired by Lord
Sumner's celebrated dictum in the House of Lords decision in _Bowman v Secular
Society Ltd_ (4) where the question was whether the propagation of
anti‑Christian doctrines constituted the offence of blasphemy:



"The words, as well as the acts, which tend to endanger society differ from
time to time in proportion as society is stable or insecure in fact, or is
believed by its reasonable members to be open to assault. In the present day
meetings or processions are held lawful which a hundred and fifty years ago
would have been deemed seditious, and this is not because the law is weaker or
has changed, but because, the times having changed, society is stronger than
before...... The fact that opinion grounded on experience has moved one way
does not in law preclude the possibility of its moving on fresh experience in
the other; nor does it bind succeeding generations, when conditions have again
changed. After all, the question whether a given opinion is a danger to
society is a question of the times and is a question of fact. I desire to say
nothing that would limit the right of society to protect itself by process of
law from the dangers of the moment, whatever that right may be, but only to
say that, experience having proved dangers once thought real to be now
negligible, and dangers once very possibly imminent to have now passed away,
there is nothing in the general rules as to blasphemy and irreligion, as known
to the law, which prevents us from varying their application to the particular
circumstances of our time in accordance with that experience. "



# 784



Seervai in his _Commentary on the Constitutional Law of India_ 2nd Ed (1975)
1261 pp. 347, 348, has on the question of freedom of speech and expression,
emphasised the distinction between the Indian and the American Constitutions.
Pre‑censorship and preventive action were constitutionally permissible in
India but not in America. The 'clear and present danger' test of Holmes, J.
was rejected by the Supreme Court of India in the case of _Babulal Parate v
Maharashtra_ (5). The test was already provided in the Indian Constitution ‑
the reasonableness of the restriction. In fact the Indian Courts have even
broadened the scope of the heads of restrictions to freedom of speech
adumbrated in the Constitution. Seervai (ibid) p. 353 refers to the case of
_Jang Bahadur v Principal, Mohindra College_ (6) where Teja Singh, C.J. held
that apart from the qualifications contained in clauses (2) to (6) of Article
19, there was the further qualification that the rights conferred by Article
19(1) must not violate the rights of others. In that case, the petitioner had
written a highly defamatory circular defaming among others, the respondent,
who was the Principal of the College in which the petitioner was studying. The
respondent rusticated the petitioner, who contended that such rustication
violated the freedom of speech guaranteed to him under Article 19(1) _(a)_. In
rejecting the contention the court said that the rights conferred by Article
19(1) were subject. to the qualification that they did not violate the rights.
of  Others. Article 19(1) _(a)_ did not entitle the petitioner to defame the
respondent and the action taken by the respondent was in the interest of
discipline and did not violate Article 19(1) _(a)._



Our Constitutional provisions in regard to freedom of speech are similar to
but not quite the same as the Indian provisions. In Sri Lanka freedom of
speech whether it be the spoken, the written or the printed word is guaranteed
by Articles 14(1) _(a)_ and 15(2) of the Constitution appearing in Chapter 111
on the subject of Fundamental Rights. Article 14(1) _(a)_ declares that "every
citizen is entitled to the freedom of speech and expression including
publication." Article 15(2) however stipulates that "the exercise and
operation of the fundamental right declared and recognized by Article 14(1)
_(a)_ shall be subject to such restrictions, as may be prescribed by law in
the interests of racial and religious harmony or in relation to parliamentary
privilege, contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence."



It will be seen that the limitations to the right of freedom of speech are in
Sri Lanka prescribed in more absolute terms than in



# 785



India In Sri Lanka the _operation and exercise_ of the right to freedom of
speech are made _subject to_ restrictions of law not qualified by any test of
reasonableness. Neither the validity nor the reasonableness of the law
imposing restrictions is open to question unlike in America or India. This is
not to say of course that the Court should not be reasonable in applying the
law imposing restrictions. Freedom of speech in Sri Lanka therefore is
_subject to_ such restrictions as the law may impose under the heads mentioned
in Article 15(2). What is the significance of the words "subject to"?



The phrase "subject to" as used in legislation came up for interpretation in
the Privy Council case of _Akistan Apena of Iporo v. Akinwande Thomas_ (7).
Lord Simonds delivering the judgment of the Board expressed the view that the
words " 'subject to' are equivalent to 'without prejudice to.' " In the case
of _Smith v London Transport Executive_ (8) the House of Lords had to consider
the meaning of the expression "subject to" as it appeared in the Transport Act
1947\. By section 1 of this Act the British Transport Commission was set up.
Section 2 spelt out the powers conferred on the Commission "subject to the
provisions of this Act." Lord Simonds in his speech from the Woolsack
explained that these words enact that the powers given are subject to
restrictions or limitations found elsewhere in the Act and went on to say at
p. 569:



"The words 'subject to' the provisions of this Act'.......... Are naturally
words of restriction. They assume an authority immediately given and give a
warning that elsewhere a limitation upon that authority will be found."



In the same case (p.577) Lord MacDermott in his speech said that the
expression "subject to" "is commonly used to avoid conflict between one part
of an enactment and another."



The language of Article 15(2) of our Constitution makes it clear that the
fundamental right of freedom of speech can only be exercised subject to the
limitation that there can be no transgression of the restrictions prescribed
in Article 15(2). So far as concerns the case before us freedom of publication
means that the applicant may publish whatever will not expose him to a
prosecution or a civil action for defamation. In exercising his fundamental
right of freedom of publication he cannot shake off the contraints imposed by
law. The freedom of publication does not include the licence to defame and
vilify others.



# 786



There is therefore no Merit in the complaint that the applicant's fundamental
rights have been infringed by the seizure of his book Nuthana Devadaththa by
the Police. The application is accordingly dismissed with costs.



**SHARVANANDA, J.**  I agree.

**  **

**COLIN ‑THOME J.** \- I agree.



### Application dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/20.html_  

