##  Ranasinghe v. The Ceylon State Mortgage Bank - SLR - 121, Vol 1 of 1981
[1981] LKSC 20; (1981) 1 Sri LR 121 (7 July 1981)

**121**

**RANASINGHE  
v.  
THE CEYLON STATE MORTGAGE BANK**

SUPREME COURT.  
SAMARAKOON, C. J., ISMAIL, J., SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J.  
AND WIMALARATNE, J.  
S.C. No. 46/80-C. A. (S.C.) APPLICATION 325/72- D.C. KANDY 9588/L.  
APRIL 6,7,1981. **  
**  
_Declaratory Judgement- Determination by bank to redeem property sold under
hypothecary decree-Vesting order published by Minister of Finance-Declaration
sought challenging power of bank to make determination-Objection to
jurisdiction of District Court-Whether it has jurisdiction to review order of
inferior tribunal­ Determination by a statutory authority- Whether District
Court empowered to make such a declaration under section 217 (G) of Civil
Procedure Code-Objections to application for redemption taken under section 70
(B) (5) of Act No. 33 of 1968 and section 23 of Interpretation (Amendment)
Act, No. 18 of 1972-Whether Courts precluded from questioning bank's
determination -Ceylon State Mortgage Bank Act, (Cap. 398) as amended by Act
No. 33 of 1968, sections 10 (B) (2) (1) (a), 70 (B) (2) (l) (a), 71 (2) (b).  
_  
The plaintiff purchased at a public auction held in execution of a hypothecary
decree entered against one A, the premises described in the schedule to the
plaint. An application was made for the redemption of the property by A to the
State Mortgage Bank under the provisions of Act No. 33 of 1968 which amended
the State Mortgage Bank Act (Cap. 398). Despite objections taken by the
plaintiff on the ground that the bank was precluded from entertaining the
application for redemption by reason of the provisions of section 70 (B) (2)
(1) (a) and section 10 (B) (2) (1) (a) a determination to redeem the property
was made by the bank. The plaintiff's objection was based on the fact that A
was disqualified from obtaining relief under the act as his income exceeded
that laid down in the section.  
  
This action was filed by the plaintiff in the District Court challenging the
power of the bank to make such a determination . A preliminary issue was heard
as regards the jurisdiction of the District Court to hear and determine this
action and the learned District Judge held that he had jurisdiction. On
appeal, the Court of Appeal holding that the District Court had no supervisory
jurisdiction over a determination by the bank and that the proper remedy was
to invoke the jurisdiction of the Appellate Court byway of writ of certiorari,
allowed the appeal. The Court of Appeal took the view that the original Court
cannot by means of a declaratory order review the decisions of inferior bodies
unless such power is expressly conferred by statute.  
  
**Held** (Wimalaratne, J. dissenting)  
  
(1) The plaintiff was entitled in law to maintain an action for a declaration.
Section 217 (G) of the Civil Procedure Code permits a declaratory judgment
without granting any substantive relief for remedy and a declaration granted
under these provisions cannot correctly be termed a "supervisory order"
inasmuch as there is no order in the first place; and secondly it is not a
judgment that the machinery of the law could

**122**

enforce. if the term "Supervisory" in reference to a declaratory judgment is
intended to describe the function of review which is a process that must
necessarily take place before a Court pronounces upon the legality or
otherwise of a decision of a body such as an inferior tribunal, then such
exercise is not forbidden by law.  
  
(2) An objection taken on behalf of the Bank under the provisions of section
70 (B) (5) of the amending Act No. 33 of 1968 that clauses (a) and (b)
precluded the District Court from entertaining this action could not be
sustained, as the proceedings before the Bank were now complete and clause (a)
did not therefore apply; and as far as clause (b) was concerned the matter
that now arises for decision was the fundamental question as to whether the
property was one which the bank was authorised to acquire and if the bank had
no power to make such a determination acquisition would be of no effect in law
to vest title in the bank. Further the validity of the acquisition could only
be questioned in a properly constituted action to question the vesting order
made by the Minister of Finance.  
  
(3) The provisions of section 23 of the Interpretation (Amendment) Act, No. 18
of 1972, do not prohibit the District Court from making a declaration such as
that sought by the plaintiff as his attack is on the very jurisdiction of the
bank to make the determination and that the bank was not empowered to make the
impugned order. If this was so, the order of the Bank is a nullity.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_(1) Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu, (1966) 69 N. L. R. 73.  
  
(2) Perera v. The People's Bank, (1975) 78 N. L. R. 239.  
  
(3) Leo v. Land Commissioner, (1955) 57 N. L. R. 178.  
  
(4) The Land Commissioner v. Ladamuttu Pillai, (1960) 62 N.L.R. 169; (1960) 3
W. L. R. 626  
  
(5) Singho Mahatmaya v. The Land Commissioner, (1964) 66 N. L. R. 94.  
  
(6) Healey v. Minister of Health, (1955) 1 Q.B. 221, (1954) 3 W.L.R. 222,
(1954) 2 All E. R. 580.  
  
(7) Barnard v. National Dock Labour Board, (1953) 2 Q.B. 18, (1953) 1A11 E.R.
1113; (1953) 2 W L. R. 995.  
  
(8) lbeneweka v. Egbuna, (1964) 1 W. L. R. 219, 108 Sol. Jo. 114.  
  
(9) Imperial Tobacco Co. Ltd v. Attorney-General, (1979) 2 W L. R. 805, (1979)
2 All E. R. 592.  
  
(10) Attorney-General v. Sabaratnam, (1955) 57 N.L.R. 481.  
  
(11) Anisminic v. Foreign Compensation Commission, (1969) 2 A.C. 147; (1969) 2
W. L. R. 163; (1969) 2 A // E. R. 1128.  
  
(12) Ex parte Jolliffe, (1873) 42 L. J. Q. B. 121; 28 L. T. 132, (1873) L. R.
8 Q. B. 134.  
  
(13) Application of A. W. Shaw (1860-62) Ram. Reps. 118.  
  
(14) in the matter of the application of John Ferguson, (1874) 1 N. L. R. 181.  
  
(15) King v. Samaraweera, (1917) 19 N. L. R. 433.  
  
(16) Attorney- General v. Chanmugam, (1967) 71 N. L. R. 78.  
  
(17) Dyson v. Attorney- General, (1911) 1 KB 410.  
_  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in (1980) 2 Sri L
.R. 11.  
  
_V. S. A. Pullenayagam,_ with F. Mustapha, Miss M. Kanapathipillai and Miss
D­. Wijesundera, for the plaintiff -appellant.  
  
_H. L. de Silva,_ with S. Sivarasa, J. Joseph and A. D. de A1wis, for the
defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**  123**

July 7,1981.  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.  
**  
This Court has granted the plaintiff -appellant leave to appeal on a question
of law. The facts are as follows:  
  
One Sunil Subasiri Abeysundera was at one time the owner of the premises
described in the schedule to the plaint. it was sold in execution of a
hypothecary decree entered against him and was purchased by the plaintiff at
the public auction held in execution of the decree. Subsequently Abeysundera
made an application to the People's Bank requesting the bank to acquire the
property under the provisions of Part V I I I of the Finance Act, No. 11 of
1963. The plaintiff objected to this application on the ground that the bank
was not empowered to acquire the property and therefore such acquisition would
contravene the provisions of section 71 (2) (b) of the said Act. We are
informed that thereafter the bank took no steps to proceed with the matter. In
the year 1968 Abeysundera took advantage of the provisions of Act 33 of 1968
which amended the State Mortgage Bank Act, No. 16 of 1931 (Cap. 398), and made
an application for the redemption of the said property. The plaintiff objected
to this application too, stating that the bank was precluded from entertaining
the said application by reason of the provisions of section 70 (B) (2) (1) (a)
of the Act and the provisions of section 10 (B) (2) (1) (a) of the Act because
Abeysundera was in receipt of an income of over ten thousand rupees during the
3 years immediately preceding his application, which fact disqualified him
from relief under the Act. Nevertheless the bank made a determination to
redeem the property. The plaintiff then instituted this action in the District
Court against the bank challenging its power to make such a determination. An
issue which challenged the jurisdiction of the District Court to hear and
determine this action raised by the bank was taken up for hearing as a
preliminary issue and the District Judge ruled against the bank. On appeal to
the Court of Appeal that Court held that the District Court had no supervisory
jurisdiction over the decision of the bank and allowed the appeal. The Court
of Appeal was of opinion that the proper remedy was to invoke the supervisory
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court by way of writ of certiorari as the original
Court cannot by means of a declaratory order review the decisions of inferior
bodies unless such power is expressly conferred by statute.

**124**

At the hearing counsel for the bank submitted that the provisions of section
70 (B) (5) of the Amending Act No. 33 of 1968 precluded the District Court
from entertaining the action. That section reads as follows:  
  
(5) No civil court shall entertain any action-  
  
(a) in respect of any matter which is pending before the bank relating to any
acquisition to be made under this Chapter; or  
  
(b) in respect of the validity of the procedure followed by the bank relating
to such acquisition, or to the validity of such acquisition."  
  
Sub-section 6 of this section provides that the question whether any premises
which the bank is authorized to acquire should or should not be acquired shall
be determined by the bank which determination is final and conclusive and
shall not be called in question in any court. We are not called on at this
stage to decide any question with regard to the finality of the decision of
the bank. The submission of counsel of the bank only involves the application
of sub-sections (a) and (b) of the section. It is common ground that pursuant
to the determination of the bank the Minister of Finance by Vesting Order No.
9 of 14.07.1970 published in Government Gazette No. 14,914/9 of 16.07.1970
vested the property in the bank. At date of action proceedings before the bank
were complete and the matter was not pending before the bank. The provisions
of section 70 (B) (5) (a) are therefore not relevant now. The provisions of
section 70 (B) (5) (b) are also not applicable. The validity of the
acquisition can only be questioned by a properly constituted action to
question the vesting by the Minister of Finance. The bank took no action to,
and in fact, could not, vest the property in itself. Furthermore the question
that arises now for decision is not a matter concerning procedure but a
fundamental question as to whether the property was one which the bank was
authorized to acquire. If the bank had no power to determine to acquire the
property in question acquisition is of no effect in law to vest title- in the
bank. The provisions of section 70 (B) (5) cannot avail the bank now.  
  
Counsel  for the respondent contended that the District Court had no
jurisdiction to entertain this application as it invoked an

**125**

appellate jurisdiction which the District Court clearly did not possess.
Section 217(G) of the Civil Procedure Court permits a District Court to
"declare a right or status", "without affording any substantive relief or
remedy". Jurisdiction is conferred by the provisions of the Courts Ordinance
(Cap. VI). Section 62 of that Ordinance, which is only a re-enactment of the
Charter of 1833, confers on District Courts "original jurisdiction in all
civil......matters and in any other matter in which jurisdiction has
heretofore been, is now, or may hereafter be given to the District Courts by
law". This dispute in this case is purely a civil matter concerning a dispute
arising out of a denial of a right to property which gives a cause of action
within the meaning of section 5 of the Civil Procedure Code. The District
Court therefore had rightly entertained this application. Whether it should
grant such a declaration is quite another matter. The limitations upon such
declaratory power are dealt with in the judgment of Fernando, S. P. J. in
Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu (1).  
  
Lastly it has been contended that the District Court cannot grant the
declaration prayed for in the plaint because it has no supervisory
jurisdiction to seek to remedy a judicial or quasi judicial determination made
by a Statutory Authority-in this case the bank. The Court of Appeal has upheld
this contention. It has followed the decision in Perera v. The People's
Bank(2). The facts of the case are as follows: The plaintiff -appellant in
that case was the title-holder by purchase of a land sold on a hypothecary
decree against the 3rd defendant- respondent. The 2nd defendant­ respondent
was the Secretary of the Land Redemption Branch of the People's Bank. The bank
acting under the provisions of section 71 of the Finance Act, No. 11 of 1963,
was satisfied that the land was sold or transferred in terms of,- and subject
to the limitations laid down by, that section. It therefore notified the
plaintiff -appellant of its decision. The plaintiff -appellant instituted an
action in the District Court of Colombo praying for a declaration that the
bank had no authority to make the proposed acquisition. A preliminary issue
had been raised as to whether the Court had jurisdiction to try the case
because the remedy was by way of writ and not by way of declaration in a
regular action. The trial Judge had decided against the plaintiff -appellant.
The appeal was heard by three Judges of the Supreme Court. Sirimane, J. was
not disposed to follow the English practice. He held that the "appropriate
remedy (was) by way of certiorari and not by regular regular action". His
reasoning is as follows:

**126**

"In cases such as this where a statutory authority acts judicially in arriving
at a determination in terms of that statute, I am of the view that where it is
sought to question or challenge the validity of such determination the
appropriate (and not merely the more appropriate) remedy is by way of writ of
certiorari. Even apart from the fact that the Court is undoubtedly exercising
a supervisory jurisdiction in such matters, the declaratory action in this
country is not a procedure that is conducive to an expeditious decision of
such a dispute. When the legislature entrusts a statutory authority to make
determinations in accordance with that statute for the purpose of achieving
the aims for which such statute was enacted, it is essential that any dispute
touching such a determination should be expeditiously disposed of one way or
another so that such authority may act or refrain from acting in such matters.
If however such statutory determinations are made the subject of a regular
declaratory action the inevitable delay in such a procedure may well
completely defeat the purposes of such statute. The instant case affords a
good example of such a situation. The determination that is being questioned
in this case was meant by the terms of the statute under which it was made to
enable a debtor in difficult circumstances to redeem through the People's Bank
his property that was sold against him on a mortgage decree. The property in
this case was sold about 24.05.61 and in consequence of a determination under
the Finance Act 11 of 1963 this action was filed in April 1964 and the
preliminary issue decided in the District Court in February 1970. We are now
in 1975­over 11 years after the action was instituted. The remedy by way of
writ on the other hand would be much more expeditious. I am therefore in
respectful agreement with the decision followed by the learned Trial Judge
above referred to that the appropriate remedy of the plaintiff was by way of
an application for a writ of certiorari."  
  
From this statement I deduce two basic reasons:  
  
(1) The District Court is "undoubtedly exercising a supervisory jurisdiction".  
  
(2) A declaratory action causes undue delay and therefore prevents expeditious
disposal of the dispute. The remedy by way of writ of certiorari "would be
much more expeditious".

**127**

For these two reasons he concludes that the remedy by way of certiorari is the
appropriate (and not merely the more appropriate) remedy. In this context the
use of the word "appropriate" can only mean "proper" or "suitable". One cannot
but concur with the second reason in the light of the facts of that case. But
is it not a statement of policy? I know of no law in Sri Lanka which states
that the expeditious disposal of a case should guide a litigant in deciding
the form in which and the Court in which his action should be filed. Nor does
the law state that such considerations should guide a court in deciding
whether it is to entertain an action or not. If prudence be the guide, then no
doubt such considerations will hold sway. The law does not however lay down
such a condition. This second reason of Sirimane, J. is therefore a statement
of policy applicable to the administration of justice. It is not a statement
of the law.  
  
The first reason given by Sirimane, J. has not been amplified and we do not
therefore have the benefit of the reasoning behind it. However there is a clue
to it in that he states the District Judge was "right in answering the
preliminary issue against the plaintiff -appellant" following the decisions in
three earlier cases. It is necessary therefore to examine these earlier cases.  
  
The first of these cases is the case of Leo v. Land Commissioner (3). There
the Land Commissioner purporting to act under the provisions of the Land
Redemption Ordinance, No. 61 of 1942, which empowered him to redeem
agricultural property sold on a hypothecary decree, sought to acquire premises
which consisted of "a substantial dwelling house, a brick wall, a temporary
latrine and a garden containing 181 coconut trees and several plantain
bushes." The purchaser had made considerable improvements to the premises at a
cost of Rs. 20,000 to render it fit for residence by him. The Supreme Court
held that it was manifestly not agricultural land and therefore the Land
Commissioner had acted in excess of his jurisdiction. The order was quashed by
writ of certiorari. The application in Leo's case was for a writ of certiorari
which is clearly a supervisory jurisdiction. There is no statement in the
judgment which categorically deals with the applicability or availability of a
mere declaratory decree nor even a discussion of the subject. However I find a
statement which seems to suggest that another remedy has to be resorted to
when the dispute evolves round a question of fact about which there is a
conflict of evidence. Gratiaen, J. states at page 182 :

**128**

 "If upon the facts, the excess Of jurisdiction is manifest, or if the
evidence before the superior Court is plainly insufficient to justify a
conclusion that the limited jurisdiction has not been exceeded, certiorari
will lie. On the other hand, the dispute may turn on a question of fact about
which there is a conflict of evidence: in that even the Court will generally
decline to interfere by way of certiorari leaving it open to the aggrieved
party to challenge the jurisdiction of an inferior tribunal in a regular
action where the issue can be more conveniently disposed of."  
  
He does not however refer to a declaratory decree.  
  
The next case is the Privy Council decision in Ladamuttu Pillai v. The Land
Commissioner (4). The plaintiff in this case sought a declaration in the
District Court of Colombo that the Land Commissioner had no power to acquire
the land which was the subject of the dispute as he was a bona fide purchaser
for value. He also asked for an injunction restraining the Land Commissioner
from acquiring the land. The District Judge has in his answer to issue 4
stated that "the question of law whether the Land Commissioner had authority
to acquire a particular land is subject to review by the District Court but
his decision on facts is final". The Privy Council ordered the restoration of
the Order of the District Court and the dismissal of the action because it
held that on the facts established the land could be acquired under the
provisions of the Land Redemption Ordinance. In regard to the constitution of
the action it had this to say:  
  
"While their Lordships must reserve their opinion upon the question (which in
view of the conclusions reached by their Lordships does not immediately arise)
as to whether in circumstances such as those in the present cause any
injunction against the Attorney- Genera I could or ought to be granted their
Lordships consider that if the authority of a Land Commissioner to make a
determination under section 3 of the Land Development Ordinance is challenged
the appropriate procedure is by way of an application for certiorari (see Leo
v. Land Commissioner (1955) (57 N. L. R. 178) ). The Land Commissioner as the
judicial tribunal the validity of whose action is being tested may then
conveniently be brought before the higher Court so that if necessary his
decision or order may be brought up and quashed. If in some particular case it
can be shown that

**129**

a determination has not been within the competence of a Land Commissioner and
if an application is made which results in an order to bring up and quash his
determination then the difficulties which the present proceedings bring into
relief are avoided. It was Mr. Amarasinghe who was the Land Commissioner in
July, 1949, when these proceedings began and whose proxy was filed and on
whose behalf an answer was presented. If a declaration were now to be made-who
would be bound? If an injunction were to be granted-who would be enjoined?"  
  
The case of Leo v. The Land Commissioner has been cited as an example of
"appropriate procedure". As stated above that case did not decide that
certiorari was the only procedure or that an action for a declaratory judgment
was not open to the plaintiff. The Privy Council refers to the fact that an
injunction or declaration would be of no value due to the fact that the
incumbent in the office of Land Commissioner had changed since the action was
instituted, and therefore if it became necessary to bring up and quash the
decision or order of the Land Commissioner the only way it could conveniently
have been done was by way of a writ of certiorari as was done in the case of
Leo v. Land Commissioner The decision of the Privy Council is no authority for
the proposition that it cannot in a case such as this adopt a supervisory
jurisdiction by way of a declaratory decree.  
  
The third case is the case of Singho Mahatmaya v. The Land Commissioner (5).
This was also instituted against the Land Commissioner seeking a declaration
that a land depicted in Plan No. 86 dated 14.7.1946 was not liable to be
acquired in terms of the provisions of the Land Redemption Ordinance. The
District Judge upheld an objection taken by the respondent that the action
cannot be maintained as it had been instituted against the Land Commissioner
nomine officii. The Supreme Court approved of this ruling but decided the
appeal on another matter which quite apparently was not the matter on which
the appeal was made to the Supreme Court. G. P. A. Silva, J. in delivering the
judgment of the Court stated that in Ladamuttu's case the Privy Council had
ruled that "if the authority of the Land Commissioner to make a determination
under section 3 of the Land Redemption Ordinance (mistakenly called the Land
Development Ordinance) is challenged the appropriate procedure was by way of
an application for certiorari. They did not say that certiorari  was the more

**130**

appropriate procedure". Silva, J. therefore concluded that the appellant could
not in any event maintain the action. As pointed out earlier, this is an
erroneous view as the Privy Council did not in Ladamuttu's case say that the
only course open to an aggrieved party was by writ of certiorari. It only
pointed to the most convenient course that could be adopted for the purpose of
achieving an effective order leading to a finality in the dispute. In view of
what I have stated above I am unable to agree with the contention that the
authorities cited support the proposition that only a remedy by certiorari is
available to the plaintiff.  
  
The Court of Appeal does not deny the plaintiff's right to seek a declaration
but states the declaration sought by him cannot be granted because it seeks to
review a decision of a Statutory Tribunal. Such a supervisory power, in the
opinion of the Court of Appeal, can only be exercised if expressly conferred
by "specific statutory provision". The dictum of Morris, L. J. in the case of
Healey v. Minister of Health (6) at 231 is-cited as authority for the
proposition. The facts of the case are as follows: By a letter dated December
31, 1952, written by the Minister of Health to the plaintiff, who was a
shoemaker employed by the Morgannwg Hospital Management Committee, the
Minister determined, pursuant to Regulation 60 of the National Health Service
(Superannuation) Regulations, 1950 that the plaintiff was not a mental health
officer within the meaning of the regulations. The plaintiff in his action
sought from Court a declaration "that he was, and at all times had been, a
mental health officer within the meaning of the regulations". The Court held
that what the plaintiff was seeking to do was to induce the Court to
substitute its declaration in place of the declaration made by the Minister.
All three Judges were clearly against making such a declaration. Denning, J.
at page 227 stated -  
  
" The plaintiff's object is clear: he is seeking in these proceedings to get
the court to say that the Minister's decision was wrong. It was wrong, he
says, either in law or in fact or in both, but it was certainly wrong; and
that is a ground for the court making a declaration saying what the right
order should have been."  
  
At page 228 he gave his reasons as follows:  
  
"The relief which is sought does not include a declaration that the Minister's
determination was invalid. It seeks only a  

**131**

declaration that the plaintiff is and was a mental health officer. It is
obvious that if the court were to consider granting this declaration it would
have to hear the case afresh. The plaintiff would have to give evidence
showing how he spent his time and the Minister would have to be allowed to
give evidence in answer to it. In short the court would have to re - hear the
very matter which the Minister has decided. If the court were to embark on a
re-hearing of this sort there is no telling where it would stop. Every person
who was disappointed with a Minister's decision could bring an action for a
re-hearing. That would be going much too far. Suppose that the court did re-
hear the matter and decide in the plaintiff's favour, and did grant the
declaration for which he asks, what would happen to the Minister's decision?
So far as I can see, it would still stand unless the Minister chose of his own
free will to revoke it. There would then be two inconsistent findings, one by
the Minister and the other by the court. That would be a most undesirable
state of affairs. In my opinion, if the court were to entertain this
declaration, it would be going outside its province altogether. It would be
exercising a jurisdiction to "hear and determine" which does not belong to it
but to the Minister."  
  
Morris, J. expressed himself thus at page 230:  
  
"It seems to me clear that what is claimed in the statement of claims is a
review, by way of appeal, of the decision of the Minister. The court is being
asked to decide a question which by regulation 60 is to be determined by the
Minister. The court is not asked to revoke the Minister's determination and if
the court made a declaration as asked then the fate of the Minister's
determination might remain obscure. In substance what is undoubtedly sought,
however, is a declaration binding on the Minister which would reverse his
previous decision. This can only mean that the plaintiff is seeking to appeal
from the Minister. His action and his claim can have no other significance or
intention."  
  
Parker, J. pointed out at page 232 that the "issue to be tried is whether, the
Minister having made a determination, this court has jurisdiction by
declaration, not to declare that his determination is null and void or that it
should be quashed, but to make another determination and one in the opposite
sense to that made by the Minister." He held that the court had no such
jurisdiction. He added-

**132**

 "To hold otherwise would be to invest the court with an appellate
jurisdiction, as opposed to a supervisory jurisdiction, which it certainly has
not got. A right of appeal is the creature of statute, and the regulations
give no right of appeal."  
  
Parker, J. makes a clear distinction between an appellate jurisdiction and a
supervisory jurisdiction. He was there not dealing with a supervisory
jurisdiction and the case is therefore not of any assistance in deciding the
present case in which the sole contention is that the District Court of Kandy
had no jurisdiction to make a supervisory order by way of a mere declaration.
There is no doubt that our District Courts do not have a general appellate
jurisdiction from a decision of a tribunal. Such a jurisdiction can be
exercised only if granted by Statute. Instances of such appellate jurisdiction
are to be found in section 41 of the Rural Courts Ordinance (Chapter 8),
section 12 (5) of the Trade Marks Ordinance (Chapter 150), section 16 of the
Trade Unions Ordinance (Chapter 138) and section 30 of the Estate Duty Act,
No. 13 of 1980.  
  
Sirimane, J. states that the law in England on this matter is not clear, and
he therefore steered clear of English precedent. The High Court in England
possesses both an original and a supervisory jurisdiction. However the law in
England does recognise a naked declaratory order. Denning, L. J. in Barnard v.
National Deck Labour Board (7) had no doubt that the English Courts did have
the power "to interfere with the decisions of Statutory Tribunals" by way of
declaration. At page 41 he states thus:  
  
"I think that there is much force in Mr. Paull's contention; so much so that I
am sure that in the vast majority of cases the courts will not seek to
interfere with the decisions of statutory tribunals; but that there is power
to do so, not only by certiorari, but also by way of declaration, I do not
doubt. I know of no limit to the power of the court to grant a declaration
except such limit as it may in its discretion impose upon itself; and the
court should not, I think, tie its hands in this matter of statutory
tribunals. It is axiomatic that when a statutory tribunal sits to administer
justice, it must act in accordance with the law. Parliament clearly so
intended. If the tribunal does not observe the law, what is to be done? The
remedy by certiorari is hedged round by limitations and may not be available.
Why then should not the court intervene by declaration and injunction? If it
cannot so intervene, it would

**133**

mean that the tribunal could disregard the law, which is a thing no one can do
in this country."  
  
In the case of lbeneweka v. Egbuna (8), the plaintiffs asked for a declaration
of title to land against defendants who, until the suit was instituted, had
done nothing to dispute that title. They however put the plaintiff to proof of
his title and the trial Judge found, that they were championing the rights of
those not represented, on which basis the case was fought, and that the
unrepresented parties were in reality fighting the suit. The Privy Council
held that a declaration of title in plaintiff's favour was properly
entertained and granted. At page 224 the Privy Council stated -  
  
"The general theme of judicial observations has been to the effect that
declarations are not lightly to be granted. The power should be exercised
"sparingly", with "great care and jealousy", with "extreme caution", with "the
utmost caution". These are indeed counsels of moderation, even though as, Lord
Dunedin once observed, such expressions afford little guidance for particular
cases. Nevertheless, anxious warnings of this character appear to their
Lordships to be not so much enunciations of legal principle as administrative
cautions issued by eminent and prudent judges to their, possibly more
reckless, successors. After all, it is doubtful if there is more of principle
involved than the undoubted truth that the power to grant a declaration should
be exercised with a proper sense of responsibility and a full realisation that
judicial pronouncements ought not to be issued unless there are circumstances
that call for their making. Beyond that there is no legal restriction on the
award of a declaration. "in my opinion", said Lord Sterndale M. R. in Hanson
v. Radcliffe U.D.C. (1922) 2 Ch. 490, 507; 38 T.L.R. 667, CA.) "under Order 25
r.5, the power of the court to make a declaration, where it is a question of
defining the rights of two parties, is almost unlimited; I might say only
limited by its own discretion. The discretion should, of course, be exercised
judicially, but it seems to me that the discretion is very wide."  
  
In the case of Imperial Tobacco Co. Ltd. v. Attorney-General (9) it transpired
that the plaintiff had started a "Spot Cash" advertising scheme to promote the
sale of their cigarettes. Prizes were offered to be won . The Director of
Public Prosecutions

**134**

launched a prosecution against the plaintiff on the basis that the scheme was
an unlawful lottery. The plaintiff sought a declaration from Court that it was
not a lottery. The Court of Appeal held that such a declaration was rightly
granted in spite of the pending prosecution as there was "a really debatable
question of construction on which it is desirable that an authoritative ruling
should be speedily obtained". In England the power to grant declarations is
contained in Order XXV Rule 5 of the Rules of the Supreme Court 1883. It reads
as follows:  
  
"No action or proceeding shall be open to objection on the ground that a mere
declaratory judgment or order is sought thereby, and the Court may make
binding declarations of right whether any consequential relief is or could be
claimed or not."  
  
Section 217 (G) of the Civil Procedure Code enacted in 1889 permits a
declaratory judgment without granting any substantive relief or remedy. Both
provisions permit a naked declaratory judgment. There is no doubt, as pointed
out by Fernando, S.P.J. in Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu (1) at 79, that our
legislature intended to adopt the English Law contained in Order XXV Rule V.
In that case a mere declaration of status was granted to plaintiff.
Declaratory actions are common in modern times. Such an action was the only
remedy available against the Crown in imperial times and is so, with some
limitation, against the State today, "and Courts of Justice have always
assumed so far without disillusionment that their declaratory decrees against
the Crown will be respected"-per Gratiaen, J. in Attorney-General
v.Sabaratnam(10). "The essence of a declaratory judgment is that it states the
rights or legal position of the parties as they stand, without changing them
in any way; though it may be supplemented by other remedies in suitable
cases." (Wade, Administrative Law, Ed. 4, page 499). A declaratory judgment
merely states in authorative fashion the legal position of the parties in a
given situation, without any order to do or not to do anything. Since there is
no demand for obedience, no execution can ensue; the declaration is a basis
for future action by the parties. Each of them is free to disregard it, though
in practice, in most cases, if a party does not conform his conduct to it, he
will lay himself open to some coercive remedy at the instance of the other
party. Yet a declaratory judgment cannot be executed as such because there is
nothing in it to execute." (Remedies of English Law by Lawson, page 30). Such
judgments and orders bear fruit only if those who are adversely

**135**

affected by them choose to respect them and act accordingly. Besides certain
limitations that Judges usually observe, and should observe in exercising
their discretion to make a declaration, (vide Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu
(supra) ), there are no other limitations that can be considered. It is now
stated that there is a limitation in that "supervisory orders" cannot be made
because a District Court has no jurisdiction to do so. "Supervisory Orders" is
not a legal term but a convenient expression used by lawyers and Judges alike
to denote cases where orders are made invalidating the order or judgment of
another tribunal such as quashing orders by way of writ of certiorari or
prohibition. "Supervisory Order" is not a term that can be applied to a
declaration under the provisions of section 217 (G) Civil Procedure Code
because there is no order in the first place, and secondly, it has no teeth
and is therefore not one that the machinery of the law could enforce.
"Supervisory" in reference to a declaratory judgment is a loose term to
describe the function of review which is a process that must necessarily take
place before a court pronounces upon the legality or otherwise of a decision
of a body such as an inferior tribunal. Such an exercise is not forbidden by
law.  
  
Vythialingam, J., while agreeing with Sirimane, J. in Perera v. Peoples' Bank
(supra), has advanced an additional reason. He states that District Courts
have not been granted supervisory jurisdiction because they are courts of
record and not superior courts. Supervisory jurisdiction if granted to
District Courts are granted by means of an appellate jurisdiction expressly
provided for in the statute, even though they are not superior courts of
record. No other supervisory jurisdiction is granted either expressly or
impliedly in law. If however he intended to refer to "supervisory" in the
sense of "review" which is a preliminary step to a naked declaration, I need
only say that the law does not either expressly or impliedly prohibit it.  
  
An argument was addressed to us based on the provisions of section 23 of the
Interpretation (Amendment) Act, No. 18 of 1972. It was contended that the
District Court was prohibited from making the declaration sought by the
plaintiff on the ground that the dispute arises "out of or in respect of or in
derogation of any order, decision, determination, direction or finding which
any person, authority or tribunal is empowered to make or issue under any
written law". The attack in this case is on the very jurisdiction of the bank
and hence that is was not empowered to make the

**136**

impugned order. If that be so the order of the bank is a nullity. Anisminic v.
Foreign Compensation Commission 11) .  
  
I am of opinion that the appellant is entitled in law to maintain this
application for a declaration. The appeal is allowed is allowed with costs  
  
**ISMAIL, J.-I** agree.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.-I** agree.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J.-I** agree.  
  
**  
WIMALARATNE, J.  
**  
I regret that I have to dissent from the conclusion arrived at by My Lord the
Chief Justice on the answer to the question as to whether our District Courts
have jurisdiction to declare the decision of a statutory body null and void.
The statutory body in this case is the State Mortgage Bank, and the decision
is one made by it by virtue of powers vested under section 70B (1) of the
Ceylon State Mortgage Bank and Finance (Amendment) Act, No. 33 of 1968. That
section authorised the bank to acquire any agricultural, residential or
business premises if the bank was satisfied that those premises were, at any
time not earlier than 1.1.52,sold in execution of a mortgage decree or were
transferred in the circumstances specified in the section, and subject to the
limitations laid down therein. The circumstances under which the bank made the
decision to acquire the premises belonging to the plaintiff are set out in the
judgment of the Chief Justice, and it is unnecessary for me to repeat them.  
  
The plaintiff is seeking in these proceedings before the District Court to get
that Court to say that the bank's decision was wrong, either in law or in fact
or in both, and that that is a ground for the court making a declaration
saying that the decision has no force or effect in law. For this purpose the
plaintiff, invokes the provisions of section 217 (G) of the Civil Procedure
Code, which reads as follows:  
  
"217\. A decree or order of court may ........without affording any
substantive relief or remedy-  
  
(G) declare a right of status."  
  
The learned District Judge answering a preliminary objection to Jurisdiction,
held that he had the jurisdiction to grant the decree

**137**

asked for. The Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 6.3.80 in setting aside
that finding, has taken the view that only a court which exercises supervisory
jurisdiction has the power to declare the decision of a statutory body null
and void: and that as our District Courts are not vested with supervisory
powers over statutory tribunals, they have no power to grant the declaration
asked for. In. reaching this conclusion the Court of Appeal has been guided by
a decision of the former Supreme Court in V. I. Perera v. The People's Bank
(2). In the course of his judgment in that case D. Q. M. Sirimane, J. observed
(at p. 244) that "where a statutory body acts judicially in arriving at a
determination in terms of the statute, I am of the view that where it is
sought to question or challenge the validity of such determination, the
appropriate (and not merely the more appropriate) remedy is by way of
certiorari". Vythialingam, J. in the course of his judgment, expressed the
same view thus (at p. 253): "The District Court has no jurisdiction to grant a
declaration in cases where it is sought as a supervisory remedy to challenge
the validity of a judicial or quasi judicial act."  
  
It does not appear from the proceedings that leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court was asked for from the Court of Appeal, nor does it appear that that
Court has granted leave to appeal. It was by petition and affidavit dated
23.3.80 that the plaintiff asked for special leave from the Supreme Court. The
Supreme Court has granted special leave by order dated 11.6.80.  
  
In challenging the correctness of this decision, learned Counsel for the
plaintiff appellant has contended before us that both the Court of Appeal in
the present case and the former Supreme Court in Perera's case (above) have
fallen into the error of classifying the jurisdiction exercised by the
District Court as supervisory. He submits that when a District Court enters a
decree declaring a right or status it exercises an original jurisdiction, even
though in the process the Court may have to "review" the correctness of the
determination of a statutory body or tribunal. The only limitation to the
granting of such a declaration is the discretion vested in the Court. Such a
declaration is a harmless one, and is one made in the exercise of the Court's
original civil jurisdiction.  
  
Learned counsel for the respondent bank has contended, on the other hand, that
the District Court would be exercising a supervisory, and not an original
jurisdiction when it declares the  

**138**

decision of a statutory body null and void, and that our District Courts have
not been vested with such supervisory jurisdiction. He submits that to
ascertain the jurisdiction of an inferior court one has to look at the
founding statute, in this case the former Courts Ordinance (Cap. 6). Section
62 gave the District Court unlimited original civil jurisdiction, the only
limitation being a territorial one. Nowhere were they given a supervisory
jurisdiction over statutory tribunals or other bodies exercising judicial or
quasi judicial functions. In contrast, section 7 of the same founding statute
designated the Supreme Court as the only superior court of record, and by
section 42 gave it full power to grant and issue according to law mandates in
the nature of writs of mandamus, quo warranto, certiorari, precedent, and
prohibition, against any District Judge, Commissioner (of Requests),
Magistrate or other person or tribunal. The only superior court being the
Supreme Court, the District Court in his submission, is an inferior court as
far as jurisdiction is concerned, and an inferior court can never exercise
supervisory jurisdiction except when the legislature specifically provides for
it. It is only a superior court that has inherent jurisdiction. An inferior
Court has no inherent jurisdiction; its only jurisdiction is that vested in it
by the statute creating it.  
  
In the case of Ladamuttu Pillai v. The Land Commissioner (4), the Privy
Council observed that "if the authority of the Land Commissioner to make a
determination under section 3 of the Land Redemption Ordinance is challenged
the appropriate procedure is by way of an application for certiorari".
Sirimane, J. has accepted that as a correct statement of the law. My Lord the
Chief Justice in his judgment, however, takes the view that "that decision of
the Privy Council is no authority for the proposition that it (the District
Court) cannot in a case such as this adopt a supervisory jurisdiction by way
of a declaratory decree". In disagreeing with Vythialingam, J., the Chief
Justice takes the view that the law does not expressly or impliedly prohibit
the District Court from exercising a power of review. I regret I have to
disagree for the reason that section 217(G) of the Civil Procedure Code does
not, in my view, empower a District Court, to "review" and/or declare as null
and void the decision of a statutory body.  
  
In this connection some important and fundamental distinctions between
superior and inferior courts have at the inception to be noted. A superior
court is a court having inherent jurisdiction to exercise a power, whereas an
inferior Court is a court whose

**139**

jurisdiction and powers are limited to those matters or things which are
expressly deputed to it by its document of foundation or by legal custom
-Stroud's Judicial Dictionary (1974), Vol. 5, p. 2685, 6. The presumption
against ousting the jurisdiction of a court is applicable only to a superior
court-Maxwell-Interpreta­tion of Statutes (12th Ed.) 153; S. A. de Smith
-Judicial Review of Administrative Action (4th Edition) 358\. The reverse
applies to an inferior court, that is that you must conclusively establish
that the Court is vested with jurisdiction over the matter in question.
Consequently it follows that a court has no power to make a declaration on a
subject relief in respect of which is beyond the jurisdiction of that court-
Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Ed.) P. 171 para 185. When our Civil Procedure
Code, by section 839, saved the inherent powers of the District Court to make
such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of
the process of Court, it did not vest any additional power to act in excess of
the District Court's jurisdiction as laid down in the founding statute.  
  
Both Sirimane, J. and Vythialingam, J. have, in support of their opinions,
made several references to Dr.1. Zamir's work on "The Declaratory Judgment
(1962)". In the case of Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu (1), H. N. G. Fernando, S.
P. J. (as he then was) has "freely borrowed" extracts from Zamir, which he has
categorised as "a comprehensive and very helpful study of English cases". This
work of Zamir has been referred to by such eminent jurists as S. A. de Smith
and F. H. Lawson. This is what Zamir has to say, at p. 69:  
  
"The jurisdiction of the superior courts to make a declaration is two fold:
Original and supervisory. The original jurisdiction may be invoked for the
determination of disputes at first instance; the supervisory jurisdiction is
exercised to review decisions arrived at by other bodies. In many cases the
Courts have both original and supervisory jurisdictions. Accordingly, upon a
particular issue they may be resorted to either in the first instance, or if
the issue had already been decided by another body, for a review of that
decision". As there has been some criticism of this statement, it is
necessary, in order to test its correctness, to trace in brief outline the
history of the development of the declaratory judgment in English Law.  
  
The declaratory judgement has its origin in the Chancery Court in the middle
of the 19th Century as a means of construing wills

**140**

and trust deeds. It gained full recognition in the field of private law in the
early part of the 20th century, and today declarations are issued concerning
matters of personal status, title to property, construction of contracts and
other written documents. Its entry into the field of public law has been
comparatively recent and it has been utilised by the citizen as a means of
challenging administrative acts and decisions which he claims to be unlawful.
It would seem that both the Court of Chancery as well as the Court of
Exchequer had always had, as part of their inherent powers, the jurisdiction
to make declarations of right not followed by consequential relief. The
reluctance of the courts to promote the development of the declaratory order
led Parliament to enact the Chancery Act of 1850 and the Chancery Procedure
Act of 1852, which made it lawful for the High Court of Chancery to make
binding declarations of right without granting consequential relief. As a
result of the narrow interpretation of these statutes by the Courts, the
declaratory relief was still unavailable where it was most needed, namely,
where no other remedy was available. The extension of the scope of the
declaratory order by the Supreme Court of Judicature Act, 1873, was therefore
a notable landmark. This Act transferred the jurisdiction of the superior
courts of common law and equity to the High Court, and empowered a Rule
Committee to make rules regulating the practice and procedure of the Court. It
is to be noted that the Rule committee had no powers to extend the
jurisdiction of the Court-de Smith, p. 481. It had, by virtue of sections 16
and 23 of the Judicature Act, only the power to make rules for practice and
procedure with respect to all matters over which the Supreme Court had
jurisdiction. By virtue of such powers, Rules were made in 1883. Several
orders made provisions for relief by way of declaratory orders, the most
important of which was Order 25 R5, which was in the following terms: "No
action or proceeding shall be open to objection, on the ground that a merely
declaratory judgment or order is sought thereby, and the Court may make
binding declarations of right whether any consequential relief is or could be
claimed or not". This order was revoked in 1962 and was replaced by Order 15 R
16 with only a minor rearrangement of the wording.  
  
The limits of the declaratory power are not laid down in this rule and the
extent of the power was left to the discretion of the High Court. Now, the
High Court was a superior court having an inherent jurisdiction, both original
and supervisory. The landmark in the use of the declaration in public law is
the case of Dyson v.

**141**

Attorney-General (17). Under an Act of 1910 the Commissioner of Inland Revenue
was empowered to demand from landowners, under threat of penalty in valuing
their lands. The notices sent out, however, demanded additional information. A
declaration was claimed in the King's Bench against the Attorney-General. The
Court of Appeal held that the demand was wholly ineffective in law and that
the land owner was entitled to the declaration. The court in granting the
declaration was there exercising its original jurisdiction. Since Barnard v.
National Dock Labour Board (7), it is clear law that the Queen's Courts can
grant a declaration by which they pronounce on the validity or invalidity of
proceedings of statutory tribunals as well. A declaration so made would be in
the exercise of the courts inherent supervisory jurisdiction. I am fully in
agreement with the statement that declaratory actions are common in modern
times and that the scope of the declaration has been extended to great
lengths, as would be seen from the judgments referred to by the Chief Justice.
But it has to be remembered that the progressive extension of the scope of the
declaratory order was possible in England because the High Court to which
resort had to be had was a superior court and was vested with inherent
jurisdiction, both original and supervisory.  
  
Proceedings in which declaratory relief is claimed under Order 15 R16 may be
instituted in any Division of the High Court before a single judge.
Alternatively, a declaration to determine a matter of public law may be
brought either alone or in combination with certiorari, prohibition, mandamus
or a claim for damages in an application for judicial review under Order 53 rr
1 (2), 2. The application for leave to apply and the application itself must
normally be brought in the Divisional Court of the Queen's Bench Division - de
Smith, p. 523.  
  
County courts, unlike the High Court, have no general jurisdiction to grant
either declarations or injunctions except in respect of disputes relating to
land whose net value for rating falls within the monetary limits of their
jurisdiction, or as ancillary relief when the principal claim otherwise falls
within their jurisdiction-­de Smith, p. 524.  
  
it will thus be seen that the development of the declaratory judgment in
England to the extent it has reached, enabling the review of decisions of
statutory bodies, was possible by reason of

**142**

the inherent original and supervisory jurisdiction exercised by the High
Courts as superior courts. Dr. Zamir's statement of the law referred to
earlier therefore sets out the correct position as far as the English Law is
concerned.  
  
We may now compare the jurisdiction of our District Courts with the
jurisdiction of the High Court in England. The founding statute, the Charter
of 1833, by section 24, as well as its successor, the Courts Ordinance, No. 1
of 1889, by section 62, vested in the District Court only an unlimited
Original Civil Jurisdiction. The jurisdiction referred to in section 217(G) of
the Civil Procedure Code was already in existence immediately before the
Courts Ordinance came into operation on 2.8.1890. In conferring that
declaratory jurisdiction the legislature seems to have adopted the English
procedure contained in Order 25 r 5 of the English Rules of the Supreme Court
1883.  
  
Like the emphasis on the word "original" in relation to this jurisdiction
placed by H. N. G. Fernando, S. P. J. in Thiagarajah's case (above at p. 76),
one has to keep in mind that the declaratory decree can be entered by the
District Court only in the exercise of its "original" jurisdiction. Nowhere is
there any investment of a -supervisory" or "appellate" Civil Jurisdiction. The
Supreme Court being designated the only superior court of record, it follows
that the District Courts are inferior courts of record. Unless it is
conclusively established that they are vested with a certain jurisdiction it
cannot be presumed that they have that jurisdiction. The declaratory decree
which the District Court is empowered to enter is, therefore, one which can be
entered only in the exercise of its "original" jurisdiction. It is similar to
the jurisdiction conferred on the County Courts to make declaratory orders
within the limits of their monetary and territorial jurisdiction, or as
ancillary relief to the principal claim made within jurisdiction. Nowhere have
our District Courts been given supervisory declaratory jurisdiction. They have
been vested with wide powers of original civil jurisdiction, and are thus able
to enter declaratory judgments within the scope of that jurisdiction,
especially in the field of private law. The case of Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu
(above), is typical of the wide extent of the jurisdiction of the District
Court, in the exercise of its original jurisdiction, to declare a status. But
where the District Court is called upon to declare the decision of a statutory
tribunal a nullity it is called upon to exercise a supervisory jurisdiction
which, in my view, it does not have

**143**

The next contention of learned Counsel for the plaintiff has been that even if
the view be taken that District Courts are not invested by any statute with
supervisory jurisdiction, yet they do have an inherent jurisdiction to review
the decisions of inferior statutory tribunals, like the inherent jurisdiction
exercised by the High Court in England. It would, I think, be wrong to compare
the High Court in England with our District Courts in this respect, because
historically the supervisory jurisdiction was inherent in the High Court by
virtue of its designation as a superior court. This is made clear in the
judgment of Cockburn, C. J. in ex parte Jolliffe (12): "It is laid down in
Hawkins (pleas of the Crown) and other writers of authority that the power of
committing for contempt committed in the face of the courts is given to
inferior courts, but it is nowhere said that they have the power so to punish
contempt's committed out of courts.  
  
"There is an obvious distinction between Inferior Courts created by statute
and superior courts of law and equity. In these superior courts the power of
committing for contempt is inherent in their constitution and has been coeval
with their original institutions, and has been always exercised. The origin
can be traced to the time when all the courts were divisions of the Great
Curia Regis-the Supreme Court of the Sovereign-in which he personally, or by
his immediate representative, sat to administer justice. The power of the
courts in this respect was therefore an emanation from the Royal authority,
which when exercised personally, or in the presence of the Sovereign made a
contempt of the Crown punishable summarily, and this power passed to the
superior courts when they were created."  
  
When the District Court of Kandy attempted in 1851 to issue a writ of habeas
corpus without having statutory jurisdiction to do so, the Supreme Court held,
in the Application of A. W. Shaw (13), that the District Court did not have
inherent power to issue the writ. On the other hand although prior to 1833 the
Supreme Court did have statutory powers to issue mandates in the nature of
writs of mandamus, certiorari, procedendo and error, it did not have statutory
power to issue writ of habeas corpus. But it did issue writs of habeas corpus
by virtue of its inherent powers, powers inherent only in Superior Courts  
  
Again when the District Court of Colombo established under the Charter of 1833
attempted to commit for contempt ex facie,

**144**

a Collective Court considered the jurisdiction of our District Courts in the
Application of John Ferguson (14), and Morgan A.C.J. had this to say (at pp.
185, 187):  
  
"Can our District Courts, then, be regarded as Superior Courts in the sense in
which the word was used in the decision last referred to? (i.e. Ex Parte
Joliffe) Superior and inferior are relative terms, and our District Courts
undoubtedly have powers much larger than those appertaining to English County
Courts. It does not follow, however, that they are Superior Courts in the
sense in which the Superior Courts at Westminster and the High Court of
Chancery are Superior Courts."  
  
"Now District Courts cannot be regarded as Superior Courts in this sense. It
is true that they are Courts invested with very important functions, and with
an unlimited original civil jurisdiction within their own districts; but their
jurisdiction is territorially very limited in all cases, and in criminal
matters is confined to the trial and punishment of the lighter classes of
offences. Unlike the Supreme Court and the Superior Courts at Westminster, a
District Court has no control or superintendence over any other tribunal
whatsoever".  
  
The Charter of 1833 was replaced by the Courts Ordinance, No. 1 of 1890. The
place of the District Courts established thereunder was considered in King v.
Samaraweera (15), where they were held to be 'Inferior Courts of Record' and
thus not having full jurisdiction to punish all descriptions of contempt such
as the Supreme Court could exercise.  
  
It is significant that when the legislature considered it necessary to vest in
the District Court a right of appeal or a right of review it has always done
so by legislation. A good illustration is provided by the repealed Rural
Courts Ordinance (Cap. 8). A right of appeal from the decision of a Rural
Court was given to the District Court by section 41 (1) and a power of review
was given by section 41 (6). So that unless Parliament by legislation vests in
the District Court a power of review, that Court has in my view no inherent
jurisdiction to review the decision of a statutory tribunal. If it does so, it
would be acting in excess of its jurisdiction.  
  
When we are called upon to decide whether the District Court has jurisdiction
with regard to any matter we cannot assume the

**145**

power of making law for that purpose. It is the function of Parliament to
apportion jurisdiction to the several courts set up by legislation. We can
only interpret what we find made, and interpret it in the sense we believe it
to have been framed. Let me give an illustration which will make this clear.
Section 13of the Citizenship Act (Cap. 349) empowers the Minister, if he is
satisfied that an applicant for citizenship has rendered distinguished public
service or is eminent in professional, commercial, industrial or agricultural
life, to decide that he be registered as a citizen of Sri Lank& It is
permissible to institute an action in the District Court seeking a declaration
of a status. Can it be said that a person would have a­right to institute an
action for a declaration that he is a citizen, and in the process seek a
review of the decision of the Minister not to grant him citizenship? I do not
for a moment accept that the legislature ever intended that District Courts
should exercise such supervisory jurisdiction, and if we were to say that our
District Courts are empowered to do so, we would be making law in a sense
never intended by the legislature.  
  
Vythialingam, J. in Perera's case (above) after analysing the earlier case law
on the subject of the jurisdiction of the District Court to exercise a
supervisory jurisdiction had come to the conclusion that the earlier decisions
were not conclusive on the matter. A. L. S. Sirimane, J. in Attorney-General
v. Chanmugam (16), appears also to have had doubts about the conclusiveness of
the earlier decisions; so that Perera's case was the law when the legislature
enacted recently the Judicature Act, No. 2 of 1978, and the Code of Civil
Procedure Act, No. 20 of 1977. If Perera's case was not in accord with the
intention of the legislature there was ample opportunity for the legislature
to have made its intention clear when it enacted the recent legislation
vesting jurisdiction in the several courts of first instance. It may be
inferred, therefore, that the legislature has accepted that the decision in
Perera's case, delivered just two years earlier, had interpreted the law
correctly with regard to this limitation in the jurisdiction of the District
Court.  
  
The answer to the question as to which of the courts of Sri Lanka had or has
the jurisdiction to declare the decision of a statutory tribunal null and void
is, in my view, contained in section 42 of the former Courts Ordinance, and
now in Article 140 of the Constitution of 1978. The former Supreme Court had,
as much as the present Court of Appeal has, the power to issue

**146**

according to Law orders in the nature of writs of Quo Warranto against the
judge of any Court, tribunal or other institution, or any other person. Now,
Quo Warranto has been replaced by Declaration and Injunction in England by
Section 9 of the Administration of Justice (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act of
1938. In Sri Lanka, therefore, it is the Court of Appeal that now has the
jurisdiction to grant declarations annulling the decisions of statutory
tribunals, both by virtue of the Constitution as well as by virtue of the
inherent powers vested in it as a Superior Court.  
  
I must not be understood as saying that the scope of the declaratory judgment
cannot be developed in this country. It can and ought to be so developed to
the extent it has developed in England. There seems to be no obstacle to its
development in the District Court, but only in the exercise of its original
civil jurisdiction. The forum in which it has a bright future is the Court of
Appeal, which by virtue of its powers is vested with the necessary
jurisdiction to review the decisions of statutory bodies, and grant
declarations in the process.  
  
For these reasons I am of the opinion that although our District Courts, in
the exercise of their unlimited original Civil jurisdiction have wide powers
to enter declaratory decrees or orders in terms of section 217 G of the Civil
Procedure Code, especially in the field of private law, they have no
jurisdiction, statutory or inherent, to review, and/or to declare null and
void, the decisions of statutory tribunals. Such powers of review of the
decisions of statutory tribunals have always been exercised by the Superior
Courts, namely, the Supreme Court under the Courts Ordinance and the
Administration of Justice Law, and now by the Court of Appeal (subject, of
course, to the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court).  
  
I would, accordingly, dismiss this appeal with costs.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/20.html_  

