##  In Re the Nineteenth Amendment To the Constitution - SLR - 85, Vol 3 of
2002 [2002] LKSC 20; (2002) 3 Sri LR 85 (1 January 2002)

**85**

**IN RE THE NINETEENTH AMENDMENT  
TO THE CONSTITUTION**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,  
ISMAIL, J.,  
EDUSSURIYA, J.,  
YAPA, J. AND  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J.  
SD NOS. 11, 13, 15; 16-21; 25-28; 30-35 AND 37-40 OF 2002  
1ST AND 3RD OCTOBER 2002  
  
_Constitution - 19th Amendment to the Constitution - Petitions under Articles
121 (1)/123 of the Constitution - Amendments to Articles 43 (1), 49 and 70 -
Legislative power of Parliament - Articles 3, 4, 75, 83 (a), 84 (2) and 99
(13) (a) of the Constitution - Sovereignty of the people - Separation of
powers - Erosion of executive power of the people exercised by the President -
Rule of Law.  
  
_A Bill titled "the Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution" was placed on
the Order Paper of Parliament for 19. 09. 2002. The above-numbered petitions
were presented invoking the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in terms of
Article 121 (1) for a determination in terms of Article 123 of the
Constitution, in respect of the Bill.  
  
The Bill deals broadly with four matters :  
  
(1) The central provisions are contained in Clauses 4 and 5 for amending
Article 70 of the Constitution relating to dissolution of Parliament. The
amendments drastically remove the President's discretion in the matter,
especially where the President is not a member of the Governing Party in
Parliament. The erosion of the President's power is even more severe after the
lapse of one year referred to in Article 70 (1).  
  
(2) An amendment to Article 43 (3) of the Constitution relating to the
President's discretion to appoint a Prime Minister, in view of the

**86**

provisions of Clause 5 which, inter alia, makes it mandatory to appoint a
Prime Minister nominated by a resolution of Parliament \- Clauses 2 and 3 (1).  
  
(3) An amendment to Article 49 of the Constitution relating to the dissolution
of the Cabinet of Ministers and the appointment of new Ministers by the
President in view of the proposed new Article 70A (1) (b) which compels the
President to dissolve Parliament upon a resolution of no confidence or to
appoint a new Prime Minister as may be named in the resolution. - Clause 3
(2).  
  
(4) A new provision which permits members of Parliament to vote on any
amendment contained in the Bill according to their conscience and yet be
immuned from disciplinary action by the Party or by the Group to which such
member belongs, as provided by Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution -
Clause 6.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) Clauses 4, 5, 2 and 3 of the Bill have to be examined -

(a) In the light of Article 3 of the Constitution which provides - "In the
Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty, is in the people and is inalienable.
Sovereignty includes powers of government, fundamental rights and the
franchise.".  
  
(b) In the light of Article 4 which is linked to Article 3 and which sets out,
inter alia, the manner in which sovereignty of the people should be exercised
by the legislative, executive and judicial organs of the Government; and  
  
(c) In the light of the balance of power that has been struck in the
Constitution and in the context of the separation of powers as contained
particularly in Article 4.

(2) The organs of Government referred to in Article 4 must exercise their
power only in trust for the people.  
  
(3) The transfer of a power which is attributed by the Constitution to one
organ of Government to another or the relinquishment or removal of such power

**87**

would be an alienation of soverlignty inconsistent with Article 3 read with
Article 4 of the Constitution.  
  
(4) Dissolution of Parliament is a component of executive power of the People
to be exercised by the President for the People. It cannot be alienated in the
sense of being transferred, relinquished or removed from where it lies in
terms of Article 70 (1) of the Constitution. The final say even in situations
referred to in Article 70 (a) to (c) remains with the President. Therefore,
the amendments contained in Clauses 4 and 5 of the Bill constitute an
alienation of executive power inconsistent with Article 3 read with Article 4
of the Constitution and require to be passed by the special majority required
under Article 84 (2) and approved by the People at a Referendum by virtue of
the provisions of Article 83.  
  
(5) Clauses 2 and 3 (1) of the Bill relate to the dissolution of Parliament
and the amendments provided by Clauses 4 and 5 which, inter alia, require the
President to dissolve Parliament and appoint a Prime Minister nominated by
Parliament. Hence, those Clauses attract the determination stated above based
on inconsistency with Article 4 (b) and require the approval of the People at
a Referendum.  
  
(6) Clause 3 (2) which would require the President to dissolve Parliament on a
resolution of no confidence {vide Article 70 A (1) (b)) results in the
dissolution of Parliament itself upon such resolution. Hence, it is an
alienation of the legislative power of the people inconsistent with Article 3
read with Article 4 (a). As such Clause 3 (2) requires to be passed by the
special majority specified in Article 84 (2) and approved by the people at a
Referendum by virtue of Article 83.  
  
(7) Clause 6 has the effect of partly suspending Article 99 (13) (c) of the
Constitution. It also has implications on franchise defined in Article 4 (c)
and judicial power under Article 4 (c). That Clause cannot be validly enacted
by Parliament in view of the specific bar contained in Article 75 of the
Constitution.  
  
(8) If Clauses 4 and 5 of the Bill are removed and replaced with a clear
amendment to proviso (a) or Article 70 (1) whereby the period of the year
referred to therein is extended to a period not exceeding three years that
would not amount to an alienation of executive power of the President. The
inconsistency with Article 3 read with Article 4 (b) would thereby cease.

**88**

The substituted clause may be passed by the special majority under Article 84
(2) and does not require the approval of the People at a Referendum.  
  
1\. _Visuvalingam v. Liyanage_ (1983) 1 Sri LR 236.  
  
2\. _Premachandra v. Jayewickrema_ (1994) 2 Sri LR 90.  
  
3\. _Gupta and Others v. Union of India_ (1982) AIR (SC) 197.  
  
**PETITIONS** challenging the "Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution" under
Article 121 (1) for a determination under Article 123 of the Constitution.  
  
Counsel for petitioners :  
  
SD No. 11/2002 - Batty Weerakoone  
SD No. 13/2002 - Sarath Weragoda (in person)  
SD No. 15/2002 - D.P. Mendis, PC with Nadeera Gunawardena and Keerthi Segara  
SD No. 16/2002 - S. S. Sahabandu, PC with Keerthi Segara, Situge and S. D.
Yogendra  
SD No. 17/2002 - A. A.De Silva, PC with A. W. Yusuf, Prasanna Obeysekera and
Chaminda Weerakkody  
SD No. 18/2002 - R. I. Obeysekera, PC with A. W. Yusuf, P. Liyanaarachhci,
Chaminda Weerakkody and Piyal  Ranatunga  
SD No. 19/2002 - B. Jayamanna with Swinitha Gunaratne  
SD No. 20/2002 - L. V. P. Wettasinghe with Swinitha Gunaratne  
SD No. 21/2002 - M. A. Sumanthiran with V. Corea and Renuka Senanayake  
SD No. 25/2002 - Anil Obeysekera, PC with Palitha de Silva and Bandula Wellala  
SD No. 26/2002 - E. P. Wickremasekera (in person)  
SD No. 27/2002 - A. A. de Silva, PC with P. Abeykoon and Kanishka Witharana  
SD No. 28/2002 - Manohara de Silva  
SD No. 30/2002 - Wijedasa Rajapakse, PC with Kapila Liyanagamage and Ranjith
Meegaswatta  
SD No. 31/2002 - Neville Jayawardene with P. D. R. S. Panditharatne  
SD No. 32/2002 - H. L de Silva, PC with Nigel Hatch  
SD No. 33/2002 - R. K. W. Goonesekera with Gaston Jayakody  
SD No. 34/2002 - Dr. Jayampathy Wickremaratne with Gaston Jayakody  
SD No. 35/2002 - Dr. Jayampathy Wickremaratne with Gaston Jayakody  
SD No. 37/2002 - A. R. I. Athurupana with R. Edirimanne  
SD No. 38/2002 - A. W. Yusuf with Piyal Ranatunga  
SD No. 39/2002 - A. A. de Silva, PC with P. Abeykoon and Kanishka Witharana  
SD No. 40/2002 - Petitioner absent and unrepresented

**89**

Counsel for the State :  
  
_K. C. Kamalasabayson, PC Attorney-General_ with _S. Marsoof, PC Additional
Solicitor-General, Uditha Egalahewa,_ State Counsel and Harsha Fernando, State
Counsel.  
  
Intervenient :  
  
_Shibly Aziz, PC with L C. Seneviratne, PC, Daya Pelpola, S. G. Mohideen,
Ronald Perera, Chandimal Mendis and Rohana Deshapriya._

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 01 and 03, 2002  
  
A Bill bearing the title "19th Amendment to the Constitution",  was placed on
the Order Paper of Parliament for 19. 09\. 2002. Twenty-four petitions,
numbered as above have been presented invoking the jurisdiction of this court
in terms of Article 121 (1) for a determination in terms of Article 123 of the
Constitution, in respect of the Bill.  
  
Upon receipt of the petitions the Court issued notice on the Attorney-General
as required by Article 134 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioners or Counsel representing them, the Intervenient petitioner and
the Attorney-General were heard before this Bench at the sittings held on 01.
10\. 2002 and 03. 10. 2002.  
  
The proposed 19th Amendment to the Constitution as contained in the Bill deals
with broadly four matters :

**90**

(1) the appointment of the Prime Minister, an amendment to Article 43 (1) of
the Constitution, as contained in clause 2;  
  
(2) the dissolution of the Cabinet of Ministers, an amendment to Article 49 as
contained in clause 2;  
  
(3) the dissolution of Parliament, an amendment to Article 70 as contained in
clauses 4 and 5  
  
(4) the conferment of an immunity from disciplinary action that may be taken
against Members of Parliament by recognized political parties or independent
groups in respect of speaking, voting, or abstaining from voting on any
amendment to the Constitution contained in the Bill, as set out in clause 6 of
the Bill.  
  
Since the Bill taken as a whole hinges on the provisions contained in clauses
4 and 5 with regard to the dissolution of Parliament we would consider this
matter first.  
  
**DISSOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT  
**  
The provisions presently in the Constitution regarding dissolution  of
Parliament are contained in Article 70 (1). The main paragraph in Article 70
(1) reads as follows :  
  
The President may, from time to time, by Proclamation Summon, Prorogue and
Dissolve Parliament."  
  
The broad power thus attributed in the President is subject to certain
limitations and clarifications as are specified in provisos (a) to (d) of the
sub article. The contents of these provisos may be summarized as follows :

**91**

(a) where a General Election has been held consequent upon a dissolution of
Parliament by the President, the President shall not thereafter dissolve
Parliament until the expiration of one year from the date of such election
unless Parliament by resolution requests the President to do so.  
  
(b) the President shall not dissolve Parliament on the rejection of the
statement of government policy at the commencement of the first session of
Parliament after a General Election.  
  
(c) restriction on the power of dissolution where a motion for the impeachment
of the President has been entertained by the Speaker.  
  
(d) where the President has not dissolved Parliament upon the rejection of the
Appropriation Bill, Parliament shall be dissolved if the next Appropriation
Bill is rejected.  
  
It is seen that provisos (a), (b) and (c) are specific restrictions on the
power of dissolution, whereas proviso (d) is mandatory and requires
dissolution.  
  
**THE CONTENTS OF THE BILL WITH REGARD TO THE DISSOLUTION OF PARLIAMENT  
  
**The amendments in the Bill in this regard are contained in clauses 4 and 5.
Clause 4 repeals proviso (a) of Article 70 (1), referred to above and
substitutes a new proviso with two sub paragraphs. As  noted, proviso (a) is a
restriction on the powers of the President to dissolve Parliament within one
year after a General Election, that had been held consequent upon a
dissolution of Parliament by the President. The effect of the amendment is
two-fold :  
  
(1) the proviso will apply irrespective of the circumstance that caused the
General Election. That is, whether it resulted from

**92**

a dissolution by the President or by the expiration of the term of Parliament
being 6 years, as contained in Article 62 (2).  
  
(2) the residuary power which in terms of the present proviso (a) lies in the
President not to dissolve, even where the Parliament by resolution requests
the same, is removed and it becomes mandatory on the President to dissolve
within 4 days of the resolution being communicated by the Speaker, However,
the period of 1 year from the General Election during which the proviso will
apply, remains.  
  
Clause 56 seeks to add a new provision as Article 70A immediately after
Article 70\. The new Article will have four sub articles, the provisions of
which can be grouped as follows :  
  
(1) Article 70A (1) (a) which deals with a situation "where the majority of
the Members of Parliament belong to a recognized political party or parties or
an independent group or groups of which the President is not a member". In
such event after the expiration of one year from the General Election the
President shall not dissolve Parliament unless upon a request by Parliament
supported by a resolution passed by not less than two-thirds of the whole
number of members, including those not present.  
  
(2) Articles 70A (1) (b) and 70A (2) are linked. Paragraph (b) provides that
where the Parliament passes a resolution that the Government no longer enjoys
the confidence of the Parliament, the President shall dissolve Parliament.
However, as stated in paragraph (2), if such a resolution identifies a Member
of Parliament who enjoys the confidence of Parliament and the resolution is
passed by not less than one-half of the whole number of members (including
those not present) the President shall not dissolve Parliament but shall
appoint such person as Prime Minister.

**93**

(3) Articles 70A (3) and (4) are consequential provisions the contents of
which need not be referred to for the purpose of this determination.  
  
Considering the somewhat diffused picture that comes to mind when the
amendment is read into the existing provision, we would summarize the
situation that will emerge as follows :  
  
(1) the main provision in Article 70 (1) referred to above, which broadly
attributes the power of dissolution of Parliament to the President, remains :  
  
(2) the substituted proviso (a) which applies in relation to the first year
after the General Election remains. The discretion that now lies with the
President not to dissolve even if the Parliament requests such dissolution is
removed and such dissolution- is mandatory on the part of the President.  
  
(3) There is a bifurcation in the provisions that will apply in respect of the
period after the lapse of 1 year from the date of the General Election. These
provisions are :  
  
(a) Where the majority of the Members of Parliament belong to a recognized
political party or independent group or groups of which the President is not a
member, the power of dissolution is totally removed from the President and can
be exercised by the  President only upon a resolution passed by not less than
two-thirds of the whole number of members (including those not present)
request such dissolution.  
  
(b) If the President is a member of the majority party or group in Parliament,
the power of dissolution will remain as it presently stands, subject to the
provisions in Articles 70A (1) (b) and (2) referred to above.

**94**

**THE GROUNDS OF CHALLENGE  
**  
The petitioners challenge the provisions contained in clauses 4 and 5 on the
basis that they constitute an erosion of the executive power  of the
President, which is inconsistent with Article 3 read with Article 4 (b) of the
Constitution and urge that the inconsistency is aggravated by the criterion
upon which the power of the President in this regard is reduced to nothing,
viz the absence of membership in a particular political party or a group.  
  
**ANALYSIS OF THE GROUND OF CHALLENGE AS TO CLAUSES 4 AND 5  
**  
The Court has to consider whether the said clauses require to be passed by the
special majority provided in Article 84 (2) and approved by the People at a
Referendum by virtue of the provisions of Article no 83. The petitioners
contend as noted above that these provisions require to be approved at a
Referendum in terms of Article 83 (a), as they are inconsistent with Article 3
read with Article 4 (b) of the Constitution. Since extensive references were
made to Articles 3 and 4 of the Constitution, we reproduce the respective
Article in full.  
  
(3) "In the Republic of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the People and is
inalienable. Sovereignty includes the powers of government, fundamental rights
and the franchise."  
  
(4) The sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in the
following manner :  
  
(a) the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament,
consisting of elected representatives of the People and by the People at a
Referendum ;  
  
(b) the executive power of the People, including the defence of Sri Lanka,
shall be exercised by the President of the Republic elected by the People;

**95**

(c) the judicial power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament through
courts, tribunals and institutions created and established, or recognized, by
the Constitution, or created and established by law, except in regard to
matters relating  to the privileges, immunities and powers of Parliament and
of its Members, wherein the judicial power of the People may be exercised
directly by Parliament according to law;  
  
(d) the fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and
recognized shall be respected, secured and advanced by all the organs of
government, and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the
manner and to the extent hereinafter provided; and  
  
(e) the franchise shall be exercisable at the election of the President of the
Republic and of the Members of Parliament, and at every Referendum by every
citizen who has attained the age of eighteen years, and who, being qualified
to be an elector as hereinafter provided, has his name entered in the register
of electors.".  
  
These Articles relate to the sovereignty of the People and the exercise of
that sovereignty. Mr. H. L. de Silva, PC, submitted and correctly so, that the
two Constitutions of Sri Lanka of 1972 and 1978 are unique in proclaiming that
sovereignty is in the People and specifically elaborating the content of such
sovereignty, whilst in most Constitutions the term "sovereignty" is used only
as descriptive of the power of the State, similar to Article I, which states
that - "Sri Lanka (Ceylon) is a Free, Sovereign, Independent, and Democratic
Socialist Republic and shall be known as the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka". This submission was further developed by Mr. Batty Weerakone from
the perspective of political theory and he submitted that in terms of Articles
3 and 4, sovereignty is transmuted from a "grim reality" to something that is
"tangible" or "palpable", without being elusive or visionary.

**96**

It was the common submission of counsel for the petitioners that sovereignty
conceptualized in Article 3 is given a practical dimension  in Article 4.
Although Mr. Shibly Aziz, PC, counsel for the intervenient petitioner sought
in a brief argument to delink the two Articles, the Attorney-General submitted
that they are linked together and should be read together. Indeed, the
Attorney-General's submission has been the constant trend of decisions of this
Court that date back to the year 1980. Whilst the previous decisions relate to
alleged instances of the erosion of judicial power, fundamental rights /
franchise or devolution of power to subordinate (or as alleged, coordinate
bodies), we are presently confronted with an alleged erosion which involves
the Legislative organ of Government and the Executive organ of Government.
Hence, it is necessary to examine the concept of the sovereignty of the People
and the working thereof, as set out in Articles 3 and 4 from a slightly
different perspective.  
  
Sovereignty, which ordinarily means power or more specifically power of the
State as proclaimed in Article 1 is given another dimension in Article 3 from
the point of the People, to include -  
  
(1) the powers of Government;  
  
(2) the fundamental rights; and  
  
(3) the franchise.  
  
Fundamental rights and the franchise are exercised and enjoyed directly by the
people and the organs of government are required to recognize, respect, secure
and advance these rights.  
  
The powers of government are separated as in most Constitutions, but unique to
our Constitution is the elaboration in Articles 4 (a), (b) and (c) which
specifies that each organ of government shall exercise the power of the People
attributed to that organ. To make this point clearer, it should be noted that
subparagraphs (a), (b) and (c) not only state that the legislative power is
exercised by Parliament; executive power is exercised by the President and
judicial power by

**97**

Parliament through Courts, but also specifically state in each sub  paragraph
that the legislative power "of the People" shall be exercised by Parliament;
the executive power "of the People" shall be exercised by the President and
the judicial power "of the People" shall be exercised by Parliament through
the Courts. This specific reference to the power of the People in each sub
paragraph which relates to the three organs of government demonstrates that
the power remains and continues to be reposed in the People who are sovereign,
and its exercise by the particular organ of government being its custodian for
the time being, is for the People.  
  
Therefore, the statement in Article 3 that sovereignty is in the People and is
"inalienable", being an essential element which pertains to the sovereignty of
the People should necessarily be read into each of the sub paragraphs in
Article 4\. The relevant sub paragraphs would then read as follows :  
  
(a) the legislative power of the People is inalienable and shall be exercised
by Parliament;  
  
(b) the executive power of the People is inalienable and shall be exercised by
the President; and  
  
(c) The judicial power of the People is inalienable and shall be exercised by
Parliament through Courts.  
  
The meaning of the word "alienate", as a legal term, is to transfer anything
from one who has it for the time being to another, or to relinquish or remove
anything from where it already lies. Inalienability of sovereignty, in
relation to each organ of government means that power vested by the
Constitution in one organ of government shall not be transferred to another
organ of government, or relinquished or removed from that organ of government
to which it is attributed by the Constitution. Therefore, shorn of all
flourishes of Constitutional Law and of political theory, on a plain
interpretation of the relevant

**98**

Articles of the Constitution, it could be stated that any power that is
attributed by the Constitution to one organ of government cannot be
transferred to another organ of government or relinquished or removed from
that organ of government; and any such transfer, relinquishment or removal
would be an "alienation" of sovereignty which is inconsistent with Article 3
read together with Article 4 of the Constitution. It necessarily follows that
the balance that has been struck between the three organs of government in
relation to the power that is attributed to each such organ, has to be
preserved if the Constitution itself is to be sustained.  
  
This balance of power between the three organs of government, as in the case
of other Constitutions based on a separation of power is sustained by certain
checks whereby power is attributed to one organ of government in relation to
another. The dissolution of Parliament and impeachment of the President are
some of these powers which constitute the checks incorporated in our
Constitution. Interestingly, these powers are found in chapters that contain
provisions relating to the particular organ of government subject to the
check. Thus, provision for impeachment of the President is found in Article 38
(2) contained in Chapter VII titled 'The Executive, President of the
Republic". Similarly, the dissolution of Parliament is found in Article  70
(1), which is contained in Chapter XI titled, 'The Legislature, Procedure and
Powers.".  
  
Mr. H. L de Silva, PC, submitted forcefully that they are "weapons" placed in
the hands of each organ of government. Such a description may be proper in the
context of a general study of Constitutional Law, but would be totally
inappropriate to our Constitutional setting, where sovereignty as pointed out
above, continues to be reposed in the People and organs of government are only
custodians for the time being, that exercise the power for the People.
Sovereignty is thus a continuing reality reposed in the People.

**99**

Therefore, executive power should not be identified with the Presi­dent and
personalised and should be identified at all times as the power of the People.
Similarly, legislative, power should not be identified with the Prime Minister
or any party or group in Parliament and thereby be given a partisan form and
character. It should be seen at all times as the power of the People. Viewed
from this perspective it would be a misnomer to describe such powers in the
Constitution as "weapons" in the hands of the particular organ of government.
These checks have not been included in the Constitution to resolve conflicts
that may arise between the custodians of power or, for one to tame and
vanquish the other. Such use of the power which constitutes a check, would be
plainly an abuse of power totally antithetic to the fine balance that has been
struck by the Constitution.  
  
The power that constitutes a check, attributed to one organ of government in
relation to another, has to be seen at all times and exercised, where
necessary, in trust for the People. This is not a novel concept. The basic
premise of Public Law is that power is held in trust. From the perspective of
Administrative Law in England, the "trust" that is implicit in the conferment
of power has been stated as follows :  
  
"Statutory power conferred for public purposes is conferred as it were upon
trust, not absolutely - that is to say, it can validly be used only in the
right and proper way which Parliament when conferring it is presumed to have
intended." (Administrative Law 8th ed. 2000 - H. W. R. Wade and C. F. Forsyth,
p. 356).  
  
It has been firmly stated in several judgments of this Court that the 'rule of
law' is the basis of our Constitution (Visuvalingam v. Liyanage,(1)
Premachandra v. Jayawickrema.(2)  
  
A. V. Dicey in "Law of the Constitution" postulates that 'rule of law' which
forms a fundamental principle of the Constitution has three meanings, one of
which is described as follows :

**100**

"It means, in the first place, the absolute supremacy or pre-dominance of
regular law as opposed to the influence of arbitrary power, and excludes the
existence of arbitrariness of prerogative, or even of wide discretionary
authority on the part of the government. Englishmen are ruled by the law, and
by the law alone . . ."  
  
The Attorney-General has appropriately cited the dictum of Bhagawati, J.
(later, Chief Justice of India) in the case of Gupta and Others v. Union of
India (3) - where he observed :  
  
"If there is one principle which runs through the entire fabric of the
Constitution, it is the principle of the Rule of Law and under the
Constitution, it is the judiciary which is entrusted with the task of keeping
every organ of the State within the limits of the law and thereby making the
Rule of Law meaningful and effective."  
  
To sum up the analysis of the balance of power and the checks contained in the
Constitution to sustain such balance, we would state that the power of
dissolution of Parliament and the process of impeachment being some of the
checks put in place, should be exercised, where necessary, in trust for the
People only to preserve the sovereignty of the People, and to make it
meaningful, effective and beneficial to the People. Any exercise of such power
(constituting a check), that may stem from partisan objectives would be a
violation of the rule of law and has to be kept within its limits in the
manner stated by Bhagawati, J. There should be no bar to such a process to
uphold the Constitution.  
  
Our conclusion on the matters considered above can be stated as follows :  
  
(1) The powers of government are included in the sovereignty of the People as
proclaimed in Article 3 of the Constitution.

**101**

(2) These powers of government continue to be reposed in the People and they
are separated and attributed to the three organs of government; the Executive,
the Legislature and the Judiciary, being the custodians who exercise such
powers in trust for the People.  
  
(3) The powers attributed to the respective organs of government include
powers that operate as checks in relation to other organs that have been put
in place to maintain and sustain the balance of power that has been struck in
the Constitution, which power should be exercised only in trust for the
People.  
  
(4) The exercise of the sovereignty of the People can only be perceived in the
context of the separation of powers as contained in Article 4 and other
connected provisions of the Constitution, by the respective organs of
government.  
  
(5) The transfer of a power which is attributed by the Constitution to one
organ of government to another; or the relinquishment or removal of such
power, would be an alienation of sovereignty inconsistent with Article 3 read
with Article 4 of the Constitution.  
  
**CONCLUSIONS APPLIED TO THE PROVISIONS OF THE BILL  
**  
Conclusions arrived at in the foregoing analysis have now to be applied to the
provisions of the Bill, the constitutionality of which should be examined in
the light of the ground of challenge.  
  
It is clear that according to the framework of our Constitution, the power of
dissolution of Parliament is attributed to the President, as a check to
sustain and preserve the balance of power that is struck by the Constitution.
This power attributed to the President in broad terms in Article 70 (1) is
subject in its exercise to specifically defined situations as set out in
provisos (a) to (c) referred to above. Even

**102**

in these situations, the final say in the matter of dissolution remains with
the President. The only instance in which dissolution is mandatory, is
contained in proviso (of), in terms of which, if the Appropriation  Bill (the
Budget) has been rejected by Parliament and the President has not dissolved
Parliament, when the next Appropriation Bill is also rejected, the President
shall dissolve Parliament. This is a situation of a total breakdown of the
government machinery, there being no money voted by Parliament for the
government to function. In such an event dissolution is essential and the
Constitution removes the discretion lying in the President by requiring a
dissolution. As the Constitution now stands this is the only instance where
Parliament could enforce a dissolution by the President and that too through
the oblique means of rejecting the Appropriation Bill twice. This
demonstrates the manner in which the Constitution has carefully delineated the
power of dissolution of Parliament. The People in whom sovereignty is reposed
have entrusted the organs of government, being the custodians of the exercise
of the power, as delineated in the Constitution. It is in this context that we
arrived at the conclusion that any transfer, relinquishment or removal of a
power attributed to an organ of government would be inconsistent with Article
3 read with Article 4 of the Constitution. The amendments contained in clauses
4 and 5 of the Bill vest the Parliament with the power, to finally decide on
the matter of dissolution by passing resolutions to that effect in the manner
provided in the respective sub clauses set out above. The residuary discretion
that is now attributed to the President (except in Article 70 (1) (d) -
Appropriation Bill being rejected for the second time) - is removed and it
becomes mandatory on the part of the President to dissolve Parliament within
four days of the receipt of the communication of the Speaker notifying such
resolution.  
  
The provision which attracted most of the submissions of the petitioners who
opposed the Bill, is the proposed Article 70A (1) (a) referred to above, which
totally removes the power of the President to dissolve Parliament, if the
majority of the members of Parliament belong to a political party or
independent group of which the President

**103**

is not a member. In such event the President shall not dissolve Parliament
unless upon a resolution passed by Parliament by a two-thirds majority.
Significantly, there were no submissions in support of this provision. Article
4 {b) of the Constitution provides that the executive power of the People
shall be exercised by the President of the Republic, elected by People. Thus,
upon election the incumbent becomes the "President of the Republic", who in
terms of Article 30 (1) is "the Head of the State, the Head of the Executive
and of the  Government, and the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces." The
power attributed to such an office cannot possibly be different, dependent on
the absence of membership of a political party or group. The Constitution
conceives of a President, who is the "Head of the State", and who would stand
above party politics. This provision moves in the opposite direction. There
may be practical considerations that led to this provision being conceived, of
which we cannot be unmindful. However, the Constitution is the "Supreme Law"
of Sri Lanka and should not be seen only from the perspective of such
considerations that arise in the moment, but as a body of law, which we could
uphold  according to the oath that we have taken. It is unnecessary to dwell
on this matter any further since the Attorney-General in his written
submission tendered after the hearing in Court was concluded, suggested an
amendment to this provision deleting the portions that include references to
the absence of membership in a political party or group and the requirement
for the resolution to be passed by a two-thirds majority.  
  
We would now consider the amendment suggested by the Attorney-General
according to which the proposed Article 70A (1) (a) is replaced with a
provision stating that after the lapse of one year from a General Election,
the President shall not dissolve Parliament unless upon a resolution passed by
not less than one-half of the whole number of members of Parliament, including
those not present. It has to be noted that this amendment does not address the
inconsistency with Articles 3 and 4, dealt with in the preceding sections of
this determination. We have stated clearly, on the basis of a comprehensive
process

**104**

of reasoning, that the dissolution of Parliament is a component of the
executive power of the People, attributed to the President, to be exercised in
trust for the People and that it cannot be alienated in the sense of being
transferred, relinquished or removed from where it lies in terms of Article 70
(1) of the Constitution. Therefore, the amendments contained in clauses 4 and
5 of the Bill, even as further amended, as suggested by the Attorney-General,
constitute in our view such an alienation of executive power, inconsistent
with Article 3 read with Article 4 of the Constitution and require to be
passed by the special majority required under Article 84 (2) and approved by
the People at a Referendum, by virtue of the provisions of Article 83.  
  
Article 123 (2) (c), empowers this Court when making a determination in the
manner set out above, to specify the nature of the amendments that would make
the provisions in question cease to be inconsistent with the Constitution.
Whilst the hearing was in progress, the Court, from time to time, posed
questions to learned Counsel to evoke a response on possible amendments. When
questioned about an increase of the period of one year from a General Election
during which the President shall not dissolve Parliament unless upon a
resolution to that effect passed by Parliament. Mr. H. L. de Silva, PC, firmly
submitted that even the slightest increase of that period would be an erosion
of the executive power and be inconsistent with Article 3 read with Article 4
(b). Questions were posed on the basis of similar provisions in other
Constitutions, being mindful at all times of the  diversity in the particular
structure of such Constitutions. More specifically, attention of Counsel was
drawn to the 1996 Constitution of the Republic of South Africa, which has a
fixed term for the duration of the National Assembly without a broad power of
dissolution, as contained in Article 70 (1) of our Constitution but includes a
provision for dissolution after three years if there is a resolution to that
effect, supported by a majority of the Members of the Assembly. This is one of
the more recent Constitutions, put in place after an extensive process of
consultation and which contributed to the transformation of a conflict ridden
country to a unified Nation. However, we noted that

**105**

Counsel were slow to respond to these questions. We are mindful of the
position that they have to be guided by instructions received from the persons
whom they represent. The lines of division were manifestly sharp and the
arguments were addressed from polarized perspectives. It is our view that an
amendment of the Constitution cannot be looked at in this manner. Dr.
Wickremaratne in a submission, replete with facts and instances, cited
previous amendments to the Constitution that were alleged to have been done
with partisan objectives. These related to a period where the political party
in power had a two-thirds majority in Parliament. He may be correct in the
sharp criticisms made of such instances. However, partisanship of one side
cannot be pitted against partisanship of the other. In the process of enacting
law, especially in amending or reforming the Constitution, sharp edges of the
divide should be blunted and we have to seek common ground, bearing uppermost
in mind the interests of the People who are sovereign.  
  
It is obvious that the proposed amendment has been conceived due to certain
difficulties that are envisaged. Although, those who framed the Constitution
are presumed to have looked to the future, it may be that they did not fully
visualize the stress on the machinery of State that would build up, when there
is a divergence in policies between the President who exercises executive
power on a mandate of the People, and the majority in the Parliament
exercising legislative power also on a mandate of the People. Article 70 (1)
(a) is intended to provide for such a situation in terms of which during the
first year after a General Election held pursuant to a dissolution of
Parliament by the President, Parliament could be dissolved only if there is a
resolution requesting such dissolution. Thus, in effect during this period the
matter of deciding on the dissolution of Parliament becomes a responsibility
shared by the President with Parliament. There is no  alienation of the power
of dissolution attributed to the President. Any extension of this period of
one year may be seen as a reduction or as contended by Mr. H. L. de Silva an
erosion of that power. However, we are of the view that on an examination of
the relevant provisions

**106**

in the different contexts in which they have to operate, that every extension
of such period would not amount to an alienation, relinquishment or removal of
that power. That would depend on the period for which it is extended. If the
period is too long, it may be contended that thereby the power of dissolution
attributed to the President to operate as a check to sustain the balance of
power, as noted above, is by a side wind, as it were, denuded of its efficacy.
But, if we strike middle ground, the balance of power itself being the overall
objective would be strengthened especially in a situation of a divergence of
policy, noted above. We are of the view that if Clauses 4 and 5 of the Bill,
dealt with in the preceding portion of this determination are removed and
replaced with a clear amendment to proviso (a) of Article 70 (1), whereby the
period of one year referred to therein is extended to a period to be specified
not exceeding three years (being one half of the period of Parliament as
stated in Article 62 (2)) that would not amount to an alienation,
relinquishment or removal of the executive power attributed to the President.
The inconsistency with Article 3 read with Article 4 (b) would thereby cease.
The substituted clause should be passed by the special majority provided in
Article 84 (2) and not require approval by the People at a Referendum.  
  
We would now move to the other clauses of the Bill that will be dealt with in
the light of the conclusions stated above.  
  
**CLAUSES 2 AND 3 (1) OF THE BILL  
**  
These provisions relate to the dissolution of Parliament and the amendments
contained in Clauses 4 and 5. They attract the determination stated above,
based on the incomsistency with Article 3 read with Article 4 (b) and require
the approval by the People at a Referendum. This inconsistency would cease, if
these provisions are removed and replaced with an amendment to proviso (a) of
Article 70 (1), as stated above.

**107**

**CLAUSE 3 (2) OF THE BILL  
**  
This provision contains an amendment to Article 49 (2) of the Constitution
which sets out certain situations in which, "the Cabinet of Ministers shall
stand dissolved". The sub-article now specifies three such situations, viz.
where the Parliament :  
  
(i) rejects the Statement of Government Policy, or  
  
(ii) rejects the Appropriation Bill, or  
  
(iii) passes a vote of no confidence in the Government.  
  
The amendment removes situation (iii). Taken by itself, this amendment would
not make any sense whatever. It appears that this amendment has to be read in
the light of the proposed Article 70A (1) (b) which states that, where
Parliament passes a resolution declaring that the Government no longer enjoys
the confidence of Parliament the President shall, dissolve Parliament. The
resulting position is that where Parliament passes a motion of no confidence
in the Government, instead of the Cabinet standing dissolved, as presently
provided, the Parliament itself which passed the motion will be dissolved. As
submitted by Dr. Wickremaratne, PC, the resulting position is illogical and
arbitrary. In the context of the framework of the Constitution dealt with
above, the matter is more serious. Article 43 (1) of the Constitution states
as follows :  
  
43 (1) "There shall be a Cabinet of Ministers charged with the direction and
control of the Government of the Republic, which shall be collectively
responsible and answerable to Parliament."  
  
This is a check put in place by the Constitution relevant to the sot executive
organ of government, whereby it is made collectively responsible and
answerable to Parliament. The check is enforced, inter alia, by the provision
in Article 49 (2), which empowers the Parliament to pass a vote of no
confidence in the Government, resulting in the dissolution of the Cabinet of
Ministers. We are of the view on the

**108**

application of the reasons set out in the preceding sections of this
determination with regard to the exercise of the sovereignty of the People
relevant to executive power, that this amendment would amount to an
alienation, relinquishment or removal of the legislative power of the People.
The amendment as contained in Clause 3 (2) would  then be inconsistent with
Article 3 read with Article 4 (a) of the Constitution and require to be passed
by the special majority provided in Article 84 (2) and approved by the People
at a Referendum.  
  
**CLAUSE 6 OF THE BILL  
**  
In view of the nature of the submissions and the amendment suggested by the
Attorney-General, we reproduce this clause in full :  
  
6\. "A Member of Parliament who speaks or votes or abstains from voting on any
amendment to the Constitution contained herein, according to his own belief or
conscience or free will, shall not be expelled or suspended from membership or
be subjected to any disciplinary action by the recognized political party or
the independent group as the case may be on whose relevant nomination paper
his name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of Parliament for
having so spoken or voted or abstained from voting, and the provisions of sub-
paragraph (a) paragraph (13) of Article 99 shall not apply to such member and
the seat of such Member in Parliament shall not thereby become vacant."  
  
All Counsel and petitioners in person, made submissions regarding this Clause.
The grounds of objection can be summarized as follows :  
  
(i) That the clause does not satisfy the requirements of Article 82 (1) of the
Constitution. This Article which states that any amendment of the Constitution
must be express, requires that a Bill for the amendment of any provision of
the Constitution

**109**

shall not be placed on the Order Paper of Parliament, "unless the provision to
be repealed, altered or added and consequential amendments, if any, are
expressly specified in the Bill ..." It was submitted that the provision of
the Constitution sought to be amended is not expressly stated.  
  
(ii) That the clause is outside the legislative power of Parliament in view of
Article 75 of the Constitution which empowers Parliament to make laws but lays
down a specific limitation to that power in the following terms :  
  
"Provided that Parliament shall not  make any law -

(a) suspending the operation of the Constitution or any part thereof . . ." It
was submitted that this clause has the effect of suspending the operation of
Article 99 (13) (a), being a part of the Constitution.  
  
(iii) That the clause erodes the franchise, which forms part of the
sovereignty of the People. It was submitted that the People exercised the
franchise at the election of the Members of Parliament, by casting a vote for
a recognized political party or an independent group and preference votes were
cast to particular candidates, on the premise that they would be subject to
disciplinary control by the party or group and in the event of expulsion, be
replaced by another candidate. This submission was further developed in
relation to Members of Parliament elected on the "National List", as provided
in Article 99A. It was further submitted that the franchise has a continuing
effect, inter alia, through Article 99 (13) (b) (which provides for the
candidate securing the next highest number of preferences to be declared,
without a fresh recourse to the electorate) and that clause is thereby an
erosion of the franchise, forming part of the sovereignty of the People

**110**

and is inconsistent with Article 3 read with Article 4 (e) of the
Constitution, as would require the approval by the People at a Referendum.  
  
(iv) That the clause denies to Members of Parliament equality before the law
and the equal protection of the law being the fundamental right to equality
guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. It was submitted that this
clause which confers an immunity from disciplinary action that may be taken by
a political party or group, only in the instance specified in the clause, is a
denial of the right to equality which is thereby an erosion of a fundamental
right, forming part of the sovereignty of the People inconsistent with Article
3 read with Article 4 (d) of the Constitution as would require the approval by
the People at a Referendum.  
  
We would deal with grounds (1) and (2) which are connected in certain
respects. Article 82 (1), referred to in ground (1), requires that any Bill
for the amendment of any provision of the Constitution should expressly
specify the provision of the Constitution if that is sought to be 'repealed,
altered or added and the consequential amendments, if any'. This manifests a
cardinal rule that applies to the interpretation of a Constitution, that there
can be no implied amendment of any provision of the Constitution. The
Attorney-General submitted that in view of the reference to the particular
provisions of Article 99 (13) (a), the clause should be considered as an
'addition' to that Article and be read as a 'proviso'. In view of ground (2),
which goes to the root of the matter, we do not have to deal with this aspect
further.  
  
Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera who made submissions on this ground of challenge,
submitted that provisos (a) and (b) to Article 75 contain specific limitations
on the legislative power of Parliament. Proviso (a) cited above, contains a
bar on the making of any law, which suspends

**111**

the operation of the Constitution or any part thereof. That clause 6 in effect
suspends the operation of Article 99 (13) (a) in the situation specified in
the clause which therefore cannot be validly included in the Bill. It was
further submitted that the Court should in such event, give effect to the
provisions of Article 75 by declaring that the particular clause has not been
validly included in the Bill. Since it is outside the legislative power of
Parliament no further question arises as to compliance with the requirement
for the clause to be passed by the special majority or be approved by the
People at a Referendum that constitutes stages of a process of making law.  
  
The submission in our view raises a very important question of Constitutional
Law and of the legislative power of Parliament. In terms of the Preamble, the
Constitution has been adopted and enacted as the Supreme Law of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka. All State authority flows from the
Constitution, which establishes the organs of government; declares their
powers and duties; proclaims the sovereignty of the People, which is
inalienable; declares and specifies the fundamental rights and the franchise
that form part of the sovereignty of the People. It necessarily follows that
the Constitution should apply equally in all situations that come within the
purview of its provisions. It is in this context that a strict bar has been
put in place in Article 75 on the suspension of the operation of the
Constitution or any part thereof. We have to give effect to this provision
according to the solemn declaration made in terms of the Fourth  Schedule to
the Constitution, to "uphold and defend the Constitution".  
  
There are two principal questions that arise in considering the objection that
has been raised. They are :  
  
(i) whether the provisions of clause 6 have the effect of suspending the
operation of Article 99 (13) (a) as contended by Counsel, and

**112**

(ii) whether Article 99 (13) (a) could be considered as being a part of the
Constitution, so as to attract the bar in Article 75 (a).  
  
We would now examine the first question stated above -  
  
The phrase, "suspending the operation", would in its plain meaning encompass,
a situation in which the clause contained in the Bill has the effect of
keeping the relevant provision of the Constitution in an inoperative state for
a time. The test would be to place clause 6 and Article 99 (13) (a), side by
side, and ascertain whether they could apply equally to a given situation
which comes within their purview. Article 99 (13) (a) recognizes the right of
a political party or of an independent group to expel a member, who is a
Member of Parliament; the consequence of such expulsion being the loss of the
seat of such Member of Parliament; the review of the validity of such
expulsion by this Court; and the process by which the vacant seat is filled.
It is manifest that clause 6 strikes at the very root of the process set out
in Article 99 (13) (a) in stating that a Member of Parliament "shall not be
expelled or suspended from membership or subject to any disciplinary action by
the recognized political party . . ." If clause 6 is enacted in this form,
being the later in point of time, it would have the effect of overriding the
provisions in Article 99 (13) (a) and keep those provisions inoperative in
respect of the instance specified in the clause. Hence, we are of the view
that clause 6 has the effect of suspending the operation of Article 99 (13)
(a). We have to state that the question would have been different, if clause 6
was sought to be enacted as an amendment to Article 99 (13) (a) as contended
by the Attorney-General. In such event the clause would have to be of general
application and not limited to a single instance. The grounds of objection
(iii) and (iv) stated above would then have to be considered in relation to
such amendment.

**113**

We now move to the second question stated above whether, Article 99 (13) (a)
the operation of which is sought to be suspended could be considered as being
a part of the Constitution so as to attract Article 75.  
  
The Constitution is divided in Chapters, Articles, Sub-Articles, Schedules and
so on. It is significant that Article 75 does not refer to any of these
divisions, but refers to a "part" of the Constitution. This is an indication
that we have to look to the functional aspect of the provision that is being
suspended and ascertain whether such provision is necessary for the working of
the Constitution. To ascertain this matter we have to examine the provisions
from three perspectives, viz :  
  
(i) the content of the provision;  
  
(ii) the context in which the provision is included; (iii) the implications of
the provision.  
  
As regards (i) we have in the preceding paragraph set out the content of
Article 99 (13) (a) by separately identifying its component elements.  
  
As regards (ii) we note that Article 99 (13) (a) is found in the Chapter
titled 'The Franchise and Elections" and significantly that the Article itself
deals with proportional representation, being a novel feature in the present
Constitution.  
  
As regards (iii), we note that Article 99 (13) (a) has implications on the
exercise of the franchise as set out in relation to ground (iii) of the
objections referred to above and the exercise of judicial power. The clause
has the effect of distorting the former and removing the latter. On the basis
of the foregoing analysis, we have no difficulty in concluding that Article 99
(13) (a) is a part necessary for the working of the Constitution.

**114**

Accordingly, we hold that clause 6 of the Bill has the effect of suspending
the operation of a part of the Constitution and cannot be validly enacted by
Parliament.  
  
Therefore, clause 6 has to be deleted from the Bill.  
  
After the hearing was concluded, the Attorney-General tendered a further
written submission requesting us to consider the amendment of clause 6 by the
deletion of the words, ".............. and the provisions of sub-paragraph 13
of Article 99 shall not apply to such member, and the seat of such Member in
Parliament shall not thereby become vacant.".  
  
It appears that this amendment has been suggested to overcome the objection
referred to above, based on the suspension of Article 99 (13) (a). However. We
note that the main portion of clause 6 yet remains in terms of which it is
specifically provided that a member "shall not be expelled or suspended from
membership or be subject to nay disciplinary action by the recognized
political party ..............."So long as that portion remains the
consequences that would otherwise flow in terms of Article 99 (13) (a) would
remain inoperative. Therefore, the proposed amendment seeks to achieve by
indirect  means what cannot be done directly.  
  
The objection referred to above would be applicable in its entirety even if
the clause is amended as suggested by the Attorney-General.  
  
Summary of Determination  
  
(1) Clause 6 of the Bill has the effect of suspending the operation of a part
of the Constitution and cannot be validly enacted by Parliament in view of the
specific bar contained in Article 75 of the Constitution.

**115**

(2) Clauses 2,3,4 and 5 contain provisions inconsistent with Article  3 read
together with relevant provisions of Article 4 and as such have to be passed
by a special majority required under the provisions of Article 84 (2) approved
by the people at a Referendum.  
  
(3) The inconsistency with Article 3 read with the relevant provisions of
Article 4 would cease if clauses 2,3,4 and 5 are deleted and substituted with
an appropriate amendment to proviso (a) to Article 70 (1) of the Constitution
by removing the period of one year in the proviso and substituting that with a
period not exceeding three years.  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, CJ.  
**  
**S.W.B. WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
  
DR. SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
ISMAIL, J.  
  
P. EDUSSURIYA, J.  
  
H.S. YAPA, J.  
  
J.A.N. DE SILVA, J.  
**  
Nineteenth Amendment to the Constitution unconstitutional and requires to be
passed by the special majority and approved by the people at a referendum
subject to item 3 of the determination.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/20.html_  

