##  Priyantha Dias v. Ekanayake, Reserve Police Constable, Police Station,
Polpithigama and Others - SLR - 224, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 20; (2001) 1
Sri LR 224 (23 January 2001)

**224**

**PRIYANTHA DIAS  
v.  
EKANAYAKE, RESERVE POLICE CONSTABLE, POLICE STATION,  
POLPITHIGAMA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, C.J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC (APPLICATION) NO. 860/99  
23RD JANUARY, 2001  
  
_Fundamental rights - Unlawful arrest and torture - Articles 13(1) and 11 of
the Constitution.  
  
_The petitioner who is from Homagama was a teacher attached to the
Kattamberiya Yaya Vidyalaya, Makulpotha. He was accompanied by the Principal
of the school and was on the way to board a bus. At that stage the 1st and 2nd
respondent Reserve Police Constables came on a motor cycle and questioned the
petitioner, including on his place of birth. When the petitioner replied that
it was Batticaloa they said that he must be a tiger and assaulted him despite
the intervention of the Principal. They forcibly took the petitioner on the
motor cycle. While riding, the 2nd respondent assaulted the petitioner. When
they rached a teak forest, the petitioner escaped and later entered hospital.  
  
The petitioner had 23 injuries including a laceration on his penis. The
respondents said that the petitioner was taken into custody as there had been
robberies in the area; and the petitioner failed to provide details of
himself.  
  
**Held :  
**  
There were no complaints or a reasonable suspicion that the petitioner was
concerned in the commission of any offence. Hence his arrest was violative of
Article 13(1) of the Constitution. The respondents had by the treatment
inflicted on the petitioner infringed the petitioner's rights under Article 11
of the Constitution.  
  
_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.  
  
"It is clear that the 1st and 2nd respondents have under the colour of office,
pounced upon and unleashed their fury on a teacher who had been peacefully
waiting near a bus halt with the Principal of his school. Their conduct
displays a total lack of discipline and an alarming tendency towards sadism.
If police officers who are guardians of the law unleash their fury in this
manner on the very persons whom they are duty bound to protect and safeguard,
a dismal picture would emerge as to what passes for law and order."

**225**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_K. Tiranagama_ for petitioner.  
  
_R. Abeysuriya_ , State Counsel for 4th respondent.  
  
1st and 2nd respondents present in person.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March, 27, 2001.  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**At the time material to this application, the petitioner was a 42 year old
school teacher attached to the Kattamberiya Yaya Vidyalaya in Makulpotha.
Around 4.30 p.m. on 02.09.1999, the petitioner, along with the Principal of
the said School walked towards the Kattamberiya Junction to board a bus. While
waiting for a bus, they saw two Policemen, (subsequently identified as the 1st
and 2nd respondents) on a motor cycle entering the premises of one Peter
Mudalali. They also witnessed the Policemen inquiring something from one Indra
Kumari. Thereafter the Policemen came towards the petitioner and inquired
about some person to which the petitioner replied in the negative as he was
not from the area. The 1st respondent queried as to where the petitioner is
residing and the petitioner stated that he is a teacher attached to
Kottamberiya Yaya Vidyalaya. At this point the Police officer wanted to know
as to why he does not know about the village, if he is a teacher of that
school. He further queried from the petitioner as to whether he is a
Sinhalese. The petitioner answered in the affirmative and further stated that
he is from Homagama. Thereafter the Police officer wanted to know the place of
birth of the petitioner. When the petitioner informed them that he was born in
Batticaloa, the 1st respondent immediately responded by stating that the
petitioner must be a 'tiger' and asked for his National

**226**

Identity Card. Simultaneously, the 1st respondent pulled the petitioner by his
shirt collar and searched for his National Identity Card in his shirt pocket.
When the petitioner informed the 1st and 2nd respondents that his National
Identity Card is in school, they assaulted him stating that he is a 'tiger'
and ordered him to get on to the motor cycle to take him to the police
station.  
  
While the 1st and 2nd respondents were assaulting the petitioner the Principal
tried to intervene and explain that the petitioner was a teacher attached to
his school, who is from Homagama and to refrain from assaulting him. 1st and
2nd respondents were visibly angry about this intervention and had assaulted
the Principal as well.  
  
The petitioner refused to get on to the motor cycle as he had not committed
any offence. The 1st and 2nd respondents again assaulted the petitioner and
got him to sit on the motor cycle. Whenever the 1st and 2nd respondents made
the petitioner sit on the motor cycle, he managed to get off and by this time
a large number of villagers were gathered there. The petitioner became
embarrassed of the situation and told the 1st and 2nd respondents that if a
helmet is given to him, he would get on to the motor cycle. The 2nd respondent
removed his helmet and gave it to the petitioner and on the insistence of them
the petitioner got on to the motor cycle. The 11 respondent rode the motor
cycle and the petitioner sat between the 1st and 2nd respondents.  
  
After the motor cycle proceeded a short distance, the 1st respondent hit the
petitioner hard on his stomach with his right elbow, scolded him in filth and
ordered him to remove the helmet. The petitioner removed the helmet and gave
it to the 2nd respondent. While the motor cycle was moving, the 2nd respondent
hit the petitioner hard on his mouth, both ears and the sides of the upper
body.  
  
After a while the 1st respondent told the 2nd respondent to hold the
petitioner hard, as there is a possibility that the

**227**

petitioner might try to runaway. The 1st respondent threatened him that he
will not allow the petitioner to continue with his employment and that they
will introduce a parcel of cannabis and send him to jail. The 1st respondent
inquired from the petitioner whether he is a graduate. When the petitioner
replied in the negative, the 1st respondent said that if he had been, they
would have killed him on the spot. Whenever the petitioner tried to explain
that he was innocent and had committed no offence, the 1st respondent informed
him that he will use this opportunity to show the petitioner the capabilities
of the Police officers.  
  
When they came to a deserted area near the teak forest at Makulpotha, the 1st
respondent stopped the motor cycle and ordered the petitioner to get off from
the cycle. Even before the petitioner could do so, the respondents started
assaulting him. The petitioner was pleading with them not to assault him, but
they did not accede to his request. Blood was oozing out of petitioner's nose
and mouth due to the assault. At that time there was a cyclist on the road and
the 1st and 2nd respondents stopped assaulting the petitioner. Using that
opportunity, the petitioner ran away from the scene. The 2nd respondent
grabbed the cycle from the cyclist and came after the petitioner. The
petitioner ran across the teak forest and reached the house of the Community
Health Officer of Kosgaha Ela and informed him as to what had taken place. In
the meantime the Principal of Kattamberiya Yaya School along with the
Principal of Nikawahara Vidyalaya, who were in search of the petitioner, sent
him to the Polpithigama District Hospital.  
  
The petitioner submitted that the 1st and 2nd respondents had infringed his
fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 11 and 13(l) of the Constitution.  
  
This Court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged infringements of
Articles 11 and 13(1) of the Constitution.

**228**

Article 13(1) of the Constitution states that,  
  
"No person shall be arrested except according to procedure established by law.
Any person arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest."  
  
The 1st and 2nd respondents who were present in Court and appeared in person
submitted that the petitioner was taken into custody on suspicion as there had
been many-robberies in the area. The 2nd respondent submitted that when the
petitioner was asked to give details of himself he had not come out with the
necessary information.  
  
However, there were no supportive affidavits or documents to substantiate the
version given by the 1st and 2nd respondents. Moreover, there was no evidence
to show that the petitioner had either committed any breach of the peace in
the presence of the 1st and 2nd respondents or was concerned in the commission
of any cognizable offence. There was no evidence to indicate that there were
reasonable complaints or a reasonable suspicion which existed against the
petitioner.  
  
The petitioner had along with his petition and affidavit tendered affidavits
from the Principal from the Kattamberiya Yaya Vidyalaya in Makulpotha, who was
with him at the time of the arrest of the petitioner by the 1st and 2nd
respondents (Pl) and by Community Health Field Officer of Kosgaha Ela (P2).
The petitioner had taken refuge at the latter's house after escaping from the
1st and 2nd respondents. Both these affidavits confirm the position taken up
by the petitioner.  
  
The 1st and 2nd respondents were unable to explain the need to check the
identity of the petitioner or to know his place of birth.  
  
In these circumstances, considering the two versions given by the petitioner
and the 1st and 2nd respondents, I do not

**229**

hesitate in accepting the allegation of the petitioner that he was arrested by
the 1st and 2nd respondents without any basis whatsoever. I accordingly hold
that the 1st and 2nd respondents had violated the petitioner's fundamental
rights guaranteed under Article 13(1) of the Constitution.  
  
The petitioner was warded in the District Hospital, Polpithigama from 02nd to
06th September and thereafter he was warded in the Teaching Hospital,
Kurunegala from 06th to 08th September 1999. While he was at the Teaching
Hospital, Kurunegala, he was examined by the Acting Judicial Medical Officer,
Kurunegala. On a direction given by this Court, the Medico-Legal Report was
submitted by the Acting Judicial Medical Officer. In a diagram attached to the
Medico-Legal Report, dated 47.09.1999, it is revealed that the petitioner had
23 injuries all over his body. These injuries included 22 abrasions and 01
laceration. The abrasions were on the forehead, chest, upper and lower left
arm and the right arm, upper left and right legs and the lower abdomen. The
sizes of the abrasions range from 0.5cm x 0.25cm to 5cm x 0.5cm. The single
Indication which was 1cm x 0.5cm was on his penis. These injuries are
consistent with the description given by the petitioner as to the inhuman and
degrading treatment meted out to him by 1st and 2nd respondents. In addition
to the injuries sustained by the petitioner, in the circumstances of this
case, the suffering occasioned by him, in my view, was of an aggravated kind
which no doubt humiliated the petitioner.  
  
I accordingly declare that the petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed under
Article 11 of the Constitution has been violated by the 1st and 2nd
respondents.  
  
It is clear that the 1st and 2nd respondents have under the colour of office,
pounced upon and unleashed their fury on a teacher who had been peacefully
waiting near a bus halt with the Principal of his school. Their conduct
displays a total lack of discipline and an alarming tendency towards sadism.
If Police

**230**

officers, who are the guardians of the law unleash their fury in this manner
on the very persons whom they are duty bound to protect and safeguard, a
dismal picture would emerge as to what passes off for law and order. Further,
the immediate reaction of the 1st and 2nd respondents that any person born in
Batticaloa should be a 'tiger' is a sad reflection of their mental make up.
Such attitudes engender hatred and not peace. I have thought it fit to note
these comments so that persons responsible for recruitment and discipline of
law enforcement officers would instil a higher degree of sensitivity and
restraint in those who are clothed with awesome power of armed law enforcement
personnel.  
  
I direct the 1st and 2nd respondents to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 5000/-
each as compensation and costs; the State will pay the Petitioner Rs.20,000/-
as compensation and costs. In all the petitioner will be entitled to a sum of
Rs. 30,000/- as compensation and costs. These amounts must be paid within
three(3) months from today.  
  
The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Inspector General of Police.  
  
**S.N. SILVA, C.J. -** I agree.  
  
**PERERA, J -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/20.html_  

