##  Hettiarachchi v. Mahaweli Authority of Sri Lanka and Others - SLR - 334,
Vol 3 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 20; (2000) 3 Sri LR 334 (15 September 2000)

**334**

**HETTIARACHCHI  
v.  
MAHAWELI AUTHORITY OF  
SRI LANKA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 131/2000  
SEPTEMBER 11TH, 2000  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Refusal to permit use of public property for a political
purpose - Punishment of an employee for such refusal \- Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.  
  
_The petitioner was an Assistant Security Supervisor employed by the Mahaweli
Authority of Sri Lanka working at the Resident Project Managers Office at the
Mahaweli "H" Division, Thambuttegama, On 18. 01. 99 when he was on night duty
at the office at about 1 a.m., a bus load of persons arrived. The evidence
shows that they consisted of 16 security officers and 11 members of the
Embilipitiya branch of the Sri Lanka Nidahas Sevaka Sangamaya. They were on
their way to attend a political meeting of the ruling party at Nikaweratiya in
support of a candidate of that Party for the election of the North-Western
Provincial Council. Five of them including one Saliyananda an Assistant
Security Supervisor and the driver of the bus met the petitioner and requested
the petitioner's permission to stay the night at the said office. The
petitioner refused to grant such permission in the absence of any instructions
from his superiors. They then demanded that they be allowed to use the office
telephone which was also refused. Thereafter they wanted to know whether they
could stay at the Mahaweli circuit bungalow. The petitioner told them that
permission had to be obtained from the Resident Project Manager (RPM), and as
he was on duty he could not accompany them to meet the RPM.  
  
A few days thereafter, Saliyananda and three other persons complained against
the petitioner to the effect that when they with others were travelling from
Embilipitiya to Thambuttegama in connection with an official duty of the
Minister of Mahaweli Development the petitioner refused to allow them
accommodation at the Project Manager's Office, did not permit the use of the
telephone and refused to accompany them to the circuit bungalow despite being
told that they had come upon the Minister's order. On the basis of a report
made on that complaint by the 6th respondent (Senior Security Officer in
charge of Mahaweli "H"

**335**

Division) and without informing the petitioner of the nature of the misconduct
and without holding a disciplinary inquiry, despite a request made by the
petitioner for an inquiry, the 3rd respondent (Executive Director, Mahaweli
Authority of Sri Lanka) by his letter dated 19. 01. 2000 fined the petitioner
and transferred him.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) The complaints on which the respondents commenced disciplinary proceedings
did not contain any allegation of misconduct.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
. . . what was alleged to be a Ministerial duty was nothing more than
political activities at Nikaweratiya in connection with a pending election in
which the Minister was interested . . . The real grievance which they (the
complaints) reveal is displeasure that the petitioner had resisted an improper
attempt to influence him to provide accommodation at the office, despite
Ministerial duty being invoked"  
  
2\. The respondent failed to comply with the disciplinary rules prior to
imposing a punishment on the petitioner.  
  
3\. The petitioner's fundamental right under Article 12(1) has been infringed.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
''The use of State and Corporation resources (whether land, buildings,
vehicles, equipment, funds or other facilities; or human resources) directly
or indirectly for the benefit of one political party or group would constitute
unequal treatment and political discrimination because thereby an advantage is
conferred on one political party or group which is denied to its rivals."  
  
**Case referred to :  
**  
_Deshapria v. Rukmani (1999) 2 Sri L. R 412, 418  
_  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Shyamal A. Collure_ for the petitioner.  
  
_Rajiv Goonatileke, S.C._ for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**336**

September 15, 2000.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The Petitioner is an (Assistant Security Supervisor) employed by the Mahaweli
Authority of Sri Lanka, the 1st Respondent, working at the Resident Project
Managers Office at the Mahaweli "H" Division, Thambuttegama. He complains that
his fundamental right under Article 12(1) was infringed by orders made on 19.
01\. 2000 and 07. 02. 2000, imposing a fine of three days' pay, and
transferring him to Embilipitiya (without expenses as the transfer was on
disciplinary grounds).  
  
The impugned orders were made in consequence of an incident which occurred in
the early hours of the morning of 19. 01. 99. There is no dispute as to the
facts.  
  
On 18. 01. 99 the Petitioner was on night duty at the Office. At about 1.00
a.m. on 19. 01. 99 five persons came to the Office: one Saliyananda, an
Assistant Security Supervisor working at Embilipitiya, three other employees
of the 1st Respondent, and one Hinnimahattaya, the driver of a bus parked
nearby in which there were about 25 others.  
  
According to the Petitioner, Saliyananda informed him "that they were on their
way to Nikaweratiya to participate in a political meeting of the ruling party
scheduled to be held the following day in support of the candidates of the
said political party contesting the Provincial Council Elections in the North
Western Province, and wanted the Petitioners permission for them to stay the
night in the said office." He added that, except for the said Hinnimahattaya,
almost all the rest were heavily intoxicated.  
  
The Petitioner replied that he had not received any instructions from his
superiors to allow them to stay in the Office and that therefore they could
not be permitted to do so.

**337**

They then demanded that they be allowed to use the Office telephone, but he
explained that no outgoing calls could be taken at that time of the night.
They then "wanted to know whether they could stay at the Mahaweli Circuit
Bungalow to which the Petitioner replied that ... prior permission had to be
obtained from the Resident Project Manager... and advised them to speak to the
caretaker . . ."  
  
They then demanded that the Petitioner should come with them to meet the
Resident Project Manager, but he told them that he could not as he was on
duty; he showed the driver the way.  
  
There was only one affidavit filed on behalf of the Respondents, and that was
by the 2nd Respondent, the Director-General of the 1st Respondent. He had no
personal knowledge of that incident, and did not deny the Petitioner's
account, merely stating that "the Respondents are unaware of the incident. .
."  
  
Between 23. 01. 99 and 31. 01. 99 Saliyananda and three other persons made
complaints against the Petitioner, to the effect that 16 security officers and
11 members of the Embilipitiya branch of the Sri Lanka Nidahas Sevaka
Sangamaya had been travelling from Embilipitiya to Thambuttegama in connection
with an official duty of the Minister of Mahaweli Development; that, needing
overnight accommodation, they came to the Project Manager's Office; that they
said that they had come in connection with an official function of the
Minister and requested suitable accommodation for the night. The Petitioner
had replied that they could not stay at the Office, even if accommodation had
been available there; when they wanted to use the telephone to contact the
Resident Project Manager, he had said there was no telephone; when they asked
whether they could stay at the Circuit Bungalow, the Petitioner had said he
did not know and to go there and find out; and when they asked him to

**338**

accompany them, he refused. They expressed amazement that despite being told
that they had come upon the Minister's order, their requests had been turned
down.  
  
By letter dated 26. 02. 99, the 5th Respondent (the Director Mahaweli Security
Organization) forwarded to the 6th Respondent (the Senior Security Officer-in-
charge, Mahaweli "H" Division) copies of the four complaints made to the 2nd
Respondent, and requested him to submit a report in regard to those complaints
to the 2nd Respondent. Upon the 6th Respondent's request, the Petitioner
appeared before him on 23. 03. 99.  
  
The 6th Respondent submitted his report on 23. 03. 99. He referred to the
several complaints, but expressed no opinion as to whether they disclosed that
a prima facie case of misconduct had been established; nor did he state that
he had informed the Petitioner of the misconduct alleged against him. He
reported that the Petitioner had refused to make a statement on the ground
that as the matter involved an incident between security officers it should
have been inquired into by a different inquiry officer. The 6d' Respondent did
not state what order he had made in respect of that submission, or that he had
overruled the objection and called upon the Petitioner to make a statement.
However, he concluded that the refusal to make a statement was in breach of
the written order of the Director of the Mahaweli Security Organization, and
forwarded to that officer his report of the preliminary investigation.  
  
By letter dated 03. 11. 99, signed by the 3rd Respondent (the Executive
Director, Administration and Finance) on behalf of the 2nd Respondent, the
Petitioner was informed that the preliminary investigation had disclosed that
when a group of persons (including the Assistant Security Supervisor,
Embilipitiya, and the Chairman of the Embilipitiya branch trade union) had
come in connection with an official duty of the Minister, the Petitioner had
taken no steps to provide accommodation or to assist them. It was stated that
it was

**339**

extremely unsatisfactory that he had treated those persons who had come on
official duty in this manner. It was noted, further, that the Petitioner had
refused to make a statement at the preliminary investigation. Accordingly, he
was asked to show cause (within 14 days of receipt) why disciplinary action
should not be taken against him.  
  
Having received that letter on 11. 11. 99, on 23. 11. 99 the Petitioner
replied to the 2nd Respondent, through the 6th Respondent (the Head of his
section). There is clear evidence that that letter had been received by the
6th Respondent, and forwarded. He pleaded that he was not guilty of the
charges, and requested a disciplinary inquiry to enable him to establish his
innocence. Nevertheless, by letter dated 19. 01. 2000 the 3rd Respondent
claimed that the preliminary investigation had established that on 19. 01. 99
the Petitioner had not provided accommodation to persons who had come to the
Resident Project Manager's Office in connection with official duty of the
Minister, or taken steps to assist them to meet the Resident Project Manager
in order to obtain accommodation. This was stated to be a breach of his
duties. Further, he had not made a statement at the preliminary investigation;
nor had he replied to the letter dated 03. 11. 99. Accordingly, he was fined
and transferred. The Petitioner immediately protested, pointing out that he
had submitted a reply, requesting an inquiry. The 3rd Respondent replied
stating that the order made on 19\. 01. 2000 could not be changed. He did not
claim that the Petitioner's reply had not been received. The transfer was
confirmed by letter dated 07. 02. 2000.  
  
This application was supported on 05. 05. 2000 for leave to proceed as well as
interim relief. The State Counsel who appeared on that occasion stated that
the instructions he had received from the 1st Respondent did not indicate what
the official Ministerial duty referred to in the impugned letter dated 19. 01.
2000 was, or that it was any part of the Petitioner's functions, whilst on
duty at the Office, to provide accommodation facilities to anybody.

**340**

However, in the affidavit which he later filed in these proceedings the 2nd
Respondent claimed that the Petitioner "has not extended his due obligation to
the group of personnel who came to the area on duty", and that although he was
entrusted with security functions he was bound to extend his co-operation to
other employees of the Authority as and when required.  
  
The 2nd Respondent's position is entirely untenable. As a security officer on
night duty at the Office, the Petitioner was not empowered to provide
accommodation to other employees, or to leave his post in order to take them
to meet the Resident Project Manager: and indeed not merely did the Petitioner
have no discretion in the matter, but it would have been a serious breach of
duty to have done so. Learned State Counsel did not attempt to justify the
impugned orders on that basis, but depended solely on the Petitioner's refusal
to make a statement to the 6th Respondent.  
  
Having regard to the pleadings and documents in this case, it is probable that
what was alleged to be a Ministerial duty was nothing more than political
activities at Nikaweratiya in connection with a pending election in which the
Minister was interested. Learned State Counsel was unable to point to any
allegation in the four complaints made against the Petitioner which suggested
the slightest lapse (let alone misconduct), or lack of courtesy. The
complaints themselves disclosed that the Petitioner acted perfectly correctly,
and rightly refused to be overawed by references to the Minister or
Ministerial duty. The real grievance which they reveal is displeasure that the
Petitioner had resisted an improper attempt to influence him to provide
accommodation at the Office, despite Ministerial duty being invoked.  
  
I hold that the four complaints on which the Respondents commenced
disciplinary proceedings did not contain any , allegation of misconduct. The
decision to commence such

**341**

proceedings was a gross abuse of power. Indeed, the complaints themselves
showed that the Petitioner should have been commended for resisting improper
attempts to depart from the path of duty.  
  
Learned State Counsel strenuously argued that the impugned orders were
justified by reason of the Petitioner's refusal to make a statement to the 6th
Respondent; that the proceedings held by the 6th Respondent constituted a
summary inquiry (within the meaning of the 1st Respondent's Disciplinary
Rules); and that the 6th Respondent's finding thereon was sufficient reason
for transfer.  
  
Those Rules provide for preliminary investigations for the purpose of
ascertaining whether there exists a prima facie case of grave misconduct;
summary inquiries in respect of misconduct; and formal inquiries in respect of
grave misconduct. Learned State Counsel's submission that the 6th Respondent
held a summary inquiry, is untenable. The 6th Respondent was not authorized to
hold a summary inquiry, he was only asked to submit a report on the complaints
made to the 2nd Respondent. It appears that he had gone beyond his mandate,
and held a preliminary investigation, because his report itself as well as the
letters dated 03. 11. 99 and 19. 01. 2000 refer to his proceedings as a
preliminary investigation (although he failed to state in his report whether
there was a prima facie case, and what the offence was).  
  
Even if I were to accept the submission that the 6th Respondent held a summary
inquiry, that inquiry was fundamentally flawed because he did not comply with
the Rules, which require that "the employee shall know the case against him"
\- the nature of the misconduct alleged against him was not disclosed to the
Petitioner. Besides, before the Petitioner could have been faulted for
refusing to make a statement, the 6th Respondent should have ruled on the
Petitioner's preliminary objection.

**342**

I hold that the Respondents failed to comply with the Disciplinary Rules prior
to imposing a punishment on the Petitioner.  
  
I hold that the Petitioner's Fundamental Right under Article 12(1) has been
infringed. In determining what relief should be granted, it is necessary to
consider the context in which the infringement took place. The attempt to
influence the Petitioner to allow the misuse of Corporation premises occurred
not just in general but in connection with a pending election. The use of
State and Corporation resources (whether land, buildings, vehicles, equipment,
funds or other facilities, or human resources) directly or indirectly for the
benefit of one political party or group* would constitute unequal treatment
and political discrimination because thereby an advantage is conferred on one
political party or group which is denied to its rivals (see Deshapriya v.
Rukmani,(1). Penalizing the Petitioner for resisting improper influence in
such circumstances aggravated the infringement of his fundamental right; and
conveyed a wrong message, that improper political influence should not be
resisted.  
  
I therefore quash the impugned transfer orders dated 19. 01. 2000 and 07. 02.
2000, and direct the 1st Respondent to pay him a sum of Rs. 100,000 as
compensation. I further direct the 2nd Respondent personally to pay him a sum
of Rs. 25,000 as costs.  
  
In his counter-affidavit the Petitioner claimed that 275 employees of the 1st
Respondent participated in the political meeting, referred to in the
conversation on 19. 01. 99, which was held at Nikaweratiya, and that meals
were provided for them at the expense of the 1st Respondent. Although the
Petitioner had produced certain bills and vouchers in support, we did not
permit learned Counsel for the Petitioner to rely on those allegations for the
purposes of this case, as the Respondents had not had an opportunity of
replying to them.

**343**

That allegation warrants investigation, and accordingly I direct the Registrar
to forward copies of this judgment and of the pleadings to the Auditor-General
for inquiry as to whether there has been any misuse of the resources of the
1st Respondent.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief Granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/20.html_  

