##  Dayarathna and Others v. Minister of Health and Indigenous. Medicine and
Others - SLR - 393, Vol 1 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 20; (1999) 1 Sri LR 393 (4 May
1999)

**393**

**DAYARATHNA AND OTHERS  
v.  
MINISTER OF HEALTH AND INDIGENOUS  
MEDICINE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
GUNASEKERA, J. AND  
WEERASEKARA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATIONS NOS. 513-528/98  
APRIL 1, 1999.

_Fundamental Rights - Legitimate expectation - Change of Government policy -
Duty to act fairly and in the public interest - Denial of expectations -
Violation of the right to equality - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._

By notification in the Gazette dated 10.05.1996 the Ministry of Health called
for applications from persons desirous of following a course of training
leading to the award of the certificate of competency as Assistant Medical
Officers. Fifteen petitioners who were eligible for enrolment to follow the
course of training applied in response to the notification and sat a
competitive examination conducted on 27.12.1996; and they were so placed on
the results of the examination as to be qualified to follow the course of
training. According to the scheme published in the Gazette, the next step was
the holding of an interview to check the qualifications, meaning the checking
of (1) the birth certificate, (2) evidence of citizenship, and (3)
certificates relating to educational qualifications. That interview was not
held. Then, on 18.12.1997 the Secretary, Government Medical Officers'
Association (GMOA) informed the Minister of Health and Indigenous Medicine
that they desired the provision of employment to medical graduates and saw no
justification 'to restart the AMP training course'; and that their members
'would not participate in any component of the training programme'. Whereupon,
on 11.03.1998 the Minister sought cabinet approval to fill the existing and
future vacancies in the cadre of Assistant Medical Practitioners with Medical
Graduates and to offer the petitioners the option

394

of following the course for paramedical services/Public Health Inspectors, if
they so desire; and by a circular letter dated 20.08.1998, the petitioners
were invited to apply for training as Pharmacists, Medical Laboratory
Technologists and Public Health Inspectors. The requisite qualifications for
such training and the course subjects are less than what are required for the
AMP course. Besides, persons serving in Para Medical Services and as Public
Health Inspectors are not eligible to seek registration under the Medical
Ordinance to practise medicine and surgery whilst Assistant Medical
Practitioners are eligible to seek such registration, subject to certain
conditions.

**Held:**

On the facts of the case, the petitioners had a legitimate expectation that
they would, upon satisfying prescribed conditions, be provided with a course
of training for the examination leading to the award of the certificate of
competency as Assistant Medical Practitioners. The decision effecting a change
of policy which destroyed the expectation of the petitioners did not depend
upon considerations of public interest. In deciding upon the conflicting
interests of Graduate Medical Officers and Assistant Medical Practitioners,
the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents (the Minister, his Secretary and the Deputy
Director General Administration, respectively) considered the views of the
GMOA and yielded to their pressure. Neither the views of the Assistant Medical
Practitioners nor those of the petitioners were sought. Hence, rights of the
petitioners guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution were violated.

_Per_ Amerasinghe, J.

When a change of policy is likely to frustrate the legitimate expectation of
individuals, they must be given an opportunity of stating why the change of
policy should not affect them unfavourably. Such procedural rights have an
important bearing on the protection afforded by Article 12 of the Constitution
against unequal treatment, arbitrarily, invidiously, irrationally or otherwise
unreasonably dealt out by the executive.'

**Cases referred to :**

1. _ _ _R. v. Hertfordshire C.C., ex P. Cheung_ \- The Times April 4, 1986.  
  
2. _R. v. MAFF ex. P. Hamble (_ Offshore Fisheries Ltd., _)_ (1995) 2 All ER 714, .723, 730, 731.  
  
3. _R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Dept., ex P. Ruddock_ (1987) 2 All ER 518, 531.  
  
4. _Findlay v. Secretary of State for the Home Dept._ (1984) 3 All ER 801.

395

5. _Council of Civil Service Union v. Minister for Civil Services_ (1984) 3 All ER 935, 949.  
  
6. _Hughes v. Dept. of Health and Social Security_ (1985) AC 776, 788.  
  
7. _HTV Ltd. v. Price Commission_ \- 1976 ICR 170 at 185.  
  
8. _Preston v. IRC_ \- 1985 2 All ER 327 at 340 - 1985 AC 835 at 865.  
  
9. _Attorney-General for New South Wales v. Quin_ (1990) 1 CLR 1, 23.  
  
10. _Att-Gen of Hong Kong v. Ng Yen Shin_ (1983) A.C. 629.  
  
11. _Re Findlay_ (1985) AC 318.  
  
12. _Robertson v. Minister of Pensions_ (1949) 1 K.B. 227.  
  
13. _Lever Finance Ltd. v. Westminster (City) London Borough Council_ (1971) QB 222.  
  
14. _Associated Pictures Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corpn_ (1948) 1 KB 223.

15. _Rex v. Secretary of State of the Home Dept., ex. P. Khan_ (1985) 1 ALL ER 40, 46.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Romesh de Silva, PC_ with _Geethaka Gunawardena_ for the petitioner.

_Kolitha Dharmawardena,_ DSG with _Viran Corea,_ SC for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 4, 1999.  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

Sixteen petitioners filed separate applications alleging the violation of
their respective fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution. Learned counsel for the petitioners and respondents submitted
that, since these applications related to complaints arising from a single
decision of the first, second and third respondents, the several applications
may be heard together and that a single judgment would be applicable as far
each of the sixteen petitioners and four respondents were concerned.

The Secretary of the Ministry of Health, Highways and Social Services by
notification in the Government Gazette No. 923 of

396

10.05.1996, called for applications from citizens of Sri Lanka who were
"desirous of following a course of training for the examination leading to the
award of the certificate of competency as Assistant Medical Officers". It is
not disputed that each and every one of the petitioners possessed the
stipulated qualifications to apply for enrolment to follow the course of
training; that their applications were submitted in terms of the notification;
that they sat the competitive examination conducted on the 27th of December,
1996; and that they were so placed on the results of the examination as to be
qualified to follow the course of training.

Although in paragraph 10 of the scheme published in Gazette No. 923 of
10.05.1996 "the method of selection for training included an "interview to
check the qualifications", meaning the checking of (1) the birth certificate;
(2) evidence of citizenship; and (3) certificates relating to educational
qualifications, no interview was held, despite several inquiries from the
petitioners as to why the interview was not held.

Instead of proceeding with the advertised course of training for the
examination leading to the award of the certificate of competency as Assistant
Medical Practitioners for which the petitioners had applied, they were by a
circular letter dated the 20th of August, 1998, (F1) invited to apply for
training as Pharmacists, Medical Laboratory Technologists and Public Health
Inspectors.

There are significant distinctions between Pharmacists, Medical Laboratory
Technologists and Public Health Inspectors on the one hand and Assistant
Medical Practitioners/Officers on the other both with regard to their standing
and their training, and eligibility for selection to training courses. In
terms of section 41 (2A) of the Medical Ordinance No. 26 of 1927 (as amended,
from time to time, by Acts of the Legislature, including the Medical
(Amendment) Act No. 30 of 1987 and the Medical (Amendment) Act No.13 of 1993),

397

an Assistant Medical Practitioner (formerly known as an 'Apothecary') on
furnishing proof to the Director of Health Services that he or she being an
Assistant Medical Practitioner has had an aggregate period of at least eight
years' of efficient and satisfactory service as an estate Assistant Medical
Practitioner or as an Assistant Medical Practitioner on an estate and in the
public service, and has within that period served in one or more hospitals
under one-or more medical practitioners for an aggregate period of two years,
is entitled to be registered to practise medicine and surgery. Section 41 (2B)
of the Medical Ordinance states that a Government Assistant Medical
Practitioner, whether he or she is in the service of the Government or has
ceased to be in such service, on production of a certificate from the Director
of Health Services to the effect that he or she (1) has had an aggregate
period of four years of efficient and satisfactory service as a Government
Assistant Medical Practitioner; (ii) has, within that period, served in one or
more district or provincial hospitals under one or more medical practitioners
for an aggregate period of at least three years; and (iii) holds a diploma
conferred by the relevant authority, may be registered as being entitled to
practice medicine and surgery.

On the other hand it is not in dispute that Pharmacists, Medical Laboratory
Technologists and Public Health Inspectors as such are never eligible to be
registered to practice medicine and surgery. Understandably, the basic
educational qualifications required of those admitted to the course of
training as Assistant Medical Practitioners on the one hand and those admitted
to courses of training as Pharmacists, Medical Laboratory Technologists and
Public Health Inspectors on the other are quite different.

The former -

"(a) should have passed the GCE (OIL) examination New/Old/ Interim syllabus in
06 subjects including Sinhala/Tamil

398

Language, Mathematics and Science or should have passed the NCGE examination
in six subjects at not more than two sittings with "B" grade passes for four
subjects including First language, Mathematics and Science; and

(b) should have passed the GCE (A/L) examination in four subjects including
Chemistry and either Zoology or Botany at one sitting.

Note : A pass in English Language as a subject at the Senior School
Certificate/GCE (O/L)/ (NCGE examination will be considered as an added
qualification" : (Gazette No. 923 of 10.05.1996, paragraph 05).

The latter should have passed -

"6.1 the Senior School Certificate or General Certificate of Education
examination (Old syllabus) in six subjects, at not more than two sittings with
Credit passes in Sinhala/Tamil Language or Literature/Sinhala Language &
Literature/Tamil Language and Literature and Mathematics and in two Science
subjects (ie Physics, Botany, Zoology, Biology or Chemistry); or

6.2 the General Certificate of Education (Ordinary Level) examination (New
syllabus) in six subjects at not more than two sittings with Credit passes in
Sinhala/Tamil Language or Literature/ Sinhala Language and Literature/Tamil
Language and Literature, Mathematics, General Science and one other subject.

6.3 the National Certificate of General Education in six subjects at not more
than two sittings with "B" grade passes for First language, Mathematics,
Science and Health Science or a Technical subject.

399

Note : Candidates who qualify under 6.1, 6.2, 6.3 above should have
compulsorily passed at least 05 subjects at one sitting: (Gazette of
09.02.1996).

The schemes of training are also different. Inter alia, selected candidates
for training as Assistant Medical Practitioners were "required to follow a 2
1/2 years training course at the Medical Faculty, University of Sri Lanka
and/or at the National Institute of Health Services, Kalutara and thereafter
an internship of 06 months at a Provincial Base or District Hospital . . ."
(Paragraph 11, Gazette of 10.5.1996).

According to information furnished by the AMP Co-ordinator, AMP Training
Programme, Faculty of Medicine, Peradeniya, (Document A), which has not been
controverted Assistant Medical Practitioner students followed courses in
Anatomy, Physiology, Biochemistry (6 months); Nutrition, Pharmacology &
Pharmacy, Microbiology, Parasitology, Pathology, Community Medicine (6
months); Medicine, Surgery, Paediatrics, Gynaecology and Obstetrics (18
months, including 8 weeks clinicals). Additionally, they also clerked for 2-4
weeks in "Otolaryngology, Opthalmology, Chest Diseases, Venereal Diseases,
Dental Surgery, Dermatology, Orthopaedic Surgery, Clinical Pathology, Out
Patient Department, Hospital Administration, Pharmacy and Anti-Malarial Work."
At the end of an Assistant Medical Practitioner's course of training it was
envisaged that a successful trainee would "as a leader of a team" "be capable
of-

01\. preventing the spread and incidents of the listed pathological states in
the community;

02\. implementing family planning programmes;

03\. preventing maternal and child mortality and morbidity in the community;

400

04\. conducting a normal delivery;

05\. diagnosing and treating individuals who are afflicated with the listed
pathological states;

06\. supervising continued treatment in individuals with the listed
conditions;

07\. detecting and referring patients with the listed clinical states or any
other problem that he is unable to deal with to the closest hospital equipped
to deal with such problems after providing appropriate initial treatment;

08\. administering peripheral units and central dispensaries;

09\. possess a scientific attitude;

10\. assume responsibility for his own continued learning;

11\. function efficiently in groups;

12\. possess skills in good inter-personal relationship with patients and
people.'

It was not suggested that the training schemes for Pharmacists, Medical
Laboratory Technologists or Public Health Inspectors equipped them with the
knowledge and skills imparted in the training course for the examination
leading to the award of the certificate of competency as Assistant Medical
Practitioners.

Having regard to the superior educational qualifications required of those
invited to apply for the course of training for the examination leading to the
award of the certificate of competency as Assistant Medical Practitioners; and
having regard to the comparatively superior nature of the training imparted to
trainee Assistant Medical Practition-

401

ers in terms of content, duration and intensity; and having regard to the fact
that the petitioners had at a competitive examination, subject to the
verification of their certificates at an interview, qualified themselves to be
admitted to the course of training leading to the award of the certificate of
competency as Assistant Medical Practitioners, the invitation to them
contained in the letter F1 dated the 20th of August, 1998 to apply for
training as Pharmacists, Medical Laboratory Technologists or Public Health
Inspectors was in my view tantamount to treating unequals equally, and
therefore the conduct of the second and third respondents was manifestly
unreasonable and unfair.

Moreover, having regard to the manner in which earlier applicants similarly
situated were treated, there was discrimination between the petitioners and
the earlier applicants. It is both a Constitutional requirement and a cardinal
principle of good public administration that all persons in a similar position
should be treated similarly: Cf. per Lord Donaldson, MR in _R. v.
Hertfordshire C. C., ex P. Cheung_.(1) There must be certainty and
predictability if the rule of law is to prevail, which Article 12 of the
Constitution, among other things, is obviously intended to safeguard. Article
12 of the Constitution requires substantive as well as formal equality: laws,
regulations and executive or administrative rules, procedures and schemes must
not discriminate between individuals on invidious or irrational grounds; and
officials are required to apply those laws, rules, procedures and schemes
consistently and even-handedly unless a deviation can be objectively and
reasonably justified on the grounds that a legitimate end is being pursued and
that the means to achieve that end are proportionate.

The petitioners contend that their "legitimate expectations" have been
disappointed, and by way of the 'just and equitable' relief the Court may
grant or direct under the provisions of Article 126 (4) of the Constitution,
they pray, among other things, for an order of this Court "revoking and/or
annulling and/or setting aside the decision contained in the letter dated
20.8.98 and marked as "F1"; and

402

an order "directing the respondents to hold the viva/or interview within a
reasonable time as contemplated in the Gazette notice marked 'B'; and to
conduct the course of study for Assistant Medical Practitioners". Essentially,
this is an appeal that the respondents should be required to act with
fairness: Cf. per Sedley, J. in _R. v. MAFF, ex P. Hamble_ ( _Offshore
Fisheries Ltd_.)(2), Following _R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Dept.,
ex P. Ruddock_ (3).

In support of the reliefs sought, the petitioners submitted that, having
regard to the promises or representations expressed or reasonably implied in
the advertisement in Government Gazette No. 923 of 10.05.1996, as well as
presentations implied from established practice based upon the past actions
and settled conduct of the first, second and third respondents and their
predecessors in office, the petitioners had a legitimate expectation of a
substantive benefit, namely that they would, upon satisfying the requirements
published in Gazette No. 923 of 10.05.1996, be provided with the training
specified and publicised in that Gazette notification.

The respondents, through the affidavit of the Secretary, Ministry of Health
and Indigenous Medicine, stated that :

"(a) The need for Assistant Medical Practitioners arose at a time in the past,
when there were insufficient Graduate Medical Officers for posting to
hospitals in the country.

(b) It is the Graduate Medical Officers who have been involved in training the
said AMPs;

(c) At present, there are approximately 800 Medical Officers graduating every
year;

(d) In the circumstances, the Government could only offer employment for these
Medical Graduates for another 2 years;

403

(e) In view of the foregoing, the Government Medical Officers' Association
(GMOA) has taken up the position that they would not engage in the training of
Registered AMPs in future.

I annex herewith marked 2R2, a copy of a letter dated 18th December, 1997,
sent by the GMOA containing, inter alia, the said position.

I also annex 'herewith marked 2R3 a copy of the relevant recruitment criteria,
which specifically states (in paragraph 3 thereof) that RMOs and AMPs would be
placed under the supervision of Graduate Medical Officers upon recruitment.

(f) In the foregoing context, it would not be possible to conduct suitable
training for Registered Assistant Medical Practitioners."

Was there more than a mere expectation or hope that might have been
entertained by a reasonable man or woman? Eg cf. _Findlay v. Secretary of
State for the Home Dept_ (4). Was there a 'legitimate expectation' in the
sense of an expectation that was worthy of protection - one that has
consequences to which effect will be given in public law? _Cf. Council of
Civil Service Unions v. Minister for Civil Service_ (5). There are many
judicial decisions and publications of learned jurists that help us to
understand what makes an expectation legitimate. I refrain from examining them
here. However, I do wish to quote with respectful approval the following words
of Sedley, J. in R v. MAFF, ex P. Hamble (Offshore Fisheries), (supra) at 731:

"Legitimacy in this sense is not an absolute. It is a function of expectations
induced by government and of policy considerations which militate against
their fulfilment. The balance must, in the first instance, be for the policy-
maker to strike; but if the outcome is challenged by way of judicial review, I
do not consider that the Court's criterion is the bare rationality of the
policy-maker's conclusion. While policy is for the policy-maker alone, the
fairness of

404

his or her decision not to accommodate reasonable expectations which the
policy will thwart remains the Court's concern (as of course the lawfulness of
the policy). To postulate this is not place the judge in the seat of the
Minister **...** (1) is the Court's task to recognize the constitutional
importance of ministerial freedom to formulate and to reformulate policy; but
it is equally the Court's duty to protect the interests of those individuals
whose expectation of different treatment has a legitimacy which in fairness
outtops the policy choice which threatens to frustrate it."

The respondents called for applications in the Government Gazette of the 10th
of April, 1996. The competitive examination for selection was held on the 27th
of December, 1996. And, then by their letter dated the 20th of August, 1998,
the respondents suggested there was a change of the advertised conditions.
Evidently, there had been a change of policy. In my view, although the
executive ought not in the exercise of its discretion to be restricted so as
to hamper or prevent change of policy, yet it is not entirely free to overlook
the existence of a legitimate expectation. Each case must depend on its
circumstances, but eventually, :t seems to me, that the Court's delicate and
sensitive task is one of weighing genuine public interest against private
interests and deciding on the legitimacy of an expectation having regard to
the weight it carries in. the face of the need for a policy change.

In general, a Government has a right to change its policies. As Lord Diplock
observed in _Hughes v. Dept. of Health and Social Security_ (6) :

"Administrative policies may change with changing circumstances, including
changes in the political complexion of Governments. The liberty to make such
changes is something that is inherent in our form of constitutional
Government. When a change in administrative policy takes place and is
communicated in a departmental circular **. . .** any reasonable expectations
that may have been aroused **. . .** by any previous circular are destroyed."

405

This passage might be thought to suggest that no expectation can survive a
change in policy. That is not so. As Sedley, J. observed in R v. MAFF,
(supra), at 730 : 'But it is also well-established that' it is a misuse of
power for (a public body) to act unfairly or unjustly towards the private
citizen when there is no overriding public interest to warrant it'. (see _HTV
Ltd. v. Price Commission_ (7) at 185 per Lord Denning MR, cited with approval
by Lord Templeman in _Preston v. IRC_ (8) at 340.

I am mindful of the reluctance of some courts to accord legitimate
expectations substantive as opposed to procedural protection on the ground
that to do so might encounter the objection of entailing, what Mason, CJ. of
Australia in _Att-Gen. for New South Wales v. Quin_ (9) described as 'curial
interference with administrative decisions on the merits by precluding the
decision-maker from ultimately making the decision which he or she considers
most appropriate in the circumstances". Admittedly, the legitimate expectation
which has been created may sometimes be no more than that a particular
procedure will be followed. eg. see _Att-Gen. of Hong Kong v. Ng Yen Shin_
(10). On the other hand in certain cases the Court may in considering a
challenge to an executive or administrative decision based on legitimate
expectations consider substantive issues. A change in policy can have a
substantive impact, eg. see _Re Findlay_ (11); Cf also _Robertson v. Minister
of Pensions_ (12); _Lever Finance Ltd. v. Wesminster (City) London Borough
Council_ (13). Thus, if it can be shown that a decision was based on
irrelevant considerations or that improper purposes were being pursued; it
will be struck down on ordinary Wednesbury criteria." ( _Associated Picture
Houses Ltd. v. Wednesbury Corpn_ (14); P. P. Craig, Legitimate Expectations: A
Conceptual Analysis, (1992) vol. 108 LQR 79 at 94. Craig (ibid.) observed:
"Now it is of course the case that the application of these criteria can
involve the danger that the Court may indirectly substitute its judgment on
the merits for that of the administrative agency. This is however, a general
problem with the, review of administrative discretion which is not rendered
more or less difficult by the fact that the origin of the applicant's standing
is the concept of legitimate expectation.

406

On the cogency of the 'no fettering' argument, it has been, in my view,
correctly said that it has been overstated. Craig (op. cit. at 90) said:

"Policies must of course be allowed to develop, and in this sense it is
correct to say that they cannot be fettered. One cannot, therefore, ossify
administrative policy, which may alter for a variety of reasons, including
experience gleaned from the operation of the previous policy, change of
political outlook, or new technological developments. Nonetheless, the 'no
fettering" theme must be kept within bounds. Where a representation has been
made to a specific person, or where conditions for the application of policy
in a certain area have been published and relied on, then the public body
should be under a duty to follow the representation or the published criteria.
This does not prevent it from altering its general policy for the future, but
it should not be allowed to depart from the representation or pre-existing
policy in relation to an individual who has relied, unless the overriding
public interest requires it, and then only after a hearing."

In the matters before me there was no Gazette notification nor a circular
formally announcing a change of policy. There was no announced change of
policy based upon a change of Government. Indeed, there was no change of
Government between the calling of applications and on the alleged change of
policy that took place later. What was the explanation then for the deviation
between the notification in the Gazette dated 10. 05. 1996 and the letter of
20. 08. 1998?

According to the affidavit of the second respondent, the Secretary of Health
and Indigenous Medicine, there was "a time in the past when there were
insufficient Graduate Medical Officers for posting to hospitals on the
country' a 'need for Assistant Medical Practitioners'. The `need for Assistant
Medical Practitioners" was recognized by the legislature in 1993: Indeed,
Assistant Medical Practitioners continue

407

to be statutorily recognized as eligible to be registered to practice medicine
and surgery even to this day. And, if there was no 'need" for them in 1996,
why did the Ministry of Health, Highways and SocialServices by advertisement
in the Government Gazette of 10. 05. 1996 call upon "citizens of Sri Lanka",
including, of course the petitioners, who were "desirous of following a course
of training for the examination leading to the award of the certificate of
competency as Assistant Medical Officers'' to make their applications, and
make them sit an examination in December, 1996, for selection, and then in
August, 1997, announce the results of that examination? Why did the
respondents fail to hold the interviews for checking the documents of the
petitioners, as promised? Why did they fail to provide the promised course of
training? Were these failures due to a change of policy based on
considerations of overriding public interest? Or were the failures due to the
omission of the first to third respondents to consult stakeholders before the
advertisement and before policy changes were effected?

On the 18th of December, 1997\. the Secretary of the GMOA wrote to the
Minister of Health and Indigenous Medicine as follows:

**PROPOSAL TO START THE AMP TRAINING PROGRAMME**

"Further to the discussion we had with you at the Monthly Meeting on 17.12.97,
we wish to reiterte our Association's stand on the above matter.

As at present the Government is not in a position to assure employment to all
medical graduates and the intention of the government is to post qualified
doctors to the peripheries. Therefore we see no justification to restart the
AMP training course and our members would not participate in any component of
the training programme.

These decisions have been arrived at a Special General Meeting of the GMOA."

408

The Minister made a Minute on that letter on the 6th of January 1998, to one
of the Directors-General as follows:

"Please report whether this training could be done without assistance of the
GMOA members."

It would appear that on the 6th of January, 1998, the Minister had given no
indication of a change of policy; indeed, he seems to have wanted to carry on
with the proposed training course, if that was possible. However, on the 6th
of January, 1998, the official responded with the following minute addressed
to the Minister:

"Without the assistance and the co-operation of the members of the GMOA it is
impossible to conduct the training as they are responsible for almost 95% both
didactic/clinical training."

The next step was the submission of a Cabinet Memorandum dated the 11th of
March, 1998, by the Minister. It stated as follows:

**FILLING THE POSTS OF REGISTERED/ASSISTANT MEDICAL OFFICERS  
FROM THE GRADUATE MEDICAL OFFICERS**

There are about 1500 Registered Assistant Medical Officers serving in the
Institutions under this Ministry and Provincial Councils and at present there
exist 92 vacancies. This Ministry invited applications to fill the above
vacancies and an examination was held by the Department of Examinations for
this purpose on 27.12.1996. The Ministry has already received the results of
this examination.

02\. In the past, these posts have been created at a time when the number of
graduate Medical Officers was not adequate to be posted to the hospitals. The
approximate number of graduate Medical Officers who pass out annually from the
Medical Colleges in Sri Lanka is about 800. When the number of vacancies

409

of Medical Officers exist at present is taken into account it is observed that
the Ministry could provide employment only for the next two years. It is the
sole responsibility of the Government to provide jobs for the doctors who are
produced .by spending a huge amount of Government money. Similarly, it is also
the duty and responsibility of those Graduate Medical Officers to serve their
motherland.

03\. Upto now, it was the Graduate Medical Officers and the Consultant Medical
Officers who contributed in a large scale for the said training of Registered
Assistant Medical Officers. However, the Government Medical Officers' Union
has informed me in writing that they will not engage in the duties of training
Registered Assistant Medical Practitioners in the future.

04\. In the circumstances, I would like to state that it is much more
appropriate to fill the existing vacancies of Registered Assistant Medical
Practitioners in the institutions under this Ministry and the Provincial
Councils from the Graduate Medical Officers, to enable to obtain the services
of Graduate Medical Officers who pass out annually from the Medical Colleges
instead of training a new batch spending an additional amount of money from
the Government funds.

05\. In addition, I could suggest that an opportunity be granted to the
candidates who have obtained higher marks at the said examination to follow
the training course for para medical services and Public Health Inspectors if
they so desire.

06\. Accordingly, Cabinet approval is sought -

i. to fill the existing vacancies and those that would fall vacant in the
future Cadre of Registered Assistant Medical Officers from the graduate
Medical Officers.

410

ii. to grant an opportunity to the candidates who have obtained higher marks
at the examination held on 27. 12\. 1996 to recruit Assistant Medical Officers
to follow the training course for para medical services/Public Health
Inspectors if they so desire."

The "circumstances" which made it "more appropriate" to fill the vacancies of
Registered Assistant Medical Practitioners with Graduate Medical Officers are
less than clear. Was it because the Minister was of the view that by doing so
Government would be better placed in fulfilling its "responsibility **. . .**
to provide jobs for doctors who-are produced by spending a huge amount of
Government money"? Was it to provide Graduate Medical Officers the opportunity
of discharging their "duty and responsibility **. . .** to serve their
motherland"? Was it to save the Government the expense of training Registered
Medical Practitioners? Was it because the 'Government Medical Officers' Union"
had informed the Minister that "they will not engage in the duties of training
Registered Assistant Medical Practitioners in the future"?

In responding to the petitioners' averment that in terms of the Gazette,
notification an interview ought to be conducted to select candidates for the
advertised course of training, the second respondent explained in his
affidavit that the GMOA had "taken up the position that they would not engage
in the training of Registered AMPs in future", and that "in the foregoing
context it would not be possible to conduct suitable training for Registered
Assistant Medical Practitioners". In responding to the petitioners' averments
that "despite repeated assurances made by the first respondent and the second
respondent, the respondents have upto now failed and neglected to hold a viva
and/or interview for the selection of students for the said course, nor has
the said course of study commenced", the second respondent in his affidavit
stated, inter alia, that "having regard to the fact that there was an adequate
number of Medical Graduates to fill the said vacancies, the 1st respondent
submitted a Cabinet memorandum seeking Cabinet approval to fill the existing
92 vacancies with Graduate Medical Officers, and to grant

211

an opportunity to the candidates who sat for the examination held on
27.12.1966 to recruit AMPs to follow the training course for para medical
services/Public Health Inspectors, if they so desire.'

Learned counsel for the respondents, Mr. Dharmawardana, was as usual frank,
free from bias and partiality and very candid: He helped to rescue us from the
involved submissions of the first respondent to the Cabinet and the averments
of the second respondent in his affidavit. He said that the real reason for
Interrupting the process of recruitment and training was the impossibility of
providing the promised course on account of the necessary resource persons for
providing the supervision and training of aspiring Assistant Medical
Practitioners being unwilling to assist. However, learned counsel for the
respondents added that since there were sufficient Medical Graduates, the
services of Assistant Medical Practitioners were no longer required and that
steps were being taken to reflect that situation in the relevant legislation.

It comes to this : in terms of existing legislative policy, both Medical
Graduates and Assistant Medical Practitioners are qualified in specified
circumstances to practice medicine and surgery. Having regard to published
information, representations and past executive practice which the petitioners
relied on in applying for the course of training and sitting the prescribed
examination, they had a legitimate expectation that they would, upon
satisfying the prescribed conditions, be provided with "a course of training
for the examination leading to the award of the certificate of competency as
Assistant Medical Officers". The respondents decided that it was preferable or
necessary to employ Graduate Medical Officers to fill the vacancies of
Assistant Medical Officers and to offer the petitioners a course of training
leading to their qualification as Pharmacists, Medical Laboratory
Technologists - described by the Minister as "paramedical services" \- or as
mere Public Health Inspectors, thereby resiling from the advertised scheme,
representations and established practices.

412

No opportunity was given to the petitioners to argue why the change of policy
should not affect them: they were faced with a situation where a change of
policy had been made without their knowledge and when it had been decided that
they might apply for some other, inferior, course "if they so desire". It was
perhaps an unsatisfactory way in which the petitioners were dealt with by the
first to third respondents from an administrative point of view. Moreover,
legally, the respondents failed to observe their duty. When a change of policy
is likely to frustrate the legitimate expectations of individuals, they must
be given an opportunity of stating why the change of policy should not affect
them unfavourably: cf. _R. v. Secretary of State of the Home Dept, exp. P.
Khan_ (15); R. v. MAFF, ex p. Hamble Fisheries (supra) at 731. Such procedural
rights have an important bearing on the protection afforded by Article 12 of
the Constitution against unequal treatment arbitrarily, invidiously,
irrationally or otherwise unreasonably dealt out by the executive. 'They focus
on formal justice and the rule of law, in the sense that the rules of natural
justice help to ensure objectivity and impartiality, and facilitate the
treating of like cases alike. Procedural rights are also seen as protecting
human dignity by ensuring that the individual is told why he is being treated
unfavourably, and by enabling him to take part in that decision." Craig (op.
cit.) 86.

In addition to the procedural opportunity required by law, there is a
substantive requirement that there must be an overriding public interest if a
change of policy were to set at nought an individual's prior expectation: R.
v. Secretary of State for the Home Dept. (ibid); R v. MAFF, ex p. Hamble
Fisheries (ibid). There was no such interest claimed in the matters before me.
For all the involved explanations of the first respondent in his Cabinet
memorandum and that of the second respondent in his affidavit, essentially the
change of policy was based on the preference of the interests of one of two
classes of persons recognized by the Legislature as entitled to practice
medicine to the other. The conflicting interests were those of the Graduate
Medical Officers and the Assistant Medical Practitioners. The first, second
and third respondents, considered the views of the Trade

413

Union known as the General Medical Officers' Union on behalf of Graduate
Medical Officers and yielded to their pressure of non-cooperation in the
matter of conducting the advertised course of training. Neither the views of
the Assistant Medical Practitioners nor those of the petitioners were sought.
The decision of the respondents, and recommendations to the Cabinet effecting
a change of policy did not depend either upon considerations of public
interest weighed against private interests or even upon an informed
consideration of conflicting private interests.

The change of policy, in the circumstances, may nevertheless affect the
future, having regard to the fact that the legislature and executive are free
to formulate and reformulate policy;. however, it is the duty of this Court to
safeguard the rights and privileges, as well as interests " deserving of
protection such as those based on legitimate expectations, of individuals. In
my view, the legitimate expectations of the petitioners with regard to the
"Scheme of Training" as described in paragraph 11 of the Gazette notification
of 10.05.1996 survive the policy change that has taken place.

For the reasons stated in my judgment,

I declare that the fundamental rights of the petitioners guaranteed by Article
12 (1) of the Constitution have been violated by the second respondent;

I further declare that document F1 dated the 20th of August, 1998, is of no
force or avail in law as far as the petitioners are concerned.

I make order that in respect of each and every one of the sixteen petitioners
the first, second and third respondents shall -

(a) hold the interview referred to in Government Gazette No. 923 of 10. 05. 96
within eight weeks from the date of this judgment; and

414

(b) provide the scheme of training advertised in Gazette No. 923 of 10. 05. 96
commencing within a reasonable time but not exceeding six months from the date
of this order.

I further make order that the State shall pay each of the petitioners a sum of
Rs. 5,000 as costs.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/20.html_  

