##  Gricilda Hewa v. Thomas Hewa - SLR - 43, Vol 3 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 20;
(1998) 3 Sri LR 43 (23 September 1998)

**43**

**GRICILDA HEWA  
v.  
THOMAS HEWA**

SUPREME COURT

AMERASINGHE, J.,

GUNAWARDANA, J.,

WEERASEKERA. J.

S.C. NO. 163/97

S.CLA. (SPL) NO. 50/97

C.A. NO. 34/96

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 16505/L

SEPTEMBER 9TH, 1998.

Rei Vindicatio Action - Preliminary Objection - No power of attorney on
record-Should a power of attorney be tendered at the time of filing of the
plaint -Civil Procedure Code s. 25 (b) - Is it fatal.?

The appellant instituted a Rei Vindicatio action and on the basis of a
preliminary objection the learned District Judge dismissed the action for the
alleged reason that a power of attorney or a copy thereof was not in the case
record. The Court of appeal affirmed this decision. -

**Held:**

1\. S. 25 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code imposes no obligation on a person
appearing as a recognised agent and holding a general power of attorney to
tender same or a copy thereof at the time of filing a plaint.

Per Amerasinghe, J.

It seems to me that in matters of this nature, the important thing is that the
person in fact had authority to act and not whether the instrument of
authorisation was filed at the time of the institution of the action'.

2\. The failure to file the power of attorney of or a certified copy thereof
in court, as stipulated in s. 25 (b) is only an irregularity, which can be
cured later.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Aitken Spence & Co. v. Fernando _\- (1900) 4 NLR 35 at 37.

44

_2.Udeshi v. Mather_ \- 1982 1 SLR 12 at 22.

_3\. Kumarihamy v. Punchi Menika_ \- (1936) 38 NLR 385 at 387.

_Romesh de Silva, PC with V.P.A. de Almeida_ for the appellant.

_Wijedasa Rajapakse_ for the respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

September 23, 1998.

**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The appellant instituted a rei vindicatio action against the respondents in
the District Court of Colombo. At a certain stage, on the basis of a
preliminary objection the learned District Judge dismissed the action for the
alleged reason that a power of attorney or a copy thereof was not in the case
record. The appellant appealed against the order of the District Court dated
20th February, 1996\. The court of Appeal on 19th March 1997, affirmed the
decision of the learned District Judge and dismissed the appeal. The Court of
Appeal stated that there was no power of attorney on record at the date of the
order of the learned District Judge and that according to the date stamp on
the power of attorney which has been filed along with the petition of appeal,
it had been tendered on 8. 4. 96.

The position of the petitioner was that power of attorney No. 332 dated 6. 11.
93 was filed with a motion on the 14th of October, 1994\. The action had been
filed on 18. 11. 93 and the judgment was delivered on the 20th of February,
1996. Learned counsel for the respondents admitted that a copy of a motion was
received by the respondents by registered post but he denied that the power of
attorney was in fact filed. The motion book of the District Court relating to
the relevant period is not available and there were no other records relating
to filing of the power of attorney. However, it is not understood why trouble
would have taken to send a copy of the motion to the respondents while not
filing the power of attorney referred to in that motion. There was nothing to
be gained by withholding the power of attorney. A perusal of the copy of the
power of attorney No. 332 shows that it was certainly in existence on the 8th
of November, 1993. This appears from the date stamp of the Registrar-General,
to whom the power of attorney had been tendered for registration. In the
circumstances, I am of the view that the appellant's claim that the

45

power of attorney was filed together with the motion on 14th October 1994, is
acceptable.

However, the question remains whether a power of attorney must be tendered at
the time of filing the plaint. Section 25 (b) of the Civil Procedure Code
requires that a person holding general powers of attorney who seeks to appear
as a recognized agent must file the power of attorney or a copy thereof in
court. In my view, section 25 (b) of the Civil Procedure Code imposes no
obligation on a person appearing as a recognized agent and holding general
powers of attorney to tender the power of attorney or a copy thereof at the
time of filing a plaint.

In Aitken Spence & Co. v. Fernando at 37 Bonser, CJ, after conferring with
Moncrieff, J. expressed the view that a power of attorney or a copy of it
might, under section 25 (b), be filed at any stage of the case. It seems to me
that in matters of this nature, the important thing is that the person in fact
had authority to act and not whether the instrument of authorisation was filed
at the time of the institution of the action. In the matter before us, the
authority had existed and therefore the filing of the copy of the power of
attorney on 14th October, 1994, was in order.

If the view is taken that the power of attorney or its copy must ordinarily be
filed at the time of the institution of the action, the failure to do so would
not be a fatal irregularity. In Udeshi v. Mather, at 22 it was observed that
it is now settled law that the failure to file the power of or a certified
copy thereof in court, as stipulated in section 25 (b), is only an
irregularity which can be cured later.

An irregularity of this nature cannot be permitted to vitiate proceedings
unless such irregularity affected the merits of the case or the jurisdiction
of the court: Kumarihamy v. Punchi Menika, - at 387.

For the reasons stated above I would allow the appeal and set aside the
judgment of the Court of Appeal with costs.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/20.html_  

