##  Galappaththi v. Bulegoda and Another - SLR - 393, Vol 1 of 1997 [1996]
LKSC 21; (1997) 1 Sri LR 393 (1 October 1996)

  

**393**

**GALAPPATHTHI**

**v.**

## **BULEGODA AND ANOTHER**



SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. NO. (SPL.) 248/96.

FEBRUARY 3, 5, 6 AND 7, 1997.  


_Expulsion of a member of a recognized political party ‑ Article 99(13) (a) of
the Constitution ‑Audi alteram partem rule._



By a letter dated 30.11.96 Sri Lanka Pragathisheeli Peramune (SLPF) a
recognized political party which party is represented in Parliament by the
petitioner purported to expel the petitioner from the party and sought to
nominate another member of the party as member of Parliament. The said
expulsion was a sequal to an allegation that the petitioner had ceased to be a
member of the party by reason of his failure to obtain party membership for
1996. The respondents claimed that the petitioner forfeited his membership by
refusing to pay the membership fee for that year. The allegation was denied by
the petitioner but the party proceeded to expel him without holding an inquiry
into the dispute. It was argued that the petitioner was never expelled from
the party but ceased to be a member of the SLPF; hence he is not entitled to
invoke the jurisdiction of the Court under Article 99(13) (a).



**Held:**



1\. The relevant document constitute _ex facie_ a purported expulsion of the
petitioner from the SLPF; hence the court has jurisdiction to entertain his
application.



2\. The respondents failed to establish that the petitioner ceased to be a
member of the SLPF by reason of the failure to obtain party membership for
1996. This apart, there has been a violation of the _audi alteram partem_ rule
by the failure of the respondents to hold an inquiry and to give an
opportunity to the petitioner to meet the case against him. Hence, the
expulsion of the petitioner was invalid.



**Case referred to:**



1. _Gamini Dissanayake v. M.C.M. Kaleel_ and _Others._ (1993) 2 Sri L.R. 135, 185. 



**394**



**APPLICATION** under and in terms of Article 99(13) (a) of the Constitution
challenging the expulsion of the petitioner from the S.L.P.F.



_D. S. Wijesinghe, P.C.,_ with _J. C. Weliamune_ and _Miss. Lilanthi de Silva_
for petitioner. __



_W P. Gunatilake_ with _J. A. J. Udawatte_ and _Upul_ _Gunaratne_ for .1st,
2nd and 3rd respondents.



_M. B. Ratnayake_ with _Sunil Watagoda_ for 4th respondent. _  
 _

5th, 6th and 7th __ respondents absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult._

  
February 19, 1997. _  
 _

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.**  


The petitioner is a Member of Parliament for the Hambantota Electoral District
nominated by the 3rd respondent, the Sri Lanka Pragathisheeli Peramuna
(S.L.P.F.), a recognised political party. By this application the petitioner
invokes the jurisdiction of this Court in terms of Article 99(13)(a) of the
Constitution seeking _inter alia,_ a declaration that his "purported
expulsion" from the S.L.P.F is invalid. The 1st respondent is the President of
the S.L.P.F. The 2nd respondent functions as the Secretary of the S.L.P.F. The
4th respondent is the Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (J.V.P.), a recognised
political party. The 5th respondent (Jathiya Galawaganeema Peramuna) is also a
political party. According to the petitioner the 5th respondent is a
"coalition" of the 3rd and 4th respondent parties.



At the General Elections held in August 1994 the S.L.P.F. became entitled to
one parliamentary seat for the Hambantota electoral district. The petitioner
was nominated as the Member of Parliament for the electoral district of
Hambantota by the S.L.P.F He took his oaths on 6.1.95 and he continued to sit
in Parliament till 13.12.96, that is, till the end of session in 1996.
However, on or about 26.9.96 he received a letter dated 16.9.96 (marked P21)
signed by the 1st and 2nd respondents informing him that he has failed to
obtain "valid

395



party membership for the year 1996". P21 (as translated) reads as follows:  


            **" Sri Lanka Progressive Front**



7th Lane,

Pagoda Road,

Nugegoda,

Sri Lanka

16.9.1996



Mr. Galapatti Arachchige Nihal,

Mutumala Mawatha, Pallikkudawa,

Tangalla.



##  

##  Notice of Termination of Membership



Sir ,



It has been revealed that you, Galappaththi Arachchige Nihal who was nominated
and appointed as a Member of Parliament of the Sri Lanka Progressive Front for
the Electoral District No. 9 Hambantota at the Parliamentary Elections 1994,
for the vacancy of Member of Parliament for the Party have not obtained Party
Membership, valid for 1996.



Therefore the decision of the Central Committee dated 7.9.96 to consider
having vacated the Membership with effect from 1.5.96 has been approved by the
Politburo that met on 13.9.96. You may submit an appeal by registered post if
you wish to give an explanation within 14 days from date hereof.



Yours faithfully,



Sgd. Ariya Bulegoda                          Sgd. Dr. Kamal Karunadasa

Chairman                    Chief Secretary (seal)

Sri Lanka Progressive Front  



   Dr. Kamal Karunadasa

                            Secretary

                                   Sri Lanka Progressive Front



copies: 1. Commissioner of Elections

2\. Secretary General of Parliament"



396



By R10 dated 27.9.96 (addressed to the 1st respondent) and P23 dated 1.10.96
(addressed to the 2nd respondent) the petitioner strongly protested against
the contents of the letter P21. In R10 and P23 he clearly asserted, _inter
alia_ , (a) that he has duly obtained membership in the S.L.P.F., (b) that he
has not ceased to be a member of the S.L.P.F., (c) that he continues to be a
member of the S.L.P.F. (d) that the Constitution of the S.L.P.F. does not
require a member to pay membership fees and in fact no member was required to
pay membership fees.



The petitioner's complaint to this court does not by any means rest with the
letter P21 for he received copies of two letters addressed to the Secretary
General of Parliament and to the Commissioner of Elections. Both letters were
signed by the 1st and 2nd respondents and were dated 30.11.96. The letter
addressed to the Secretary General of Parliament has been marked as P52A while
the letter addressed to the Commissioner of Elections has been marked as P27.
Both letters are in identical terms and (as translated) they read as follows:

##  "Notice of Cessation of Party Membership



It is hereby notified that at the party Convention of the Sri Lanka
Progressive Front held on 30.11.96 it was unanimously decided to expel Mr.
Galappaththi Arachchige Nihal who was nominated by our Party as a Member of
Parliament for the Electoral District No. 9, Hambantota to represent Sri Lanka
Progressive Front and that therefore he has ceased to be a member of our
Party.



It is most respectfully requested to give us the opportunity to nominate
another member of our Party to fill the vacancy in his place.



Yours faithfully,



Sgd. Ariya Bulegoda Sgd. Dr. Kamal Karunadasa

Chairman (seal)

        S. L. P. F. 



397



copies: 1. Mr. Galappaththi Arachchige Nihal,

Mutumala Mawatha,

Pallikkudawa, Tangalla



2\. Hon. Ratnasiri Wickremanayake

Minister of Parliamentary Affairs."



The petitioner, relying on P52A and P27, contends that the respondents
purported to expel him from the S.L.P.F. and he is therefore entitled to
invoke the jurisdiction of this court in terms of the proviso to Articles
99(13) (a) of the Constitution. On the other hand, the case for the 1st to 3rd
respondents (hereinafter referred to as the respondents) is that the
petitioner was never expelled from the S.L.P.F but that he **ceased to be a
member of the S.L.P. F  **by reason of not having "obtained party membership
valid for 1996." The respondents rely on P21, on R6 (the minutes of the
S.L.R.F Central Committee meeting held on 7.9.96), on R9 (the report of the
S.L.RF politburo meeting held on 13.9.96) and R12 (the Party Convention held
on 30.11.96) in support of their case.



Upon the case as presented on behalf of the respondents, the first question
that arises for decision is the date of the cessation of the petitioner's
membership of the party. It seems to me that the evidence on this crucial
point is not only unclear but is also of a contradictory nature. In R6 and in
P21 the date given is 1st May 1996. In paragraph 61 of the objections filed on
behalf of the respondents the date is given as 7th September 1996 while in
paragraph 68 of the objections the date specified is 16th September 1996\. In
paragraph 34 of the written submissions of the respondents the date is stated
to be 31st December 1995.



As seen from paragraph 67 of the objections of the respondents the gravamen of
the charge against the petitioner is that he has ceased to be a member of the
S.L.P.F by his **" refusal to pay the membership for the year 1996 **...".
There is no evidence whatever that the petitioner was called upon to pay the
membership subscription for 1996 and that he refused to do so. Nor is there
evidence as to the precise amount of the subscription fee for membership for
the year 1996 and the date on which payment

398



became due for 1996. The affidavit of the Treasurer of the S.LPF (R14) does
not throw any light on these crucial matters. What is more, neither the party
Constitution (P17) nor any rule, regulation or resolution **validly** passed
in terms of the party Constitution makes any provision for the cessation of
membership by reason only of non-­payment of the subscription fee for one
year. It is relevant to bear in mind that the petitioner is not an
office‑bearer but an ordinary member of the party. Any rule of resolution
passed by the Central Committee or other body must be shown to be binding on
the petitioner and that it has been brought to his notice. There is no
evidence at all to establish that the petitioner was aware of the contents of
R6 and R9. In short, the respondents have failed to establish the
all‑important fact, namely that the payment of an annual subscription fee is a
condition precedent to the petitioner continuing to remain a member of the
SLPF In this regard, R4 is of no relevance as it is only an application for
membership of the party made by the petitioner.



On a consideration of the matters set out above and the material on record, I
hold that the respondents have failed to establish that the petitioner has
ceased to be a member of the S.L.P.F by reason of the failure to obtain "party
membership for 1996" _(vide_ P21).



This apart, the other cogent ground upon which the petitioner **** assailed
the "purported expulsion" is that there had been a clear **** violation of the
_audi alteram partem_ rule. It seems to me that this contention advanced on
behalf of the petitioner is well founded. Upon receipt of P21, the petitioner
wrote R10 (dated 27.9.96) and P23 (dated 1.10.96). While R10 was addressed to
the 1st respondent, P23 was addressed to Secretary of the party. In R10 the
petitioner specifically took up the position that he has duly obtained
membership of the S.L.RF, that he has not ceased to be a member of the party
and that he continues to remain a member of the party. In substance P23 was to
the same effect. Once the petitioner denied the claim of the respondents that
he had ceased to be a member of the S.L.R.F., it was incumbent upon the
respondents to have held an inquiry and to have given an opportunity to the
petitioner "to explain, controvert or mitigate the case against (him)" per
Fernando, J., in _Gamini Dissanayake v. M. C. M. Kaleel and Others_ (1) _._
This, the

399



respondents failed to do, and the consequence is that the "purported
expulsion" is void.



It was further submitted as a matter of law, on behalf of the respondents,
that there was no "expulsion" of the petitioner from the S.L.R.F and therefore
this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the petitioner's application. With
this submission, I am afraid, l cannot agree. The contention that there was no
"expulsion" of the petitioner from the S.L.P.F is in the teeth of the express
statements made in both P52A and P27. To my mind, there is no doubt that P27
and P52A constitute ex _facie_ a purported expulsion of the petitioner from
the S. L.P.F



Finally, it was contended that this application which was filed on 30.12.96 is
time barred. The reasoning is that the petitioner ceased to be a member of the
S.L.P.F. on "the date on which P21 becomes effective, that is either 14 days
from the date of the letter (16.9.96) or 14 days after the arrival of the
petitioner from abroad, that is 14 days from 26.9.96" _(vide_ paragraph 10 of
the written submissions dated 10.2.97 filed on behalf of the respondents). It
is clear that on the respondent's own showing there is no certainty at all in
regard to the operative date of P21. What is worse, P21 in express terms has a
retrospective effect; the cessation of membership from the party is from
1.5.96. How then is the period of one month to be calculated? I hold that the
objection based on time bar is untenable and that this court has jurisdiction
to entertain the petitioner's application in view of P27 and P52A.



For the reasons set out above, I determine that the "purported expulsion" of
the petitioner is of no force or avail in law and that it is **invalid.** The
1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents must jointly pay the petitioner a sum of Rs.
5000/‑ (Five Thousand Rupees) as costs of these proceedings.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Expulsion determined invalid._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/21.html_  

