##  Abasin Bandn v. S. I. Gunaratne & Others - SLR - 244, Vol 1 of 1995 [1995]
LKSC 21; (1995) 1 Sri LR 244 (6 October 1995)

**244**

**ABASIN BANDA**

**v.** **  
S. I. GUNARATNE & OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE ,J  
KULATUNGA, J  
WIJETUNGA, J  
SC. APPLICATION NO.109/95  
OCTOBER 6,1995

_Fundamental Rights-constitution Articles 13(1)and (2)Article 1l-code of
criminal Procedure Act, Section 32(1) (b) 36and 37 informs reasons for arrest-
Unreasonable delay- Torture \- United Nations Convention on Torture, Articles
2.1,10,11,12,13,and 16-Act,No.22 of 1994._

The Petitioner alleges that he was arrested at about 6 p.m. on 1, March
1995,for no reason He was taken to the Hanguranketha police Station where the
1st Respondent assaulted him with a piece of wood he was produced before the
Magistrate in the morning of 2, March, 1995.

The question to be decided is whether there was "unreasonable delay" and
whether his detention before production was ,"Under all the circumstances of
the case ", "reasonable" ,rather than ,the question whether the arrest was
unlawful and consequently the subsequent detention was also unlawful.

245

**Held :**

1\. The infringement of fundamental rights by the police continue unabated
even after nearly 18 years from the promulgation of the 1978 Constitution and
despite the numerous decisions of this court which have condemned such
infringements. As this court had observed in previous judgments, this
situation exists because police offices continue to enjoy an immunity from
appropriate departmental sanctions on, account of such conduct. It is hoped
that the authorities will take the remedial action to end this situation.

2\. The 24 hour limit is the maximum time for production. Where in all the
circumstances of the case it was unreasonable to delay production before, the
Magistrate, the person making the arrest would be acting in contravention of
Article 13(2).

3\. There being no grounds for arrest whatsoever, the detention overnight was
unreasonable, and in failing to produce the Petitioner before the Magistrate
soon after the arrest the 1st Respondent failed to act in accordance with
procedure established by law.

4\. The award of compensation is useful because it provides an opportunity to
demonstrate society's abhorrence of such conduct. Whereas courts are not
obliged to reflect public opinion they must not disregard it, especially where
there is general anger or dismay or fear over transgressions of this nature.

5\. The fact that a transgressor is personally required to pay a part of the
compensation assessed by the court as being just and equitable is useful to
the extent that it will to some extent assuage the wounded feelings of the
victim.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Ratnapala v. Dharmasiri [1993]1 Sri L.R. 224 at 232, 233; 236.  
_  
_2\. Garusinghe v. Kaduragamuwa S.C. App 133/87 SCM 1 June 1988  
_  
_3\. Chandrasekaram v. Wijetunge 3.C. Ref. 1-3/92 SCMN 29 June 1992.  
_  
_4\. Fail v. A.G.S.C. App 89/91 SCM 1993.  
_  
_5\. Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera S.C App 379/93 SCM 2 March 1994.  
_  
_6\. Peiris & Others v. A.G.. & Others [1994] 1 Sri L.R. 1  
_  
_7\. Mahinda Rajapakse & Vasudeva Nanayakkara v. Chief Inspector Karunaratne &
others S.C.A. 2 $ 4/93 SCM 31 March 1994.  
_  
_8\. Kumaratena v.Sriyantha & Others S.C. App 257/93 SCM 23 May 1994.  
_  
_9\. Selvakumar v. Douglas Devananda & Others. S.C. App 150/93 SCM 13 July
1994._

246

_10\. Kumara v. Rohan Fernando & Others S.C. App 22/90 S.C.M. 21 July 1994\.  
_  
_11\. Pelwattage (AAL) for Piyasena v. OIC Wadduwa SC App 433/93 SCM 28
October 1994.  
_  
_12\. Jayasena v. Ramanayake & Others S.C. (F/R) 17/94 SCM 28 October 1994\.  
_  
_13\. Weragama v. Indran & Others S.C. App's 396 and 397/93 SCM 24 February
1995.  
_  
_14\. Saman v. Leeladasa [1989] 1 Sri L.R. 1. 15. Cf. R. v. Oddy [1974] 2 ALL
E.R. 666._

**APPLICATION** alleging Infringement of fundamental rights.

_Nimal Hapuarachchi for the Petitioner._  
  
_Kanthilal Kumarasiri for the 1st and 2nd Respondents._  
  
_V. Puvitharan, S.C. for the 3rd and 4th Respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult_

5 November 03, 1995.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

The petitioner alleges that he was arrested by the 1st respondent (Sub
Inspector of Police) on 01.03.95 at about 6.00 p.m. for no reason he was taken
to the Hanguranketha Police Station where the 1st respondent assaulted him
with a piece of wood. The petitioner complains that by such acts his rights
under Article 11, 13(1) 13(2) have been infringed by executive or
administrative action. The 2nd respondent (also a Sub Inspector of Police) was
the Officer-in Charge of the Hanguranketha Police Station. In his petition,
the petitioner does not make any allegation against the 2nd respondent.

The Petitioner states that he was waiting or a bus at the Rikillagaskada
junction to go home, after selling cloth Then the 1st respondent arrived in a
jeep with two Police Constables and arrested him. The petitioner was not
informed of the reason for his arrest. On the 1st respondent's order the two
constables put the petitioner into the jeep. He was then taken to the
Hanguranketha Police Station. At the Police Station the 1st respondent told he
petitioner "you are the one at I wanted..... you are having land cases with my
relations you dog", This has reference to the motive for the petitioner's
arrest, according to the case presented by the petitioner.

247

The petitioner's position on the question of motive is that the 1st
respondent's, sister Bisso Menik is his neighbour. she is married to one
Gunaratne who is not on good terms with the petitioner due to a land dispute.
Gunaratne who is not on good terms the petitioner punished by his brother-in-
law the 1st respondent.

At about 7.30 p.m. the petitioner was taken towards Kandy in a jeep. On the
way the jeep was halted. The 1st respondent took a bottle of arrack, opened it
and forced it into the petitioner's mouth. Petitioner was thus compelled to of
it spilt on his shirt. In attempting to get the petitioner to consume arrack
the 1st respondent assaulted the petitioner on his cheek and shoulder. As a
result, he fell down and injured fell down and injured his left elbow. He was
then taken to the Government Hospital Marassana. He was shown to a doctor. The
1st respondent told the Doctor that the petitioner was drunk. The doctor
recorded it in a book.

Thereafter, the petitioner was brought back to the Police Station at about
10.30p.m. and the 1st respondent assaulted with a broken, leg of a chair. The
petitioner sustained injuries on his left knee and the right shoulder. When
the petitioner asked for some drinking water, the 1st respondent gave him a
cup of urine.

On 02.03.95 the petitioner was taken to Court On the way he sent a message to
his wife through one Seneviratne. An Court he pleaded "not guilty" to the
charge. And was given bail. "On the same day, he got himself admitted to the
Generak Hospital Kandy and received treatment as an in patient in Ward No. 10,
The petitioner has produced marked PI the report of the JMO dated 31.03.95
which reads:

"This patient was admitted to General Hospital kandy on 02.03.1995 at 2.35 p.m
Ward No.10 BHT No. 15315\. He alleged that he was assaulted with a club by a
Police Officer on 01.03.1995 around 9.00 p.m. and 11.00.p.m. He had the
following injuries.

(1) Parallel contusion 3"'x 3/4" across the upper back of the right upper arm.

248

(2) Scabbed grazed abrasion 2 1/2' x 1/2" on the upper back of the right
forearm.

(3) Scabbed grazed abrasion 3/4" diameter on the back of left elbow.

(4) Swelling of left knee - No fractures found vide X-ray No. 9591.

(5) Pain in the right buttock.  
  
All injuries are caused by a blunt weapon and were non-grievous in nature".

The petitioner has annexed to his petition supporting affidavits from several
witnesses including the following -

(1) One Ranasinghe Banda who states that on 01.03.95 he, too was waiting for a
bus at Rikillagaskada, with the petitioner when the 1st respondent came in a
jeep and arrested the petitioner. On the 1st respondent's order two police
constables put the petitioner into the jeep - (P2).

(2) One Gnanapala who says that having heard of the arrest of the petitioner
he visited the Police Station at about 6.00 am on 02.03.95. At the request of
the petitioner the witness gave him a shirt. The petitioner appeared to be in
pain and the shirt which he was wearing was smelling - (P5).

(3) One Seneviratne Banda who says that he saw the petitioner being taken
along the road by a constable. The petitioner was limping and said; that he
was being taken to Court. At the request of the petitioner the witness carried
a message to the petitioner's wife. On the way he met the petitioner daughter
and the information to - (P6)

The 1st respondent states that on 01.0395 he was on Station duty and never
left Police Station and that on 02.03.95 he signed a plaint against the
petitioner in his capacity as the Officer-in-Charge of

249

the crime branch .He denies that he arrested the petitioner and also the
alleged assault.

The 2nd respondent (R.M.K.Ranaweera) states that he arrested the petitioner at
about 9.30 p.m for drunken and disorderly behaviour. He states that when he
was passing, the Rikillagaskada town, he saw the petitioner on the ground and
strongly smelling of liquor His sarong had fallen off his body. In support of
this version the 2nd respondent has produced affidavits from the following
witness, obtained in june,1995

(1) Ratnayake who claims to be the owner of a shop, in Rikillagaskada
town-(1R2)

(2) Wickremasinghe a labour who had been to a liquor shop in the town for a
drink of arrack-(2R3)

(3) Nimal who is the owner of a private van who used to ply it in the
town-(2R4)

According to these witnesses the petitioner was drunk and disorderly from
about 6.30 p.m. to 8.00 p.m. He was abusing in obscene language. By 8.00 p.m.
he was lying on the ground. They say that nobody went to his assistance as, he
was in the habit of behaving in that manner after drinks.

As per the 2nd respondents notes of investigations, at the time the 2nd
respondent arrived at the scene, the petitioner was still abusive. When the
2nd respondent put him up the petitioner became more abusive and used obscene
language - (2R6) he 2nd respondent arrested the petitioner and brought him
Police Station. According 16 Me notes of the police officer who took charge of
the petitioner at the Police Station, he had contusions and abrasions. He was
also under the influence of liquor-(2R7).

Continuing his version, the 2nd respondent states that the petitioner was sent
for a medical examination and produced marked

250

2R10 - a copy of the medico-legal examination form police custody. 2R10 states
that the petitioner was examined at 11:30.p m. on 01.03.95 by doctor Bentota.
However, it is not signed by that "doctor. According to 2R10 the petitioner"
had abrasions which fact is indicated by a tick against the relevant cage. By
a similar tick 2R10 indicates that the petitioner was under the influence of
liquor

On 02.03.95 the petitioner was produced Court, charged with an offence under
s.2 read with s. 12(2) of the Offences committed under the Influence of Liquor
(Special Provisions) Act-No.41 of 1979. The report to Court has been produced
marked 2R13.

Finally, the 2nd respondent his produced an affidavit dated 20.06.95, marked
2R19 from Ranasinghe Banda, the witness for the petitioner denying that he
gave, the affidavit which the petitioner produced marked P2. However on a
comparison of the signatures on 2R19 and P2,it appears plain, having regard to
the formation the shape the angle and the letters of the two signature that
both affidavits have been- signed by one and the same person namely

The petitioner has filed a counter affidavit reiterating his version of the
incidents. He has annexed thereto inter alia, an affidavit marked P9 from one
Ratnatilake who had been a school principle for 12 years and held the post of
Principle of Hanguranketha Vidyalaya since 1993. This witness states that
knows petitioner he has five children three of whom studied in his School
until they obtained scholarships and joined other schools. Two children are
still students in his school. The petitioner is devoted to his children. He is
a good man. He attends the meeting of the development Society and helps the
school. To the witness Knowledge the petitioner is not a man who is prone to
drunken and disorderly conduct.

On a careful consideration of evidence ,I am satisfied that the petitioner's
version is intrinsically credible. It is well supported by other witnesses and
the medical report P1. I reject unsigned medico-legal examination from 2R10
produced by the

251

2nd respondent. Even if the petitioner had been shown to a doctor, there has
been no proper examination of the petitioner for the doctor has failed to
observe even the contusions which have been noted by the police constable who
took charge of the petitioner.

There is no motive for the petitioner to have falsely implicated the 1st
respondent. Counsel for the 1st and 2nd respondent submitted that the motive
is fact that the 1st respondent charged the petitioner under a special law
which provides for a minimum sentence both as regards fine (ie. Rs. 1000/-}
and imprisonment (ie. one year). This fact tends to show that the 1st
respondent has a strong motive to have the petitioner sentenced. The motive
alleged by the petitioner has not seriously rebutted in all the circumstances,
I am satisfied that the 1st respondent did arrest the petitioner to penalise
the petitioner one account of the 1st respondent's brother-in-Law.

I am also satisfied that the 2nd respondents versions is false when he says
that it was he who arrested the petitioner at 9.30 p.m. on the day question.
The 2nd respondent's story is a mere cover up designed to absolve himself (as
the OIC of the police Station) and the 1st respondent from liability for the
acts complained of by the petitioner it is not clear how and in what
circumstance the witness who gave the affidavits 2R2,2R3 and 2R4 were
discovered. I reject the evidence of those witness.

In view of the fact that I have accepted the petitioner's version, I hold the
arrest of the petitioner to be unlawful The detention by police which followed
such arrest is also, unlawful. I am also satisfied that the petitioner was
assaulted by the 1st respondent. The 2nd respondent himself was aware of and
deliberately tolerated acquiesced in such assault. The Police Station Where
the incident occurred appears to be a small Police Station Where the 2nd
respondent, as Sub Inspector was the OIC. The 2nd respondent cannot feign
ignorance of the assault. The condition of the petitioner

by reason of the assault was so bad that even on the morning of the next day,
he was limping, on the way to the Court, The 2nd respondent who admitted gave
orders in respect of the petitioner had every opportunity of being aware of
his condition. As the OIC he took no action against his subordinate. On the
contrary he suppressed the occurrence of the alleged acts. It is on these
facts that I hold that the 2nd respondent is also personally responsible. As
such both respondent are personally responsible for the impugned acts. Vide
Ratnapala v. Dharmasiri (1).

Accordingly, I grant a declaration that the rights of the petitioner under
Article 11, 13(1) and 13(2) have been infringed by executive or administrative
action. In respect of the infringement of Article 11, I direct the State to
pay a compensation in a sum of Rs. 20,000/-; the 1st respondent is directed to
pay a sum of Rs. 8000/- and the 2nd respondent (SI Ranaweera ) is directed to
pay a sum of Rs 8000/-. I also direct the State to pay a sum of Rs. 5000/- for
the infringement of Articles 13(1) and 13(2) and costs in a sum of Rs 2000/-.
In the result the petitioner will be entitled to a total sum of Rs.43,000/- as
compensation and costs.

I wish to add that infringements of fundamental rights by the police continue
unabated after nearly 18 years from the promulgation of the 1978 Constitution
and despite the numerous decision of this Court which have condemned such
infringements. As this Court had observed in previous judgements, this
situation exists because police officer continue to enjoy an immunity from
appropriate departmental sanction on accounts of such conduct. It is hoped
that the authorities will take remedial action to end this situation.

The Registrar is directed to forward a copy of this judgement to the 3 rd
respondent who is directed to ensure expeditious payment of the sums ordered
here to maintain a record of this judgment for departmental purpose; and to
take other appropriate action. The 3rd respondent is also directed to make a
report to this Court that these directions have been complied with. The report
should be forwarded to this court on or before 31.12.1995.

253

**AMERASINGHE, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading the draft of the judgment prepared by
Kulatunga, J. I agree with his Lordship's statement of the facts established
by the evidence.

The petitioner was Bisso Menika's neighbour. Bisso Menika was the wife of
Gunaratne. Gunaratne had a land dispute with the petitioner. Gunaratne had
threatened to have the petitioner punished by the first respondent. The first
respondent was the brother of Bisso Menika. The arrest was in pursuance of
that threat. Article 13(1) of the Constitution provides that "No person shall
be arrested except according to procedure established by law. Any person
arrested shall be informed of the reason for his arrest. The petitioner was
not concerned in any cognizable offence, and there was no reasonable complaint
made or credible information received or a reasonable suspicion of his having
been so concerned. Therefore in arresting the petitioner without a warrant,
the first respondent was not acting according to the applicable procedure,
namely the procedure established by section 32(1) (b) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure. I therefore declare that the petitioner's fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution not to be arrested except
according to procedure established by law was violated by the first
respondent. There were no grounds for arrest, and consequently no reason for
his arrest in the relevant sense could have been given. I therefore declare
that the petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed by Article 13(1) to be
informed of the reason for his arrest' was violated by the first respondent.

Article 13(2) of the Constitution provides, among other things, that "Every
person. held in custody, detained or otherwise deprived of personal liberty
shall be brought before the judge of the nearest competent court according to
procedure established by law..." According to the applicable procedure in this
matter, after taking the petitioner into custody the first respondent should
have without "unnecessary delay" taken or sent the petitioner before the
Magistrate. (Section 36 Code of Criminal Procedure). Section 37 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure states that a peace officer "shall not

254

detain in custody or otherwise confine a person arrested without a warrant for
a longer period than under all the circumstances of the case is reasonable,
and such period shall not exceed twenty-four hours exclusive of the time
necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the Magistrate." The
petitioner was arrested at about 6.p.m. on 1st March 1995 and was produced
before the Magistrate in the morning of 2nd March 1995. The question to be
decided is whether there was "unnecessary delay" and whether his detention
before production was, "under all the circumstances of the case",
"reasonable", rather than, with all due respect, the question whether the
arrest was unlawful and consequently the subsequent detention was also
unlawful. (See per Fernando, J in _Garusinghe v. Kadurugamuwa_ (2), per
_Fernando J in Chandrasekeram v. Wijetunge_ (3), _per Goonewardene, J. in Faiz
v. A.- G_. (4), per _Goonewardene, J in Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera_ (5),
_Pieris and Others v. A.-G. and others_ (6), per Bandaranayake, J in Mahinda
Rajapakse and Vasudeva Nanayakkara v. Chief Inspector Karunaratne and Others
(7)). The twenty-four hour limit is the maximum time for production. Where in
all the circumstances of the case it was unreasonable to delay production
before the Magistrate, the person making the arrest would be acting in
contravention of Article 13(2). (See _per Fernando, J in Faiz v. A.-G_.
(supra); Kurnarasena v. Shriyantha and Others (8), _Selvakumar v. Douglas
Devananda and Others_ (9), _Kumara v. Rohan Fernando and Others_ (10)). In the
circumstances of this case, there being no grounds for arrest whatsoever, the
detention overnight was unreasonable, and in failing to produce the petitioner
before the Magistrate soon after the arrest the first respondent failed to act
in accordance with procedure established by law, namely that he should have
taken or sent the petitioner before the Magistrate without unnecessary delay.
I therefore declare that the first respondent violated the petitioner's
fundamental right guaranteed by Article 13(2) to be produced before a judge in
accordance with procedure established by law.

The medical evidence is consistent with the petitioner's allegation that he
was severely assaulted by the first respondent while he was in his custody.
Article 11 of the Constitution provides that "No person

255

shall be subject to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment". I therefore declare that the petitioner's fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 11 was violated by the first respondent.

The second respondent was the officer-in-charge of the Police Station, at
which the petitioner was detained and assaulted. The petitioner did not allege
that the second respondent was implicated in the arrest or assault, although,
presumably in order to exonerate himself from possible blame that might have
been attached to him as the officer-in-charge, he made explanation of the
arrest which I reject as being unsupported by the evidence. However, there was
no evidence that the second respondent was involved in any of the
transgressions of the petitioner's fundamental rights. I therefore hold that
the second respondent was not guilty of violating any of the petitioner's
fundamental rights.

Judicial condemnation and the imposition of sanctions byway of requiring
transgressors to personally contribute towards the compensation assessed by
the Court as being just and equitable in the hope that, other persons may, be
deterred from violating Article.11 of the Constitution has meant very little.
The Court's sense of frustration has been openly expressed. (E.g. see
Pelawattage (AAL) for Piyasena v. O.I.C. Wadduwa, Jayasena v. Ramanayake and
Others, Weragama v. Indran and Others. I had in Saman v. Leeladasa raised
doubts about the appropriateness and effectiveness of awarding compensation as
a punitive measure. From my point of view, the award of compensation is useful
because it provides an opportunity to demonstrate society's abhorrence of such
conduct. Whereas Courts are not obliged to reflect public opinion, they must
not disregard it especially where there is general anger; or dismay or fear
over transgressions of its nature. The principle of retribution is one that is
most easily understood by the public Since the Court must have regard to his
means when it requires a respondent to personally contribute to the sum
awarded, (Cf. R. v. Oddy) there is, perhaps not enough awarded to make a
person suffer for his actions. The fact that a transgressor is personally
required to pay a part of the compensation assessed by the Court as being just
and equitable is

256

useful to the extent that it will to some extent assuage the wounded feelings
of the victim.

I am of the view that a comprehensive approach must be adopted if,
satisfactory results are to be achieved. Article 2.1 of the United Nations
Convention on Torture, which entered into force for Sri Lanka with effect from
2 February 1994, requires the State to take "effective legislative,
administrative, judicial or other measures to prevent acts of torture..." Sri
Lanka has enacted legislation (Act No. 22 of 1994) making "torture" an
offence. Sanctions, whether penal or disciplinary, will no doubt play their
part, but a meaningful course of action to minimize violations of Article 11
should include other measures. The United Nations Convention stresses the need
for education and certain procedural steps the State should adopt.

Article 10

(1) Each State Party shall ensure that education and information regarding the
prohibition against torture are fully included in the training of law
enforcement personnel, civil or military, medical personnel, public officials
and other persons who may be involved in the custody, interrogation or
treatment of any individual subjected to any form of arrest, detention or
imprisonment.

(2) Each State Party shall include this prohibition in the rules or
instructions issued in regard to the duties and functions of such persons.

Article 11

Each State Party shall keep under systematic review interrogation rules,
instructions, methods and practices as well as arrangements for the custody
and treatment of persons subjected to any form of arrest, detention or
imprisonment in any territory under its jurisdiction, with a view to
preventing any cases of torture.

Article 12

Each State Party shall ensure that its competent authorities proceed to a
prompt and impartial investigation, wherever there is reasonable

257

ground to believe that an act of torture has been committed in any territory
under its jurisdiction.

Article 13

Each State Party shall ensure that any individual who alleges he has been
subjected to torture in any territory under its jurisdiction has the right to
complain to, and to have his case promptly and impartially examined by its
competent authorities. Steps shall be taken to ensure that the complainant and
witnesses are protected against all ill-treatment or intimidation as a
consequence of his complaint or any evidence given.

I should like to add one further observation: Although the U.N. Covenant is
primarily concerned with torture, Article 16 provides that

"Each State Party shall undertake to prevent in any territory under its
jurisdiction other acts of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
which do not amount to torture... when such acts are committed by or at the
instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or
other person acting in an official capacity. In particular, the obligations
contained in Articles 10, 11, 12 and 13 shall apply with the substitution of
references to torture of references to other forms of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment."

For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that the first respondent
has violated the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 11,
13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.

The State shall pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 20,000 by way of compensation
and a sum of Rs. 6000 as costs. The first respondent shall pay the petitioner
a sum of Rs. 10,000 by way of compensation.

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the Attorney-
General for such action as he may deem to be appropriate.

258

The Registrar is directed to send a copy of this judgment to the Inspector-
General of Police. The Inspector-General of Police is directed to place a copy
of this judgment in the personal file of the first respondent. The Inspector-
General of Police is further directed to take such action as he deems
appropriate against the first respondent and to report to this Court on or
before 31 December 1995 as to the action taken by him.

**WIJETUNGA, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading in draft, the judgments of my brothers
Amerasinghe and Kulatunga.

I respectfully agree with my brother Amerasinghe.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/21.html_  

