##  Jayasinghe v. The Attorney General and Others - SLR - 74, Vol 2 of 1994
[1994] LKSC 21; (1994) 2 Sri LR 74 (3 October 1994)

**  74**

**JAYASINGHE**

**v.**

**THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND OTHERS**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.

PERERA, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION N0. 86/94

OCTOBER 3, 1994.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Prolonged delay in commencing and concluding disciplinary
inquiry against interdicted employee ‑ Are disciplinary proceedings
"administrative action"? ‑ Equal protection of the law ‑ Article 12(1) of the
Constitution ‑ Protection of liberty ‑ Protection of livelihood ‑ Is it always
necessary to produce evidence of cftey similar instances to prove infringement
to equal protection of the law ‑ Co‑operative Employees' Commission Act No. 12
of 1972 and Regulations ‑ Co‑operative Employees' Commission.

_  _

The petitioner was a storekeeper employed by the 2nd respondent (Colombo South
Co‑operative Society). He was interdicted by letter without a stated reason
and without pay. It was known that he was alleged to have been responsible for
shortages at four places where he had worked between 16.3.94 to 16.9.77. No
charge sheet was served on him for 14 years until 1.1.92. The disciplinary
proceedings were concluded only in August 1994 after the court had given leave
to proceed. By letter dated 2.9.94 he was informed that his services were
terminated with effect from 14.10.77.



Two sets of proceedings, criminal and civil, intervened: Two prosecutions for
criminal breach of trust, were launched but withdrawn in December 1981 and
February 1982 and an arbitration commenced in 1979 and concluded with an award
on 16.12.81 holding petitioner responsible for shortages to the value of
Rs.121,691.89. The petitioner appealed but on 6.8.92 the Registrar of
Co­operative Societies dismissed the appeal and affirmed the award. The
petitioner then applied for writs of Certiorari and Mandamus to the Court of
Appeal and this application is still pending.



The petitioner alleged political victimization contrary to Article 12(2).



The 2nd respondent took a preliminary objection that the application was time
barred.



**Held:**



1\.         The 2nd respondent has not given any satisfactory explanation for
the delay in commencing and concluding the disciplinary proceedings. A charge
sheet was issued on 1.1.92 and awarded on 15.10.92.



**  75**

2\.         The petitioner cannot complain of political victimization because
the law at that time provided no remedy. Articles 12(2) and 126 do not apply
retrospectively.



3\.         It was by no means obvious that the application was time barred,
and it is difficult to identify the precise date when prolonged delay might
become denial of equal protection; indeed it might well have been argued that,
this was a continuing infringement; or that the dismissal itself would have
been an infringement, and therefore the complaint made was of an infringement
which was then imminent. Hence the objection was not permitted.



4\.         Delays in regard to criminal proceedings are not delays by
executive or administrative action. So are arbitration proceedings as they are
judicial in nature. The disciplinary proceedings stand on a different footing.
The powers of a Co­operative Society in relation to its employees are subject
to the statute, the regulations made thereunder and the directions of the
Co‑operative Employees Commission established under the Co‑operative
Employees' Commission Act No. 12 of 1972. Disciplinary action and dismissal
are subject to appeal or review by the Commission. Employees of Co‑operative
Societies thus enjoy a status, in relevant respects similar to that of public
officers; their position is significantly different to that of private sector
employees. Disciplinary action is governed by statutory provisions rather than
by contract. Disciplinary action by a Co‑operative Society ‑ interdiction,
framing charges, holding inquiries and dismissal ‑ is "administrative" action
within the meaning of Article 126.



5\.         Article 12(1) should not be restricted to the protection only of
liberty; it must be extended to the protection of livelihood. The Constitution
and the law provide safeguards for liberty. In the same way the Co‑operative
Employees' Commission Act and regulations provides "protection" for the
livelihood of an employee. Some of those safeguards are set out in the
Co‑operative Employees' Commission (General) Regulations 1922. An employee is
assured of protection for his livelihood: notice of the charges on which he
risks deprivation of his livelihood; an opportunity to reply and to defend
himself; a fair inquiry procedure and a right of appeal. The petitioner's
complaint is not that he was directly deprived of those safeguards; but only
of the delay in the proceedings. Justice delayed is justice denied: for the
very good reason that delay may result in the denial of the substance of a
fair trial, although all the forms are solemnly observed. Delay may result in
essential witnesses and documents becoming unavailable, and recollections
slowly fading; in legal expenses gradually becoming even more unbearable and
in sapping the will to fight on for justice. All the safeguards may be there
as a matter of form, but the substance of the protection of the law will be
lacking. Protection delayed is protection denied.



6.                  All delay is unacceptable. As to what amount of delay would be inordinate, what is a reasonable time, may vary from case to case. But in regard to employees interdicted without pay pending inquiry, no legislative intention to acquiese in proceedings being dragged on for years can be assumed. Interdiction without pay prevents an employee accepting employment elsewhere 

**  76**



and where it lasts a long period seriously prejudices livelihood. A subsidiary
consideration is that the petitioner could not seek his remedy in the Labour
Tribunal because this right was excluded by section 39 of the Co‑operative
Employees' Commission Act until that section was amended by Act, No. 51 of
1992.



7\.         There has therefore been a denial of one important protection
which the law provided for the Petitioner, upon interdiction without pay, in
respect of his livelihood that disciplinary proceedings, which could have
resulted in depriving him of his livelihood, should have been completed
without inordinate delay. Howsoever the boundary between permissible and
unacceptable delay is demarcated; the delay of 16 years which had occurred
when the petitioner came into Court was manifestly excessive.



8\.         When the petitioner was interdicted the petitioner was in the
prime of his life and would have passed the normal age of retirement by the
time the validity of his dismissal was determined in a court or tribunal of
first instance. Delay has robbed him, and his family of half his working life.



9\.         It is not enough for the petitioner to show that he has been
denied the protection of the law. He must also show that he has been denied
**equal** protection ‑ that he was treated less favourably than others
similarly situated. The petitioner has not produced any evidence of delays in
similar cases. But this is not an inflexible principle of universal
application. The facts of each case must be considered. Where an employee
alleges a denial of equal protection because he was compelled to participate
in a disciplinary inquiry without ever being told what the charges against him
were, no court would require evidence to prove at least one other contrary
instance. The court must take judicial notice that ordinarily ‑and not merely
in a few instances ‑ charges are disclosed prior to inquiry. Likewise, that
however serious the laws delays, it does not take over 10 years for a charge
sheet to be served, and over 15 years for a disciplinary inquiry to be
completed.



10\.       The Petitioner's fundamental right to the equal protection of the
law has been infringed and he is entitled to relief. Liability in respect of
shortages and whether termination was justified are questions to be decided in
other proceedings. His success or failure in those proceedings must not affect
these proceedings.



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Sebastian Fernando v. Katana_ MPCS [1990] 1 Sri LR 342.

2.           _Hakmana MPCS v. Fernando_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 272. 

3\.         _Perera v. Jayawickreme_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 285.

4\.         _Weligama MPCS v. Daluwatte_ [1984] 1 Sri LR 195.



**APPLICATION** for relief for the infringement of the fundamental right of
equal protection of law guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

**  77**

_  P. K. E Perera _for petitioner.

_  Samith de Silva SC _for 1st and 3rd respondent.

_Tudor Dharmadasa_ for 2nd  respondent.

_B. V. S. Silva_ for 4th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

 November 04, 1994.

**FERNANDO, J.**





This application involves the question whether unexplained and inordinate
delay by a co‑operative society in commencing and concluding disciplinary
proceedings against an employee, interdicted without pay, amounts to a denial
of the equal protection of the law guaranteed by Article 12(1).



**INVOKING THE JURISDICTION OF THIS COURT**



The Petitioner had been an employee of the 2nd Respondent co-­operative
society at least since 1972 (and perhaps even from 1962). He made his
complaint in an affidavit dated 29.3.94 to this Court. This was not an
application in conformity with Rule 44(1). Order was made that it be treated
as a "special" application. This order was referable to Rule 44(7) of the
Supreme Court Rules, 1990, though this was not specified. The matter came up
on 2.5.94; the Petitioner was unrepresented, and the Court inquired from Mr.
P. K. E. Perera, Attorney‑at‑Law, who was present in Court, whether he could
assist the Petitioner. In the best traditions of the legal profession, Mr.
Perera consented, and thereafter assisted the Court, presenting his client's
case with competence and restraint. Further pleadings were thereafter filed.
All these steps were in substantial conformity with Rule 44(7) of the Supreme
Court Rules, 1990, and Rule 2(b) of the Supreme Court (Assigned Counsel)
Rules, 1991, and no objection has been taken on the ground of any procedural
defect.



On 21.6.94 leave to proceed was granted. State Counsel who appeared on notice,
on behalf of the Attorney‑General, undertook to take steps to have the
disciplinary inquiry completed.

**  78**



**THE FACTS**



The Petitioner was a storekeeper employed by the 2nd Respondent. He was
interdicted by letter dated 14.10.1977 without a stated reason, and without
pay. But it is known that he is alleged to have been responsible for shortages
at four places where he had worked between 16.3.1974 and 16.9.1977.



No charge sheet was served on him for over 14 years, until 1.1.92. It is that
delay which is his principal ground of complaint. Thereafter, the disciplinary
proceedings were concluded only in August 1994, after this Court had granted
leave to proceed. He was informed by letter dated 2.9.94 that his services had
been terminated with effect from 14.10.77. This delay too has some relevance
to the Petitioner's claim that the equal protection of the law has been denied
to him.



Two sets of proceedings, criminal and civil, intervened. In consequence of
complaints made to the Police in October 1977, two prosecutions for criminal
breach of trust were launched in the Magistrate's Court of Colombo; these were
withdrawn in December 1981 and in February 1982\. The dispute between the 2nd
Respondent Society and the Petitioner was referred to arbitration under
section 58 of the Co‑operative Societies Law, No. 5 of 1972: those proceedings
commenced in 1979, and the arbitrator made his award on 16.12.1981, holding
the Petitioner responsible for shortages to the value of Rs. 121,691.89/‑; the
Petitioner appealed, having been compelled to deposit one‑tenth of the amount
of the award, in view of the relevant regulation (as to the validity of which
I expressed serious doubts in _Sebastian Fernando v. Katana MPCS_ (1),
particularly as it might operate to deny the _bona fide_ exercise of the right
of appeal given by the principal enactment). On 6.8.92, the Registrar of
Co-­operative Societies dismissed the Petitioner's appeal and affirmed the
award. The Petitioner then made an application to the Court of Appeal for
Certiorari and Mandamus, and that application is still pending.



The Petitioner made some effort to get matters expedited. He has produced a
copy of a letter dated 10.3.83, by which he complained



**  79**

 of the delay in regard to the disciplinary inquiry, to the Co‑operative
Employees' Commission, the 3rd Respondent, established under the Co‑operative
Employees' Commission Act, No. 12 of 1972. The 3rd Respondent, however, says
that the first intimation it had of the delay in those proceedings was on
9.7.91 when the Presidential Secretariat sent it a copy of a letter dated
8.4.91 which the Petitioner had sent to the President. After making some
inquiry from the 2nd Respondent, on 6.12.91 the 3rd Respondent directed the
2nd Respondent to complete the proceedings by 15.3.92. Thereafter the
Petitioner wrote to the Co‑operative Employees' Commission of the Western
Province, the 4th  Respondent, on 17.6.93, complaining of the delay, but
despite correspondence over the next six months, the 4th Respondent did not
direct the 2nd Respondent to conclude the inquiry. In regard to his pending
appeal to the Registrar of Co-­operatives, the Petitioner has stated in his
application to the Court of Appeal that the appeal was delayed because the
officer dealing with it had some difficulty in reading the transcript of the
proceedings; and that he made several complaints in this respect, and even to
the Parliamentary Petitions Committee. Even after the problem regarding the
transcript was resolved, the appeal was not dealt with expeditiously.



The 2nd Respondent has not given any satisfactory explanation for the delay in
commencing and concluding the disciplinary proceedings. A charge sheet was
first issued only on 1.1.92; the Petitioner submitted his explanation; and the
inquiry then commenced. The charge sheet was amended on 15.10.92. Apparently
because of ill‑health, the inquiry had to be resumed before another officer,
and was not concluded ‑ despite complaints to the President and to Parliament
‑ even by 29.3.94 when the petitioner complained to this Court.



**POLITICAL VICTIMIZATION**



The Petitioner has alleged that his interdiction was motivated by political
victimization, contrary to Article 12 (2). However, that was in October 1977,
and the Petitioner cannot complain of that for many reasons: the law at that
time did not provide a remedy, the then

**  80**

 Supreme Court had no jurisdiction in respect of such a complaint, and
Articles 12(2) and 126 do not apply retrospectively to acts done before the
1978 Constitution. Leave to proceed was not granted in respect of Article
12(2), and I make no finding on that issue.



**PRELIMINARY OBJECTION**



The objection that, the application was out of time had been taken in the
affidavit filed on behalf of the 2nd Respondent. Although this was a
preliminary objection which should have been taken at the commencement of the
hearing, learned Counsel for the 2nd Respondent failed to do so, and mentioned
it only towards the end of the submissions on behalf of the Petitioner. It was
by no means obvious that the application was time‑barred, and it is difficult
to identify the precise date when prolonged delay might become denial of equal
protection; indeed, it might well have been argued that this was a continuing
infringement; or that the dismissal itself would have been an infringement,
and therefore that the complaint made in March 1994 was of an infringement
which was then only imminent. In those circumstances, we did not permit the
objection to be taken.



# EXECUTIVE OR ADMINISTRATIVE ACTION



Learned Counsel for the 2nd Respondent submitted that in any event the
Petitioner's grievance was outside the scope of Article 126 because the
disciplinary proceedings taken (or omitted) by the 2nd Respondent did not
constitute "executive or administrative" action. It is true that many of the
duties, and obligations of a co‑operative society arise from contract ‑ as
between members _inter se_ , or as between members and the society, or as
between the society and third parties; and many of its functions are purely
commercial. All these probably involve no "executive or administrative"
action. However, a co‑operative society enjoys certain privileges conferred by
the executive; thus section 22 of the Co‑operative Societies Law, No. 5 of
1972, empowers the Minister by order to compel producers, even if not members
of a co‑operative society, to sell all or any part of their produce to or
through that society.



**  81**

But the question for decision now is whether the delays which the Petitioner
complains of, were caused by "executive or administrative" action. Delays in
regard to the criminal proceedings are clearly excluded. The arbitration
proceedings were also judicial in nature (see S.C. References Nos. 1‑17/91,
S.C.M. 27.3.92), and those delays too cannot be the subject of complaint in
proceedings under Article 126. However, the disciplinary proceedings stand on
a different footing. The Co‑operative Employees' Commission established by
Parliament consists of members appointed by the Executive; in regard to
appointment, dismissal and disciplinary control, it has powers which are in
some ways comparable to the Public Service Commission, though certainly not as
extensive. The Co‑operative Employees' Commission Act, No. 12 of 1972, was
enacted to "make special provision in respect of employees of co­-operative
societies"; and the Commission has power under section 11 to determine all
matters regarding recruitment and promotion (including qualifications,
examinations, salary scales, and terms and conditions of service), and the
procedure in regard to disciplinary action; to call upon any society to
complete disciplinary inquiries within a time stipulated by it, and to hear
appeals arising from disciplinary orders. Section 23 provides that no employee
shall be dismissed or punished except in accordance with the provisions of the
Act and the regulations made thereunder.



The powers of a co‑operative society in relation to its employees are thus
subject to the statute, the regulations made thereunder, and the directions of
the Commission; disciplinary action and dismissal are subject to appeal or
review by the Commission. Employees of co‑operative societies thus enjoy a
status, in relevant respects similar to that of public officers; their
position is significantly different to that of private sector employees.
Disciplinary action is governed by statutory provisions rather than by
contract.



I hold that disciplinary action by a co‑operative society ‑ interdiction,
framing charges, holding inquiries, and dismissal ‑ is "administrative" action
within the meaning of Article 126.



**  82**

**EQUAL PROTECTION OF THE LAW**



The equal protection of the law is perhaps most significant in relation to
criminal law and procedure, because there a liberty is at risk. But liberty
without livelihood is no better that livelihood without liberty, and in the
absence of plain words in the Constitution, restricting Article 12(1) to the
protection only of liberty, I hold that it extends to the protection of
livelihood.



There is no doubt that the "protection" here claimed is the protection "of the
law" (and not of contractual or property rights). Because what the Petitioner
complains of is the denial of rights under the Act and the regulations.



What "protection" means in relation to liberty is an useful guide also in
regard to livelihood. The Constitution and the law provide safeguards for
liberty. Thus Article 13 provides against arbitrary deprivation of liberty: by
allowing safeguards such as legal representation, and a fair trial by a
competent court. The Code of Criminal Procedure Act provides safeguards such
as making the charges known to the accused, the manner of answering the
charges, and the conduct of a criminal trial. Such safeguards constitute the
"protection" which the law extends for liberty. In the same way, the
Co‑operative Employees' Commission Act and the regulations provide
"protection" for the livelihood of an employee. Some of those safeguards are
set out in the Co‑operative Employees' Commission (General) Regulations, 1972:



CHAPTER III



REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE CONDUCT OF CO-­OPERATIVE EMPLOYEES

           

            ...............................



69\. The Commission may frame Rules specifying other situations to regulate
the conduct of those connected with or

**  83**



employed in Co‑operative Societies to enable them to maintain high standards
of honesty and probity, including situations where employees are arrested for
debt or are declared insolvent.



.......................................



CHAPTER IV



MISCONDUCT



73(1)  Subject to such Rules as may be framed by the Commission the Management
of the co‑operative society shall be responsible for initiating disciplinary
inquiries against employees suspected or alleged to be guilty of misconduct.



(2)  Such inquiries may be initiated whether any criminal proceedings are
taken or not and shall be proceeded with and a decision given irrespective of
the progress of any ... criminal case.



(a)  MINOR OFFENCES



74(1)  Where the misconduct is of a minor nature, the charge may be stated in
writing ...



(2)  Where the misconduct is of a minor nature ... and it is necessary to call
witnesses ... the Board of Management ... may nominate a senior official of
the Society to hold an inquiry and submit a report ...



(3)  In such inquiries as are referred to in Regulation 74(1) above the
Inquiry Officer may follow such procedure as he thinks appropriate provided
that the following principles are adopted:



(a)  that the accused employee is informed in writing what the

                  alleged offences are;



(b)  the accused officer or his representative is allowed to examine and if
necessary, take

      copies of any documents that may be used in evidence against him; 

**  84** _ _

_  _



(c)  the accused employee or his representative is allowed to ask questions of
witnesses ...;



(d) the, accused employee or his representative is allowed to produce
witnesses and/or

     documents in his defence.





75\. The evidence given at the inquiry shall be taken down in writing by the
Inquiry Officer ...



76\. The Inquiry Officer having inquired into the matter will forward his
report thereon ...



77\. Where the Board of Management does not take action under Regulation 73(1)
above, or where urgent action is necessary, the General Manager ... may
exercise these functions ... In doing so the General Manager may hold the
inquiry himself or nominate someone else.



78\. Where an employee desires witnesses to be summoned ...



79\. ... the Inquiry Officer shall not be bound by the rules of evidence ...



80\. The Inquiry Officer shall also endeavour to complete the inquiry as
quickly as possible and in any case not later than one month from the 1st date
of inquiry. Where for any reason completion within one month is not possible
he shall report the matter to the Board of Management and in any case the
inquiry shall not exceed two months from the 1st date of inquiry without the
express permission of the Commission.



81\. Where an employee fails to answer any charges ... he shall be deemed to
accept the truth of the charges ..............



82\. The Board of Management may impose such punishment as it considers
appropriate if the employee is found guilty.



83\. The Commission may call for the record ...

###   85 _ _

_             _(b)  GRAVE OFFENCES



84\. Where the employee is suspected or alleged to be guilty of grave
misconduct as specified in Appendix II a charge shall be served on him and his
explanation called for within a reasonable period of time, which shall not
exceed six weeks.



85\. Where the employee admits guilt to any of the charges, the Board of
Management may either proceed to take action on the admission or decide to
hold an inquiry.



86\. Before an inquiry is held the accused employee shall be given a list of
the witnesses ... [and] a list of the documents and informed where [they] may
be inspected ...



87\. In any inquiry that is held the Inquiry Officer shall follow the
principles as laid down in regulation 69(3).



88\. ... the Board ... may ... interdict an employee ...



89\. The Commission may call for the record and take such action as it
considers necessary in terms of Regulation 77 above.



            An employee is thus assured of protection for his livelihood: notice of the charges on which he risks deprivation of his livelihood; an opportunity to reply and to defend himself; a fair inquiry procedure, and a right of appeal. 



The Petitioner's complaint is not that he was directly deprived of those
safeguards: but only of the delay in the proceedings. It is trite, but
nevertheless true, that justice delayed is justice denied: for the  very good
reason that delay may result in the denial of the substance of a fair trial,
although all the forms are solemnly observed. Delay may result in essential
witnesses and documents becoming unavailable, in recollections slowly fading,
in legal expenses gradually becoming ever more unbearable, and in sapping the
will to fight on for justice. All the safeguards may be there as a matter of

**  86**

form, but the substance of the protection of the law will be lacking. The aim
of the protection of the law is to ensure justice, and so when there is
inordinate delay, it can equally truly be said: protection delayed **** is
protection denied.



All delay is unacceptable, but that is not enough. What amount of delay is to
be regarded as inordinate ?



There appears to be a lacuna in the Regulations: although they set out in fair
detail the inquiry procedure in respect of minor offences, similar provision
is lacking for grave offences. Regulation 87 seems to have been intended to
incorporate some, if not all, of the procedural provisions set out in
Regulations 74 to 80, but unfortunately it refers to a non‑existent Regulation
69(3). (There is another mistake in Regulation 89, which makes reference to
Regulation 77 instead of Regulation 83).



Regulation 73 makes it clear that the 2nd Respondent was not obliged to defer
disciplinary action until the conclusion of criminal proceedings. In the case
of grave offences, Regulation 84 requires an employee to submit his reply to
the charge sheet within a "reasonable time", and goes on to indicate that a
delay of over six weeks would not be reasonable. If so, the Regulations could
not have considered a delay of 14 years to be "reasonable" or permissible for
serving a charge sheet: and I cannot believe that the Regulations contemplated
that it would take more than a few months to serve a charge sheet. In the case
of minor offences, Regulation 80 discloses an intention that a disciplinary
inquiry be completed within a matter of months; and further delay requires the
permission of the Commission. Even assuming that Regulations 74 to 80 have not
been made applicable to grave offences, it would be quite unreasonable to
assume that there was no desire for comparable speed in regard to grave
offences. Section 11(1) (e) of the Co‑operative Act gives power to the
Commission to call upon a co‑operative society to complete disciplinary
inquiries within a time to be stipulated by it, and that is referable to a
legislative intention that disciplinary proceedings should be concluded
expeditiously. The 3rd Respondent Commission gave such a direction to the 2nd
Respondent on 6.12.91 that the

**  87**

 proceedings should be completed by 15.3.92, but even two years later, when
the Petitioner came to this Court, the proceedings were still pending.



What is a reasonable time may vary from case to case. But in regard to
employees interdicted without pay pending inquiry, I cannot assume a
legislative intention to acquiesce in proceedings being dragged on for years.
In this connection _Hakmana MPCS v. Ferdinando_ (2), is of some relevance. It
was held that Mandamus did not lie to enforce compliance with a circular
issued by the 3rd Respondent Commission in 1973, which provided for payment of
half‑salary to an interdicted employee if disciplinary proceedings had not
been completed in six months; indeed, doubts were expressed as to the power of
the Commission to issue such a circular. That circular has not been produced
as a document in this case, nor is it known whether it was applicable to the
Petitioner. However, that circular ‑ even if unauthorised and unenforceable ‑
does show that, consistently with a legislative desire for expedition, the
Commission considered that, in general, six months was sufficient for a
disciplinary inquiry. That does not mean that delay beyond six months is
unreasonable or inordinate, but it does indicate that permissible delay, for
this purpose, must be reckoned in months and not years.



Another relevant circumstance is that it may well be a breach of the contract
of employment ‑ warranting another charge sheet ‑ for an employee under
interdiction to accept employment elsewhere. Thus interdiction without pay for
a long period seriously prejudices livelihood.



A subsidiary consideration is that the Petitioner had no remedy in a Labour
Tribunal. Learned Counsel for the 2nd Respondent strenuously contended that
the Petitioner could have applied to a Labour Tribunal on the basis of a
constructive termination. However, learned Counsel for the 4th  Respondent
drew our attention to section 39 of the Co‑operative Employees Commission Act,
which excluded that right, until that section was amended by Act No. 51 of
1992.



I therefore hold that there has been a denial of one important protection
which the law provided for the Petitioner, upon interdiction



**  88**



without pay, in respect of his livelihood: that disciplinary proceedings,
which could have resulted in depriving him of his livelihood, should have been
completed without inordinate delay. I make no attempt to demarcate the
dividing line, between permissible and unacceptable delay: howsoever that
boundary is demarcated, in this case it is clear - as night from day - that
the delay of 16 years which had occurred when the Petitioner came into Court
was manifestly excessive. As to the effect of that delay, it will be seen that
the Petitioner when interdicted was yet in his prime, and will have passed the
normal age of retirement by the time the validity of his dismissal is
determined in a court or tribunal of first instance. Delay has robbed him, and
his family, of half his working life.



            It is not enough for the Petitioner to show that he has been denied the protection of the law. He must also show that he has been denied **equal** protection - that he was treated less favourably than others similarly situated. Since the Petitioner has not produced any evidence of the delays in similar cases, it is contended on behalf of the 2nd Respondent (relying on _Perera v. Jayawickreme_ (3)), that the Petitioner has failed to prove this essential ingredient. I doubt whether that decision must be regarded as laying down an inflexible principle of universal application; the facts of each case must be considered. If an employee alleges a denial of equal protection because he was compelled to participate in a disciplinary inquiry without ever being told what the charges against him were, would a Court demand evidence to prove at least one other contrary instance? I think not. The Court must take judicial notice, that ordinarily - and not merely in a few instances - charges are disclosed prior to inquiry. Likewise, that however serious the law's delays, it does not take over ten years for a charge sheet to be served, and over fifteen years for a disciplinary inquiry to be completed. However, the judgment of this Court in _Hakmana MPCS v. Ferdinando_ confirms what I would have been prepared to assume: there a charge sheet was issued within six months. In _Weligama MPCS v._ _Daluwatte_ (4), a charge sheet, though delayed, was issued in eight years.



            I therefore hold that the Petitioner's fundamental right to the equal protection of the law has been infringed. 

**  89**

**  RELIEF**



            Whether the Petitioner is liable to pay any sum to the 2nd Respondent in respect of shortages, and whether his termination is justified, are questions to be decided in other proceedings in other courts and tribunals. His success or failure in those proceedings must not affect these proceedings, and _vice versa_. The Petitioner has already been denied the equal protection of the law, and for that he is entitled to relief, independent of his prospects of success in other proceedings.



            The 2nd Respondent has not given any reason for the delay. Even if I were to make every possible allowance, in favour of the 2nd Respondent, and to assume, contrary to Regulation 73(2), that there was some justification for awaiting the outcome of the criminal proceedings, and the arbitrator's award, and that 2 1/2 years was not unreasonable for the disciplinary inquiry to be concluded, nevertheless the 2nd Respondent has no excuse for not framing charges in 1982. This would have eliminated 10 years delay. The Petitioner's livelihood has been affected during this period. In addition, he would have undergone much mental anguish and anxiety. I consider it just and equitable to assess and award compensation in a sum of Rs. 100,000.



            In regard to costs, the Supreme Court (Assigned Counsel) Rules, 1991, authorise the Court to order payment of a sum of Rs. 1,000 as costs to an Attorney-at-law assigned by the Court in a fundamental rights application. It is not necessary to do so in this case, as this is eminently one in which the Petitioner's costs should be paid by the 2nd Respondent. I direct the 2nd respondent to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 2,500 as Counsel's fees and Rs. 2,500 for other expenses.



            I grant the Petitioner a declaration that his fundamental right under Article 12(1) has been infringed by the 2nd Respondent, and direct the 2nd Respondent to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 100,000 as compensation and Rs. 5,000 as costs.



**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



Relief granted.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/21.html_  

