##  De Mel v. Nettasinghe - SLR - 332, Vol 2 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 21; (1993) 2
Sri LR 332 (8 July 1993)

324

DE MEL **  
v.  
NETTASINGHE **

SUPREME COURT.  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 68/92.

C.A. APPEAL NO. 1232/86.  
D.C. GAMPAHA - 27299/L  
JULY 08, 1993.

_     Landlord and tenant - Service of summons on being pointed out -
Requirement of affidavit of proof of service - Civil Procedure Code ss. 55 and
60\. _

Although there is no provision in the Civil Procedure Code making this
imperative, where summons is served on a party on his being pointed out it is
a salutary practice that an affidavit should be filed verifying the service so
as to make the alleged service valid in law.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Babun Nona v Ariyasena 58 NLR 575._  
_  
2\. Mohottihamy v. Podisinno 7 CWR 17._

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_A. A. de Silva with R. L Goonewardena for plaintiff - petitioner -
appellant._

  
D _. H. Siriwardena for defendant - respondent respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 02, 1993.  
**PERERA J.**

The Plaintiff - Petitioner - Appellant (herein after referred to as the
Plaintiff - Appellant) instituted action in the District Court of Gampaha on
19.11.84 for ejectment of the Defendent - Respondent - Respondent (hereinafter
referred to as the Defendent - Respondent) and for recovery of arrears of rent
in respect of premises No 267, Ganemoli Mawatha, Mabole, Kadawatha. Summons
was issued on the Defendent returnable on 23.05.85. According to the journal
entry dated 17.05.85 the Fiscal has reported to court that summons were served
on the Defendent on his being pointed out by the Plaintiff. On the summons
returnable date the Defendent - Respondent was absent and unrepresented and
the learned District Judge fixed the case for Ex - Parte trial on 21.07.85.
The Ex-Parte trial was held on 21.07.85 at which the evidence of the Plaintiff
- Appellant was recorded and the learned trial judge entered judgement ex
parte for the Plaintiff - Appellant as prayed for in the plaint. (Vide 'D')
There after the fiscal reported to court that the decree was served on the
Defendent - Respondent. Writ of execution was then obtained and the same was
executed on 08.04.86 and vacant possession was handed over to the Plaintiff -
Appellant.

In the meantime the Defendent - Respondent filed proxy, petition and affidavit
on 25.04.86 with notice to the Plaintiff - Appellant and moved that the same
be called on 2nd May 1986 in open court for support.

On the 2nd May 1986 the Plaintiff - Appellant was not present due to illness.
But both parties were represented by counsel. Legal submissions were made by
both Counsel. It was the contention of Counsel for the Defendent-Respondent
that his client has filed an affidavit stating inter alia that he had not been
served with summons in this case. Further that according to the journal entry
of 17th May 1985 the fiscal has reported to court that summons was served on
the Defendent-Respondent on his being pointed out to the fiscal by the
Plaintiff - Appellant. Counsel invited the attention of the court

334

to the fact that the Plaintiff - Appellant had failed to file an affidavit in
support of this fact. In the circumstances Counsel moved that the Ex-Parte
judgement entered in the case be vacated as there was no material to satisfy
the court that summons had been duly served on his client.

Counsel for the Plaintiff - Appellant however submitted that there was no
provision in law which warranted the filing of an affidavit verifying this
fact by either the fiscal or by the Plaintiff as contended for by counsel for
the Defendent - Respondent.

Having heard the submissions of both counsel the learned District Judge
vacated the Ex-Parte judgement entered against the Defendent \- Respondent
dated 25.07.85. The District Judge held that as the Plaintiff had not filed an
affidavit stating that he had pointed out the Defendent to the fiscal for the
purpose of serving summons, the summons had not been duly served on the
Defendent - Respondent.

The Plaintiff - Appellant appealed against this order to the Court of Appeal.
The Court of Appeal dismissed the Plaintiff - Appellant's appeal on 20.07.92.
The present appeal is from that judgement of the Court of Appeal.

At the hearing of the present appeal learned Counsel for the Plaintiff -
Appellant strenuously urged that there was no provision in the Civil Procedure
Code which required the Plaintiff to file affidavit in support, where service
of summons had been effected by the fiscal on the Defendent on being pointed
out by the Plaintiff. Counsel invited the attention of court to Section 55 (1)
of the Civil Procedure Code and submitted that this provision did not require
the filing of such an affidavit. It was his submission that the words in the
section only required the Fiscal to" cause the same to be duly served on the
Defendent or on each Defendent if more than one and
............................... return the same and the execution there of to
the court duly verified by him".

Counsel also in support of his argument adverted to Form No 17 which was the
form of precept to the fiscal to serve summons, and urged that the precept
only required the fiscal to certify to court in what manner he has executed
the precept returning the summons attached to his certificate as an exhibit.
It was Counsel's submission

335

therefore that there was no specific requirement in the Civil Procedure Code
for either the fiscal or the plaintiff to file such an affidavit. Counsel
urged that the learned District Judge was therefore in error when he set aside
the Ex - Parte judgement on the ground that there had been a failure on the
part of the Plaintiff to file an affidavit to the effect that he had pointed
out the Defendent to the fiscal to enable the latter to serve summons on him.
It was Counsel's submission that the report of the Fiscal to court that
summons had been served, sufficed to satisfy the court that summons had been
duly served on the Defendent.

Counsel for the Plaintiff - Appellant further submitted that the learned
District Judge had also misdirected himself when he vacated the Ex \- Parte
judgement on the notice returnable date without an inquiry and satisfying
himself that the summons had not been duly served on the Defendent.

I have given careful consideration to Counsel's submissions and I agree that
there is no specific provision in law which requires the filing of an
affidavit by a Plaintiff who claims to have pointed out a Defendent to the
fiscal for the purpose of serving summons on him. The court has however to be
mindful of the fact that the objective of service of summons on a Defendent it
to give notice to the party on whom it is served of a pending suit against
him, so that he might be aware of and be able to resist such suit, if he
wishes so to do. The Court must therefore be perfectly satisfied that summons
has been duly served on the Defendent. As in the instant case where summons
has been served by the fiscal on a person unknown to him but on being pointed
out, it is imperative that the court should act with even a greater degree of
care and caution. In the present case there was no proof whatsoever that the
correct person had been pointed out to the Fiscal for service of summons. In
other words there was no material before the court that summons had been
served on the Defendent-Respondent in person as required by Section 60 of the
Civil Procedure Code. In the circumstances the subsequent steps takers in this
case could not be justified on any legal basis. In _Babun Nona v. Ariyasena_
(1) the Supreme Court has held that the provisions of Section 60 of the Civil
Procedure Code regarding service of summons on a Defendent are imperative and
can be satisfied only if the summons is delivered or handed to the Defendent
personally.

336

In the case before us an affidavit has been filed by the Defendent stating
inter alia that neither the summons nor the decree has been served on him. In
his affidavit the Defendent -Respondent has set out several facts which lend
credibility to this statement. In such a situation it is prudent, although
there is no specific legal requirement, for the person who pointed out the
Defendent to the fiscal, to file an affidavit identifying him as the correct
person. In _Mohottihamy v. Podisinno_ (2) De Sampayo J has observed that "the
practice of the court is and ought to be that when a person is being served
with summons on being pointed out by a party there should be an affidavit
verifying that fact, so as to make the alleged service valid in law". I am
very much in agreement with this view expressed by be Sampayo J. and I hold
that this is a very salutary practice which must necessarily be followed in
such a situation in the interests of justice."

On the question raised by counsel in regard to the failure on the part of the
learned District Judge to hold an inquiry into this matter I wish to observe
that Counsel who appeared for the Plaintiff - Appellant on 2nd May 1986 has
not made any application to court to fix this matter for inquiry but was
content to make a legal submission on which an order was made by the learned
District Judge. Counsel merely made the submission that there was no
requirement in law for the Plaintiff to file such an affidavit. Having regard
to the uncontroverted material set out in the affidavit of the Defendent -
Respondent, I am of the view that the failure on the part of the District
Judge to hold an inquiry has in no way caused prejudice to the Plaintiff -
Appellant.

There is thus no justification to interfere with the order of the learned
District Judge for the reasons set out above I affirm the order of the Court
of Appeal. The order of the District Judge dated 25.07.85 vacating the ex
parte judgement will therefore stand.

The appeal is dismissed with costs.

**AMERASINGHE J -** I agree

  
**WIJETUNGA J -** I agree  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/21.html_  

