##  Ratnasiri Perera v. Dissanayake, Assistant Commissioner of Co Operative
Development and Others - SLR - 286, Vol 1 of 1992 [1992] LKSC 21; (1992) 1 Sri
LR 286 (27 March 1992)

**286**

**RATNASIRI PERERA** **  
v.** **  
DISSANAYAKE, ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF CO-OPERATIVE  
DEVELOPMENT AND OTHERS**

  
SUPREME COURT,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,  
M. D. H. FERNANDO, J. AND  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
S.C. REFERENCES 1 to 17/91 (Consolidated)  
C.A. APPLICATIONS 1060/85, 713/83, 1528/83, 1373/82, 1069/84, 27/84, 32/84,
1006/84, 1068/84, 1267/84, 1666/84, 1623/84, 32/85, 62/85,559/85, 344/85,
976/85  
31 JULY AND 01 AUGUST, 1991.

_Judicial Power - Does arbitrator appointed by the Registrar of Co-operative
Societies under Section 58(2) of the Co-operative Societies Law, No. 5 of 1972
exercise judicial power ? - Has appointment to be made by the Judicial Service
Commission in terms of Article 114(1) of the Constitution ? - Are the words
"Judicial Officer" appearing in Article 170 applicable in construing the
provisions of Article 114(1) ?- Can an appointment and/or order of an
arbitrator appointed under the Co-operative Societies Law be questioned in a
court of law ? - Constitution, Articles 4(c), 114, 168(1) and 170 -
Interpretation Ordinance, Section 16(1) - Co-operative Societies Law, Section
58(2) - Rule 49(v) of the Cooperative Societies (Special Provisions) Act, No.
34 of 1970: " _

Acting under section 58(2) of the Co-operative Societies Law, No. 5 of 1972,
the Registrar of Co-operative Societies referred certain disputes falling
within S. 58(1) (c) of the said Law for arbitration. Parties aggrieved by the
awards of such arbitrators or by the decisions of the Registrar on appeal,
made applications to the Court of Appeal for orders in the nature of writs of
certiorari. The following questions which arose in the course of the hearing
of those applications were referred by the Court of Appeal to the Supreme
Court, under Article 125 of the Constitution.

1\. Does an arbitrator appointed by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies in
terms of Section 58(2) of the Co-operative Societies Law, No. 5 of 1972 fall
into the category of court, tribunal or other institution exercising judicial
power under Article 4(c) of the Constitution ?

2\. Has the appointment of the said arbitrator to be made by the Judicial
Service Commission in terms of Article 11 4(1) of the Constitution ?

287

3\. Is the interpretation of the words "Judicial Officer" appearing in Article
170 applicable for the purpose of construing the provisions of Article 114(1)
of the Constitution.?

4\. In any event, can the appointment and/or the order of an arbitrator
appointed under the Co-operative Societies Law be questioned in those
proceedings in as much as the said Law constitutes an existing law in terms of
Article 168 of the Constitution ?

**Held:**

(1) The Registrar is an institution exercising judicial power within the
meaning of Article 4(c) and an arbitrator appointed by the Registrar is a part
of such institution.

(2) No.

(3)Article 170 cannot apply in its entirety to Article 114, because the
appointment and dismissal of Judges of the Superior Courts and the High Courts
is (by virtue of Articles 107 and 111) outside the purview of the Judicial
Service Commission. The words "other than in Article 114" occurring in Article
114 could mean **either** that the definition is totally inapplicable to
Article 114 or that it is inapplicable only to the extent that the contrary
provision is made to Article 114(5). Clearly the latter is the correct
position. To hold otherwise would mean that "Judicial Officer" in Article 114
is undefined; it would open the door to the argument that this phrase should
be limited to those who hold office as District Judges, Magistrates and other
Judges traditionally so regarded, which was decisively rejected both in
Senadhira (6), by Sansoni J., (as he then was) who held that that phrase
included not only the officers of the established courts but also those again
to them and in Ranasinghe (3), by the Privy Council. The definition of
"judicial officer" in Article 170 applies to Article 114(1) save as otherwise
expressly provided in Article 114(6) : in relation to Article 114(1) that
definition will apply with the omission of the words "a Judge of the Supreme
Court or a Judge of the Court of Appeal or any Judge of the High Court".

4\. No.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Karunatillake v Abeyweera (1966) 68 NLR 503,504-5.  
_  
_2\. Jayasekera v. Minuwangoda Co-operative Society (1970) 73 NLR 354, 355,
356._

288

  
_3\. Bribery Commissioner v. Ranasinghe (1962) 64 NLR 449; (1964) 66 NLR 73,
74 (PC).  
_  
_4\. R. v. Liyanage (1962) 64 NLR 313, 359.  
_  
_5\. Liyanage v. The Queen (1965) 68 NLR 265, 281, 283, (PC).  
_  
_6\. Senadhira (1961) 63 NLR 313.  
_  
_7\. Don Anthony (1962) 64 NLR 93.  
_  
_8\. Piyadasa (1962) 64 NLR 385.  
_  
_9\. Jailabdeen v. Danina Umma (1962) 64 NLR 419, 420, 421._

  
_10\. Ibrahim v G. A. Vavuniya (1966) 69 NLR 217.  
_  
_11\. Anthony Naide (1966) 68 NLR 558, 570.  
_  
_12\. Walker Sons & Co. Ltd. v Fry (1965) 68 NLR 73, 101.  
_  
_13\. Moosajees v. Fernando (1966) 68 NLR 414, 418, 424.  
_  
_14\. Panagoda v. Budinis Singho (1966) 68 NLR 490.  
_  
_15\. Xavier v. Wijeyekoon (1966) 69 NLR 97.  
_  
_16\. Ranaweera v. Wickramasinghe (1961) 72 NLR 553, 558.  
_  
_17\. Visuvalingam v. Liyanage (1983) 1 Sri L R 203, 216, 217._

  
_18\. Shanmugam v. Commissioner of Registration of Indian and Pakistani
Residents (1962) 64 NLR 29, 33.  
_  
_19\. Gunaseela v. Udugama (1966) 69 NLR 193._

**REFERENCE** to the Supreme Court under Article 125 of the Constitution by
the Court of Appeal.

_Sanath Jayatilleke for the petitioner in No. 1/91.  
_  
_Kithsiri Gunaratne with Miss S. M. Senaratne and Saliya Mathew for the
petitioners in Nos. 2/91 and 3/91.  
_  
_J. C. Boange for the petitioner in Nos, 5/91 to 15/91 and 17/91.  
_  
_Rohan Sahabandu for the petitioner in No. 16/91._

289

_K. C. Kamalasebayson, SSC with K. Siripavan, SSC and K. Indatissa, SC for the
Deputy/Assistant Commissioner of Co-operative Development in Nos. 1/91 to
17/91.  
_  
_Bimal Rajapakse for the Respondent Societies in Nos. 1/91, 8/91, 14/91 and
15/91.  
_  
_H. D. Gomes for the Respondent Societies in Nos. 2/91 and 3/91.  
_  
_T. M. S. Nanayakkara for the Respondent Society in Nos. 13/91, 16/91 and
17/91_

_Cur adv vult._

27th March, 1992\.  
**M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.**

Section 58 of the Co-operative Societies Law, No. 5 of 1972, provides:

"58 (1) If any dispute touching the business of a registered society arises
...

(c) between the society or its committee and any officer or employee of the
society, whether past or present, or any heir or legal representative of any
deceased officer or employee; or

.............................................................................................................................

such disputes shall be referred to the Registrar for decision.

(2) The Registrar may, on receipt of a reference under subsection (1) -

(a) decide the dispute himself, or

(b) refer it for disposal to an arbitrator or arbitrators.

(3)Any party aggrieved by the award of the arbitrator or arbitrators may
appeal therefrom to the Registrar ..."

290

Rule 49(v) of the Co-operative Societies Rules, 1974, requires an arbitrator
to be appointed by the Registrar.

Acting under section 58(2), the Registrar of Co-operative Societies referred
certain disputes for disposal to arbitrators. It was agreed, for the purpose
of these references, that these disputes fell within paragraph (c) of section
58(1). Parties aggrieved by the awards of such arbitrators, or by the
decisions of the Registrar on appeal, made applications to the Court of Appeal
for orders in the nature of writs of certiorari. The following questions which
arose in the course of the hearing of those applications were referred by the
Court of Appeal to this Court under Article 125 of the Constitution:

"1\. Does an Arbitrator appointed by the Registrar of Co-operative Societies
in terms of Section 58(2) of the Co-operative Societies Law No. 5 of 1972 fall
into the category of Court, Tribunal or other Institution exercising judicial
power under Article 4(c) of the Constitution ?

2\. Has the appointment of the said Arbitrator to be made by the Judicial
Service Commission in terms of Article 114(1) of the Constitution ?

3\. Is the interpretation of the words "judicial officer" appearing in Article
170 applicable for the purpose of construing the provisions of Article 114(1)
of the Constitution ?

4\. In any event can the appointment and/or the order of an arbitrator
appointed under the Co-operative Societies Law be questioned in these
proceedings in as much as the said Law constitutes an existing law in terms of
Article 168 of the Constitution ?

The following constitutional provisions are relevant:

Art. 4(c):

The judicial power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament through
courts, tribunals and institutions created and established, or recognized, by
the Constitution, or created and established by Law ...

291

Art. 114:

(1) The appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of judicial
officers, and (notwithstanding anything to the contrary in Chapter IX) of
scheduled public officers, is vested in the (Judicial Service) Commission.

(6) In this Article ... judicial officer does not include a Judge of the
Supreme Court or of the Court of Appeal or of the High Court.

Art. 168(1)

Unless Parliament otherwise provides, all laws, written laws and unwritten
laws, in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution, shall
mutatis mutandis, and except as otherwise expressly provided in the
Constitution, continue in force.

Art. 170:

"judicial officer", other than in Article 114, means any person who holds
office as -

(a) a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Judge of the - Court of Appeal:

(b) any Judge of the High Court or any judge, presiding officer or member of
any other Court of First Instance, tribunal or institution created and
established for the administration of justice or for the adjudication of any
labour or other dispute but does not include a person who performs arbitral
functions or a public officer whose principal duty or duties is or are not the
performance of functions of a judicial nature ...

Section 58 corresponds to section 53 of the Co-operative Societies Ordinance
(Cap. 124) which was considered by H. N. G. Fernando, S.P.J., (as he then
was), in _Karunatillake v. Abeyweera_ (1):

"... As between a society and its members, disputes can well arise as to the
construction and effect of the rules governing relations between members inter
se and the relations between a society and its members, as to whether a
society or a member

292

had acted in breach of the rules, as to the qualification of members to hold
office in the society (etc) ... It was clearly the intention of the
Legislature that such disputes should be finally decided by the Registrar, in
the exercise of his supervisory functions, or by arbitrators appointed by him.
Disputed claims by a society against its members, in their capacity as such,
were also in contemplation, although it is arguable whether Section 45 applied
also to other claims against members, not arising by reason of their
membership of a society, but arising instead upon transactions involving
ordinary contractual rights and obligations or else arising in delict. Except
in regard to claims of the nature lastly mentioned, I have no doubt that the
determination by the Registrar or an arbitrator of a dispute affecting any of
the matters just mentioned does not involve the exercise of the judicial power
of the State.

An "officer" of a co-operative society is not necessarily in a contractual
relationship with the society ... But if in addition an officer has custody or
control of goods or funds of the society, or has power to negotiate contracts
on behalf of the society, then contractual relationships, such as that between
principal and agent, can exist between a society and its manager. In this way
disputes can arise as to the due performance of contractual rights and
obligations. In the instant case ... the liability of the manager arises at
the least upon an implied contract, in the nature of agency. The dispute
concerning the existence of this liability and the duty to perform it is an
ordinary civil dispute within the traditional jurisdiction of the Courts. It
is not such a dispute as might, prior to the passing of the Act No. 21 of
1949, have been determined under the special procedure provided by the Co-
operative Societies Ordinance. The amending Act purported to oust the
jurisdiction of the Courts over disputes which at the time when the
Constitution came into force were exclusively within that jurisdiction. In the
language of recent judgments, there has thus been a clear encroachment of the
powers exclusively vested in the Courts."

This decision was sought to be distinguished in _Jayasekera v. Minuwangoda Co-
operative Society_ (2), on the basis that it applied

293

 only to claims against an officer, and not to claims against a member, that
such claims could have been referred to arbitration prior to the 1947
Constitution; and that the reference of such claims to arbitrators, not
appointed by the Judicial Service Commission ("the J.S.C."), continued to be
valid. H. N. G. Fernando, C.J., held that adjudication upon such claims
against members did involve the exercise of judicial power:

When the Ceylon (Constitution) Order in Council of 1946 was enacted there
clearly was contemplation that pre-existing Ordinances did contain provisions
which would conflict with provisions of the Order in Council. Accordingly,
s.88 of the Order in Council authorised the Governor to make Proclamations
amending, repealing or modifying written law in order to bring such law into
conformity with the provisions of the Constitution. Numerous amendments were
in fact made in pursuance of this authority; but the fact that a particular
written law was not thus amended cannot in reason have the consequence that
the law does not conflict with the Constitution or that it must be regarded as
valid despite such conflict.

A single instance suffices to make the position clear. Section 54 of the
Courts Ordinance, which formerly provided for the appointment of District
Judges and Magistrates by the Governor was altered by deleting the reference
to the Governor's power of appointment. That alteration was made for the quite
obvious reason that the power of appointment of judicial officers was vested
by the Constitution in the Judicial Service Commission, and that the
alteration was necessary to avoid conflict between s. 54 and the Constitution.
But even if (by accident or deliberately) no such alteration had been made in
s.54, the Governor would have ceased to be vested with that power when the
Constitution came into operation. Thus the mere fact that s.45 of the Co-
operative Societies Ordinance was not amended by a Proclamation under s.88 of
the Constitution does not justify an argument that all its provisions
continued to be valid despite the fact that some of them were not in
conformity with overriding provisions of the Constitution."

294

It is common ground that here the disputes referred to arbitrators arose from
transactions with officers or members involving ordinary contractual rights
and obligations.

The cumulative effect of the contentions of learned Counsel who challenged the
validity of the appointment and the orders of the Registrar and the
arbitrators may be summarised thus:

1\. In view of the aforesaid decisions, the resolution of the disputes
involved the exercise of judicial power;

2\. Article 4(c) precluded the conferment of judicial power on the Registrar
and on arbitrators, who were not "institutions" created, established or
recognised by the Constitution or by Parliament;

3\. Although Section 58(2) and Rule 49(v) were "existing law", within the
meaning of the Constitution,

(a) they had to be read mutatis mutandis (in terms of Article 168(1)),
necessitating the substitution of "Judicial Service Commission" for
"Registrar" in Rule 49(v); and

(b) Articles 114 and 170 "expressly provided" (within the meaning of Article
168(1)) for judicial officers to be appointed by the Judicial Service
Commission, so that the Registrar or an arbitrator could determine a dispute
only if appointed by that Commission under and in terms of Article 114.

Learned Senior State Counsel did not contend that the resolution of the
disputes did not involve the exercise of judicial power. His principal
contention was that subsequent to the aforesaid decisions, Parliament had
enacted the Co-operative Societies (Special Provisions) Act, No. 34 1970, with
a two-thirds majority. That Act expressly provided that it shall be as valid
and effectual as though it was a Constitutional amendment; that every power,
duty and function conferred and imposed on, and assigned to, the Registrar
under section 53 of the Co-operative Societies Ordinance, as amended from time
to time, was deemed to have been, and to be, validly

295

conferred, imposed and assigned; and that every arbitrator appointed by the
Registrar, was deemed to have been, and to be, validly appointed. Therefore,
he submitted, the exercise of judicial power by the Registrar and arbitrators
under section 53 of the Ordinance, despite want of appointment by the J.S.C.,
was made Constitutionally proper. Thereafter the Co-operative Societies Law,
No. 5 of 1972, repealed the earlier Ordinance and other statutes (see section
73), but did not repeal Act No. 34 of 1970. Section 16(1) of the
Interpretation Ordinance (Cap. 6) provides that where in any written law
reference is made to any written law which is subsequently repealed, such
reference shall be deemed to be made to the written law by which such repeal
is effected. Accordingly, the provisions of Act No. 34 of 1970 applied to the
1972 enactment. Thus when Article 168(1) was enacted, it had been the law at
least for the preceding 8 years that the Registrar and arbitrators could
exercise judicial power when acting under section 58 (or its predecessor).
Section 58(2), Rule 49(v) and Act No. 34 of 1970 were thus "existing written
law", kept in force by Article 168; the application of the mutatis mutandis
principle did not require appointment by the J.S.C.; and there was no "express
provision" in the Constitution which repealed or modified those provisions.
Alternatively, he submitted that-the Registrar was a public officer "whose
principal duty or duties is or are not the performance of functions of a
judicial nature", and accordingly was not included in the definition of
"judicial officer" in Article 170; appointment by the J.S.C. was not required.

Following _Karunatilleke_ (1) and _Jayasekera_ ,(2) I hold that the
determination by the Registrar or an arbitrator of disputes arising from
transactions involving ordinary contractual rights and obligations involves
the exercise of the judicial power of the People. The other contentions
arising in this case require this Court to consider (a) what institutions
created, established or recognised by the Constitution or by Parliament may
exercise judicial power, (b) how the officers and members of such institutions
should be appointed, (c) how such appointments should be made when such
institutions (or their officers or members) have mixed judicial and non-
judicial functions, and (d) whether the position is different in regard to
institutions established by laws enacted prior to the Constitution.

296

The relevant provisions of the 1978 Constitution were not enacted in vacuo,
but in the background of the Constitutional provisions, judicial decisions and
unsettled problems of the preceding three decades, to which a brief reference
is necessary. The Ceylon (Constitution and Independence) Orders-in-Council,
1946 and 1947, (the "1947 Constitution"), were interpreted in a series of
decisions.

The 1947 Constitution did not expressly provide for a separation of powers and
functions; "no express mention is made of vesting in the judicature the
judicial power which it already had and was wielding in its daily process
under the Courts Ordinance"; however "there was no compelling need ... to make
any specific reference to the judicial power of the Courts when the
legislative and executive powers changed hands" (i.e. in consequence of the
change of sovereignty effected by the 1947 Constitution); "but the importance
of securing the independence of judges, and maintaining the dividing line
between the judiciary and the executive" (and also, one should add, the
legislature) "was appreciated by those who framed the Constitution". The
structure of the Constitution and in particular the provisions for the
independence of Judges of the Superior Courts and for the appointment of other
judges by an independent Judicial Service Commission "manifest an intention to
secure in the judiciary a freedom from political, legislative and executive
control. They are wholly appropriate in a Constitution which intends that
judicial power shall be vested only in the judicature. They would be
inappropriate in a Constitution by which it was intended that judicial power
should be shared by the executive or the legislature. The Constitution's
silence as to the vesting of judicial power is consistent with its remaining,
where it had lain for more than a century," (i.e. Under the Charter of
Justice, 1833, and the Courts Ordinance, 1889) "in the hands of the
judicature. It is not consistent with any intention that henceforth it should
pass to, or be shared by, the executive or the legislature", "there exists a
separate power in the judicature which under the Constitution as it stands
cannot be usurped or infringed by the executive or the legislature." (
_Bribery Commissioner v. Ranasinghe_.(3) _R. v. Liyanage_ ,(4): _Liyanage v.
The Queen_ (5)).

After some initial uncertainty, the nature of "judicial power" was clarified:
a historical test was also applied and judicial power was

297

 held to include powers which, though administrative in nature, have
traditionally been ancillary to the judicial power, such as the power to
nominate a Bench to hear a case ( _Liyanage_ ,(4)).

In regard to Bribery Tribunals, whose members were not appointed by the
_J.S.C., in Senadhira_ ,(6) it was not contested that the power to try, and to
reach findings of guilt or innocence, could lawfully be conferred on such
Tribunals; the only objection was that such tribunals could not convict and
sentence an accused, and this objection Sansoni, J. (as he then was), and T S.
Fernando, J. upheld. This was followed in _Don Anthony_ ,(7)though attracted
by the contention that in ascertaining and declaring the liabilities of an
accused such tribunals were in fact exercising judicial power, the Court
upheld a technical procedural objection and refrained from deciding that
matter. In _Piyadasa_ ,(8) Tambiah, J., swept aside the procedural objection,
and went on to hold that no judicial power can be conferred on Bribery
Tribunals except by constitutional amendment. The matter was finally resolved
in two judgments of H. N. G. Fernando, J., (as he then was). He held in
_Jailabdeen v. Danina Umma_ (9).

"There is nothing illegal, in the sense of conflict with the Constitution, in
a statute which establishes a new judicial tribunal with jurisdiction (whether
exclusive or not) over particular charges or causes. Indeed the legislature
might well consider it necessary in the public interest to constitute such
tribunals, and one can think of many reasons for the adoption of such a course
...

There is no provision in the Constitution restricting the establishment of
judicial offices and it follows that a Bribery Tribunal to which persons are
duly appointed in accordance with the proper law can legally exercise all the
powers which the Act confers upon such a tribunal. But since a tribunal having
such powers is a judicial office, all that I find unconstitutional in the
Bribery Act is the power given to the Governor-General to appoint the panel
from which members of such a tribunal have to be constituted. The objection
thus goes not to legal validity of the tribunal itself, or to the exercise of
judicial power by it,

298

but rather to the right and authority of the persons constituting the tribunal
to exercise the powers conferred by the Act";

and in _Ranasinghe_ ,(3)

"... there is no question of a wholesale challenge of the entire Act, that the
Legislature can validly confer judicial power on specially created tribunals,
and that the objection which lies against a conviction by a particular Bribery
Tribunal is that the judicial power validly vested in the special tribunals
cannot be lawfully exercised by persons who are appointed to the Tribunal by
the Governor-General, and not by the Judicial Service Commission."

On appeal, the Privy Council - although dealing principally with the duty of
the Court to look for the Speaker's certificate to ascertain whether the
Constitution has been validly amended - was "in accord with the view so
clearly expressed by the Supreme Court that the orders made against the
respondent are null and inoperative on the ground that the persons composing
the Bribery Tribunal which tried him were not lawfully appointed to the
Tribunal".

These decisions recognised that the creation and establishment by Parliament
of courts, tribunals and institutions for the exercise of the judicial power
of the State was not inconsistent with the Constitution or the principle of
the separation of powers; all that was constitutionally necessary was
compliance with constitutional provisions as to the manner of appointment of
the officers and members thereof. These principles are now expressly
entrenched in Articles 4(c), 114 and 170.

It is necessary to consider whether the Registrar is an "institution" within
the meaning of Article 4(c). This expression occurs in several other
provisions of the Constitution; e.g. Articles 105 and 156. It is not confined
to a body of persons, and will include an "institution" consisting of a single
officer or member. Thus the Ombudsman, the Commissioner of Elections, and the
Public Trustee are "institutions". The Registrar is also an "institution". The
numerous powers, duties and functions statutorily entrusted to the Registrar
cannot be

299

exercised and performed by him single-handed. Hence section 2 enables certain
other public officers to exercise all or any of the powers of the Registrar.
Section 58 also permits the Registrar to refer a dispute to an arbitrator
(appointed by him in terms of Rule 49(v)). But since an appeal lies from the
award of an arbitrator to the Registrar himself, the scheme of that enactment
is that the ultimate decision of a dispute is by the Registrar. It is true
that such an arbitrator may be appointed ad hoc, but he is nevertheless part
of the institution created by that law. Article 4(c) does not preclude the
creation and establishment, or the recognition, of such an institution. Since
the Co-operative Societies Law was enacted prior to the Constitution, the
question also arises whether the Registrar is an institution "created and
established", or "recognised", by the Constitution or by law, within the
meaning of Article 4(c). Article 105(2) provides that all institutions created
and established by existing written law for, inter alia, the adjudication of
industrial and other disputes shall be deemed to be institutions created and
established by Parliament. The Registrar is thus an "institution" deemed to be
created and established by Parliament; and is also, by virtue of Articles
105(2) and 168(1), "recognised" by the Constitution.

if created by a statute enacted after the Constitution, the question would
arise whether an officer or member of that institution (a) falls within the
definition of "judicial officer", within the meaning of Article 170, and, if
so, (b) must be appointed by the J.S.C. This would have had to be determined
solely by reference to Article 170. Prima facie, the Registrar would be an
institution created and established "for the adjudication of any labour or,
other dispute" within the meaning of Article 170, and would therefore be a
"judicial officer". However, having regard to the extent of the non-judicial
statutory duties and functions of the Registrar under the 1972 Law, it is also
clear that his "principal duty or duties is or are not the performance of
functions of a judicial nature", for his judicial functions under section 58
form only a small part of the duties of his office. The Registrar would
therefore be excluded from the definition. This confirms that there is no
inconsistency between Article 170, and the pre-Constitution legislation which
established the institution of the Registrar. In coming to this conclusion, I
have also had regard to judicial decisions in the background of which Article
170 was enacted.

300

The usurpation or infringement of the judicial power was struck down - in the
Bribery Tribunal cases; in relation to Quazis (in Jailabdeen); and in regard
to the imposition of fines under the Licensing of Traders Act for
contravention of the Price Control Act (in Ibrahim v. G. A. Vavuniya (10)).
However, it was held in Anthony Naide, (11) that the "Legislature has power to
abolish the jurisdiction of the Civil Courts of original jurisdiction and thus
indirectly to abolish the appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court,
provided of course that the legislature does not attempt to arrogate such
jurisdiction to itself or to transfer such jurisdiction to some authority not
holding judicial office." H. N. G. Fernando, S.P.J., continued to entertain
doubts as to whether an ordinary law could abolish the jurisdiction of the
Supreme Court in regard to the prerogative writs, for "it may well be that the
Constitution has, in section 52, recognised and adopted, and thus
incorporated, some provisions of the Courts Ordinance which confer
jurisdiction on the Supreme Court". The Constitution now entrenches some of
the jurisdictions of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeal, precluding
an erosion of such jurisdictions by ordinary law. Other jurisdictions,
however, can be taken away by ordinary law, provided of course that if they
are transferred to other bodies, the officers or members thereof must be
appointed in terms of Articles 114 and 170. Although it was held in
Karunatilleke and Jayasekera that the power to determine disputes under
section 58 was at one time a jurisdiction vested in the civil courts, and that
the transfer of that jurisdiction to persons not appointed by the J.S.C.
constituted an usurpation of jurisdiction. Act No. 34 of 1970 constitutionally
validated that transfer of jurisdiction. In the result, when the Constitution
was enacted in 1978, no question arose of the usurpation of a jurisdiction
previously vested in the civil courts.

The question of mixed functions was considered in several decisions. In Walker
Sons & Co. Ltd v. Fry, (12) H. N. G. Fernando, S.P.J., observed that -

"Section 55 of the Constitution . . . failed to preclude the possibility of
the entrustment of judicial power to some authority bona fide established for
administrative purposes. If administrative officials, the majority of whose
powers and functions are administrative, are in addition entrusted on

301

grounds of expediency with judicial power, there would not in my opinion be
conflict with section 55. But if, under cover of expediency, judicial powers
are vested in an office administrative only in name, then the principle that
you cannot do indirectly that which you cannot do directly will apply. That
principle will also apply if there is frequent entrustment of judicial power
to unpaid functionaries".

However, after the Privy Council decision in _Liyanage v. The Queen_ ,(5) he
modified this view (see _Moosajees v. Fernando_ ,(13)) in relation to post-
Constitution legislation - holding that there could be no erosion of judicial
power. But he maintained this view in regard to pre-Constitution legislation,
holding in _Panagoda v. Budinis Singhe_ ,(14) that where "the holder of some
office established mainly for administrative purposes was entrusted also with
judicial power necessary for effectively securing the purpose of the
establishment of the office", such officer could validly exercise judicial
power despite want of appointment by the J.S.C. Thus the office of
Commissioner for Workmen's Compensation, established prior to the
Constitution, was an administrative tribunal, a small part of its functions
being judicial, and was not a judicial office. Dealing with a similar question
in regard to powers exercised by officers administering the income tax laws in
_Xavier v. Wijeyekoon_ ,(15) he held that the Commissioner of Inland Revenue,
in imposing a penalty for making an incorrect return, does not exercise
judicial power; such a penalty is a civil, rather than a criminal sanction,
and is intended to protect the revenue against loss and expense arising from
the taxpayer's fraud. In approving that decision, the _Privy Council in
Ranaweera v. Wickramasinghe_ ,(16) held that although such public officers
have to act judicially, they are not holders of judicial office; "where the
resolution of disputes by some Executive Officer can properly be regarded as
being part of the execution of some wider administrative function entrusted to
him, then he should be regarded as still acting in an administrative capacity,
and not as performing some different and judicial function". In this
background, it may well be that Article 170 does not permit an erosion of
existing jurisdictions; nor the mala fide entrustment of judicial power to
public officers, in order to achieve indirectly a result which cannot be
achieved directly; and only allows the conferment of

302

some judicial power or function which can properly be regarded as being
ancillary to some wider administrative function entrusted to an executive
officer. Even if Article 170 is so construed, the power conferred on the
Registrar satisfies this test.

But this may not necessarily suffice to exclude an arbitrator from the
definition of "judicial officer". If the Registrar appoints as arbitrator a
private individual, such arbitrator would not be a "public officer" as defined
in Article 170, for a public officer is one appointed in terms of Chapter IX
of the Constitution; appointment by the Registrar would be inconsistent with
those provisions. In any event, since such an arbitrator would perform no
other function, he would be a presiding officer or member of an institution
created and established for the adjudication of disputes, but would not be
excluded from the definition of "judicial officer" on the ground that he has
mixed functions. If the Registrar appoints a person who is already a duly
appointed "public officer", yet the question whether such person is excluded
from the definition would depend on whether his executive functions exceed his
judicial functions. However, Article 170 is primarily prospective, and we have
to turn to Article 168(1) to ascertain what effect Article 170 has on the
continuance in force of existing law authorising the appointment of an
arbitrator by the Registrar. "Written Law" includes subordinate legislation,
and hence section 58, Act No 34 of 1970, and Rule 49(v), constitute written
laws in force immediately before the commencement of the Constitution. They
continue in force despite inconsistency with the Constitution, except in three
specified situations. The first exception does not arise for consideration as
Parliament has made no provision contrary to such "existing written law". The
modification of statutory provisions mutatis mutandis is where the
circumstances demand it; where change is essential or necessary, and not
merely useful (see _Visuvalingam v. Liyanage_ (17). Section 2 of the Co-
operative Societies Law provides that "there may be appointed a Registrar of
Cooperative Societies", but does not stipulate the appointing authority; if he
is not a "judicial officer", appointment by the J.S.C. is not required; there
is nothing in section 2 to be modified. Rule 49(v) is undoubtedly inconsistent
with Article 170, but the mutatis mutandis rule does not require the removal
of every inconsistency. It is relevant to mention that Article 16(1) makes all
existing written law valid and operative

303

notwithstanding inconsistency with fundamental rights since inconsistency of
such a serious nature does not invalidate existing written law, I cannot
regard Article 168(1) as requiring the elimination of less serious
inconsistencies. Finally, it is necessary to consider whether it has been
"otherwise expressly provided in the Constitution" (i.e. in Articles 114 and
170) that the Registrar and/or arbitrators should be appointed by the J.S.C.
An example of "express provision" is to be found in Article 169(1) which deems
any inconsistent provisions of the Administration of Justice Law to be
repealed. Here there is no "express provision" of that kind. However, to be
"express provision" in relation to some matter, specific mention of that
matter is not essential; for "express provision" is provision the
applicability of which does not arise by inference, and even if there is no
specific mention, it is sufficient if it is directly covered by the language
used: _Shanmugam v. Commissioner for Registration of Indian & Pakistani
Residents _(18). While Articles 114 and 170 are inconsistent with the existing
written law, and while the necessary implication of those Articles, in the
case of arbitrators, is that appointment by the J.S.C. is required, they
cannot be regarded as I express provision" to that effect, for they do not
make specific mention or directly cover the appointment of the Registrar and
arbitrators. Had Article 168(1) been omitted, there would have been a conflict
between pre-existing written law and a constitutional provision; as in the
example given in _Jayasekera_ , (2) it could have been argued that the
statutory provisions ceased to be valid as they did not conform to overriding
provisions of the Constitution; or as in _Gunaseela v. Udugama_ (19), Panagoda
v. Budinis Singho, and Ranaweera v. Wickramasinghe, that the Constitution did
not affect pre-existing jurisdictions. Article 168(1) precluded such
controversies: mere inconsistency between existing written law and the
Constitution did not invalidate the former; that result would happen only if
there was "express provision" in the Constitution.

I therefore determine the questions referred to this Court as follows:

1\. The Registrar is an institution exercising judicial power, within the
meaning of Article 4 (c), and an arbitrator appointed by the Registrar is a
part of such institution.

304

2\. No.

3\. Article 170 cannot apply in its entirety to Article 114, because the
appointment and dismissal of Judges of the Superior Courts and the High Court
is (by virtue of Articles 107 and 111) outside the purview of the Judicial
Service Commission. The words "other than in Article 114" occurring in Article
114 could mean either that the definition is totally inapplicable to Article
114 or that it is inapplicable only to the extent that contrary provision is
made in Article 114(6). Clearly the latter is the correct position. To hold
otherwise would mean that "judicial officer" in Article 114 is undefined; it
would open the door to the argument that this phrase should be limited to
those who hold office as District Judges, Magistrates and other judges
traditionally so regarded, which was decisively rejected both in _Senadhira_
(6) at p.320-1), by Sansoni, J., (as he then was), who held that that phrase
included not only the officers of the established Courts but also those akin
to them; and in Ranasinghe, (3) by the Privy Council. The definition of
"judicial officer" in Article 170 applies to Article 114(1), save as otherwise
expressly provided in Article 114(6): in relation to Article 114(1) that
definition will apply with the omission of the words "a Judge of the supreme
Court or a Judge of the Court of Appeal or any Judge of the High Court,"

4\. No.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_References determined._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/21.html_  

