##  Abeywardene v. Inspector General of Police and Others - SLR - 349, Vol 2
of 1991 [1991] LKSC 21; (1991) 2 Sri LR 349 (1 June 1991)

**349**

_  _



**ABEYWARDENE**

**v.**

**INSPECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE AND OTHERS**

** **



SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., FERNANDO, J., AMERASINGHE, J.

S. C. APPLICATION NO. 92/91.

JULY 23, 24, 25, 1991.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Constitution, Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1)(g)
‑Emergency (Prohibition of Importation of Instruments and Appliances for
Gaming) Regulations No. 1 of 1991 ‑ Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulation No.
1 of 1991 ‑ Seizure of Jackpot Machines ‑ Discrimination ‑ Free­dom to do
business.



The petitioner owned jackpot machines or jackpots, which were installed and
operated in various parts of the country, in shops and eating houses to which
the public had access. The jackpot machines were imported whole or assembled
from imported components. The imports were on the basis of import licences
issued by the Controller of Imports and Exports. On about 01 June 1991 the
Police, acting in terms of powers vested in them by the Emergency (Prohibition
of Importation of Instruments and Appliances for Gaming Regulations No. 1 of
1991, and the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulations No. 1 of 1991 seized and
took away the Jackpot Machines. The petitioner's complaint of infringement of
fundamental rights was entertained only in respect of the alleged violations
of Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1) (g) of the Constitution.



**Held:**



(1)        What Article 12(1) guarantees is equal justice, that is, that every
per­son from the President downward, is subject to the law, and that among
equals, the law should be equal and should be equally administered, the like
being treated alike, and that, subject to this, all persons should be entitled
to pursue their happiness and enjoy their property, and have equal access to
the Courts in Sri Lanka for the protection of their persons and property.



(a)        There was here no complaint of unequal treatment between jackpot
owners.



**350**



(b)        Instruments or appliances used by lotteries conducted by the State
and public corporations, unlike instruments and appliances used by others like
the petitioner for playing games for stakes, being exemp­ted from seizure does
not amount to a denial of equality because the distinction is not between
private persons, but between the State, including State sponsored
institutions, and private persons.



(c)        The petitioner was engaged in one of those pernicious forms of
gaming that placed public order and security in jeopardy. The State lotteries
were not engaged in such activities. The differentiation between persons like
the petitioner and the State lotteries is, there­fore, quite intelligible.



(a)                The object of the Regulations was the preservation of
public secur­ity and public order and not the eradication of gaming. The
Regula­tions were intended to **eliminate** specified forms of gaming which
were regarded by the President, on the basis of information placed before him
by the Inspector‑General of Police, as being particularly harmful because they
threatened public security and the preserva­tion of public order.



**Per Amerasinghe, J.:**



"Article 12 of the Constitution does not require that a legislative
classification should be scientifically perfect or logically complete....... A
State need not, in order to meet the requirements of equal protection, provide
for abstract symmetry in its legislation, but may mark and set apart the
classes and types of problems according to the needs and as dictated or
suggested by experience.......I am bound to assume that those who enact the
laws of this country,....... understand and correctly appreciate the needs of
the people and that the laws are directed to problems made manifest by
experience and the discriminations are based on adequate grounds. Those who
make the law are free to recognize degrees of harm and to confine the
restrictions to those cases where the need is deemed to be the greatest.......
That belongs to the realm of legislative policy. It is not a matter for us.
All I need say in that connection is this. It is a generally recognized, basic
principle of law that a piece of legis­lation is not bad merely because the
legislature selects one or some evil things for elimination while other evils
may, in the opinion of certain persons be equally in need of similar
attention. Moreover the State may choose to deal with different persons and
things or geographical areas at different times owing to the exigencies of
con­venience, even though this might necessarily impose varying burdens."



**351**



**Per Amerasinghe, J.:**



"The making of laws in the interests of national security, public order and
the protection of public health or morality or for the purpose of securing due
recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others or of meeting
the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society,
necessarily involves classifi­cation, differentation and curtailment of
individual rights and free­doms. It must almost always result in some
inequality. But that is not enough.



So long as the classification is founded upon an intelligible dif­ferentia
which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those who
are left out of the group, and so long as the differentia have a relation to
the object sought to be achieved by the legislation, the discriminatory
legislation is not in violation of Article 12 of the Constitution and is
valid, even though it might trench upon the freedom of a citizen."



(e)        Regulation, rather than elimination seems to be the prevail­ing
legislative policy. The State lotteries are expressly excluded by Regulation 4
of the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulations. Therefore such lotteries are,
whether this be personally agreeable or not, lawful. However, even assuming
that they are not lawful, it is not open to the petitioner to claim therefore,
that as a matter of equality, he too should be permitted to engage in an
unlawful acti­vity.



**Per Amerasinghe, J:** "Article 12 of the Constitution guarantees equal
protection of the law and not equal violation of the law. One illegality does
not justify another illegality."



(f)         There is a clear nexus between the Regulations and their pur­pose.
There is also a recognizable and evident connection between the proclaimed
reasons for the state of emergency and the Emer­gency (Prohibition of
Importation of Instruments and Appliances for Gaming) Regulations No. 1 of
1991 and the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulations No. 1 of 1991. The
decisions as to whether there is a state of emergency and what regulations may
be consi­dered necessary or expedient to deal with such a situation is a
mat­ter for the President and not the courts of law.



(g)        There was nothing at all in the newspaper reports to show personal
hostility to the Petitioner either on the part of the Presi­dent, the members
of the Government or the administration includ­ing the police. Nor is there
any indication in the news items even remotely suggesting that the Regulations
were designed to particu­larly affect the petitioner's business as an act of
revenge or for any other reason. There was no proof of lack of bona fides or
discrimi‑



**352**





nation on political grounds. A Government is entitled to deal with problems
according to its own timetable.



(h)        Now that Jackpots are illegal the petitioner cannot invoke the
protection of Article 14(1)(g). He has no fundamental right to conduct
unlawful gaming.





**Per Amerasinghe, J:** "A person who comes before this Court for just and
equitable relief under article 126(4) of the Constitution must in his act of
supplication show the Court clean hands into which relief may be given."







**Cases referred to:**



1.                  _State of U.P. v. Deoman_ AIR 1960 S.C. 1125   


2\.         _Lal Chand v. Union of India_ AIR 1956 Ajmer 10  


3.                  _State v. Shanker_ AIR 1958 All 432 



4\.         _Madhya Pradesh Mineral Industries Association v. Regional
Provident_ _  Fund Commissioner_ AIR 1959 Bom. 60



5\.         _P & O Steam Navigation Co. v. Secretary of Siate_ 1968 ‑ 69 5
Bomb  HCR App. 1



6\.         _Seshadri v. Second Additional I. T. Officer, Salaries Circle,
Madras_ AIR 1954 Mad 806



7\. _         Shiv Prasad v. Punjab State_ AIR 1957 Punj 150



8\.         _Manohar Lai v. State_ AIR 1956 Pepsu 14, 16



9\.         _Amraoti Electricity Supply Co. v. N. H. Majumdar_ AIR 1953 Nag.
35 10.   _Secretary to the Government Public Works and             Transport
Department_

10   _AP v. Adoni Ginning Factory_ AIR 1959 Andh, Prad, 538



11\.       _Sheoprasad v. State of M.P._ AIR 1955 Nag. 177



12\.       _Motilal v. U.P. Government_ AIR 1951 All 257



13.                  _Firm Jaswant Bai v. Sales Tax Officer_ AIR 1955 All 585 



14\.       _General Motor Bus Service, Tonk v. Regional Transport Authority,
Jai_ _pur_ AIR 1955 Raj 14  


15\.       _Saghir Ahamed v. The State of U.P._ AIR 1954 SC 728, 740



16\.       _Chadami Lai v. General Manager, Western Railway_ AIR 1962 All 159,
163



17\.       _Madden v. Kentucky_ 1940 309 US 83



18\.       _Chandrajit Lal v. Union of India_ AIR 1951 SC 41



19\.       _State of Bombay v. F.N. Balsara_ AIR 1951 SC 318



20\.       _Champakam Dorairajan v. State of Madras_ AIR 1951 Mad 120



21\.       _Chowdhury v. Union of India_ AIR 1951 SC 41



22.                  _Kanthi Raning v. State of Saurashtra_ AIR 1952 SC 123 



23\.       _Lachhmandas v. State of Bombay_ AIR 1952 SC 235



24\.       _Kedar Nath v. State of West Bengal_ AIR 1953 SC 404



25\.       _Sakhi Chand v. Central Co ‑operative Bank_ AIR 1955 Pepsu 129, 132



**353**





26\.       _Ramkrishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar_ AIR 1958 SC 538



27\.       _Moti Das v. Sahi_ AIR 1959 SC 942



28.       _Barbier v. Connolly_ (1885) 113 US 27



29\.       _Saghir Ahamad.v. State of_ _U.P._ AIR 1954 SC 728



30\.       _Sakhichand v. Central Co ‑operative Bank_ AIR 1955 Pepsu 129



31\.       _Tilakram Rambaksh v. Bank of Patiala_ AIR 1959 Punj 440



32\.       _Manna Lal   v. Collector of Jhalwar_ AIR 1961 SC 828



33\.       _Lachhman Dass and Nand Ram Tulsi Ram v. State of Punjab_ AIR 1963
SC 222  


34.       _State of Rajasthan v. Mukan Chand_ AIR 1964 SC 1633



35\.       _Skinner v. Oklahoma_ (1942) 316 US 535



36\.       _Qureshi v. State of Bihar_ AIR 1958 SC 731



37\.       _Moti Das v. Sahi_ AIR 1959 SC 942



38\.       _Lochner v. New York_ (1905) 198 US 45



39\.       _The State of Bombay v. RMD Chamarbaugwala_ 1957 AIR SC 699, 719



40\.       _C. W. Mackie & Co. Ltd. v. Hugh Molagoda, Commissioner‑General of_
_Inland Revenue and Others_ _II_ 1986 1 Sri LR 300,             309 ‑ 310, 311



41\.       _T. Venkatasubbiah Setty v. Corporation of the City of Bangalore
and_ _  others _ AIR 1968 Mysore 251, 256



42\.       _Ram Prasad v. Union of India_ AIR 1978 Rajasthan 131



43.       _Chief Commissioner v. Kitty Puri_ AIR 1937 Delhi 148, 153



44\.       _Narain Dass v. Improvement Trust_ AIR 1972 SC 861, 871



45\.       _Yasapala v. Ranil Wickremasinghe and others_ (1980) 1 FRD 143,
159‑60



46\.       _Lipton Ltd. v. Ford_ 1917 2 KB 647



47\.       _Attorney ‑General for Canada and another and Hallet Carey Ltd. _ _
another_ 1952 AC 427  


48\.       _Mugler v. State of Kansas_ (1887) 123 US 273, 296‑297

  
49\.       _Munn v. Illinois_ 94 US 124

  
50\.       _Bhagat Singh v. Emperor_ AIR 1931 PC 111



51\.       _Reference as to the Validity of Certain Chemical Regulations_
[1943] SCR 13



52\.       _Carltona Ltd. v. Commissioner of Works and others_ 1943 2 All ER
560,564



53\.       _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali_ AIR 1952 SC 75



54\.       _Krishnachandra and others v. State of Madhya Pradesh_ AIR 1965 SC
307



55\.       _Stone v. Mississippi_ 101 US 814



56\.       _Beer Co. v. Massachnselts_ 97 US 32



57.              _Malekotla v. Mohd. Mustaq_ 1960 A. Punj 18



58.              _Boota Singh v. state_ 1961 A. punj 21



59\.       _UP. v. Kartar Singh_ 1964 SCR 679



60\.       _Rewata Thero v. Horalala_ (1939) 14 CLW 155, 156s



**354**

  **APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.



_R. Weerakoon_ , with _Kusal Subasinghe_ and _E. L. Tirimanne_ for Petitioner.



_Sunil de Silva_ P.C., Attorney ‑ General with _Tilak Marapone_ ,
Solicitor­-General, _Upawansa Yapa_ , Deputy Solicitor‑General and _Kalinga
Indatissa_ State Counsel for Respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._

  October 23, 1991.

**  
AMERASINGHE, J.**



The Petitioner owned instruments or appliances, commonly described as _Jackpot
Machines or Jackpots_. They were installed and operated in various parts of
the country in shops and eating houses to which the public had access. The
_Jackpot Machines_ were imported whole or assembled from imported components.
The imports were on the basis of import licences issued by the Controller of
Imports and Exports. On or about June 1, 1991, the police seized and took away
the _Jackpot Machines_ to Police Stations. The police acted on the basis of
the powers given to them by the Emergency (Prohibition of Importation of
Instruments and Appliances for Gaming) Regu­lations, No. 1 of 1991 which were
made by the President under section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance
(Chapter 40) and published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 664/9 ‑ 1991 on 31
May, 1991. The Regulations authorized the seizure of specified kinds of
instruments and appliances used for gaming. By the Emergency (Games of Chance)
Regulations No. 1 of 1991 made by the President under Section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance (Chapter 40) and published in Gazette Extraordi­nary No.
665/13‑1991 on 6 June 1991, among other things, certain categories were
excluded from the definition of "play­ing of a game for stake. "



### 355



On 17 June, 1991, the Petitioner applied, by a petition under Article 126 of
the Constitution, for a declaration that his fundamental rights under Articles
12 (1), 12 (2), 12 (6) and 14 (1) (g) had been violated and for relief and
redress in the form of a return of the confiscated machines, for compensa­tion
for any loss or damage to such confiscated machines and compensation for
losses caused by the alleged unlawful inter­ference with his business.



Article 12 has four sub‑sections: There is no such thing as Article 12(6) in
the Constitution. Leave to proceed was, there­fore, granted only in respect of
the alleged violations of Arti­cles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1) (g) of the
Constitution.



Article 12(1) provides that "All persons are equal before the law and are
entitled to the equal protection of the law". With regard to Article 12(1),
Mr. Weerakoon said that his case rested principally on the denial of equal
protection of the law and not on the violation of the guarantee of equality
before the law.



Article 12(1) of our Constitution is based on Article 14 of the Indian
Constitution. and although some Judges (e.g. _Subba Rao, J. in Suite of U.P.
v. Deoman_ (1) have, from time to time, sought to distinguish between
"equality before of the law" as being a negative concept and "equal protection
of the law" as being a positive concept, it is not necessary for the purposes
of this case to consider tile differences, if any. Indeed, the. Fourteenth
Amendment of the Constitution of the United States of America, upon which the
Indian Article is based, uses the words "equal protection of the laws" and
makes no reference to "equality before the law." In essence, I think, what
Article 12 (1) guarantees is equal justice, that is, that every person, from
the President downward, is subject to the law, and that among equals, the law
should be equal and should be equally administered, the like being treated
alike, and that, subject to this, all persons should be entitled to



### 356

**  **

pursue their happiness and enjoy their property, and have equal access to the
Courts of Sri Lanka for the protection of their persons and property.



There is no complaint with regard to equal access to the Courts.

           

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner admitted that _Jackpot Machines_ belonging
to all persons whomsoever had been taken away in a manner similar to the way
in which the Petitioner's machines had been removed. And, so, there was no
complaint of unequal treatment between _Jackpot_ owners.



The Petitioner, however, complained that, while the Emer­gency (Prohibition of
Instruments and Appliances for Gaming) Regulations No. 1 of 1991 permitted the
forfeiture of instru­ments and appliances used for the purpose of gaming,
Regula­tion 4 of the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulations No. 1 of 1991
removed "the conduct of any lottery by the State or a public corporation..."
from the definition of "playing of a game for a stake." In this way,
instruments or appliances used by lotteries conducted by the State and public
corporations, unlike instruments and appliances used by others, like himself,
for playing games for stakes, were exempted from seizure. This, the Petitioner
said, was a denial to him of the equal pro­tection of the law guaranteed by
Article 12 (1) of the Constitu­tion.



Regulation 4 of the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regula­tions not only exempts
lotteries conducted by the State or by public corporations, but also those
"under the authority of a licence issued under the Lotteries Ordinance." The
Petitioner in his petition, and Mr. Weerakoon on his behalf, were only
concerned with the distinction drawn between the State, including
State‑sponsored institutions, and private persons.



The law, Mr. Weerakoon said, must be the same for all persons, be it the State
or others. Moreover, among equals, like must be treated alike. In paragraphs 4
and 13 of the Peti‑



**357**



tion, and during the argument before us, it was said that the lotteries run by
the State known as Sevana. _Saturday Fortune and Mahajana Sampatha_ were forms
of gambling, and if one form of gambling was prohibited, other forms too must,
as a matter of equality, be prohibited. "The gaming principle", the Petitioner
said, was the "same" for all, whether gambling was conducted under State
auspices or otherwise.



Mr. Weerakoon proceeded on the basis that the public cor­porations engaged in
one or more of the lotteries referred to in the petition were conducting State
lotteries. Assuming, for the limited purposes of this case, that all the
lotteries referred to by the Petitioner are, as Mr. Weerakoon submits, State
lotter­ies, the first question then is whether the State is a _person_.
Article 12(1) says that all _persons_ are equal before the law and entitled to
the equal protection of the law, and, therefore, in order to support an
allegation of unequal treatment between persons, it must be established that
the distinction was between persons.



According to some authorities, the word "persons" in the Article of the
Constitution guaranteeing equality ought not to mean or include the State.
[e.g. see _Lal Chand v. Union of India_ (2), _State v. Shanker_ (3), _Madhya
Pradesh Mineral Industries Association v. Regional Provident Fund
Commis­sioner_ (4)]. This is said to be obviously so where the State is acting
in, what Sir Barnes Peacock, CJ in _P. & O. Steam Nav­igation Co. v. Secretary
of State_ (5) referred to as, its "sover­eign" capacity. For instance, this
would be the case in the matter of taxation, (cf. _Seshadri v. Second
Additional I.T. Officer, Salaries Circle_ , _Madras_ (6) or the imposition of
licence fees, (cf. _Shiv Prasad v. Punjab State_ ) (7), or the recovery of
State dues (cf. _Manohar Lai v. State_ ) (8) or exercising powers under public
security legislation, (cf. _Amraoti Electricity Supply Co. v. N. H. Majumdar_
) (9) or in the exercise of its power to raise the standard of living of the
people, in general, and creating a favourable climate for the pursuit of
happiness



**358**



and for the development of the human personality, (cf. Secre­tary to the
Government Public Works and Transport _Depart­ment A.P. v. Adoni Ginning
Factory_ (10), and, perhaps, where the matter is at least incidental to such
an ordinary function of government. (cf. _Sheoprasad v. State of M.P._ ) (11).



It may be argued that, in conducting lotteries, the State is not exercising a
sovereign function or one that is incidental to a traditional function of
government and that, therefore, in the case before us, since the State has
descended into an area of competition with private persons like the
Petitioner, the State must be treated like any ordinary person engaged in
similar activities. There is some authority in support of such a view. (E.g.
see per _Agarawala, J. and per Malik CJ in Motilal v. U.P. Government_ (12)
_Firm Jaswant Bai v. Sales Tax Officer_ (13) _General Motor Bus Service, Tonk
v. Regional Transport Authority, Jaipur_ (14).

_ _

However, Mukherjea, J. in _Saghir Ahamad v. The State of U.P._ (15) rejected
the argument that the State ceases to func­tion as a State as soon as it
engages in a trade like an ordinary citizen.



The matter was discussed by _Srivastave, J. in Chadami Lal v. General Manager,
Western Railway_ (16) who indicated that the question was not free from
difficulty. And since the matter was not argued, his Lordship did not express
any opinion on that question. Nor was the matter argued before us and,
there­fore, I do not express any opinion on the question whether, when the
State engages in activities that are not traditionally within the exercise of
its sovereign powers or incidental thereto, the State remains a unique, and
for the purposes of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution, an incomparable
entity.



But this does not end the matter. Admittedly, Regulation 4 differentiates
between the State and others. But this does not necessarily make the
Regulation otiose and invalid. The State necessarily has the power of what is
known as "classification".



**359**



and, under that power. it has the greatest freedom to make distinctions
between persons and things. The burden is on the one attacking the legislative
arrangement to negative every conceivable basis which might support it. (See
_Madden v. Ken­tucky_ (17). A legislative authority, _as Patanjali Sastri, J.
observed in Charanjit Lal v. Union of India_ (18) is



"empowered to make laws on a wide range of subjects must of neces­sity have
the power of' making special laws to attain particular objects and must, for
that purpose, possess large powers of distinguishing and classifying the
persons or things to be brought under the operation of such laws, provided the
basis of such classification has a just and reas­onable relation to the
obiect"



which the legislating authority has in view. The power to make discriminatory
legislation in relation to the advancement of women, children and disabled
persons is expressly given in Article 12 of the Constitution itself. But the
power to differen­tiate is not limited to those categories. With regard to the
exercise of its "police powers", the State has a wide discretion which is not
taken away by the Articles of the Constitution guaranteeing the fundamental
right to equality (Article 12). The fundamental right to freedom from
arbitrary arrest and detention (Article 13 (1) & (2) and the fundamental right
to freedom of assembly, association, to form and join a trade union, to
manifest his religion or belief, to promote his cul­ture, to use his own
language, to engage in any lawful occupa­tion, profession, trade, business or
enterprise, to move about freely and to choose his residence and to return to
Sri Lanka (Article 14), are all, in terms of Article 15 (7) of the
Constitu­tion,



"Subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the inter­ests of
national security, public order and the protection of public health or
morality, or for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the
rights and freedoms of others, or of meeting the just requirements of the
general welfare of a democratic society."



For the purpose of Article 15(7) of the Constitution, "law" includes
regulations made under the law for the time being relating to public security.



### 360



The making of laws in the interests of national security, public order and the
protection of public health or morality or for the purpose of securing due
recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others or of meeting
the just require­ments of the general welfare of a democratic society,
necessar­ily involves classification, differentiation and the curtailment of
individual rights and freedoms. It must almost always result in some
inequality. But that is not enough. (Cf. _State of Bombay v. F. N, Balsarrt_
_AIR_ (19). So long as the classification is founded upon an intelligible
differentia which distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together
from those who are left out of the group, and so long as the differentia have
a relation to the object sought to be achieved by the legislation, the
discriminatory legislation is not in violation of Article 12 of the
Constitution and is valid, even though it might trench upon the freedom of a
citizen. (Cf. per _Viswanatha Sastri, J. in Chanrakam Dorairajan v. State of
Madras_ (20), _Chowdhury v. Union of India_ (21) per _Mukcrjca_ , _Das and
Petanjali Sastri JJ_ in their __ judgments in _Kanthi Raning v. State of
Saurashtra_ (22) _Lachhmandas v. State of Bombay_ (23), _Kedar Nath v. State
of West Bengal_ (24), _Sakhi Chand v. Central Co­operative Bank_ (25)
_Ramkrishna Dahnia v. Justice Tendolkar_ (26) _Moti Das v. Sahi_ (27) _Chadmi
v. General Manager, West­ern Railway (supra)_



So long as the legislation is in conformity with those prin­ciples, the
unfortunate consequences for particular individuals, like the Petitioner in
this case. are of no consequence. As it was observed in _Barhicr v. Connolly_
(28) the equality provi­sion was not designed toy interfere with the "police
power" of the State, viz.,



"to prescribe regulations to promote the health, peace, morals, educa­tion and
good order of the people and to legislate so as to increase the industries or
the State, develop its resources and add to its wealth and prosperity...
Regulations for these purposes may press with more or less weight upon one
than upon another, but they are designed, not to



**361**



impose unequal or unnecessarv restrictions upon any one, but to pro­mote with
as little individual inconvenience as possible, the general good."



Even assuming that the State has no incomparable and unique position when it
descends into areas of activity shared with others, it may, in using its
powers of classification, legit­imately place itself in a separate class and
accord itself prefer­ential treatment without violating the equality
principle. (See _Saghir Ahamad State of U.P._ (29) ‑ _transport. Cf.
Sakhichand v. Central Co ‑operative Bank_ (30) ‑ banking; _Tilakram Ram­baksh
v. Bank of Patiala_ (31); banking; _Manna Lal v. Collec­tor of Jhalwar_ (32)
banking; _Chandami Lal v. General Man­ager, Western Railway (supra)_ _Lachhman
Dass and Nand Ram Tulsi Ram v. State of Punjab_ (33); banking (but see the
dis­senting judgment of Subba Rao, J. at paras. 57‑58). There must, however,
be a rational connection between the differen­tiation and the object sought to
be achieved by the legislation. Otherwise, the legislation will be in
violation of Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. (Cf. _State of Rajasthan v.
Mukan Chand_ (34).



In terms of Regulation 4 of the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulations No. 1
of 1991 the State has distinguished between itself and others engaged in the
provision of facilities for gambling. There are, I think, quite understandable
reasons for differentiating between State lotteries and others, like the
Petitioner. And I am also of the view that there was a rational nexus between
the differentiation and the object sought to be achieved by the Regulations.



Why do I say this? Look at the evidence placed before us by the
Inspector‑General of Police.



According to the affidavit of the Inspector‑General of Police, the Regulations
in question were made by the President under section 5 of the Public Security
Ordinance (Cap. 40) on his recommendations. Why? The Inspector‑General of
Police states in his affidavit that the Police had received numerous



**362**

requests from members of the public, school principals and various religious
dignitaries to prevent the use of instruments and appliances for unlawful
gaming. The places where they were installed and operated had become centres
of criminal activity and vice. The activities in these places of gaming were
also linked to trafficking in narcotics, terrorism, pornography, and
prostitution. These illegal activities, he said, had an inter­national
dimension as a result of certain foreigners collaborat­ing with local persons
involved in the gaming business. The free flow of foreign exchange had not
only supported terrorist activities, but it had also placed the national
economy in peril.



The Petitioner was engaged in one of those pernicious forms of gaming that
placed public order and security in jeo­pardy. The State lotteries were not
engaged in such activities. The differentiation between persons like the
Petitioner and the State lotteries is therefore, quite intelligible.



The nexus between the object of the Regulations and the differentiation is
equally clear. There was a clearly visible, and indeed a perfectly rational,
relation between the differentia and what seems.to me to be the object sought
to be achieved by the Regulations. What was the object of the Regulations?
According to Mr. Weerakoon, it was the eradication of gam­ing.



Mr. Weerakoon was mistaken with regard to the object of the Regulations. The
object of the Regulations was the preser­vation of public security and public
order and not the eradica­tion of gaming. This is very clear when the
Regulations are read with the Proclamation bringing into operation Part II of
the Public Security Ordinance, and thereby vivifying section 5, which then
enabled the President to make the Regulations. The Regulations were intended
to control the business of gam­ing. The control of certain forms of gaming by
certain persons was a _means to the end of achieving those purposes_ _that are
ascertainable by reading the Regulations with the Proclama­tion_ , and not the
object of the Regulations. The fact that only



**363**



certain types of gaming were prohibited is an indication that the intention of
the Regulations was not simply the eradication of gaming. Nor was it merely a
measure of control of gaming in general. The Regulations were intended to
eliminate speci­fied forms of gaming which were regarded by the President, on
the basis of information placed before him by the Inspector­General of Police,
as being particularly harmful because they threatened public security and the
preservation of public order. A perusal of the affidavit of the
inspector‑General of Police filed by the Attorney‑General in these proceedings
removed any doubt one may have on the matter.



Mr. Weerakoon said that the Regulations should cover _all_ forms of gaming in
order to be valid in terms of Article 12 of the Constitution. The Petitioner
cannot insist on this. Article 12 of the Constitution does not require that a
legislative classi­fication should be scientifically perfect or logically
complete. (See _Kedar Nath v . State of West Bengal_ ) _(24)_. _A State need
not, in order to meet the requirements of equal protection, provide for
abstract symmetry in its legislation, but may mark and,set apart the classes
and types of problems according to the needs and as dictated or suggested by
experience. (See Skinner v, Oklahoma_ (35). I am bound to assume that those
who enact the laws of this Country, including Regulations under the Public
Security Ordinance, understand and correctly appreciate the needs of the
people and that the laws are directed to problems made manifest by experience
and that the discriminations are based,on adequate grounds. Those who make the
law are free to recognize degrees of harm and to confine the restrictions to
those cases where the need is deemed to be the greatest. (See _per Fazl Ali,
J. in State of Bombay v. F. N. Balsara (supra;) Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Jus­tice
Tendolkar (26)._ That belongs to the realm of legislative policy. It is not a
matter for us. All I need say in that connec­tion is this: It is a generally
recognized, basic, principle of law that a piece of legislation is not bad
merely because the legisla‑



**364**



ture selects one or some evil things for elimination while other evils may, in
the opinion of certain persons, be equally in need of similar attention.
Moreover, the State may choose to deal with different persons and things or
geographical areas at dif­ferent times owing to the exigencies of convenience,
even though this might necessarily impose varying burdens. (See _Qureshi v.
State of Bihar_ (36); _Moti Das v. Sahi_ (37); _Chadmi Lal v. General Manager_
, _Western Railway_ (16). Legislation may be, what _Holmes, J._ _in Lochner v.
New York_ (38) des­cribed as an "installment" of a general regulation of the
matter.



Asked whether the legislation in question was an instal­lment on the way to
the total elimination of all forms of gam­bling, the Attorney‑General said
that he had no instructions on that matter.



Regulation, rather than elimination seems to be the prevail­ing legislative
policy, as indeed it seems to have been the case since the Gaming Ordinance
was enacted in 1889. While most religious teachers and many learned Judges in
various coun­tries have disapproved of garnbling, in all its myriad, countless
forms, a few ancient sages like Yajnavakya and Kautilya, have advocated
control rather than eradication. Indeed, although Chief Justice Das in _The
State of Bombay v. R. M. D. Cha­marbaugwala_ (39) condemned gambling in the
strongest terms,his Lordship observed that Kautilya, "as a practical person
that he was, not averse to the State earning some revenue" front gambling. The
State lotteries are expressly excluded by Regulation 4 of the Ernergencv
(Games of Chance) Regula­tions from the definition of' "playing of a game for
a stake", and, therefore, such lotteries are, whether this be personally
agreeable or not, lawful. However. even assuming that they are not lawful, it
is not open to the Petitioner to claim, therefore, that _as a matter of
equality_ , he too should be permitted to engage in an unlawful activity.
Article 12 of the Constitution





### 365



guarantees equal _protection_ of the law and not equal _violation_ of the law.
One illegality does not justify another illegality. (See per _Sharvananda, CJ
in C. W. Mackie & Co., Ltd. v. Hugh Molagoda, Commissioner‑General of Inland
Revenue and others _(40). See also the decisions in _T. Venkatasubbiah Setty
v. Corporation of the City of Bangalore and others_ (41) per Chandrashekar, J:
_Ram Prasad v. Union of India_ (42) per Shrimal, J at p. 132 para. 6; _Chief
Commissioner v. Kitty Puri_ (43) para, 13 per Deshpande, J: and _Narain Dass
v. Improve­ment Trust_ (44) per Dua, J.)



The Petitioner challenged the validity of the Regulations. In paragraph 9 (a)
of his petition, he states that the Regula­tions are "ultra vires _the Public
Security Ordinance_ (Chapter 40) in that the said Ordinance as amended by
subsequent legis­lation does not provide for the making of Regulations under
the said Ordinance for the matters and purposes set out in the Emergency
Regulations. "On that aspect of the matter, I must say this at once: In terms
of Article 15(7) of the Constitution, I must presume the constitutional
validity of the Regulations, as being "law", declared as they are to be
concerned with pub­lic security. In the circumstances, the burden is upon the
Peti­tioner, who attacks the Regulations, to show that there has in fact been
a transgression of the Constitution. (Cf. _Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justicc
Tendolkar_ , (26).



Mr. Weerakoon submitted that the subject of the Regula­tions was gaming.
Gaming was not, he said, an appropriate matter to be dealt with by Emergency
Regulations made under the Public Security Ordinance. Emergency Regulations,
he said, can only be used to "normalize" a situation when there was a riot or
rebellion or something of that nature. Citing the decisions in _Yasapala v.
Ranil Wickremasinghe and others_ (45); _Lipton Ltd. v. Ford_ (46); and
_Attorney ‑General for Can­ada and another v. Hallet & Carey Ltd. & another_
(47). Mr. Weerakoon submitted that the regulations were not "reasona­ble" and
"relevant" from "the perspective of the declared



### 366



emergency situation" and that there was no "rational relation­ship between the
proclaimed reasons for the emergency and the object of the Regulations" and,
therefore, the Regulata­tions must be struck down.



Section 2 (1) of the Public Security Ordinance (Cap. 51) provides as follows:



Where, in view of the existence or imminence or a state of public emergency,
the President is of opinion that it is expedient so to do in the interest of
public security and the preservation of public order or for the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the life of the community, the President
may, by Proclamation published in the Gazette, declare that the provisions of
Part II of this Ordinance shall, forthwith or on such date as may be specified
in the Proclamation, come into operation throughout Sri Lanka or in such part
or parts of Sri Lanka as may be so specified."



On 14 May 1991, the President, by Proclamation, brought into operation Part II
of the Public Security Ordinance. That Proclamation, published in Gazette
Extraordinary No. 662/2‑1991 of May 14, 1991, was as follows:.

           

"Whereas I am of opinion that by reason of a state of public emer­gency in Sri
Lanka it is expedient so to do in the interest of public security, the
preservation of public order and the maintenance of supp­lies and services
essential to the life of the community: know ye that I Ranasinghe Premadasa,
President, by virtue of the powers vested in me by section 2 of the Public
Security Ordinance (Chapter 40 as amended by Act No. 8 of 1959, Law No. 6 of
1978 and Act No. 20 of 1988) do by this Proclamation declare that the
provisions of' Part II of that Ordinance shall come into operation throughout
Sri Lanka on the 14th day of May 1991."



In accordance with section 2 (4) of the Public Security Ordinance, the
Proclamation was duly approved by Parliament on 23 May 1991. A notification to
that effect was published in Gazette Extraordinary No. 665/27 ‑ 1991 on June
6,1991.



Part II of the Public Security Ordinance which the Procla­mation brought into
operation deals with the subject of Emer­gency Regulations, including section
5, which empowers the



**367**



President to make emergency regulations. Section 5 (1) of the Public Security
Ordinance states as follows:



"The President may make such regulations (hereinafter referred to as
"emergency regulations") as appear to him to be necessary or expe­dient in the
interests of public security and the preservation of public order and the
suppression of mutiny, riot or civil commotion, or for the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the life of the community".



I am unable to agree that Emergency Regulations may be made under the Public
Security Ordinance only in the circum­stances suggested by Mr. Weerakoon. The
plain meaning of the section 5 makes it obvious why I must hold Mr.
Weera­koon's restricted interpretation to be entirely unacceptable. The
President may not only, as Mr. Weerakoon suggests, make Regulations to quell a
riot or rebellion, but he may make any Regulations as appear to him necessary
or expedient in the interests of public security and the preservation of
public order. This, it was held in _Yasapala's Case_ (supra) at p.159,
included measures to prevent an anticipated breach of public order. In terms
of section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance, the President may also make
such Regulations as appear to him necessary and expedient for "the suppression
of mutiny, riot or civil commotion or for the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the life of the community." In _Yasapala's Case_ (supra)
it was held by Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) that the words in section 5
were "not words of limitation" and that



"the enumeration of the purposes Outlined in section 5 is a compendious means
of delegating full power of' making Emergency Regula­tions. The power to make
Emergency Regulations for the purposes indicated in section 5 is a power to
enact any kind of Regulation to deal with the exigencies of the emergency.
Section 5 confers on the President plenary powers of making Emergency
Regulations. rile gamut of the power extends to even superseding existing
law."



Mr. Weerakoon submitted that the need for, and the appropriateness of the
regulations had to be seen from the



**368**



"perspective of the emergency situation" and the question of public order and
security, and these were not matters for the President alone to judge.The
proclaimed reasons for the state of emergency must in fact exist and there
must, lie said, be a "rational and proximate" connection between the
Regulations and the reasons for the proclamation of a state of emergency. In
support of this argument, Mr. Weerakoon cited the follow­ing words of
Sharvananda, J. in _Yasapala's Case_ (supra) at pp. 159‑160:



"As stated earlier, the reasonableness of' a regulation will have to be judged
from the perspective of the emergency situation and the infor­mation which the
President was possessed of in regard to that. The relationship between the
impugned regulation and the purpose of the regulation must, of course, be
rational or proximate. If the regulation is one that is reasonably capable of
being a regulation for securing public order, that will be sufficient"



I do not think that Mr. Weerakoon's suggestion that the reasons for a
proclamation of a state of emergency and tile appropriateness of the
Regulations must be objectively decided is supported by the observations of
Sharvananda, J. which lie quoted. His Lordship had earlier, at p. 154‑156,
explained that the test is "a subjective one" and that the



"President's belief in the necessity or expediency of Emergency Regu­lations
is conclusive of its validity. His belief that the Emergency Reg­ulations will
achieve the object of counteracting the emergency is suffi­cient justification
for the Regulation... The test of the need of the Regulations is a subjective
one. The words are "as appear to be neces­sary or expedient" and not "as may
be necessary", which is objective. The President is made the sole judge of the
necessity of the Regula­tions... The President having deemed necessary or
expedient to make the said Regulations, it is not for this Court, in the
absence of evidence of bad faith, to review what the President has done, Nor
is it compe­tent for the Court to examine whether the Regulation was
reasonable in the circumstances or likely to achieve the object of defusing
the emergency. It is not the objective fact but the subjective opinion of the
President that it is necessary or expedient to pass a regulation that is a
condition of the regulation‑making power. In the absence of aver­ments of bad
faith or ulterior motive, the jurisdiction of the Court is



**369**



excluded. Quick decision and effective action must be the essence of those
powers and the exercise of them must be left to the subjective satisfaction of
the President charged with the duty of maintaining law and order. To make the
exercise of those powers justiciable and sub­ject to judicial scrutiny will
defeat the very purpose of those Regula­tions."



At p. 156, Sharvananda, J. does state that the Court may determine "the
connexion (sic.) between the power to exercise and the purposes described by
statute. " However, I believe his Lordship, following the observations of Lord
Radcliffe in _Attorney ‑General for Canada v. Hallet & Carey Ltd_. (47)
(supra) at p.450, was merely emphasizing the need for a nexus between the
Regulations and its general objectives so as to obviate the interpretation of
the words in section 5 (1) of the Public Security Ordinance empowering the
President to make such regulations "as appear to him to be necessary or
expe­dient" to mean that the President may do whatever he may feel inclined.
In that connection, as Sharvananda, J. observes at p.160, all that needs to be
established is that "the regulation is one that is reasonably capable of being
a regulation for sec­uring public order"



I have already said that there was a clear nexus between the Regulations and
their purpose. Mr. Weerakoon said that there should be a connection between
the Regulations and the reasons for the proclamation of the state of
emergency. Hav­ing regard to the affidavit of the Inspector‑General of Police,
I am equally satisfied that there was a recognizable and evident connection
between the proclaimed reasons for the state of emergency and the Emergency
(Prohibition of Importation of Instruments and Appliances for Gaming)
Regulations No. 1 of 1991 and the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulations No.
1 of 1991.



In every civilized society, public security and public order must be regulated
by some authority. As was said in _Hugler v. State of Kansas_ (48), following
_Munn v. Illinois_ (49):



### 370



"While power does not exist with the whole people to control rights that are
purely and exclusively private, government may require each citizen to so
conduct himself, and so use his own property, as not unnecessarily to injure
another. But by whom, or by what authority is it to be determined whether the
use of property will injuriously affect the public? Power to determine such
questions, so as to bind all, must exist somewhere; else society will be at
the mercy of a few, who, regarding only their own appetites or passions, may
be willing to imperil the peace and security of the many, provided only they
are permitted to do as they please. Under our system that power is lodged with
the legislative branch of the government. It belongs to that department to
exert what are known as the police powers of the state, and to determine,
primarily, what measures are appropriate or needful for the protection of the
public morals, the public health or the public safety."



Where a public emergency exists or is imminent, our legis­lature has, through
the Public Security Ordinance, conferred special powers on the President.
Section 2(1) of the Public Security Ordinance makes it clear that the person
who must decide that there is a state of emergency is the President. And
section 5 (1) gives the President the power to make such emer­gency
regulations "as appear to him to be necessary or expe­dient in the interests
of public security and the preservation of public order... " Subject to the
provisions of section 2(4) of the Public Security Ordinance, which states that
a Proclama­tion of a state of emergency shall expire after a period of
four­teen days unless the Proclamation is approved by Parliament, it is the
President alone who is empowered to decide whether there is an emergency and
the law gives him the amplest pos­sible discretion with regard to the
emergency regulations he may make to effectively deal with the situation. (Cf.
per _Shar­vananda, J. in Yasapala's_ _Case_ (supra) at pp. 155‑157).



In _Bhagat Singh v. Emperor_ (50) the Court had to decide on the validity of
ordinances promulgated by the Governor­-General in the exercise of his powers
under section 72 of the Government of India Act for the peace, order and good
government of British India. Viscount Dunedin in delivering the judgment of
the Privy Council said at pp. 111‑112:



**371**



"The petitioners ask this Board to find that a state of emergency did not
exist. That raises the question who is to be the judge of whether a state of
emergency exists. A state of emergency is something that does not permit of
any exact definition. It connotes a state of matters cal­ling for drastic
action which is to he judged as such by someone. It is more than obvious that
someone must be the Governor‑General and he alone. Any other view would render
utterly inept the whole provision. Emergency demands immediate action and that
action is pres­cribed to be taken by the Governor‑General. It is he alone who
can promulgate the ordinances ....It was next said that the ordinances did not
conduce to the peace and good government of British India. The same remark
applies. The Governor‑General is also the judge of that."



The decision as to whether there is a state of emergency and what regulations
may be considered necessary or expedient to deal with such a situation is a
matter for the President and not the Courts of law. Whether in proclaiming a
state of emer­gency or in making emergency regulations the President has acted
reasonably and in a rational, sensible or agreeable manner are not matters for
our consideration. It is not for me to decide whether a President's judgment
in proclaiming a state of emergency is sound or foolish or absurd or whether
the steps he has taken by way of emergency regulations are extravagant or
inappropriate.



In _Lipton Ltd. v. Ford_ (46), acting under the Defence of the Realm
Regulations, a quantity of raspberries had been requisitioned for the use of
the powers given for securing the public safety and defence of the realm. At
p. 654 Atkin, J said:



" ....it was further contended that taking possession of a crop of
rasp­berries could not be necessary for the public safety or defence of the
realm. I do not think that those arguments are well‑founded. I think that all
that I have to see is whether the regulation is one that is rea­sonably
capable of being a regulation for the public safety and defence of the realm.
If it is, I do not think the Court is entitled to question the discretion of
the Executive to whom Parliament has entrusted powers in such wide terms."



### 372



In _Attorney ‑General for Canada and Another v Hallet & Carey Ltd. _and
_Another_ (47), in the ostensible exercise of the powers conferred on the
Governor in Council by the National Emergency Transitional Powers Act 1945 of
Canada, by an Order in Council, all oats and barley in commercial positions in
Canada, with certain specified exceptions, were vested in the Canadian Wheat
Board. The Privy Council held that it was not competent for the courts to
canvass the considerations which had led the Governor in Council to deem it
necessary to effect the vesting, or to ascribe to the Order in Council a
pur­pose other than that which it professed to serve; the measures authorized
were such as the Governor in Council, not the courts, deemed necessary or
advisable. Lord Radcliffe, who delivered the judgment of the Privv Council,
said at p.444:

           

"The validity of the vesting provision of the Order in Council has been
attacked on several grounds. It has been said that its "real purpose was not
to carry out any of the purposes specified in the Act of 1945 but to
confiscate the profits that would otherwise have been made by a certain class
of owners of barley or to exact an impost from them. It has been said that the
order was not in fact necessary or related to any of the purposes of the Act
and was therefore not a valid exercise of the powers which the Act conferred.
It has been said that the order was invalid because it discriminated against
some out of the whole body of citizens or barley owners and that the authority
given by the Act did not extend to the making of such discrimination. All
these are views that found favour with one or more of the Court of Appeal for
Manit­oba, and they constitute a different class of objection from those which
are more properly related to the construction of the enabling Act itself, for
however expressed, they are in reality an attempt by the Court to take over
into its own hands the functions which have been entrusted by Parliament to
the Governor in Council. This is, in their Lordships view, an inadmissible
proceeding."



Later, at p.445, Lord Radcliffe quotes with approval the following words of
Chief Justice Duff in _Reference as to the validity of certain Chemical
Regulations_ (51) 



"I cannot agree that it is competent to any court to canvass the
con­siderations which have or may have led him to deem such regulations
necessary or advisable for the transcendent objects set forth..... The



**373**



words are too plain for dispute: the measures authorised are such as the
Governor‑General in Council (not the Courts) deems necessary or advisable."



In _Carltona Ltd. v. Commissioners of Works and Others_ (52) Lord Greene, MR
at p. 564 said:



"It has been decided as clearly as anything can he decided that, where a
regulation of this kind commits to an executive authority the deci­sion of
what is necessary or expedient and that authority makes the decision, it is
not competent to the courts to investigate the grounds or the reasonableness
of the decision in the absence of an allegation of bad faith. If it were not
so it would mean that the courts would be made responsible for carrying on the
executive government of this country on these important matters. Parliament
which authorizes this regulation, commits to the executive the discretion to
decide and with that discretion if bona fide exercised no court can interfere.
All that the Court can do is to see that the power which it is claimed to
exer­cise is one which falls within the four corners of the powers, given by
the legislature and to see that those powers are exercised in good faith.
Apart from that, the courts have no power at all to inquire into the
reasonableness, the policy, the sense or any other aspect of the
tran­saction."



The Petitioner questioned the bona fides of the President in making the
Regulations and he made on oblique attack on the validity of the Regulations
while dealing with the question of the alleged infringement of his rights
under Article 12 (2) of the Constitution. Although it is not incumbent upon a
Peti­tioner who complains of a violation of Article 12 of the Con­stitution to
assert and prove that, in making the law in ques­tion, the legislating
authority was actuated by a hostile or inimical intention against him or a
class to which, he belonged ( _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali_ ) (53) the
Petitioner, because he had other things in view, in paragraphs 14,15,16 and 17
of his petition, alleged that the Regulations had been made so as to affect
his business on account of his political opinions. Since he had been
discriminated against on account of his political views, there was, he said, a
violation of Article 12(2) of the Constitution which provides, among other
things, that no citizen shall be discriminated against on the ground of



**374**



political opinion. And if the discriminatory regulations had been motivated by
vindictive considerations, rather than the interests of the community, then,
in terms of the law as laid down in _Yasapala's Case_ _(supra)_ and _Carltona
Ltd. v. Com­missioner of Works & others (supra)_, requiring bona fides, the
Regulations should be regarded as invalid:



The Petitioner alleged that, although he had earlier been a supporter of the
United National Party, yet at the most recent Presidential Election, he had
not supported that Party's candi­date, namely, the incumbent President. (The
Regulations in question, it will be noticed, were made by the President). The
Petitioner also suggested that the Regulations affecting his busi­ness were
made because he had helped the Minister of State, the late Mr. Ranjan
Wijeratne, with information concerning the illegal activities of a man named
Joe Sim, who was there­fore deported. Sim, a citizen of Singapore, it was
alleged, "enjoyed a high level of patronage and support from the Government
and members and Ministers of the Government and persons in the administration
including the police". A number of newspaper reports were filed with his
Petition and read in Court. However, in my opinion, there was nothing at all
in them to show personal hostility to the Petitioner either on the part of the
President, the members of the Government or the administration, including the
police. Nor was there any indication in these news items even remotely
suggesting that the Regulations were designed to particularly affect the
Peti­tioner's business as an act of revenge or for any other reason , The
Petitioner states that action against Casinos were taken after the _Jackpot_
operation, to enable the Government to repel the charge of discrimination. A
Government is entitled to deal with problems according to its own time‑table.
If it did take action against some forms of gambling, other than those
con­ducted with _Jackpots_ , it is evidence of good faith on the part of the
Government rather than of arbitrary discrimination against the Petitioner and
other owners of _Jackpots_.



**375**



The Petitioner states in paragraph 9 (b) of his petition that the Regulations
were



"obnoxious to the 13th Amendment to the _Constitution of the Demo­cratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka_ in that the subject of betting and gambling
is exclusively allotted to the sphere of powers of Provincial Councils in the
transfer of political and administrative power under the Constitution."



During the course of his submissions on that matter, Mr. Weerakoon accepted
the suggestion of my Mother, Fernando, J. that section 3A of the Gaming
Ordinance (Cap. 59) con­cerned the prohibition of importation into Sri Lanka
of instruments or appliances that may be used for the playing of any game of
chance or of mixed chance and skill. It was _at least_ as much a Customs and
Import Control matter as it was a matter concerning gaming. Indeed, section 3A
(2) expressly states that the provisions of section 3A



"shall be read and construed as one with the Customs Ordinance, and, for the
purpose of the application of that Ordinance, any instrument or appliance the
importation of which is prohibited by Order made under sub‑section (1) shall
be deemed to be goods the importation of which is prohibited by enactment."



Therefore, it was not a matter exclusively reserved for the Provincial
Councils. His submission that the word "Minister" in section 3A of the Gaming
Ordinance, meant the Provincial Council Minister responsible for the subject
of gaming in view of the allocation of the subject of gaming to Provincial
Coun­cils in terms of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, could not be
sustained.



In paragraph 10 of his petition, the Petitioner states that ___



"the Proclamation of Emergency under which the said Regulations have been made
has not been approved by a Resolution of Parliament as required by section 2
(b) of the _Public Security Ordinance_. Peti­tioner annexes hereto marked C1
the first and last pages of the Hans­ard of 23 May 1991 which is the day
Parliament considered the Proc­lamation made on 14th May 1991. The annexure
shows that the resolution moved for the approval of the said Proclamation had
failed to get a 2/3 majority of' a House of 225 members."



### 376





As for the averment in paragraph 10 of the Petition, that the Regulations had
not been duly passed by Parliament, it was totally abandoned by Mr. Weerakoon.
In the absence of evidence to the contrary I must presume that what was
required to be done was properly done. _Omnia pracsulntlnter rite esse acta_.



The Petitioner complained in paragraph 12 of his Petition that by the seizure
and confiscation of the instruments and appliances used in his business, he
was unable to engage in his lawful occupation, trade, business or enterprise.
This, he said was in violation of Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.
Article 14(1)(g) provides that every citizen is entitled to the freedom to
engage by himself or in association with others in any law­ful occupation,
profession trade, business or enterprise.



Article 14(1)(g) is based on Article 19(1)(g) of the Indian Constitution which
provides that "All citizens shall have the right to practise any profession,
or to carry on any occupation, trade or business." Although that Article does
not expressly confine the occupation, trade or business" to _lawful_
activities, the Courts have consistently held that the Constitution only
protects the right to lawful occupations. Gambling, for instance, has been
held in India to be an unmitigated evil and that legislation to root out
gambling was in the public interest and valid. There could be no "trade" or
"business" in gam­bling which was entitled to the protection of Article
19(1)(g) of the Indian Constitution, which corresponds to Article 14(1)(g) of
our Constitution. (See _State of Bombay v. R. M. D. Cha­marbaugwala_ (39);
_Krishnachandra and Others v. State of Madhya Prades_ (54). Since gambling is
not absolutely prohi­bited in Sri Lanka, we may assume that those forms of
gam­bling that are permitted may constitute "trade" or "business". However,
transacting _Jackpot_ business, is not something which is entitled to the
protection of the Constitution because it is now declared to be unlawful.



**377**



Admittedly, it was not _always_ unlawful. Mr. Weerakoon addressed us at length
on the vicissitudes of _Jackpot_ machines in the context of the law and law
enforcement relating to gam­ing in Sri Lanka in an effort to sandpaper the
sensitive con­science of this Court with the fact that the Petitioner had
imported the confiscated machines, at an enormous cost, with the leave and
licence of the Controller of Imports and Exports, at a time when it was lawful
to operate such instruments or appliances. The Attorney‑General responded to
this by stating that the Regulations provided for the payment of compensa­tion
for confiscated instruments and appliances in the circum­stances specified
therein.



Section 3A (1) of the Gaming Ordinance provides that __



"The Minister may, by Order published in the Gazette, prohibit the importation
into Sri Lanka of any instrument or appliance that may be used for the playing
of any game of chance or of mixed chance and skill."



Section 3B prohibits the possession or manufacture of any instrument or
appliance the importation of which is prohibited by Order made under
subsection (1) of section 3A. A person who contravenes that provision is
declared to be guilty of an offence punishable with a fire or imprisonment or
both fine and imprisonment.



Whether an instrument or appliance falls within the des­cription of a
prohibited instrument or appliance is to be con­clusively determined by a
certificate under the hand of the Government Factory Engineer. (Section 3C).



Section 22 (3) of the Gaming Ordinance provides that "unlawful gaming"
includes



"the act of playing, in any place whatsoever whether for a stake or not, a
game of chance or of mixed chance and skill with any instru­ment or appliance
the importation of which is prohibited by Order made under subsection (1) of
section 3A, whether or not such instru­ment or appliance is one that has been
actually imported into Sri Lanka and whether or not it is one the importation
of which into Sri Lanka has been before the coming into force of that Order."



### 378





            On July 12th, 1957, the Minister made an Order under sec­tion 3A, published in the Gazette of July 19, 1957, prohibiting the importation of certain instruments and appliances. These expressly included _Jackpots_. On 5th December 1961, the Min­ister made an Order under section 3A rescinding the Order of 1957 and prohibiting the importation of the following instru­ments or appliances:



"(a) Any instrument or appliance which when operated in any manner whatsoever
after any person inserts therein a coin or any such token or other device as
may be provided by the person in charge of that instrument or appliance upon
the payment or delivery to him of any money or other thing of value by the
first mentioned person, emits or does not emit any money or other thing of
value to which, by express or implied agreement between the two aforesaid
persons, the first men­tioned person becomes entitled to.



(b) Any instrument or appliance. which when operated in any manner whatsoever,
after any person pays or delivers any money or other thing of value to the
person in‑charge of the instrument or appliance produces a result which by
express or implied agreement between the two aforesaid persons, entitles or
does not entitle the first mentioned persons to receive any money or other
thing of value".



On 5th March 1987, the Minister, by Order made under section 3A and published
in the Gazette Extraordinary dated April 3, 1987, amended the 1961 Order by
stating that nothing in the 1961 Order "shall apply to, and in relation to,
the importation into Sri Lanka of Jackpots."



On 22nd September 1987, the Minister made Order under section 3A, published in
the Gazette Extraordinary of December 8th,1987, rescinding the 1961 Order.



On 31 May, 1991, the President made the Emergency (Prohibition of Instruments
and Appliances for Gaming) Regulations No. I of 1991 under section 5 of the
Public Security Ordinance. These Regulations were published in the Gazette
Extraordinary of May 31, 1991. Regulation 2 provided that



"The importation into Sri Lanka of any such instruments or applian­ces for the
playing of any game of chance or the playing of any game



**379**



of mixed chance and skill as is specified in the schedule hereto shall be
deemed, for all purposes and with effect from the date on which this
regulation comes into force, to have been prohibited by an Order made under
subsection (1) of section 3A of the Gaming Ordinance (Chapter 46) and approved
by Parliament under subsection (3) of section 3 of that Ordinance."



The Schedule described the prohibited instruments and appliances in exactly
the same terms used in the 1961 Order.



On June 6th, 1991, the President, acting under section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance, made the Emergency (Games of Chance) Regulations 1 of
1991. These Regulations were pub­lished in the Gazette Extraordinary of June
6, 1991. These Regulations, inter alia, made the playing of a game for stake
an offence and exempted State and public corporation lotteries from the
definition of "playing of a game for stake."



It would appear that, except during the period March 5th, 1987, 31st May,
1991, _Jackpot_ machines had been prohibited from importation and that their
use at other times was unlaw­ful in terms of the Gaming Ordinance. In the
circumstances, the Petitioner cannot, in my opinion, properly claim, as he
does in paragraph 2 of his Petition, that he has for twenty three years been
engaged in lawful gaming if _Jackpots_ consti­tuted his only business. Nor can
he complain that he has been prevented from carrying on a "lawful" occupation,
trade, busi­ness or enterprise since May 31, 1991. There was a short period
during which he might have been justified in operating _Jackpots_. and
claiming the protection of Article 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution. But there
was no assurance that his good fortune would continue indefinitely. No such
assurance could ever be given. In _Mugler v. State of Kansas_ (48), the
Supreme Court had to deal with two cases. At a certain time, it was lawful to
make liquors in the State of Kansas. During that time, the defendant, who had
been engaged in brewing, had made extensive improvements peculiarly adapted to
such busi­ness. The State of Kansas then prohibited and made it an offence to
manufacture and sell intoxicating liquor within that



**380**



state except for medical, scientific and mechanical purposes. It was held that
the legislation did not deprive him of any right, privilege or immunity as a
citizen of the United States or deprive him of life, liberty or property
without due process within the meaning of the 14th Amendment to the American
Constitution. Mr. Justice Harlan, delivering the opinion of the Supreme Court,
said at p. 301, as follows:



"It is true, when the defendants in these cases purchased or erected their
breweries, the laws of the State did not forbid the manufacture of
intoxicating liquors. But the State did not thereby give any assurance, or
come under any obligation, that its legislation upon that subject would remain
unchanged, Indeed, as was said in _Stone v. Mississippi_ , (56), the
supervision of public health and the public morals is a government power,
"continuing in its nature", and to be dealt with as the special exigencies of
the moment may require", and that, "for this purpose, the largest legislative
discretion is allowed, and the discretion cannot be parted with any more than
the power itself." So in _Beer Co. v. Massachusetts_ , (57) "If the public
safety or the public morals require the discontinuance of any manufacture or
traffic, the hand of the legislature cannot be stayed from providing for its
discontinuance by any incidental inconvenience which individuals or
corporations may suffer."



Operating as he was, in a sort of twilight area of activity, the Petitioner
might have known, and in any case, ought to have known, having regard to the
varying status of _Jackpots_ that legislative policy might change once again.
He took a risk. A calculated risk, perhaps, knowing very well that the
Government might change its mind as it had done before. The Government did
change its mind. It was entitled to do so. And like many a _Jackpot_ player, I
suppose, the Petitioner ventured and lost. In this case, the prohibition of
the _Jackpot_ business was not a matter of mere whim or fancy. It was not a
matter of caprice. There were, as it clearly appears from the affidavit of the
Inspector‑General of Police, sufficient reasons for the making of the
Regulations in question.



And now that _Jackpots_ are illegal, I hold that the Peti­tioner cannot invoke
the protection of Article 14(l)(g). He has



**381**



no fundamental right to conduct unlawful gaming for the same reasons that no
keeper of a brothel ( _Malekotla v. Mohd. Mushtag_ (57) or a dealer in
smuggled goods ( _Boota Singh v. State_ (58) or a dealer in adulterated
foodstuffs ( _U.P. v. Kartar Singh_ (59) can claim a fundamental right to do
his business. Crime may generate income, and I am told that some forms of
crime are extraordinarily lucrative. However, it does not, ther­eby become an
occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise which the law must
recognize and protect.



Moreover, a person who comes before this Court for just and equitable relief
under Article 126 (4) of the Constitution must in his act of supplication show
the Court clean hands into which relief may be given. The Supreme Court as
Chief Justice Sharvananda said in _C. W. Mackie v. Hugh Molagoda_ ,
_Commissioner ‑General of Inland Revenue and Others_ (40) "cannot lend its
sanction or authority to any illegal act. Illegality and equity are not on
speaking terms" For the reasons stated, if I might borrow some words from Mr.
Justice _Nihill in Rewata Thero v. Horatala_ (60) , "He who seeks equity
should come with clean hands'". In that case, the hands of the defendant were
described by Justice Nihill as being "very dirty indeed."



I have carefully considered each and every word the Petitioner has said in his
petition; and , with equal care, every submission of his counsel, from this
angle and that. More than that, I cannot do. Yet, for the reasons stated in my
Judgment, I make Order dismissing the Petitioner's application. I make no
Order with regard to costs.



**Bandaranayake, J. __** I agree.



**Fernando. J, __** I agree.



_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/21.html_  

