##  Nandasiri v. Desilva, G.M.S., Chairman, Ambalangoda, U.C., & Another - SLR
- 102, Vol 1 of 1989 [1988] LKSC 21; (1989) 1 Sri LR 102 (2 December 1988)

**

102

NANDASIRI  
v.  
G. M. S de SILVA  
CHAIRMAN, U. C. AMBALANGODA & ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT  
SENEVIRATNE J. FERNANDO J & AMERASINGHE J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 161 OF 1987.  
OCTOBER 17, 1987. _  
  
Fundamental Rights _\- _Infringement of Fundamental Rights under Article 12
(1), 12 (2) and 14 (f) (g) of the Constitution_ \- _Disconnection of
electricity supply.

_

The petitioner's supply of electricity used by him to run a chillie grinding
mill was disconnected by the 1st respondent Chairman of the Urban Council of
Ambalangoda on the ground that the running of such a mill caused pollution,
noise, nuisance and was a health hazard. No licence was granted to run the
mill.

**

Held

**

  1. The fact that the electricity is being used to produce an improper result is not relevant. The disconnection was unlawful but to attract relief under Article 12 (1) it must also be established that those in like circumstances are being unequally treated. It was not established that the other business referred to by the petitioner like manure factory, printing press, casting types, electric tape factory and cinnamon processing factory were in fact similar. No violation of Article 12 (2) has been established as 1st respondent's conduct has not been proved to have been motivated by political animosity.  


  2. Licensing requirements in regard to offensive or dangerous trades or which are likely to create a nuisance are clearly justifiable under Article 1 5 (7) in the interests of public health, securing the rights of others, and the just requirements of the general welfare of society. In the absence of a licence, the petitioner's occupation or business was not " lawful" and his complaint is not within the scope of Article 14(1) (g).  


  3. In making an application under Article 126 the petitioner has misconceived his remedy.

**

Cases referred to :-

**_

  1. Negombo M.C._ v. _Fernando -_ 63 NLR 512
_

  2. M.C. Badulla_ v. _Ratnayake -_ (1978-79] 2 SRI LR 141.
_

  3. David_ v. _Abdul Cader_ 77 N LR 18.
_

  4. Corea_ v. _U.C. Kotte_ \- 62 NLR 253.

**103**

**

Application** complaining of infringement of Fundamental Rights.

_

C.V. Vivekanandan_ with _S. Perimpanayagam, K. Packialingam_ and _Miss K.

Rajanathan _for Petitioner.

_

D.S. Wijesinghe_ with _Miss S. Nandadasa_ for the 1st Respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

December 2, 1988 **  
FERNANDO, J.

**

This application is in respect of the alleged infringement of the Petitioner's
fundamental rights, under Articles 12(1), 1 2 (2) and 14 (1) (g), by the 1st
Respondent, the Chairman of the Urban Council of Ambalangoda, who directed the
disconnection of the supply of electricity to premises No. 370, Main Street,
Ambalangoda, where the Petitioner was carrying on the business of a grinding
mill. The Petitioner's case is that (a) others carrying on like businesses
were not similarly treated, (b) he was discriminated against on account of
political opinion, and (c) his right to engage in a lawful business was
violated.

In October 1 986, the Petitioner took these premises on lease, and applied to
the Council for a 3-phase supply of electricity for business purposes,
specified as a grinding mill.-Some residents petitioned against the business
of grinding chillies being carried on in these premises ; this was referred
for inquiry to certain officials, who reported that the Petitioner had not
obtained a licence to carry on this business in these premises, that the area
was a mixed residential area, that approval should not be granted for such
business, and that before a supply of electricity was given, these matters
should be brought to the notice of the Electrical Superintendent. The
Petitioner obtained a letter of consent from several residents, but not from
his immediate neighbours on either side. By letter dated 29.11.86, the 1st
Respondent informed the Petitioner of the refusal of permission for the
proposed grinding mill.

**104**

The Petitioner pursued his efforts to obtain permission for the grinding mill.
In March 1987, the Urban Development Authority (U.D.A.) requested the 1st
Respondent to consider the grant of permission subject to such conditions as
to the hours of business, and the prevention of pollution and noise, as may be
recommended by the Central Environmental Authority (C.E.A.). Having inspected
the proposed grinding mill, that Authority recommended conditions as to an
exhaust ventilation system, a chimney taller than the neighbouring buildings,
the maximum noise level, and working hours. The 1 st Respondent nevertheless
did not permit the grinding of chillies. By letter dated 9.4.87, the
Petitioner complained to the 11D.A. that, while the Council was taking steps
to give the electricity supply, permission for the grinding of chillies had
been refused ; he requested the U.D.A. to advise the Council to grant such
permission. On or about 1 2.4.87 the electricity supply was given, and the
Petitioner was permitted to carry on, and did commence, the business of a
grinding mill the 1st Respondent states that the grinding of chillies was
expressly excluded. No formal licence was issued. Up to this time, the
relationship between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent was cordial.

While these facts are undisputed, the contents of a document dated 9.4.87 are
hotly disputed. The Petitioner says that he handed to the 1st Respondent some
blank papers, signed by him, to be used for the purpose of obtaining the
licence. The 1st Respondent denies this, asserting that this document was
tendered by the Petitioner in connection with the electricity supply, which
had not yet been given on 9.4.87 this contains conditions, specified by the
Petitioner, which are substantially the same as those specified by the C.E.A.
shortly before, as well as a condition excluding the grinding of chillies. The
signature being admitted, it was for 'the Petitioner to prove that the
document was signed in blank (and perhaps also that the 1st Respondent had no
implied authority to insert whatever now appears therein). His letter dated
9.4.87 to the U.D.A. and the fact that he was given the electricity supply and
permission to run the grinding mill within a few days makes it probable that
the contents of this document were not inserted after it was signed, I think
it more likely that, six months having already elapsed, he

**105**

reluctantly agreed to a condition excluding the grinding of chillies but
nevertheless persisted in his efforts to get the U.D.A. to advise the Council
to grant such permission.

Later the relationship deteriorated. The 1st Respondent had been elected to
the Urban Council as a candidate of the United National Party, of which the
Petitioner was an active supporter. Early in June 1 987, the 1st Respondent
tendered his nomination for the Urban Council elections, as a nominee of an
Independent Group, and was thereupon expelled from the U.N.P. Thereafter, says
the Petitioner, steps were taken to cripple his business. During this period,
the Petitioner was grinding chillies at his grinding mill permission having
been refused on 9.4:87, there is nothing to suggest that any such permission
was thereafter given, despite a request by the U.D.A. by letter dated 20.4.87
to consider granting such permission. Complaints were made by Major Ranjit
Vithana, the Petitioner's immediate neighbour in regard to pollution, noise
and injury to health. Acting on these complaints, the 1st Respondent warned
the Petitioner not to grind chillies, and the Police instituted proceedings
(still pending) in the Magistrate's Court, where too he was similarly warned.
The C.E.A. by letter dated 24.9.87 informed the U.D.A. that upon an inspection
of the premises it was found that chillies were being ground, causing air and
noise pollution, as well as being a nuisance 1o residents in the vicinity. On
14.10.87, the 1st Respondent directed the disconnection of the Petitioner's
electricity supply, although, he avers, long before that date he had ceased to
grind chillies.

We are called upon to decide whether the disconnection of the Petitioner's
electricity supply was unlawful, and in violation of Articles 12 (1), 12 (2)
and 14 (1) (g).

It was conceded that the 1st Respondent could exercise the rights and powers
of the Urban Council in regard to the grant and disconnection of a supply of
electricity. It was submitted for the Petitioner that there was no statutory
provision or contractual right of disconnection in the circumstances of this
case. The application for supply was for business purposes, and there was no
right to exclude a particular business any condition

**106**

purporting to exclude the grinding of chillies, was therefore ultra vires ;
and hence disconnection on that ground was unlawful. He relied on _Negombo
M.C. v. Fernando_ (1), where H.N.G. Fernando, J., held that there cannot be
imposed on a contract for the supply of electricity terms and conditions which
are not authorised expressly, by the Electricity Act or the regulations made
thereunder. Counsel for the 1st Respondent did not seek to contend that the
impugned condition was " authorised ". This decision was followed in
_M.C.Badullav. Ratnayake (2)_ there the business of milling paddy was an "
offensive or dangerous trade " which could be carried on with a licence from
the Council ; however, under a zoning scheme this business was totally
prohibited in buildings in residential areas. The plaintiff applied for a
supply of electricity for such a business in a residential area
notwithstanding the zoning scheme the Council decided to give the supply,
accepted payment and commenced work. Later the Council refused to give-the
supply, on the basis that it was not legally able to grant a licence for that
business and that no useful purpose would be served by supplying electricity.
Vythialingam, J., held that the purpose for which the supply was required was
irrelevant if the plaintiff carried on a prohibited business, he would be
liable to prosecution and punishment, and " this has nothing to do with the
Electricity Act ". However, the plaintiff at the relevant time knew nothing
about the zoning scheme and the legal prohibitions, and his evidence, that if
such business was not possible, he would have used the premises for some other
permissible business, was accepted. In those circumstances, it was held that
the refusal to give the 'supply of electricity was wrongful, and the plaintiff
was held entitled to damages.

If a supply of electricity is given for a purpose which becomes illegal,
because of statutory provisions or the failure to obtain a necessary licence,
it may well be contended that the contractual obligation is discharged by
supervening illegality, despite the absence of statutory or contractual
conditions entitling the supplier to _disconnect_ the supply. This question
was not expressly decided in the cases cited, nor did Counsel for the 1st
Respondent submit that" principle was applicable to the present case, and I
therefore do not express any opinion thereon for it

**107**

may also invoke other issues, e.g. whether the 1st Respondent's failure to
grant a licence was wrongful. I have therefore to proceed on the assumption
that the disconnection was unlawful, as the condition relied on was not "
authorised ", however laudable the 1st Respondent's motives (of preventing
pollution and nuisance) might have been.

Counsel for the 1st Respondent fell back on a condition contained in terms and
conditions said to have been annexed to the original application, authorising
the disconnection of the supply of any consumer who uses or applies electrical
energy in an improper manner so as to obstruct any other consumer or the
efficient supply of electricity; he submitted that subjecting _residents_ in
the vicinity to environmental pollution and causing a nuisance amounted to
such obstruction, This condition relates to obstruction to other " _consumers_
".and for that reason alone a violation has not been established. More
important, it refers to the improper manner in which electrical energy, _qua_
energy, is used, and not to an improper result produced by a proper use of
electricity. Thus electricity may be used properly (complying with technical
requirements regarding voltage, amperage, quality of wiring, earthing, etc.)
in a printing press ; if the press is used at some point of time to print
defamatory or seditious matter, it is the press, and not electricity, that is
then being used in an improper manner. This submission also fails, and it is
unnecessary to consider the submission in reply, that no such document was
ever signed by the. Petitioner and that a copy thereof was not even served on
him in these proceedings.

The Petitioner's allegation that others were carrying on businesses of a
similar nature at Main Street was denied the instances cited were " manure
factory, printing press, casting types, electric tape factory and cinnamon
processing factory ", and the 1st Respondent's rejoinder was that no adverse
reports or complaints had been received in respect of these. Article 1 2
applies where those in like circumstances are unequally treated the material
before us is totally inadequate to establish that the other businesses were in
fact similar. We do not know whether they were causing comparable pollution
and nuisance, whether adequate precautions were taken, whether they were duly

**108**

licensed, and whether they had been carried on before new environmental
standards came to be recognised. If the disconnection is unlawful it would
entitle the Petitioner to a legal remedy, but it would not amount to a
violation of Article 1 2(1) unless both factors - like circumstances, and
unequal' treatment :- are established, in regard to the allegation that the
1st Respondent was motivated by political animosity, there is no doubt that
the 1st Respondent's conduct from October 1986 was consistent : he was
motivated by other factors, relating to environmental pollution and nuisance.
The delay in the supply of electricity and the refusal of a licence, up to
April 1987, were therefore not attributable to political bias, for differences
of political opinion occurred only in June 1987 and there was no significant
change of attitude by the 1st Respondent thereafter. No violation of Article 1
2 (2) has been established.

Counsel also submitted that the Petitioner's right to engage in a lawful
occupation or business has been infringed. This right is not absolute, but is
subject to restrictions in terms of Articles 1 5 (5) and 1 5 (7). It is common
ground that a licence was required for the business in question, and had not
been obtained there was no suggestion that the requirement of a licence was
unconstitutional. Licensing requirements in regard to offensive or dangerous
trades, or which are likely to create a nuisance, are clearly justifiable
under Article 1 5 (7) in the interests of public health, securing the rights
of others, and the just requirements of the general welfare of society. In the
absence of a licence, the Petitioner's occupation or business was not " lawful
", and thus not within the scope of Article 14(1) (g). The Petitioner's right
to carry on that business elsewhere was not proved to have been affected, but
I express no opinion on the question whether for that reason too a violation
of the Article 14(1) (g) has not been established.

The decisions cited (1), (2) indicate that the nature of the remedies
available for the wrongful disconnection of an electricity supply are clear
(see also _David v. Abdul Cader_ (3) and

**109**

_Corea v. U.C. Kotte (A)._ In making this application under Article 126 the
Petitioner has misconceived his remedy. In the circumstances, I dismiss the
Petitioner's application with costs fixed in a sum of Rs. 750,

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.,** \- I agree.

**

AMERASINGHE, J.,** \- I agree.

_

Application dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/21.html_  

