##  Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku Inspector of Police and Others - SLR -
119, Vol 2 of 1987 [1987] LKSC 21; (1987) 2 Sri LR 119 (3 July 1987)

**

119

AMAL SUDATH SILVA** **  
v.** **  
KODITUWAKKU INSPECTOR OF POLICE AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
SHARVANANDA, C.J. ATUKORALE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No. 186/86.  
MAY 5, 1987.

_

Fundamental Rights-. Torture and/or cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment-
Article 7P of the Constitution-Police an organ of the State-Liability pf State
to pay compensation._

The petitioner has established that he has been subjected to torture and cruel
treatment by the Police whoever they be despite doubts about the exact
identification of the particular Police Officers, when he was under arrest.
The police force is an organ of the State. The State is liable to pay
compensation to the victim.

Per Atukorale, J. The report of the M.O. is in my view, valueless and unworthy
of acceptance. On his own showing it is evident that he has not carried out an
independent examination of the petitioner to ascertain whether he had any
injuries. It seems to me to be preposterous for any medical, officer before
whom a suspect is produced for a medical examination in the custody of a
police officer to expect him to tell the officer in the very presence of that
police officer that he bears injuries caused to him as a result of a police
assault. I therefore reject the report of the M.O. as being worthless and,
unacceptable. The circumstances of this case disclose a gross lack of
responsibility and 6 dereliction of duty on the part of the M.O. Bandaragama."

**120**

Per Atukorale, J. "The facts of this case have revealed disturbing features
regarding third degree methods adopted by certain police officers on suspects
held in police custody. Such methods can only be described as barbaric, savage
and inhuman."

**

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution for violation of
fundamental rights.

_

H. L. de Silva P.C. with Anton Fernando, C. J. Fernando and Miss L. N. A. de
Silva_ for the petitioner.  

_

D. S. Wijesinghe with Miss D. Dharmadasa_ for the 1st to 4th respondents. __  

_

D. P. Kumarasinghe S. S. C_. for the 5th and 6th respondents.

_

Cur. adv.. vult._

July 3, 1987.  
**ATUKORALE, J.**

This is an application under Article 126 of the Constitution alleging
infringements of certain fundamental rights of the petitioner by the 1st to
the 4th respondents (hereinafter referred to as the 4 respondents) who were at
all times material police officers attached to the Panadura police station.
The petitioner pleads that he was arrested by the police on 9.10:1986 on
suspicion of having committed theft of side mirrors from several motor
vehicles. He was thereafter, taken to the Panadura police station and kept in
custody for 5 nights without being produced before a Magistrate. During this
period of 5 days he states he was severely beaten up by the 4 respondents with
batons and was also subjected to physical torture by them by being hung to a
beam at the police station by his hands tied to a rope and by his penis being
crushed as a result of it being put into a drawer and closed causing him
unbearable pain and suffering. He further states that when he asked for water
he was given water mixed with chilli powder which he was forced to drink. In
his petition he thus alleges infringements of the fundamental rights
guaranteed by Articles 11, 12(1) and 13 of the Constitution. At the hearing
before us, however, learned President's Counsel appearing for hi was content
with confining his case to the alleged violation of the right, guaranteed-by
Article 11 only. He Contended that there was sufficient material to establish
that the petitioner had been subjected to torture and/or to cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment at the hands of the 4 respondents: It was not disputed
that such action, if proved constituted executive or administrative action and
that the State would be liable to compensate the petitioner."

**121**

The 4 respondents deny that the petitioner was arrested: on 9. 10. 1986. Their
position is that he was arrested at or about 6.45 p.m. on 13.10.1986 near the
Panadura bus stand by a police party comprising the 1st and the 4th
respondents and two other police offices; that when the police party arrived
at the bus stand the petitioner dropped his bicycle and took to his heels but
was chased and arrested that whilst being questioned he again attempted to
escape when a certain amount of force as was reasonably necessary under the
circumstances was used on him to bring him under control, and that after
conducting investigations the police party returned to the police station at
11.35 p.m. when the petitioner was handed over to the reserve officer who put
him in the lock-up. The 4 respondents deny that they assaulted the petitioner
or that they subjected him to torture or such treatment as alleged by him.

I do not think it is necessary for me to embark on a detailed analysis of the
conflicting averments with regard to the date of the petitioner's arrest since
learned President's Counsel has frankly conceded that apart from the
petitioner's ipse dixit there is nothing else to support the allegation that
the petitioner's arrest took place on the 9th as urged by him and not on the
13th as urged by learned counsel for the 4 respondents. It is, however,
necessary that I should on this aspect of the matter point out that the notes
of inquiry (1R5) produced by the 1st respondent appear to support the position
of the 4 respondents that the arrest took place on the 13th as maintained by
them. Be that as it may, in view of the oral submissions made to us at the
hearing the crucial issue that arises for, our determination is the
petitioner's allegation that he was subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment by the 4 respondents. For a proper appreciation of the
relevant matters pertaining to this issue, it will be helpful if I set out
certain events in their chronological sequence which have not been
controverted before us. The day after his arrest, namely on the 14th (the time
is not clear), the petitioner was taken by Police Constable Senaratne firstly
to the Panadura hospital to be produced before the D.M.0. for a medical
examination and since the D.M.O. was not available thereafter to the M.O. of
the Bandaragama hospital After the M.0. examined him, he was taken by P. C.
Senaratne before the acting Magistrate, Panadura, on the same day who made
order remanding the petitioner till the 27th, whereupon P.C. Senaratne took
him to the Panadura remand prison and entrusted him to the prison authorities
also on the same day Exhibit 1R9, a certified copy of the

**122**

Magistrate's Court case, confirms that the petitioner was produced by P. C
Senaratne before the acting Magistrate on the 14th and that he was remanded to
Fiscal's custody till the 27th. It further establishes that on the following
day (15th) the petitioner's attorney moved court to call for a report from a
government doctor regarding the injuries on the petitioner. The 1st respondent
then informed court that the petitioner had already been produced before the
M.O.; Bandaragarna. The Magistrate thereupon made order that the petitioner be
produced before him on the following day (16th). It seems tome very probable
that this order was made because the Magistrate himself wanted to see the
petitioner before ordering a medical examination. On the 16th the petitioner
was produced in court in fiscal custody. His attorney then informed court that
the petitioner had, inter alia, been hung from a beam at the police station
and beaten up and that his penis had been inserted into a drawer and closed.
He also drew the attention of Court to the-fact that the court itself observed
the manner in which the petitioner walked up when the case was called. He also
referred to the report of the M.O., Bandaragama, according to which the
petitioner had been examined at 8 p.m. on the 14th, and pointed out that it
only specified that the petitioner had no external injuries as against the
'Remarks Column' and nothing else. He requested court for an order that the
petitioner be produced forthwith before the J.M.O., Colombo, and a report be
called from him. The Magistrate made order accordingly and directed that the
petitioner be again produced in court on the 20th. Op the 20th the petitioner
was not produced in court as he was stated to be undergoing medical treatment
at the Prison hospital in Colombo. Nor had the petitioner. been produced for
examination by the J.M.O., Colombo. The Magistrate then directed that the case
be called on the 22nd and that the petitioner be produced before him on that
day. The petitioner again was not produced in court on that day. Observing
that no steps had been taken by the Superintendent of Prisons, Welikada to
produce the-petitioner before the. J.M.O. on the ground that he was being
treated at the remand hospital, the Magistrate directed the Superintendent of
Prisons to comply with his order forthwith and to report to court on the 29th.
He also called for a medical report from the prison doctor who had treated the
petitioner The petitioner was also ordered to be produced in court on the
29th.

On the 29th the petitioner was produced in, court. All 3 medical reports,
namely those of the Bandaragama M.O., the prison doctor

**123**

and the A. J. K O., Colombo, were also before court. The report of the
Bandaragama M.O. shows that the petitioner was examined by him at 8 p.m. on
the 14th. All the cages therein are unanswered and are left blank. As against
the Remarks Column he states 'No external injuries. The report of the prison
doctor discloses that the petitioner was admitted to the prison hospital on
the 17th and that on an examination of him the same evening he was found to be
suffering from pyelitis and that he had two abrasions one just above the right
wrist joint and the other, at the back of the left wrist joint. The report of
the A.J.M.O. reveals that the petitioner was examined by him on the 24th and
that he had three scars one on the left wrist, one on the right wrist and the
other on the lower right forearm and that he was suffering from traumatic
urethritis due to erauma on the penis causing pain and difficulty in passing
urine. The A.J. N.O. further states that the petitioner gave, a history of
having been assaulted by the 4 respondents with clubs after being hung and of
his penis being crushed by putting it into a drawer and locking it on the
13th. He also expresses the opinion that the scars are consistent with marks
caused by ligatures used for hanging him and that the injuries on him are
compatible with the history given by him. On the 29th the petitioner's
attorney, making submissions to the Magistrate in the light of the A. J. M. O
's report requested him to issue a notice on the M.O., Bandaragama, to
explain, why he had stated in his report that there were no external injuries
on the petitioner. A notice was issued on him accordingly. He appeared in
court on 26.11.1986 in response thereto and stated in court that as the
petitioner, did not complain of any pain or injuries on being asked by him he
reported that the petitioner had no external injuries.

Placing much reliance on the report of the M.0. Bandaragama, and stressing the
fact that the petitioner had made no complaint of torture or assault to the
acting Magistrate or other person in authority prior to the 15th, learned
counsel for the 4 respondents and learned Senior State Counsel for the 5th and
6th respondents contended that the allegations levelled by the petitioner were
false and, untenable. I am, however, unable to agree with this submission. One
significant feature which stands out as being, incontrovertible in this case
is the presence of injuries on the petitioner as evidenced by the reports of
the prison doctor and of the A J.M.O. Thus even, on the assumption that the
petitioner bore no injuries at the time of his examination by the M.O.,
Bandaragama, and his production before the acting Magistrate, yet it

**124**

seems manifest to me that from the moment of his arrest by the police party on
the 13th up to the time he was examined by the A.J.M.O., Colombo, on the, 24th
in the custody of the fiscal, the petitioner remained during this entire
period in the custody of either the police or the fiscal. Assuming, therefore
that the injuries were not inflicted whilst the petitioner was in police
custody, then it would necessarily follow that they were inflicted when he was
in fiscal custody. In the absence of any material to the contrary, then they
only reasonable inference is that -they were inflicted by the fiscal officers
in which event too the State would be liable to compensate the petitioner in
terms of Article 126 of the Constitution as such action on their part would
constitute executive or administrative action.

However a close-and careful scrutiny of the salient facts and circumstances of
this case would seem to indicate that the injuries on the' petitioner were
inflicted on him at a time when he was held in police custody. They are not
self-inflicted injuries. Nor is it the position of the 4 respondents that they
were injuries caused at any time prior to or during the course of his arrest.
The police party arrested him on the 13th. He remained in their custody till
they returned to the station at about 11.45 p.m. that night. He was then
handed over to the reserve officer who took over his custody. He remained in
the charge of the reserve officer until Police Constable Senaratne took him
first to the Panadura D.M.O.'s office, next to the Bandaragama M.O.'s office
and finally before the acting Magistrate and to the remand prison, Panadura,
all of which took place on the 14th. According to 1R5 (notes of inquiry)
Police Constable Senaratne left the station with the petitioner for this
purpose at 6 p. m. and returned at 8.20 p. m. On the very next date (15th) the
petitioner's attorney, alleging that there were injuries on the petitioner,
moved court to have him examined by a government doctor, while on the
following day (16th) the attorney specifically stated to court who caused them
and how they were caused and also drew the attention of court to the manner in
which the petitioner -walked up when the case was called in court. As
submitted by learned President's Counsel, it is quite probable that the court
having directed on the" 15th that the petitioner be produced before it on the
16th, and having seen him, was satisfied that the petitioner exhibited some
form of discomfort or pain which needed further investigation. These
representations made by the petitioner's -attorney in court at the very first
opportunity that presented itself lo him are, of the utmost significance and
have to be given due weightage. True, no doubt, the petitioner himself made no
such

**125**

complaint either to the Bandaragama M.0 or to the acting Magistrate. But his
failure to-do so must be viewed and judged against the backdrop of his being,
at that time, held in police custody with no access to any form of legal
representation. The report of the M.O., Bandaragama is, in my view, valueless
and unworthy of acceptance, On his own showing it is evident that he has not
carried out an independent examination of the petitioner to ascertain whether
he had any injuries. It seems to me to be preposterous for any medical officer
before whom a suspect is produced for a medical examination in the custody of
a police officer to expect him to tell the officer in the very presence of
that police officer that he bears injuries caused to him as a result of a
police assault. This seems particularly so when the suspect is produced at the
instance of the police themselves acid not upon an order of court. I therefore
reject the report of the M.O. as being worthless and unacceptable. The
circumstances of this case disclose a gross lack of responsibility and a
dereliction of duty on the part of the M.O., Bandaragama. I do not entertain
the slightest doubt that the A.J.M.O., Colombo, sets out in his report the
true and precise nature of the injuries found by him on the petitioner at the
time he examined him. Although certain insinuations have been made against the
A.J.M.O. in the written submissions filed on behalf of the 4 respondents, at
the hearing before us-learned counsel, quite properly, made no endeavour to
substantiate them or to challenge the description of the injuries or the
opinion, expressed by the A.J.M.O. in his report. His opinion materially
supports the petitioner's position that the injuries on him were inflicted at
a time when he was in police custody. I may add that the injuries found by the
prison doctor, on the petitioner when he examined him on the. 17th lends
support to the findings of the A.J.M.O. In the circumstances of this case the
conclusion is irresistible that the injuries found on the petitioner by the
A.J.M.O. have been inflicted on him at a time when he was being held in police
custody and this appears to be the real reason for not carrying out, until the
24th, the order of the Magistrate made on the 16th to produce the petitioner
forthwith before the A.J.M.O for a medical examination. I hold that the
petitioner has been subjected-to torturous cruel and inhuman treatment as
alleged by him by one or more police officers of the Panadura police station
whilst being held in police custody at the police station. The petitioner has
thus established an infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by
Article 11 of the Constitution by virtue of executive or administrative action
'and is entitled to relief under Article 126(2).

**126**

In view of this finding I do not think it necessary for me on the material
placed before this court to arrive at a specific finding as to whether the 4
respondents or any of them perpetrated this crime on the petitioner. In his
affidavit the petitioner incriminates all four of them. In the written
submissions filed on his behalf it would appear that the allegations are,
confined to the 2nd respondent only. Exhibit 1135 a certified extract of the
relevant entries in the Information Book shows that the 2nd and 3rd
respondents were not members of the police party that arrested the petitioner
on the 13th Exhibit 2132, an extract from the Routine Information Book, shows
that the 2nd respondent left the Panadura police station at 7 a.m. on the 12th
to attend an inquiry at Anuradhapura and returned to the station at 1.50 p.m.
on the 15th. It is therefore very improbable that the 2nd respondent had any
hand in this sordid episode. This circumstance throws a certain amount of
doubt as to the petitioner's identification of the police officers who
inflicted injuries on him. Further the petitioner has not set out the material
upon which his identification rests. As such it is unsafe, on the material
placed before this court, to reach a finding adverse to the 4 respondents
However as the petitioner has established that he has been subjected to
torture and cruel treatment by the police whoever they be, when he was under
arrest, the State is liable to pay compensation to the victim of such action.

Article 11 of our Constitution mandates that no person shall be subjected to
torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. It
prohibits every person from inflicting torture some, cruel or inhuman
treatment on another. It is an absolute fundamental right subject to no
restrictions or limitations whatsoever. Every person in this country, be he a
criminal or not, is entitled to this right to the fullest content of its
guarantee. Constitutional safeguards are generally directed against the State
and its organs. The police force being an organ of the State is enjoined by
the Constitution to secure and advance this right and not to deny, abridge or
restrict the same in any manner and under any circumstances. Just as much as
this right is enjoyed by every member of the police force, so is he prohibited
from denying the same to others, irrespective of their standing, their beliefs
or antecedents. It is therefore the duty of this court to protect and defend
this right jealously to its, fullest measure with a view to ensuring that this
right which is declared and intended to be fundamental is always kept
fundamental and that the executive by its action does not

**127**

reduce it to a mere illusion. This court cannot, in the discharge of its
constitutional duty, countenance any attempt by, any police officer however
high or low, to conceal or distort the truth induced perhaps, by a false sense
of police solidarity. The facts of this case have revealed disturbing features
regarding third degree methods adopted by certain police officers on suspects
held in police custody. Such methods can, only be described as barbaric,
savage and inhuman. They are most revolting to one's sense of human decency
and dignity particularly at the present time when every endeavour is being
made to promote and protect human rights. Nothing shocks the conscience of a
man so much as the cowardly act of a delinquent police officer who subjects a
helpless suspect in his charge to depraved and barbarous methods of treatment
within the confines of the very premises in which he is held in custody. Such
action on the part of the police will only breed contempt for the law and will
tend to make the public lose confidence in the ability of the police to
maintain law and order. The petitioner may be a hard core criminal whose tribe
deserve no sympathy. But if constitutional guarantees are to have any meaning
or value in our democractic set up, it is essential that he be riot denied the
protection guaranteed by our Constitution.

For the reasons set out above I hold that the petitioner has succeeded in
establishing an infringement of the fundamental right guaranteed by Article,
11 by virtue of executive action. In the circumstances of this case I make
order directing the State to pay him a some of Rs. 10,000 (Rupees ten
thousand), as compensation and a further sum of Rs. 1,000 (Rupees one
thousand) as costs of this application. In view of the gravity of this
incident I further direct the Inspector-General of Police, who is the 5th
respondent to these proceedings, to cause a full inquiry to be made as to who
were the officers responsible for inflicting the torture which I have held has
been inflicted on the petitioner and to take disciplinary action against such
officers. The circumstance that this court cannot, on the material placed
before it, bring home to the 4th respondents the allegations made against them
by the petitioner will not in anyway inhibit a finding of guilt against them
at such inquiry if further material points to their identity as being the
offenders.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.** \- I agree.  

**

L. H. de ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

_Application granted, compensation ordered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/21.html_  

