##  Madduma Banda v. Assistant Commissioner Agrarian Services and Another -
SLR - 80, Vol 2 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 21; (2003) 2 Sri LR 80 (17 July 2003)

**80**

**MADDUMA BANDA  
v.  
ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER OF AGRARIAN SERVICES  
AND ANOTHER**

  
SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, C.J.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J., AND  
YAPA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 111/97  
CA NO. 61/94 (H.C.) AND 74/94 (H.C.) 4 OF 1991.  
H.C. NO. 28/92  
16TH JULY, 30TH SEPTEMBER AND 30TH OCTOBER, 2002  
AND 11TH APRIL, 2003  
  
_Writ of certiorari - Jurisdiction of the High Court of a Province to issue
writ against an order under section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act -
Constitution, Article 154P(4) - Ambiguous statute - Interpretation according
to purpose of enactment and to advance the remedy.  
_  
The appellant, a tenant cultivator sought a writ of certiorari from the High
Court of the Province to quash an order made by the Assistant Commissioner of
Agrarian Services (1st respondent) under section 18 of the Agrarian Services
Act as amended by Act, No. 4 of 1991.  
  
Under Article 154P(4) of the Constitution, the High Court has jurisdiction to
issue a writ against any person exercising any power under a law or statute in
respect of any matter set out in the Provincial Council List. "Agriculture and
Agrarian Services" are found in section 9 of the list with an inclusive
definition of "Agriculture". The impugned order related to the failure of the
appellant to pay rent due to the landlord of the paddy land.  
  
However, in view of certain limitations provided by section 3 of the
Provincial Councils (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 regarding appeals
under the Agrarian Services Act, and certain dicta contained in the
determination of the Supreme Court on the constitutionality of the Bill for
the amending Act, No. 4 of 1991 the High Court opined that the impugned order
was not a matter set out in the Provincial Council List and refused the writ.

**81**

**Held :  
**  
1\. The word "agrarian" in section 9 of the Provincial Council List relates to
landed property and such property could no doubt attract paddy lands and
tenant cultivators of such land and hence the impugned order would be covered
by the said section 9 in the Provincial Council List.  
  
2\. In case of ambiguity, the enactment should be interpreted so as to give
effect to its purpose. The purpose of the 13th Amendment is to give a right to
an aggrieved party to have recourse to the Provincial High Court instead of
having to seek relief from the Court of Appeal in Colombo. As such the High
Court is deemed to have jurisdiction to grant writ sought under Article
154P(4).  
  
_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.  
  
"It would not be correct to say (as stated in the S.C. determination on the
Bill for amendment No 4 of 1991) that the matters that were dealt with in the
Bill are all matters of National Policy that falls within list II"  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. In re An Act to amend the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979.  
  
HANSARD 19.02.1991 Column 1184.  
  
2\. Fothergill v Monarch Airlines Ltd (1981) AC 251 at 272  
  
3\. AG of New Zealand v Oritz (1982) Q B 349 at 361  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
Dr. Jayampathi Wickramaratne, P.C. with Pubudini Wickramaratne for appellant  
  
Nizam Kariappar with M.C.M. Nawaz, A.W. Ramzoon, Keerthi Weerasekera and
M.I.M. lynullah for 2nd respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

July 17,2003  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
The appellant had come before the Court of Appeal challenging the order of the
High Court of the Central Province dated 29.06.1994. The Court of Appeal, by
its order dated 10.06.1997,

**82**

while dismissing the appeal before that Court, granted leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court under Rule 4(12) of the Court of Appeal Appellate Procedure
Rules of 1990, on the following questions:  
  
1\. Is an order made under section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of
1979, a matter set out in the Provincial Council List in the 9th schedule to
the Constitution?  
  
2\. Did the learned High Court Judge err in holding that he had no
jurisdiction to hear and determine the appellant's applica­tion for a writ of
certiorari to quash an order made under sec­tion 18 of the Agrarian Services
Act, No. 58 of 1979?  
  
The facts in this case, albeit brief, are as follows :  
  
The appellant was a tenant cultivator and the 1st respondent made order
against him under section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act, No.58 of 1979. In
order to quash the said order, the appellant invoked the writ jurisdiction of
the High Court of the Central Province in terms of Article 154(P) (4) of the
Constitution. The 20 respondents took up a preliminary objection at the High
Court that the matter in question, did not fall under Article 154 P, as the
writ jurisdiction of the High Court of the Provinces is restricted to mat­ters
set out in the Provincial Council List. The learned Judge of the High Court,
by his order dated 29.06.1994, upheld the preliminary objections and dismissed
the application, stating inter alia that the High Court of the Provinces has
no jurisdiction to issue a writ of cer­tiorari quashing the decision of the
1st respondent as the question in issue does not come within the subject area
specified under the Provincial Council List in terms of the 9th Schedule of
the 13th 30 Amendment to the Constitution.  
  
Learned counsel for the 2nd respondent took up the position that the purported
order challenged by the appellant is made by the 1st respondent, in terms of
sections 18 and 26 of the Agrarian Services Act. The 1st respondent, according
to learned counsel, excercises his powers in terms of the Agrarian Services
Act, to give effect to the common law principle that the contractual
relationship between the landlord and the tenant cultivator will be terminated
if the latter refuses to pay the rentals to the former. Learned counsel for
the 2nd respondent contended that section 18 of the Agrarian

**83**

Services Act is merely for the purpose of conferring the jurisdiction to the
Agrarian Service Commission to terminate the tenancy right of the tenant
cultivator when he fails or refuses to pay the rental and therefore the
subject matter does not come within clause 9 of the Provincial Council List.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant argued that the subject matter
based on the Agrarian Services Act, falls within the parameters of the
Provincial Council List and therefore the 1st respondent's decision is
amenable to the writ jurisdiction exercised in terms of Article 154P (4) b of
the Constitution.  
  
The 13th Amendment to the Constitution, which came into effect in November
1987, was chiefly introduced for the purpose of devolving power from the
Central Government to the Provincial Councils. In addition to the legislative
and executive power that was devolved to the Provincial centers, High Courts
of the Provinces were established and empowered to exercise the original
criminal jurisdiction, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of
any convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by Magistrate's
Courts and Primary Courts within the province and such other jurisdiction and
powers as Parliament may by law pro- 60 vide. Furthermore, in terms of Article
154(P) (4), High Courts of the Provinces shall have the jurisdiction to issue
according to law orders in the nature of habeas corpus, in respect of persons
ille­gally detained within the province; and orders in the nature of writs of
certiorari, prohibition, procedendo, mandamus and quo warranto. The
jurisdiction of the High Court of the Provinces, to issue such orders however
is restricted as the Article specifies that this power could be used only
against any person exercising within the Province any power under any law or
any statute, made by the Provincial Council established for that Province in
respect of any 70 matter set out in the Provincial Council List. It is
therefore abun­dantly clear that for the High Court to issue a writ quashing
the order made by the 1st respondent, it is necessary that the subject matter
should belong to one of the subjects listed out in the Provincial Council
List.  
  
The subject matter concerned as pointed out earlier, is related to Agriculture
and Agrarian Services. The subject heading of "Agriculture and Agrarian
Services" is listed under the Provincial

**84**

Council List (item No.9) as well as in the Concurrent List (item No.8).  
  
The subjects that come within the Provincial Council List, under the heading
"Agriculture and Agrarian Services", refer to the following:  
  
9.1 Agriculture, including agricultural extension, promotion and education for
provincial purposes and agricultural services (other than in inter-provincial
irrigation and land settlement schemes, state land and plantation
agricul­ture)  
  
The Concurrent List on the other hand refers to the following sub­ject
matters:  
  
8.1 Establishment and promotion of agro-linked industries, the establishment
and maintenance of farms and super­ vision of private nurseries;  
  
8.2 Soil conservation;  
  
8.3 Plant pests.  
  
The Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979 was enacted to pro­vide security of
tenure to tenant cultivators of paddy lands; to spec­ify the rent payable by
tenant cultivators to landlords; to provide for maximum productivity of paddy
and other agricultural lands through the proper use and management of
agricultural crops and live- 100 stock; to provide for the establishment of
Agrarian Services Committees; to provide for the determination of tenurial and
other disputes relating to agricultural land by the Commissioner of Agrarian
Services; to confer and impose certain powers and duties on the Commissioner;
to provide for the appointment of cultivation officers; to provide for the
repeal of the Agricultural Productivity Law, No. 2 of 1972, and the
Agricultural Lands Law, No. 42 of 1973; and to provide for matters connected
therewith or incidental there­to.  
  
This enabled the Commissioner of Agrarian Services to inquire  and consider
various disputes arising out of the duties and liabili­ties of the cultivators
and paddy land owners within the jurisdiction.

**85**

The learned High Court Judge took the view that a High Court established by
Article 154P of the Constitution for a Province could exercise appellate and
revisionary jurisdiction only in respect of orders made under sections 5 and 9
of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979. This was based on section 3 of
the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990,
which reads as follows:  
  
"A High Court established by Article 154P of the Constitution 120 for a
Province shall, subject to any law, exercise appellate and revisionary
jurisdiction in respect of orders made by Labour Tribunals within that
Province and orders made under section 5 or section 9 of the Agrarian Services
Act, No. 58 of 1979, in respect of any land situated within that Province."  
  
Admittedly section 3 of the aforementioned Act refers only to sections 5 and 9
of the Agrarian Services Act. However, Article 154P(4) provides that the High
Court shall have jurisdiction to issue orders in the nature of writs against
any person exercising within the Province any power under any law in respect
of any matter set 130 out in the Provincial Councils List.  
  
The Provincial Council List as pointed out earlier refers to the word
Agriculture. The Agrarian Services Act defines the word Agriculture in the
following manner:  
  
"Agriculture includes -  
  
(i) the growing of rice, field crops, spices and condi­ments, industrial
crops, vegetables, fruits, flowers, pasture and fodder;  
  
(ii) dairy farming, livestock rearing and breeding;  
(iii) plant and fruit nurseries;  
  
The Agrarian Services Act mainly deals with paddy lands, ten­ant cultivators
who grow rice and the landlords of the paddy fields.  
  
The learned Judge of the High Court in deciding that the matters relating to
Agriculture and Agrarian Services do not come under the Provincial Council
List, based it on the determination of the Supreme Court in  re An Act to
amend the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979.(1) Learned President's
Counsel for the

**86**

appellant, however submitted that the view taken by the learned Judge of the
High Court is incorrect, as the Supreme Court, in Party V of its determination
under the title "inconsistency with Article 154G" referred to the various
items in the Provincial, Reserved and the Concurrent List and that the Court
did not hold that "Agriculture and Agrarian Services" do not come under the
Provincial Council List. In determining the consistency or the inconsistency
of the provisions of the Bill in question, and especially referring to the
submissions on whether the land rights or land tenure is a provincial subject,
the Supreme Court stated that,  
  
"............ However, without the benefit of a full [argument] it is not
desirable that we should decide the question now. It is suffi­cient for
present purposes that the matters dealt with in the Bill  are all matters of
national policy in regard to the rights and lia­bilities of owners and tenant-
cultivators, and thus fall within List II."  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant contended that the determination
of the Supreme Court was to the effect that the provisions of the Amending
Bill laid down National Policy. His posi­tion is that under item 1 of the
Reserved List, National Policy on all subjects and functions is a matter for
Parliament, where it would be permissible for Parliament to lay down National
Policy even with regard to a matter listed in the Provincial Council List. By
this, learned President's Counsel claimed, that the subject matter is not
shifted to the Reserved List. In his words what it means is that the matter
continues to be in the Provincial Council List, but all Provinces are required
to conform to the National Policy laid down by the Parliament.  
  
An illustration is given in order to clarify this position further. Item 2 of
the Appendix III to the Provincial Council List refers to the supervision of
the management of all pre-schools. The Parliament may pass a law limiting the
maximum number of students in a class to be below 30 and setting down the
minimum qualifications a pre  school teacher should possess. Although the
subject matter is within the Provincial Council List, all Provincial Councils
would have to adhere to the policy laid down by the Parliament. However, this
will not shift the subject areas from the Provincial Councils List to the
Reserved List. While the subject remains as an area within the

**87**

purview of the Provincial Councils, the administration of the subject will
have to be carried out in conformity with the National Policy laid down by the
Parliament.  
  
Section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19
of 1990 deals with the jurisdiction of the  High Court to hear appeals from
orders under the Agrarian Services Act. According to this provision, a High
Court of a Province shall have the power to exercise appellate and revisionary
jurisdic­tion in respect of orders made under section 5 or section 9 of the
Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, in respect of any land situ­ated within
that Province. Sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian Services Act are in Part I
which consists of 25 sections (from section 2 to section 26) and deals with
the tenant cultivators of paddy lands.  
  
The question in the instant case as referred to earlier, arose over a decision
the Commissioner for Agrarian Services had taken  in terms of section 18 of
the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979. This section, which is in Part I of
the Act, deals with the conse­quence of failure by a tenant cultivator to pay
rent. Section 5 of the Act on the other hand deals with the rights of tenant
cultivators, pro­vision in regard to certain evicted tenants of paddy lands
and restriction of eviction of tenants of paddy lands whereas section 9
provides for the Commissioner to decide disputes regarding devo­lution of
rights to a tenant cultivator.  
  
On a comparison of the provisions in sections 5, 9 and 18 of the Act, it is
difficult to assess as to how appellate or revisionary  jurisdiction on the
Agrarian Services Act, could be restricted to only sections 5 and 9 of the
Act. Furthermore, in terms of the provisions in section 3 of the High Court of
the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990, it is clear that
sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian Services Act are treated as matters which
fall under the category of List I to the 9th Schedule to the Constitution,
which is, as referred to earlier, commonly known as the Provincial Council
List. If these two sections are within the Provincial Council List, it would
not be feasible to separate section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act from them,
as this too belongs to Part I of the said Act, which, as referred 220 to
earlier, deals with the tenant cultivators of paddy lands.

**88**

In the determination of the Supreme Court in the Agrarian Services (Amendment)
Bill, the Court considered and examined the three Lists in the 9th Schedule to
the Constitution as a whole in order to interpret them consistently and was of
the view that,  
  
"The Bill quite clearly does not deal with any of the matters referred to in
List I, items 9.2 and 9.3 or List III, items 8.1 to 8.3. Turning to List I,
itefTk9.1 the Bill does not deal with 'agri­culture, including agricultural
extension, promotion and educa­tion for provincial purposes' or 'agricultural
services'. It deals with the rights of tenant cultivators, the determination
of dis­putes, the devolution of the rights of the tenant, the transfer of the
rights of the landlord, the liability of tenants to eviction, the payment of
rent, loans, surveys, information and statistics, farmer organisations and the
like."  
  
It is a well known principle that when the meaning of the statu­tory words is
plain and unambiguous there is no necessity for a Court to attempt to
interpret the meaning of such words. On the other hand when there are
ambiguities in a statute, it becomes nec­essary to obtain an interpretation to
clarify such ambiguities. As pointed out by Lord Wilberforce in Fothergill v
Monarch Airlines Ltd.(2) "consideration of the purpose of an enactment is
always a legitimate part of the process of interpretation" and "consideration
of the purpose of an enactment" would clarify any ambiguities that would have
arisen. In AG of New Zealand v Oritz(3)  Staughton, J. referred to 'the power
of the Courts to disregard the literal meaning of an Act and to give it a
purposive construction'. When a strained meaning is given where the literal
meaning is not in accordance with the legislative purpose of an enactment it
would become nec­essary to examine the purpose of Parliament in passing the
Act in question. As Bennion, suggests (Statutory interpretation, 3rd edi­tion,
pg. 731), the "purpose or object of Parliament in passing an Act is to provide
an appropriate remedy to serve as a cure for the mischief with which the Act
deals". The legislative purpose of an enactment would have to be arrived at
accordingly.  
  
By the 13th Amendment to the Constitution as referred to earlier, the High
Courts of the Provinces were empowered to exercise original criminal
jurisdiction, revisionary jurisdiction as well as the writ jurisdiction.
Section 3 of the High Court of the Province

**89**

(Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990 provided for the High Court  to
exercise appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of orders made
under sections 5 or 9 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979 in respect
of any land situated within that province.  
  
According to Salmond (Jurisprudence, 10th edition, pp. 170-173):  
  
"The essence of the law lies on its spirit, not in its letter, for the letter
is significant only as being the external manifestation of the intention that
underlies it. Nevertheless in all ordinary cases the Courts must be content to
accept the 'litera legis' as the exclusive and conclusive evidence of the
'sententia legis'. They must in general take it absolutely for granted that
the Legislature has said what it meant, and meant what it has said. Ita
scriptumest is the first principle of interpretation, judges are not at
liberty to add to or take from or modify the letter of law, simply because
they have reason to believe that the true in 'sententia legis' axe not
completely or correctly expressed by it. That is to say, in all ordinary cases
grammat­ical interpretation is the sole form allowable. To this general
principle there are two exceptions. There are two cases in which the 'litera
legis' need not be taken as conclusive, and in which the 'sententia legis' may
be sought from other indications. The first of these cases is that in which
the letter of the law is logically defective, that is to say, when it fails to
express some single, definite, coherent and complete idea .... The second is
that in which the text leads to a result so unreason­able that it is self-
evident that the Legislature could not have meant what it has said .... To
correct the 'sententia legis' on logical grounds is a true process of
interpretation; it fulfils the ultimate or dormant, if not the immediate or
conscious inten­tion of the Legislature (emphasis added)."  
  
At the time of the introduction of devolution of power in terms of the
provisions of the 13th Amendment to the Constitution, the intention of the
legislature was to empower the provincial centres to deal with the specific
subjects devolved to such centres which included not only executive and
legislative power, but also to devolve judicial functions to be carried out
through the newly introduced High Courts of the Provinces. As referred to
earlier, the High Courts were empowered to deal with appellate and revisionary

**90**

jurisdiction with regard to orders of Labour Tribunals and orders pertaining
to sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979. It is to be
remembered that sections 5 and 9 also deal with tenant cultivators of paddy
lands. The subject matter of "Tenant cultivators of paddy lands" does not
relate directly to land matters such as transfer, registration, inheritance,
partition and the like as set out in item 18 of List I read with the relevant
part in Appendix II. More importantly it is to be considered that if a
petitioner could come before the High Court of the Provinces, regarding a
matter in connection with tenant cultivation in terms of sections 5 and 9 of
the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979, it is surprising that such a person
cannot come under the jurisdiction of the High Court of the Provinces with
regard to section 18 of the same Act. Such a narrow 310 interpretation cannot
be given to the provisions laid down in List I to the 9th Schedule to the
Constitution, taking into consideration the unreasonableness in the
application of section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special
Provision) Act, No. 19 of 1990 read with Part I of the Agrarian Services Act,
No.58 of 1979.  
  
One final point to be made before I part from this judgment. The learned Judge
of the High Court, based his reasoning on the determination of the Supreme
Court on the Amendment to the Agrarian Services Act, No.58 of 1979, as the
Court had stated that "the matters dealt with in the Bill [are] all matters of
national policy in regard to the rights and liabilities of owners and tenant
cultiva­tors, and this fall within List II". It is to be noted that the
amendment inter alia dealt with section 5(3) of the principal enactment
regard­ing inquires in respect of eviction of tenant cultivators. In terms of
section 3 of the High Court of the Provinces Act, No. 19 of 1990 appellate and
revisionary jurisdiction orders given under section of the Agrarian Services
Act is vested in High Courts of the Provinces, If so, it would not be correct
to say that the matters which were dealt in the Bill are all matters of
national policy that falls within List II.  
  
Provincial Councils were established to permit the people to deal with their
day to day life within the provinces itself. A tenant cultivator in any area
within the country therefore should have the opportunity to challenge an order
relating to the payment of agricultural rent in the High Court of the
Provinces, instead of having to

**91**

come to Colombo to invoke the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. If section
3 of the High Court of the Provinces, (Special Provisions) Act, No.19 of 1990,
in furtherance of the objects of the 13th Amendment provided for the appeals
in respect of orders made in terms of sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian
Services Act to be made 340 to the High Court of the Provinces and not to the
Court of Appeal, there is no such justification for excluding applications
relating to section 18 of the Agrarian Services Act.  
  
The word 'agrarian' relates to landed property and such prop­erty no doubt
would attract paddy lands and tenant cultivators of such land.  
  
In the circumstances, it appears that the subject dealing with paddy lands
falls within the ambit of the Provincial Council List and therefore the High
Courts of the Provinces have the jurisdiction to issue orders in the nature of
writs by virtue of the power given to 350 them in terms of Article 154P of the
Constitution.  
  
For the aforementioned reasons both the questions on which leave to appeal was
granted by the Court of Appeal are answered in the affirmative. This appeal is
accordingly allowed and the Provincial High Court of the Central Province is
directed to hear and determine the application made by the appellant.  
  
There will be no costs.  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, C.J. -** I agree.  
  
**YAPA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/21.html_  

