##  Laxamana and Others v. Weerasooriya, G.P.S. General Manager of Railways
and Another - SLR - 172, Vol 1 of 1987 [1986] LKSC 21; (1987) 1 Sri LR 172 (17
December 1986)

**

172

LAXAMANA AND OTHERS  
v.  
G. P. S. WEERASOORIYA  
GENERAL MANAGER OF RAILWAYS AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., L. H. DE ALWIS, J. AND H A. G DE SILVA, J  
S.C. APPLICATIONS 116/86, 118/86, 122/86, 123/86 AND 124/86  
NOVEMBER 11 AND 12, 1986.

_

Fundamental Rights - Article 12 (2) of the Constitution - Railway Security
Service - Right to compel officers in the Railway Security Service to undergo
military or quasi-military training.

_

Owing to terrorist activities and unsettled conditions the Government deeded
that Railway Security Officers should be given further training so as to
enable them to perform their duties both in protecting railway property and
defending themselves. The first batch was taken to Pannala Army Camp where
rigorous discipline was imposed Owing to an incident at Pannala when a Railway
Security Serviceman was assaulted the Railway Security Officers left the camp.
Thereafter these Railway Security Servicemen were ordered to proceed to
Tampalagrama for training. Tampalagrama is in the Eastern Province and
undoubtedly a high risk area Some went but others did not and notices of
vacation of post were served on those who did not

**

Held :

**

The Government was entitled to call upon these officers for further training.
The State has plenary authority to deploy these officers to meet any situation
confronting the Railway Service. There was bona fides on the part of the
authorities but this will not absolve them where their actions are violative
of the rights of others. From the manner of training and the subsequent
deployment of the petitioners to a high risk area the Railway Authorities had
not paused to consider the dividing line between what may be civil defence
security and what appertains to military or quasi or para military action.

The authorities have gone beyond a matter of civil security. Though even a
civil defence outfit like the Railway Security Service must be adequately
trained to meet the contingencies arising from possible terrorist activity yet
the rights of its members must be scrupulously respected. The treatment
accorded to the petitioners cannot be justified in law. The notices of
vacation of post are invalid.

**

APPLICATION** for infringement of Fundamental Rights.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C. with Sanath Jayatilleke, Saliya Mathew and Mrs. A. B.
Dissanayake for the petitioner in S.C. Application No. 116/86_  

**173**

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C. with Sanath Jayatilleke, Miss S. K. Senaratne, Sakya
Mathew, Mrs. A. B. Dissanayake, Miss A. D. Telespha and Miss Chamantha
Weerakoon for petitioners in S.C. Applications Nos. 118/86. 122/86 and
123/86._  

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with Sanath Jayatilleke, Mrs. A. B. Dissanayake, Miss
A. D. Telespha and Miss Chamantha Weerakoon for the petitioner in S.C.
Application No 124/86._  

_

S. W. B. Wadugodapitiya, Additional Solicitor-General with Y. J. W
Wijeyatilleke, S. C. for the 1st and 2nd respondents.

Cur, adv. vult

_

December 17, 1986.  
**  
WANASUNDERA, J.** read the following judgment of the Court. **

**

**ORDER OF COURT**

These five fundamental rights applications (S.C. 116/86, 118/86, 22/86,123/86
and 124/86) were consolidated and heard together at the request of all
counsel. Basically, the salient facts and the law relating to these petitions
are common to all, though there are some differences and variations in respect
of incidental matters. The two respondents to all these applications are also
common. They are the General Manager, Sri Lanka Railways and the Attorney-
General. The petitioners have complained that their fundamental rights under
Articles 11, 12 (1) & (2), 13 (4), 14 (1) (a) to (h), and 10 have been
infringed. In S.C. Application No. 116/86, leave to proceed was granted only
in respect of Article 12 (2).

To eliminate any controversy, we have chosen to rely mainly on the averments
contained in the affidavits filed on behalf of the respondents in regard to
the facts. Where necessary, we shall indicate any matters of importance on
which the parties are at variance.

Due to terrorist activities and the prevailing unsettled conditions in many
parts of the country, the Government had decided that Railway Security
Officers should be given further training so as to enable them to perform
their duties both in protecting railway property and also in defending
themselves. In this regard the respondents have invited our attention
specifically to Rule 7 (b) of the relevant regulation which is to the effect
that Railway Security Officers of all ranks-

"shall also be required to attend any course of training that may be specified
from time to time by the Chief Security Officer-.

**174**

The Railway Security Service functions as a department of the Railway and is
under the General Manager of Railways. It consists of about 592 security
officers. It was decided that this group should be trained in three batches.
The first batch to consist of 208 officers, the second of 153 officers, and
the third batch to consist of the rest. This last batch was to take in all the
Tamil Officers

This training was to be done at what is known as the Pannala Army Camp, which
is about 40 miles from Colombo. This camp had been established by the
Government specifically for training officers such as the National Auxiliary
Force personnel, home guards, security guards, etc. Accordingly, consequent to
a request made by the Ministry of Security for Commercial and Industrial
Establishments, the camp made arrangements for such training.

It is admitted that on 11th May 1986, 208 officers of the Railway security
staff were ordered to proceed to the Pannala Army Camp for training. The 1st
defendant has denied that they were sent for military training. The affidavit
of Lt. Col. Wickramasekera, Commanding Officer of this camp, relied on, states
that-

"The course of training for these non-military categories cover basic drills,
tactics and weapon handling. By way of contrast, military training for
soldiers at established army training centres would be entirely different,
inasmuch as they are trained for combat and other military operations
involving intensive training and detailed lessons on various military subjects
over a period of at least 4 months."

These .208 officers protested at the order, but nevertheless they proceeded to
the Pannala camp. It would appear that this camp was run on Army, lines.
Judging from what a later batch of trainees had experienced, the discipline
and the rules at this camp required these officers to reside in the camp for
the required period of 30 days and they were considered to be in camp for 24
hours a day. They were entitled to a day off once in two weeks, but not
allowed to go home. These strict rules providing for, their confinement to the
camp, the petitioners state, would have seriously interfered with their lives
and liberty and their contacts and dealings with their families.

Admittedly there had been an incident on the very first or second day of their
stay when one Mutu Banda, one of the officers, had been assaulted and injured
by Army personnel for not complying with camp

**175**

regulations. Thereupon all the officers left the camp without permission and
returned to their homes. It is also alleged that the facilities that were
available at the camp were unsatisfactory. The 1st respondent admits that
after representations were made, the facilities were improved.

This breakdown of relations between these officers and the Railway authorities
appears to have been patched up temporarily and these ; officers were allowed
to resume their normal duties.

Thereafter, on 10th June 1986, the officers were again ordered to proceed to
the Pannala camp. Their union protested at this order. Many of those officers,
by means of some device or other, actually avoided undergoing such training.
Most of them had submitted medical certificates claiming exemption from this
duty.

Later, on 18th July 1986, the officers were ordered to go to the Tampalagrama
Army Camp at Gal Oya. 19 security officers and 2 staff . officers had
proceeded to this Army camp on the 18th and 19th July 1986. The others had
refused to do so. Notices of vacation of post have been served on them.

The Army Camp at Tampalagrama was in the Eastern Province at the Gal Oya
junction on the Trincomalee-Batticaloa railway line and apparently set up,
inter alia, to guard the line of communication between Colombo and Trincomalee
and Batticaloa. There was considerable terrorist activity within this area.

The petitioners state that they are public officers like other public officers
of the Government and that their hours of work, shifts, attendance are similar
to those of other civilian public servants. Outside their working hours they
are free to be with their families and attend to personal matters. They have
added that the petitioners were not recruited for service involving the use of
firearms in combat or for military training. Their duties are of a civil
nature and are confined to the apprehension of offenders, to protect railway
property, and their area of duties does not extend beyond the precincts of the
railway stations, depots, workshops, and within 50 yards of either side of the
railway track.

We can take notice of the fact that the kind and form of terrorist activities
now prevailing in this country is unprecedented and have been inflicted on
this country and the Government against its will. We are now confronted with a
situation so grave that it has come to the

**176**

point of endangering the State. It is the duty of everyone, especially the
public service, to take such steps as may be expected of them to meet the
challenges offered by this armed separatist uprising. Public officers, like
everyone else, must adapt themselves to these developments and it would be
idle for them to hope that they can continue to function in the same way they
have been doing in the past, without improving their skills by the necessary
training and qualifications, so that they can better discharge their duties in
the present context.

We are therefore of the view that the Government was entitled to call upon
these officers for further training. No State can function or survive if
public officers are not prepared to make some sacrifices and to adapt
themselves to meet such challenges. The applicable regulations also empower
the Government to do so. The need for training has not been challenged by
counsel for the petitioners. What is in issue is the form, manner and content
of such training programme and the nature of the service these officers are
expected to perform.

It is however evident that some of the rules and regulations to which these
officers were subjected to at the Army Training Camp were unduly strict. If,
however, there is a continuation of violence in the country or an escalation
of this violence, the people and the public officers in this country may have
to undergo hardships and even some regimentation in the protection of the
State.

But we are however of the view that the strict discipline imposed on these
officers at the Pannala Army Camp, in the context of this case, was in excess
of permissible limits. Considering the type of persons involved, their
background, and the nature of their accustomed duties, some relaxation of the
rules could have been effected. This irregularity by itself would not have
been sufficient to invite our intervention. This irregularity was not a
serious lapse-good faith is not in issue-but for the subsequent events. The
training and their subsequent deployment constitutes as it were one
transaction, throwing light on how the authorities have looked at and
interpreted the nature of the relationship with these officers and about the
intentions and actions of the authorities. The subsequent deployment, when
taken in conjunction with the manner of training, gives support to the
complaint of the petitioners that they have been pressed to undertake and
perform services which are qualitatively different from the normal duties for
which they had enlisted.

**177**

It is admitted that these officers were ordered to proceed to Tampalagrama. In
this context the affidavit of the 1 st respondent is of great significance,
where an attempt has been made to justify the subsequent actions of the
Government. The 1st respondent has denied that the lawful duties of these
security officers are merely limited to protecting stations, workshops, yards
and the railway track extending within 50 yards on either side of the track.
The 1st respondent has stated that "security officers are required to perform
any other duties specifically assigned to them". Neither he nor counsel
appearing for the State has indicated any limitation on the powers of the
State in this regard. It is this assumption, namely, that the State has
plenary authority to deploy these officers to meet any situation confronting
the railway service, which is at the heart of the problem in this case.

Paragraph 22 (e) and (f) of the 1st respondent's affidavit shows the reasons
for and the circumstances relating to the deployment of these security
officers to Tampalagrama

'"22. (e) due to disturbances in certain areas of the country the train
service from Trincomalee to Colombo was disrupted. As the two trains
transporting 900 tons of flour from Trincomalee to Colombo were often
distrupted due to the disturbances in that area there was the threat of an
acute shortage of flour in the country as all flour that reached the domestic
market was milled at the Prima Flour Milling Complex at Trincomalee and
thereafter transported to Colombo;

(f) since it was vital that flour from Trincomalee should reach Colombo every
day so as to avert a possible food crisis it was decided that every effort
should be made to run two trains per day transporting flour. Adequate security
for the trains were to be provided by the railway security officers who were
to be on duty together with Army personnel. The railway security officers are
expected to travel in those trains as well as guard part of the track. The
railway security officers who are presently at the Thampalagrama Army Camp are
only expected to guard the railway track for a distance of about 3 or 4 miles
on either side of the army camp and that too also during the time trains pass,
after which the railway security officers return to their camp."

**178**

In this connection, Dr. de Silva drew our attention to document 1 R 5 dated
19th June 1985, which was a Government Circular relating to the payment of
compensation to disabled officers, employees, and to the children and widows
of officers killed on duty. It contemplates the death or the disablement of
such officer or employee "while on duty as a result of terrorist activity in a
high risk area where terrorists are active". This circular reflects what is
common knowledge, that is, that there are certain areas where the probability
of terrorist activity is high or even very high as against other areas where
terrorist activity may be sporadic or minimal. Tampalagrama in the Eastern
Province is undoubtedly a high risk area.

The averments in the 1st respondent's affidavit reproduced above makes it
clear that the train that was operating on this line, for which these officers
were deployed, was not an ordinary passenger or civilian train, but a special
goods train to transport essential foodstuffs which the Government was
compelled to operate with army cover, whatever be the risks or hazard from
terrorist activity. This spell of duty required them to reside in the Army
camp where the risk of attack was high. There was in addition the further risk
involved in the participation of defending this Army outpost in case of
attack.

The facts of the present case indicate sufficiently that the Government was of
the view that the security officers could have been deployed on any railway
line where a railway service was in operation. In the Government's view it was
immaterial whether it was a passenger train or a special train and whether or
not it passed through a high risk area. It seems to us that the Railway
authorities had made these arrangements with the best of intentions and with a
desire to keep the railway services in operation. The training course was
designed to this end and was part and parcel of this scheme. The mere bona
fides of the authorities would not absolve them if their actions are otherwise
violative of the rights of others or of the law.

It appears to us that the railway authorities have overlooked the rights of
the petitioners based on their contractual relations with the Government when
making these decisions. However serious or urgent the matter was, it was
necessary for the Government to act lawfully and within the confines of the
law. Where the law recognises rights in other persons, such rights cannot be
brushed aside or overridden, but have to be given their due recognition. No
government is powerless to

**179**

deal with situations such as this, however extraordinary they be. If the laws
are inadequate, the Government can clothe itself with the necessary powers by
enacting suitable legislation to meet such a situation.

Our attention was drawn to the Mobilization and Supplementary Forces Act, No.
40 of 1985, which appears to allow the mobilization of necessary manpower for
situations where the existing security forces are considered inadequate. Apart
from that, we take it that the Government has sufficient authority, if it so
desires, to raise, train and equip a new Railway Security Force to meet the
greater demands now made on the authorities. It may also be possible to re-
constitute or revamp the existing service, taking into consideration vested
rights and obligations, so as to enable a greater measure of security than
contemplated hitherto to be provided for the operation of the railway service.

It is not for this court to decide on the form of the required administration
arrangements or even to indicate the nature of the training and skills that
would be required for this purpose. These are matters essentially for the
executive and, being policy matters. the executive enjoys a wide latitude in
deciding such matters. The courts will step into regulate such decisions only
when they are clearly shown to transgress the bounds of the law. Our ruling is
confined to the facts of this case and to pronounce whether or not in the
circumstances of this case the several acts of the Government are violative of
the fundamental rights of the parties.

Both from the manner of training and the subsequent deployment of the
petitioners to a high risk area, it seems to us that the Railway authorities,
acting in the heat of the moment, had not paused to consider the dividing line
between what may be civil defence security-for which we understand there will
now be a new Ministry of Civil Security-and what appertains to military or
quasi or para military action. What the Railway authorities have done in this
case appears to go beyond a matter of civil security. While on this matter we
would like to make it clear that even a civil defence outfit like the railway
security service must be adequately trained to meet the contingencies arising
from possible terrorist activity. Such training could go well beyond what may
be now in the contemplation of the authorities. The duty of guarding a train
or Railway property may, in today's context, even in a non high risk area,
necessitate a preparedness to. deal with hold-ups

**180**

and sporadic attacks, which cannot be completely ruled out as unlikely in any
part of the country. Physical fitness and skills in using weapons must be
expected from such officers. Where such officers are vested with wide powers
and are equipped with sophisticated weapons, it is of utmost importance that
there should also be discipline of a high order. Such discipline is required
not only in their own interests as a civil defence service, but more important
in the interests of the public whose rights must be scrupulously respected.
Army training schemes would have to take all these factors into consideration
even though such officers may be regarded as performing non-military duties.

In the result we hold that the Railway authorities should have approached this
matter with greater circumspection and care. The training and manner of
deployment of those officers reveal a lack of due appreciation of the
distinction between security arrangements of an essentially civilian nature as
against military or quasi-military operations. The breakdown of relations
between the authorities and these officers could be attributed to this error
and the present state of affairs is unsatisfactory and does no good to
anybody.

The Deputy Solicitor-General objected to some of the petitions on the ground
that in S.C. 118/86, S.C. 122/86 and S.C. 123/86 the petitions were not
supported by as many affidavits as there are petitioners. He submitted that
this is required by regulation 65 of the Supreme Court Rules. We find that
each joint petition is supported by an affidavit. We do not think that there
is substance in this objection, nor do we feel it necessary to rule on his
objection that some of the affidavits contain hearsay matter and those
averments should be disregarded. Since all these applications were not dealt
with separately, but were consolidated and heard as one, on his own
application, there is sufficient admissible material on record to warrant our
findings.

The treatment accorded to the petitioners cannot be justified in law. We
therefore declare that the notices of vacation of post served on them are
invalid. This order would however not affect orders of interdiction, if any,
which may have been made on other grounds not connected with the specific
matter before us.

**181**

We are not disposed to giving any further relief other than costs. Our order
leaves it open to the authorities to arrange a satisfactory training course
for these officers and for their deployment on the lines indicated in this
judgment. While allowing these applications, we would also award the
petitioners in S.C. 116/86 and S.C. 124/86 costs in a sum of Rs. 1,500 each,
and the petitioners in S.C. 118/86, S.C. 122/86 and S.C. 123/86 costs in a sum
of Rs. 2,500 each. This would be payable by the State.

_Applications allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/21.html_  

