##  Gomes v. Sri Lanka State Trading Corporation and Another - SLR - 260, Vol
2 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 21; (1983) 2 Sri LR 260 (18 November 1983)

# 260

  **GOMES**

**v.**

**SRI LANKA STATE TRADING CORPORATION**

**AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT

WIMALARATNE, J., COLIN‑THOME, J. AND ABDUL CADER, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 54/82, C. A. NO. 186/77, LT. NO. 1/A/264/74.

NOVEMBER 18 1983.

_  _

_     Industrial Dispute ‑ Change of employment ‑ Absorption of department
into different institution  Retirement._



(1) Public Administration Circular dated 24.6.1970 in terms of which employees
would not be entitled to extensions of service beyond the age of 55 years
superseded the Co‑operative Wholesale Establishment ‑ Rules of Procedure,
Administrative and Financial Part 1, on age of retirement. The termination of
the applicant's services as a stenographer when she reached 55 years was
regular.



(2) The change of employer by Governmental action will not affect the right to
gratuity.



Cases referred to :



1. _Kulatunga v. The Board of Directors of the C.W.E._ S. C. 7/81 ‑ Minutes of 3.10.81.



2. _K.S.G.N. de Silva v. The Sri Lanka State Trading (Textiles) Corporation._ S.C. 39/76 ‑ Minutes of 9.8.78



3\. _Lanka Salu Sala v. Wickremanayake_ ‑ S.C. 47/75 L.T. No. 8/554/75-
­Minutes of 9.4.75.



**APPEAL** from order of Labour Tribunal.



_H L. de Silva, SAAL_ with _L. A. T. Williams_ for applicant‑appellant.



_D. H. M. Jayamaha_ for respondent‑ respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



#  261



16 December, 1983

  
WIMALARATNE, J.



The Applicant‑Appellant was employed as an English Stenographer in the
Cooperative Wholesale Establishment (C.W.E.) from 3.3.52. In accordance with a
government policy decision the text le department of the CW.E. where the
applicant worked was handed over to the Lanka Salu Sala Ltd. from 1.10.67, and
employees in the textile department of the C.W.E. were offered employment in
Lanka Salu Sala Ltd. on terms and conditions similar to those that obtained in
the C.W.E. The applicant accepted such appointment without a break in service.
After the coming into operation of the State Trading Corporations Act, No 33
of 1970, Lanka Salu Sala Ltd. was incorporated in this Corporation, which is
the 1st respondent-­respondent, and became an employee of the 1st respondent.



A government Policy decision relating to retirement of public officers and
public sector employees was incorporated in a Public Administration Circular
dated 24.6.70, in terms of which employees would not be entitled to extensions
of service beyond the age of 55 years. The Board of Directors of Salu Sala
Ltd., acting upon that circular decided at a meeting held on 27.6.70, that no
extension of service would be granted to its employees after the age of 55
years. Certain changes in government policy resulted in a rule that extension
of service from the 55th to the 58th year could be granted by the Minister in
charge of the Department or Corporation concerned, while extensions beyond age
58 up to 60 could be granted only by the Cabinet of Ministers. That decision
had been conveyed by the Cabinet Secretary to all Secretaries of Ministries by
circular dated 25.4.73.



The applicant completed her 55th year on 5.1.74, and before that she was given
notice by letter dated 31.7.73 that she would be retired as from the date she
completed her 55th year. Her appeals to the Board of Directors of the 1st
respondent as well as to the Minister met with no success. Hence this
application to the Labour Tribunal for relief in respect of what she says is
wrongful dismissal.



#  262



Both the Tribunal and the Court of Appeal have dismissed her claim, and she
has appealed to this Court claiming relief in a sum of Rs.36,000/‑ as damages
for breach of contract, and Rs.13,200/‑ by way of gratuity.



A document which was at the forefront of the applicant's case before the
Tribunal as well as in the Court of Appeal, and before us is the document
marked A3 which is a part of a booklet, the first page of which has the words
"Cooperative Wholesale Establishment ‑ Rules of Procedure, Administrative &
Financial, Part 1" printed in bold type. In support of her case that employees
of the C.W.E. had a right to remain in service up to age 60, Counsel relied
upon the following rules in A3.

"62



**RETIREMENT**          Permanent employees of the CWE will be permitted to
retire, if they so desire, on   reaching the

**OPTIONAL     **        optional age of retirement (55 years). **   **They
may not be permitted to continue in service

**AT 55 YEARS         **after reaching this age when it is possible to effect
retrenchment by retiring an officer who  
has attained the age of 55 or his efficiency is definitely below normal.



            An employee whom it is proposed to retire compulsorily for the reasons stated above should not be allowed an extension on compassionate grounds.



**COMPULSORY**         An officer who is compulsorily retired from service
after reaching  the

**RETIREMENT**         age of 55 years should, in ordinary circumstances, be
given 3 months

**AT 55 YEARS**            notice of the date of retirement.



64 (i)



**AUTOMATIC**             All employees shall be automatically retired on
reaching the age of

**RETIREMENT**          60, unless the sanction of the Board of Directors has
been received

**AT 60 YEARS**             beforehand to retain their services after reaching
the compulsory age of retirement,''



It has been argued that when the applicant was appointed to the C.W.E. she had
a reasonable expectation of working until she completed 60 years unless she
was retired either on the ground of



#  263

**  **

retrenchment or on the ground of inefficiency. Neither of those grounds were
relied upon for termination of her services. This, indeed, had been the
interpretation placed on those Rules by this Court in the case of _Kulatunga
v. The Board of Directors of the C.W.E._ (1); Learned Counsel for the
respondents sought to distinguish that case on two grounds. The first is that
the employee in that case continued to be employed in the CWE until he was
retired, unlike in this case, where there was a change of employer. It must be
noted, however, that both corporations are public sector corporations and a
circular dated 24.11.68 by the General Manager of Salu Sala Ltd. expressly
stated that till such time as a separate set of rules etc. were formulated,
the CWE Rules & Regulations would apply to all members of the staff. The
second ground on which that case is sought to be distinguished is more
substantial. None of the Public Administration Circulars which were produced
in this case had been produced in that case. Had there been such proof the
result in **Kulatunga** may well have been different, for it is difficult to
see how the Cabinet decisions relating to age of retirement, subsequently
adopted and circulated at the instance of the Board of Directors of Salu Sala
Ltd. can be ignored. That, indeed, had been the decision in _K. S. G. N. de
Silva v. The Sri Lanka State Trading (Textiles) Corporation_ (2).



I am, however, unable to agree with the Tribunal and the Court of Appeal that
A3 contains only some **draft** rules which had never been adopted by the
Board of Directors of the CWE. They bear the date stamp of "The McCallum
Stores" under date 17.8.69, and the oral evidence established on a balance of
probability that those were the Rules and Regulations acted upon by the CWE,
and subsequently adopted by Lanka Salu Sala Ltd. The subsequent Public
Administration Circular had, however, the effect of overriding those rules as
far as age of retirement is concerned.



Learned Counsel for the appellant stressed the relevance of the reasonable
expectation the appellant had of working till age 60 at the time she was
appointed to the CWE in 1952. In the absence of any stipulation as to the
retiring age in the letters of appointment to the CWE and to Lanka Salu Sala
Ltd. one would



#  264



expect some evidence to have been led before the Tribunal as to the date when
the Rules A3 came into operation. In the absence of such evidence how could it
be inferred that way back in 1952 she had this reasonable expectation. I am
therefore of the opinion that the termination of the applicant's service was
not unlawful. The claim for damages (or rather compensation) for wrongful
termination has therefore been correctly refused.



The applicant prayed not only for compensation but also for any other relief;
it was therefore open to the Tribunal to have awarded the applicant relief by
way of gratuity for 22 1/2 years meritorious service as an English
Stenographer, 15 1/2 years under the 2nd respondent and 7 years under the 1st
respondent. It is significant that both respondents are public sector
corporations. The work undertaken by the textile department and the textile
storage point of the CWE at Jawatta was **handed over** to the Lanka Salu Sala
Ltd. also at Jawatta with effect from 1.10.67. Employees of the textile branch
of the CWE were to be paid on the same salary scales they enjoyed, and leave
and other conditions of employment were to continue under the Lanka Salu Sala
Ltd. Just as a rose by any other name would smell as sweet, so also would the
employees of the textile department of the CWE have felt justifiably that
their transfer to the Lanka Salu Sala Ltd. would give them the same sweet
benefits enjoyed by them earlier notwithstanding such change. It would thus be
unjustifiable to deprive them of a gratuity which they had earned solely
because of a metamorphosis not of their making. The applicant should therefore
be given gratuity for the entirety of the 22 1/2 years of her services.



But the 2nd respondent was discharged by the President on 4.2.75 as a result
of a technical objection. I do not think that should alter the position
because the new employer the 1st respondent has "cooperated to effect this
metamorphosis as a result of a policy decision" as observed by the Court in
_Lanka Salu Sala Ltd. v. J. M. Wickramanayake_ (S.C.47/75 LT. No.8/5544/75 ‑
minutes of 9.4.76).



The computation of gratuity has given us some concern because the statistics
necessary for such computation have not



**  265**

**  **

been led in evidence. There is a document marked R17 not produced by any
witness, but which purports to be a statement of E.P.F. due to the applicant
in a sum of Rs.17,101.48 up to 31.12.73. If we were to remit the case to the
Tribunal for the limited purpose of computing gratuity, it would result in
time and expense not commensurate with the claim of Rs.13,200/‑ as gratuity
before us. We are of the view that the award of that sum is just and equitable
under the circumstances of this case.



In the result, we dismiss the appeal relating to compensation for termination
of services, but we allow the appeal relating to the claim for gratuity in a
sum of Rs.13,200/‑ payable by the 1st respondent. There will be no costs of
this appeal.



**COLIN THOME, J.** ‑ I agree.



**ABDUL CADER, J.** ‑ I agree for different reasons. (See separate Order.)



ABDUL CADER, J.



I agree with Wimalaratne J. that the rules and regulations in "A3" were acted
upon by the C.W.E. and later adopted by Lanka Salu Sala Ltd. A further reason,
if need there be, is that this is the first occasion in litigation of this
nature that this defence was put forward. On this conclusion, I am of the view
that whatever the date be that these rules began to be observed, the
petitioner, even if she had been employed earlier, would have been entitled to
believe that these same terms will be applicable to her, too. If it was
different, the burden was on the respondent to establish it and this has not
been done. ("R1" has no reference to the period of service.)



But her appointment to Salu Sala Ltd. made a vital difference. By "R4" she was
informed that "your services under the C.W.E. will terminate on 30th
September, 1967, and that an attached letter sets out the terms and conditions
of your employment there." She is required to sign the copy of the letter and
to return it. Presumably, she did it and thereafter she received the



#  266



appointment letter "R4" from Salu Sala. Para 9 of the letter reads as follows:



"You will be subject to the rules, regulations and departmental orders
obtaining in Lanka Salu Sala Ltd., and any **other orders, rules or
regulations which may be issued from time to time by the Board. "**



Therefore, whatever may have been her expectations in the C.W.E. she bound
herself to the conditions that her appointment to Salu Sala was subject to
"rules........which may be issued from time to time."



The rules under which she was discontinued fall into this category and it
cannot be said that they were motivated by bad faith as they were based on a
Cabinet direction. I am, therefore, of the view that the petitioner is not
entitled to damages for the termination of her services. (For a similar view,
see S.C. No. 39/76 ‑ Minutes of 9.8.78.) (2).



As regards gratuity, when she was discontinued from the C.W.E. she could have
then made the claim from the C.W.E. It is true that she had been lulled into a
sense of trust by the provisions of Clause 10, but carefully analysed, it
means that the Salu Sala would grant her the privilege of a gratuity on the
same terms as in the C.W.E., but contains no promise to pay the gratuity due
from the C.W.E. I am, therefore, of the view that the petitioner will be
entitled to gratuity for the period of service, under Salu Sala Ltd. only.



However, in view of the fact that a majority has decided to grant the
petitioner gratuity in a sum of Rs.13,200/‑ and in view of the more
enlightened thinking in respect of gratuity now prevailing, I agree to the
order made by Wimalaratne J.



### Compensation not allowed.



_Gratuity allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/21.html_  

