##  Mariyadas Raj v. Attorney General and Another - SLR - 461, Vol 2 of 1983
[1982] LKSC 21; (1983) 2 Sri LR 461 (13 November 1982)

#  461

**  MARIYADAS  RAJ**

**v.**

**ATTORNEY ‑GENERAL AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., RANASINGHE, J. AND RODRIGO, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 130/83

7 FEBRUARY 1983.



    Fundamental Rights -Illegal arrest -Failure to communicate reason for arrest to arrestee -Article 13(1) of the Constitution.



# Held ‑



Article 13(1) embodies a rule which has always been regarded as vital and
fundamental for safeguarding the personal liberty in all legal systems where
the Rule of Law prevails. Anyone who is arrested shall be informed at the time
of arrest of the reasons for his arrest. The purpose of this rule is to afford
the earliest opportunity to the arrested person to remove any mistake,
misapprehension or misunderstanding in the mind of the arresting official and
disabuse his mind of the suspicion which actuated the arrest.



The contention that S.I. Godagama who was the person who arrested the
petitioner has not been made a respondent and the grant of the application
would involve a finding adverse to the officer is based on a misapprehension
as to the nature of the present proceedings. What the petitioner is
complaining of is an infringement of his fundamental right by executive or
administrative action, that the state has through the instrumentality of an
over‑zealous or despotic official committed the transgression of his
constitutional right. The protection afforded by Article 126 is against
infringement of fundamental rights by the State, acting by some public
authority endowed by it with the necessary coercive powers. The relief granted
is principally against the State although the delinquent official may also be
directed to make amends and/or suffer punishment.



The petitioner could have been spared the trauma of arrest and detention, had
S.I. Godagama only told him the ground for his arrest, namely suspicion on his
part that the petitioner was an illegal immigrant; the petitioner could and
Would have satisfied the sub‑inspector that he was not an illegal immigrant,
that he had lawfully entered and was staying in Sri Lanka, by the exhibition
of his Indian Passport, which bore the endorsement of the relevant visa
permitting his entry and stay. For the default of S.I. Godagama the State is
in the circumstances, liable to pay fair compensation.



#  462



**Cases referred to :**



1. _Muthusamy v. Kannangara_ 52 NLR 524.



2\. _Christie v. Leachinsky_ 1947 AC 573.



3. _Corea v. The Queen_ 55 NLR 457.



4\. _McNabb v. USA_ 1943 318 US 332, 343, 87 L. Ed. 819.



5\. _Velmurugu v. Attorney-General and Another_ S.C. Application No. 74/81 -
S.C. Minutes of 9.11.1981.



6\. _Maharaja v. Attorney-General_ 1978 2 all ER 670, 679 PC.



7\. _Thornhill v. Attorney ‑General_ 1981 AC 61, 73.



8\. _Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola, Superintendent of Police_ S.C. Application
No. 125/82 -SC Min. 8.2.83.



**APPLICATION** complaining of infringement of the fundamental right of
protection against illegal arrest.



_V. S. A. Pullenayagam_ with _S. C. Chandrahasan,_ _Miss N. Kanapathipillai_
and _Miss D. Wijesundera_ for petitioner.



_Priyantha Perera, D.S.G,_ with _Nimal Amaratunga, State Counsel_ for 1st
respondent.



_S. D. P Valentine_ with _C. Kadiramanpulle_ for 2nd respondent.



## Cur. adv. vult



14 February 1983,

  
SHARVANANDA, J.

_  _

The petitioner in this case is a foreigner. He is a citizen of India holding
an Indian Passport bearing No. K 988409\. He has come to Sri Lanka on
10.11.1982 on a Sri Lankan visa No. 67904/82 issued at the Office of the
Deputy. High Commissioner for Sri Lanka in Madras on 2.11.1982.



By his petition under Article 126 of the Constitution the petitioner
complains, that while he was staying with. one Anthony Rodrigo at Chilaw, he
was awaken up from his sleep at about



#  463

**  **

1 a.m. on 13th November 1982 by the 2nd Respondent, Nihal Karunaratne, an
Inspector of Police, Chilaw and was brutally assaulted and was arrested and
taken to the Chilaw Police Station in spite of his pleading that he was a mere
visitor to the house of Anthony Rodrigo, having come from India two days ago.
Petitioner states that when, he was arrested he was not informed of the cause
or ground for his arrest. By his petition the petitioner complains that on
13th November, 1982, he,



(a) was subjected to cruel inhuman treatment and punishment in violation of
Article 11 of the Constitution,

and



(b) was arrested not according to procedure established by law, nor was
informed of the reason for his arrest, in violation of Article 13(1) of the
Constitution.



The petitioner was produced before the Acting Magistrate at about 7.30 or 8.30
p.m. on 13.11.1982 and on the order of the Magistrate he was remanded. He was
ultimately discharged from detention only on 3.12.1982. Articles 11 and 13(1)
apply to all persons, not only to citizens.



By his affidavit the 2nd Respondent has stated that he had nothing to do with
the arrest and assault of the petitioner. He produced an affidavit from one
Dhammika Godagama, Sub­-Inspector of Police, Chilaw dated 30.1.1983, in
support of his defence. According to the latter's affidavit it would appear
that it was Sub‑Inspector of Police, Dhammika Godagama who arrested the
petitioner in the early hours of 13.11.1982 and not the 2nd Respondent. In his
affidavit Sub‑Inspector of Police, Godagama has stated that he arrested the
petitioner because he suspected the petitioner to be an illegal immigrant.



In view of these affidavits it would appear that the petitioner had made a
mistake in identifying the 2nd Respondent as the Police Officer who arrested
him and assaulted him on



#  464



13.11.1982. The case against 2nd Respondent was therefore not pressed by
Counsel for the petitioner. Counsel however submitted that the case of the
petitioner was that the Police Officer, whoever it might be, who arrested him
did not comply with the mandatory requirements of the law which obliged the
officer arresting a person to inform him the reasons for his arrest; since
Sub‑Inspector of Police Dhammika Godagama has owned that it was he who
arrested the petitioner on 13.11.1982 and not the 2nd Respondent, the failure
to communicate the reasons for his arrest was ascribable to Godagama. The
infringement by executive or administrative action of the fundamental right
guaranteed by Article 13(1) of the Constitution to be informed of the reasons
for his arrest thus consisted in Dhammika Godagama, the Police Officer, not
informing the petitioner of the reasons for his arrest on 13.11.1982. Counsel
very relevantly pointed out that in his affidavit Dhammika Godagama had not
refuted the petitioner's averments in his affidavit that the officer who
arrested him did not inform him the cause or grounds for his arrest, and that
in the circumstances the allegation of infringement of the petitioner's
constitutional right of freedom from arbitrary arrest guaranteed to him by
Article 13(1) of the Constitution has been established. In this connection the
'B' Report made by the Officer‑in‑Charge of the Chilaw Police Station dated
13.11.1982, under Chapter III of the Criminal Procedure Code provides relevant
material supporting the petitioner's allegation. It is stated in the report
that in the course of a search of the house of Anthony Rodrigo "we questioned
a person who was sleeping in front of the said house and found that he has
come from India and that he has no visa to remain here, that he was a person
called Mariyadas Raj of Tamil Nadu territory and as such we took him into
custody and produced to the Police. I state that further investigations in
connection with this person are being carried on and move that he be remanded
till 23.11.1982 and until the investigations are over." It is quite clear that
the petitioner was taken into custody by the Police Officer because he was
suspected to be an illegal immigrant and that he had no valid visa. The
petitioner in his



#  465



affidavit has stated that he had pleaded with the Police Officer who arrested
him that he was a mere visitor to the house, having come from India two days
ago and that he had stated that he could show his passport and air ticket. But
the said Police Officer had turned a deaf ear to his pleas. Had Sub‑Inspector
Godagama duly informed the petitioner the reasons for his arrest as mandated
by the law, the suspicion which was the warrant for the exercise of his Police
powers of, arrest and detention would have been dispelled, and there would
have been no justification for the arbitrary arrest and detention of the
petitioner. Had Sub­-Inspector of Police, Godagama complied with the law and
informed the petitioner of the reasons for his arrest, namely that he
suspected the petitioner to be an illegal immigrant, it is inconceivable that
the petitioner who had with him his Indian passport would have failed to show
his passport, which at page 17 had the visa endorsed on it authorising the
entry into Ceylon of the petitioner within one month of the date of issue,
namely 2.11.1982 and stay in Ceylon for one month from the date of his entry
namely 10.11.1982. In view of this visa there would have been no foundation
for Sub‑Inspector Godagama's suspicion that he was an illegal immigrant. These
circumstances tend to militate against the acceptance of any denial by
Godagama of the petitioner's version that he was not informed of the reasons
for this arrest. The allegation of the petitioner that when he was arrested he
was not made aware of the reasons for his arrest by the Police‑Officer who
arrested him has, in my view, been established.



Article 13(1) provides that -"No person shall be arrested except according to
procedure  established by law. Any person arrested shall be informed of the
reasons for his arrest." Section 23(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
No. 15 of 1979. provides that ‑



"in making an arrest, the person making the same ... shall inform the person
to be arrested of the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is
arrested."



#  466



The corresponding provision of the Criminal Procedure Code, which was repealed
by the Code of Criminal Procedure Act of 1979, namely, Section 23(1) of the
Code does not specifically provide for the person arrested to be informed of
the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is arrested. Even though
there was no such express provision in the Criminal Procedure Code, Gratien,
J., in _Muthusamy v. Kannangara_ (1), held that "whenever a Police Officer
arrests a person on suspicion without a warrant "common justice and common
sense" require that he should inform the suspect of the nature of the charge
upon which he is arrested." He relied on the judgment of the House of Lords in
_Christie v. Leachinsky_ (2), as authority for the principle and expressly
desired that the following general propositions enunciated by Lord Chanceller
Simon should be borne in mind by all Police Officers in this country: ‑



"1.If a Police Officer arrests without a warrant, upon reasonable suspicion,
he must, in ordinary circumstances inform the person arrested of the true
ground of arrest. He is not entitled to keep the reason to himself or give a
reason which is not the true reason. In other words a citizen is entitled to
know on what charge or on suspicion of what crime he is seized.



2.If a citizen is not, so informed, but is nevertheless seized, the Policeman,
apart from certain exceptions, is liable for false imprisonment."



In _Corea v. The Queen,_ (3) -Gratien J., with whom Fernando, A.J., agreed
re‑affirmed at page 462 his conviction



"that in this country (as in England) a Police Officer who arrests private
citizens with or without the authority of a warrant is equally obliged to
notify the arrested person of the reason for interfering with his personal
freedom. A recognition of this fundamental rule .... is demonstrably implicit
in the scheme of our Code."



#  467

**  **

Against this background the present Criminal Procedure Act chose specifically
to make express provision that the person to be arrested should be informed of
the nature of the charge or allegation upon which he is arrested. The concern
of the framers of Constitution for this elementary principle was manifested
when they caused it to be incorporated in the Constitution and made a
justiciable fundamental right; section 13(1) of the Constitution,
unequivocally and in no uncertain terms provides that the person arrested
shall be informed of the reasons for his arrest. The law is solicitous for the
freedom of individual and has therefore enacted that the person who is
arrested, is entitled to know the reasons for his arrest and has elevated this
right into a fundamental right with the attendant sanctions for its breach.



In _Leachinsky case_ (2) -Lord Simonds observed at page 591 :‑



"Putting first things first I would say that it is the right of every citizen
to be free from arrest unless there is in some other person, whether a
constable or not, the right to arrest him. And I would say next that it is a
corollary of the right of every citizen to be thus free from arrest that he
should be entitled to resist arrest unless that arrest is lawful. How can
these rights be reconciled with the proposition that he may be arrested
without knowing why he is arrested? ......... Blind unquestioning obedience is
the law of tyrants and of slaves; it does not yet flourish on English soil".



Professor Glanville L. Williams in his article "Requisites of a valid arrest"
in 1954 Criminal Law Review page 6 at page 16 criticises the reason given by
Lords Simonds as "somewhat legalistic", because few people know the law of
arrest in such a way what they can decide on the spot whether the arrest to
which they are being subjected is legal. In his opinion the true reason is a
different one, e.g. the reason given by Viscount Simon L.C., in the same case
at page 588 in the following words: ‑



"If the charge on suspicion of which the man is arrested is then and there
made known to him, he has the opportunity of giving an explanation of any
misunderstanding or of calling



#  468



 attention to other persons for whom he may have been mistaken with the result
that further inquiries may save him from the consequences of false
accusation."



One more reason is that it acts as a safeguard against despotism and
over‑zeal, as remarked by Prof. Glanville L. Williams (Supra) page 17 ‑



"The rule has the effect of preventing the Police from arresting, on vague
general suspicion not knowing the precise crime suspected but hoping to obtain
evidence of the commission of some crime from which they have power to
arrest."



In _McNabb v. U.S.A._ (4) Frankfurter, J., observed at page 343 ‑



"Experience has therefore counselled that safeguards must be provided against
the dangers of the over‑zealous as well as the despotic .... Legislation such
as this, requiring that the Police must with reasonable promptness show legal
cause for detaining arrested persons constitutes an important safeguard."



There is thus good reason and sense for the person arrested to be entitled to
know why he is being arrested and what is the crime he is suspected to have
committed.



The Constitution of the Democratic Socialist of Sri Lanka, 1978 has, as
reasonably to be expected, given this human right the status and sanction of
fundamental right. On being arrested, a person must be informed of the reason
for his arrest , the very nature of the right indicates that if he is not
informed, his detention after the arrest is illegal. The omission to so notify
cannot be regarded as a mere irregularity. According to Viscount Simon in the
_Leachinsky's case_ ‑



"the matter is a matter of substance and turns on the elementary proposition
that in this country a person is, prima facie entitled to his freedom and is
only required to submit to restraints on his freedom if he knows in substance
the reason why it is claimed that this restraint should be imposed" (page
567).



#  469



Article 13(1) embodies a rule which has always been regarded as vital and
fundamental for safeguarding the personal liberty 'in all legal systems were
the Rule of Law prevails. The International Covenant on Civil and Political
Rights (1966) also provides "Anyone who is arrested shall be informed, at the
time of arrest of the reasons for his arrest and shall be promptly informed of
any charges against him" (Article 9(2)). The purpose of this rule is to afford
the earliest opportunity to the arrested person to remove any mistake,
misapprehension or misunderstanding in the mind of the arresting official and
disabuse his mind of the suspicion which actuated the arrest.



The Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the petition should fail for the
reason that Godagama, Sub‑Inspector of Police, who was the person who arrested
the petitioner has not been made a respondent to these proceedings, and that
the grant of the application would involve a finding adverse to the said
officer. This submission is based on a misapprehension as to the nature of the
present proceedings. What the petitioner is complaining of is an infringement
of his fundamental right by "executive or administrative action", that the
State has through the instrumentality of an over‑zealous or despotic official
committed the transgression of his constitutional right. The protection
afforded by Article 126 is against infringement of fundamental rights by the
State, acting by some public authority endowed by it with the necessary
coercive powers. The relief granted is principally against the State, although
the delinquent official may also be directed to make amends and/or suffer
punishment.



In this connection, it is apposite that I should reiterate what I stated in my
judgment in _Velmurugu v. Attorney ‑General and another _(5).



"It is to be noted that the claim for redress under Article 126 for what has
been done by the executive officers of the State is a claim against the State
for what has been done in the exercise of the executive powers of the State.
This is not



#  470



 vicarious liability; it is a liability of the State itself; it is not a
liability in tort at all; it is a liability in the public law of the State
-vide _Maharaja v. Attorney-General of Trinidad_ (6).



On this analysis it is not of much consequence whether the violation of
petitioner's fundamental right was caused by inspector of Police, Nihal
Karunaratne (2nd Respondent) or Sub­-Inspector of Police, Godagama, in the
exercise of the coercive powers with which the State has clothed them. The
relevant question is, has the impugned infringement of petitioner's
fundamental rights been caused by "executive or administrative action"; if the
answer is in the affirmative then the State is liable.



The Deputy Solicitor General then contended that in any event the action of
the Police Officer concerned does not constitute executive or administrative
action" such as would give to the petitioner the right to apply for relief
under Article 126 on the ground of contravention of his constitutional rights.
In my view this contention is not well founded. Sub‑Inspector of Police,
Godagama, is a repository of State Power, charged with law-enforcement duties.
In the performance of his police duties he represents the executive arm of the
State and his action is to be deemed the action of the State. As was stated by
the Privy Council in _Thornhill v. Attorney-General_ (7) ‑



"It is beyond question, however, that a Police Officer in carrying out his
duties in relation to the maintenance of order, the detection and apprehension
of offenders and bringing them before a judicial authority, is acting as a
public officer carrying out an essential executive function of any sovereign
virtue of a public position under State government in the name and for the
State ........... are not to be treated as if they were the acts of private
individuals, although in doing them the official acted contrary to the express
command of the State Law. Where a State official acting under the colour of
State authority invades, in the course of his duties, a private right secured
by the federal constitution, that right is violated even if the State Officer
not only exceeded his authority, but disregarded the special command of the
State Law."



#  471



In this context it is relevant to bear in mind that Article 4(d) of the
Constitution mandates all organs of government not to restrict or deny the
fundamental rights declared by the Constitution but to secure and advance
them.



What is "executive or administrative action" and its ambit have been discussed
by me more fully in my judgment in the _Velmurugu case_ (supra). It is to be
noted that in _Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola_ (8). Superintendent of Police,
et al. (8), the wrongful seizure by the Gampaha Police of petitioner's 20,000
phamplets which he intended to publish, was held by a Divisional Bench of this
Court to constitute an infringement of the petitioner's fundamental right
under Article 14(1)(a) of the Constitution and the petitioner's application
under Article 126 was allowed. This decision is explicable only on the basis
that the unlawful action of the Superintendent of Police, in causing the
seizure of the petitioner's phamplets, in the exercise of his powers , though
an individual action of a police officer, was regarded by the Court to be
constituting "executive or administrative action". It is to be noted that the
State did not contest the position that the police officer's action
constituted "executive or administrative action."



On the application of the above criterion of "executive or administrative
action", the State cannot disown responsibility for the misfeasance or
misconduct of Sub‑inspector of Police, Godagama; it is answerable for the
wrong way that the officer had chosen to exercise the powers with which the
State have invested him.



I agree with the relevant submission of the Counsel for the petitioner and I
hold that the petitioner has established the allegation that his fundamental
right assured to him by Article 13(1) of the Constitution has been infringed
by "executive or administrative action". Accordingly, I make the declaration
that the arrest of the petitioner on the 13.11.1982 by Sub‑inspector of
Police, Godagama was not according to procedure established by law and that
the petitioner was not informed of the reasons



#  472



for which he was arrested, in contravention of Article 13(1) of the
Constitution.



The material on record does not justify the grant of a declaration that the
petitioner was subject to cruel and inhuman treatment and punishment in
violation of Article 11 of the Constitution. Counsel for the petitioner too
did not press this allegation.



As stated earlier the petitioner could have been spared the trauma of arrest
and detention, had Sub‑Inspector of Police, Godagama only told him the ground
for his arrest, namely suspicion on his part that the petitioner was an
illegal immigrant; the petitioner could and would have satisfied Sub‑Inspector
that he was not an illegal immigrant, that he had lawfully entered and was
staying in Sri Lanka, by the exhibition to him of his Indian passport, which
bore the endorsement of the relevant visa permitting his entry and stay. For
the default of Sub‑Inspector of Police, Godagama, the State is, in the
circumstance, liable to pay a fair compensation. Officers who feel called upon
to arrest other persons (whether they are citizens or not) and deprive them of
freedom in the discharge of what they conceive to be their duty ought strictly
and scrupulously, observe the forms and rules of law and have due regard for
their Constitutional or fundamental rights.



I allow the application of the petitioner against the 1st Respondent in
respect of his complaint of violation of Article 13(1) and grant the
declaration that the arrest of the petitioner on 13th November 1982, was in
violation of Article 13(1) of the Constitution and direct the State to pay Rs.
5000/-as compensation to the petitioner. I also make order that the 1st
Respondent pay the petitioner the costs of this application. Since
Sub‑Inspector, Godagama has not been a party to these proceedings, I do not
make any order against him though strongly I disapprove his flouting the law
and exercising his powers despotically.



#  473



As the petitioner has by mistakenly made Inspector Nihal Karunaratne, the 2nd
Respondent, instead of Sub‑Inspector, Godagama, I dismiss the application
against him and direct the petitioner to pay him Rs. 150/-as costs of this
application.



**RANASINGHE, J.** -I agree.



**RODRIGO, J.** -I agree.



_Application allowed;_

_  
Compensation ordered;_

_  
Application against 2nd respondent dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/21.html_  

