##  Abeypala v. Abeyakirthi - SLR - 86, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 21; (1981) 1
Sri LR 86 (6 April 1981)

**86**

**ABEYPALA  
 V.  
ABEYAKIRTHI**

**SUPREME COURT.  
SAMERAWICKRAME, J., ISMAIL, AND WANASUNDERA, JJ.  
S. C. APPEAL No. 40/80-D. C. NEGOMBO 347/RE.  
JANUARY 15,1981.  
**  
_Lease-Whether letting of business or of premises- Defendant not tenant of
premises but a licencee-Whether letting is of the business only - Errors in
typing of prayer to amended plaint- Plaintiff not to be denied relief in such
circumstances.  
_  
The plaintiff sued the defendant on the basis that he had leased to the
defendant by a document marked "A" a business of a hotel and bakery and that
the defendant wrongfully continued to carry on business after the expiry of
the lease. The defendant, inter alia, pleaded that he was sub-tenant under the
plaintiff of the premises in suit and was protected by the provisions of the
Rent Act. In regard to the plaintiff's right to obtain a decree for ejectment,
the defendant further relied on the fact that the amended plaint filed by the
plaintiff had omitted to include a prayer for ejectment, although in the body
of the amended plaint it was pleaded, as it had been 'in the original plaint,
that a cause of action had accrued to the plaintiff for ejectment.  
  
**Held  
**  
(1) On the evidence and a construction of the lease agreement, the plaintiff
only let the business carried on by him in the premises to the defendant.
Possession of the premises by the defendant was therefore not on the basis of
a tenancy but only as licencee to enable him to conduct the business during
the stipulated period.  
  
(2) The finding of the Court of Appeal that the omission in the prayer to the
amended plaint filed by the plaintiff, of a prayer for ejectment, was a
typist's error, must on an examination of the circumstances of the case be
affirmed. The plaintiff is therefore entitled to a decree for ejectment.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
_(1) Nicholas Hamy v. James Appuhamy, (1950) 52 N.L.R. 137.  
  
(2) Andiris Appuhamy v. D. B. M. Kuruppu, (1963) 65 N.L.R. 21.  
  
(3) Abdul Latif v. Seyed Mohamed, (1967) 72 N. L R, 20.  
  
(4) Charles Appuhamy v. Abeysekera, (1954) 56 N. L. R. 243  
  
(5)Jayasinghe v. Goolam Hussein, (1955) 56 N. L. R. 381.  
  
(6) Devairakkarn v. Samarasinghe, (1962) 65 N. L. R. 18.  
  
(7) Sadiris Singho v. Wijesinghe, (1965) 70 N. L. R. 185  
_  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
E. D. Wickramanayake, with D. S. Wijesinghe, for the defendant- appellant.  
  
J. W. Subasinghe, with J. C. Nilanduwa, for the plaintiff - respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**87**

April 6, 1981.  
**  
ISMAIL, J.  
**  
The plaintiff has filed this action on the basis that he had been carrying on
the business of hotel and bakery known as Sri Lanka Hotel and Bakery in the
lands and premises rented out by him on a monthly tenancy as described in
schedule "X" to the plaint from about the year 1967. He further avers that by
written lease agreement of 13th September, 1971, marked "A" he had leased the
above business, including the management and control, and the right to carry
on the business and enjoy the goodwill and pr6fits and the right to use
movable property and accessories ancillary to the said business to the value
of Rs. 8,341/21 to the defendant for a period of one year from the date of the
lease agreement "A" at a monthly rental of Rs. 400. According to this document
the defendant had also undertaken to pay the dues in respect of the
electricity supplied to/the premises in the name of the plaintiff. In
consequence of the lease agreement the defendant had been placed in
possession. The plaintiff had averred that after the expiry of the lease on
14th September, 1972, the defendant maliciously, wrongfully and unlawfully
continued in occupation of the said lands and premises and continued to use
the said movable properties and accessories and to have carried on the said
business, enjoyed the goodwill and profits and had refused to hand over
possession of the business and the premises to the plaintiff though demand had
been made.  
  
The defendant in his answer while admitting the execution of the lease
agreement "A" takes up the position that firstly, the plaintiff had
represented to him that he was the owner of the premises where the business
was carried on, and that after he had carried on the business for some time he
became aware of the fact that the plaintiff was not the owner of the premises
in suit but only the tenant of these premises, and that the owner of the
premises was one Mrs. V. Beatrice Fernando who had instituted the action D. C.
Negombo 297/RE and secondly, he takes up the position that the lease agreement
'A' is illegal and unenforceable and the plaintiff has accepted him as a sub-
lessee, he cannot evict him and that he is protected by the provisions of the
Rent Act.  
  
With regard to the first of the grounds set up in the answer it is clear that
even at the execution of the. document "A", which is also marked P1, in
paragraph 4 it is stated that if there is any rent

**88**

owing to the landlord the party of the first part shall pay the same, which
clearly indicates that it was within the knowledge of both the plaintiff and
the defendant at the execution of this document "A" that the plaintiff was
only a lessee of the premises in question and that the defendant was aware of
this fact. Therefore the defendant's averment in his answer that he became
aware of the fact that the plaintiff was a lessee only after the execution of
the document "A" is manifestly untruthful and must affect his credibility.  
  
After the trial had been proceeded with and the evidence of the parties had
been fully led it was discovered by the plaintiff that the premises in
question had been incorrectly described since there had been an alteration in
the assessment number of the premises. For that specific purpose counsel for
plaintiff had applied to Court for permission to amend the plaint. There had
been no objection raised by the defendant to the application and the
application had been allowed. Subsequently amended plaint had been filed dated
25.10.74. In the original plaint one of the relief's asked for was for
ejectment of the defendant from the premises in suit. This particular
paragraph in the prayer had not been reproduced in the amended plaint but
there is the averment in paragraph (7) of the amended plaint that a cause of
action had accrued to the plaintiff to eject the defendant from the lands and
premises in which the said business was being carried on and for the
restoration to the plaintiff of peaceful possession of the said lands and
premises, etc. Further, issue No. 7 which had been raised by the plaintiff as
to whether the plaintiff was entitled to eject the defendant from the premises
in which the business was carried on remained on the record and was not
deleted in consequence of the plaint being amended.  
  
 I am of the view that the reasons advanced in the judgment of the Court of
Appeal which indicated that the omission in the plaint of the prayer for
ejectment is an error by the typist is amply substantiated and appears to me
to be the correct assessment in respect of this matter. As stated in the
judgment the whole purpose of the plaintiff's action was to get these premises
back and a mere declaration that he is entitled to the business and movable
property would not be of much benefit to the plaintiff. Further the numbering
of the several paragraphs of the prayer to the amended plaint as (a), (b),
(c), (e) and (f) and the omission of paragraph (d) clearly indicates that this
is an inadvertent omission,

**89**

otherwise the paragraphs would have been marked as (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e)
in that order and not as (a), (b), (c), (e), and (f), omitting (d) in that
sequence. I am therefore of the opinion that the Court of Appeal judgment
making order that the plaintiff is entitled to decree for ejectment is
correct.  
  
The next matter that arises for consideration is whether by this document the
plaintiff had really leased the business carried on in these premises to the
defendant, the occupation of the premises therefore being ancillary to the
carrying on of the business, or whether by this document the plaintiff had
sought to circumvent the provisions of the Rent Act and it in reality was a
lease of the premises to the defendant.  
  
Both the original Court and the Court of Appeal on a consideration of the
facts before them had arrived at the identical conclusion that by document "A"
the plaintiff had only leased the business carried on on these premises to the
defendant and that the occupation of the premises by the defendant was in
order to carry on this business and that the plaintiff had therefore not
surrendered his right to occupy the premises to the defendant.  
  
Several cases were cited to us and I shall refer briefly to those cases. What
emerges on a consideration of these several authorities is that one has to
examine the documents by which possession had been handed over in order to
determine whether there has been a letting or sub-letting of premises or
whether the lessee was merely permitted to occupy the premises as a licencee
for the sole purpose of carrying on the business until the business was handed
back to the lessor. I shall now refer to these cases.  
  
In the case of Nicholas Hamy v. James Appuhamy (1) the facts indicate that the
defendant had taken charge from the plaintiff a "workshop" called "The City
Engineering Works", together with certain tools, machinery and implements. The
defendant undertook to pay a sum of Rs. 160 per mensem "for the above workshop
until such time as I am in occupation". The defendant also agreed to quit on
receiving three months' notice. It was held that what was let was a building
and not a "a business" and that the agreement contained all the ingredients
necessary to constitute a valid letting of "premises" within the meaning of
the Rent Restriction Ordinance.

**90**

In the case of Andiris Appuhamy v. D. B. M. Kuruppu (2) where a tenant who
carried on a business in a portion of rent­ controlled premises purported to
lease out the "business" to a third party but, according to the evidence, the
transaction was in reality sub-letting of a distinct portion of the premises,
it was held that the landlord was entitled to eject the tenant and sub-tenants
on the ground of sub- letting.  
  
In the case of Abdul Latif v. Seyed Mohamed (3) the facts indicated that the
tenant of a rent controlled premises had entered into what was stated to be in
the document a partnership agreement but the facts indicated that this
agreement was only a plan to cover the sub-letting of premises. It was held
that the tenant and the sub-tenant were liable to be ejected by the landlord,
if the landlord had not given his written consent to  the agreement. In the
course of the judgment in that case the dictum of Nagalingam, S. P. J. in
Charles Appuhamy v. Abeysekera (4) at 244, was quoted with approval. "The mere
affixing of a label to a transaction by the parties or by their legal advisers
does not control or govern the true nature of the rights and liabilities
created which have to be determined by an examination of the terms and
conditions of the instrument itself." In that reported case where a business
of the nature of a hotel and tea kiosk was "leased" by A to B and, under the
contract, A gave over to B the management, control and conduct of the business
for a term of years. It was held that at the end of this specific period B was
not entitled to the protection of the Rent Restriction Act with regard to the
premises in which the business was carried on. In the course of that judgment
Nagalingam, S. P. J. examined the document P1 in that case and came to the
conclusion that it cannot probably be said that there was a letting of
immovable property to which the provisions of the Rent Restriction Act apply.
On a consideration of the document P1 in that case he further stated: "On a
proper reading of the document P1, it is impossible to resist the conclusion
that the transaction entered into between the parties was one not of letting
any immovable property for the purpose of enabling one party to carry on a
business, nor the letting bf the building to that party with the option to him
to carry on or not the business previously carried on there, but of placing
the "lessee" in charge of a business that had been land was being carried on
for the sole purpose of its being continued as a going concern and with a view
to its being delivered back as such going concern together with the

**91**

goodwill and the improvements and the advantages gained or accrued thereto in
the meantime; and as ancillary to the object which the parties had in
contemplation, it was that possession of the premises was delivered. The
defendant's position was no more that that of a licencee and is far removed
from that of a tenant."  
  
In the case reported in 56 N.L.R. page 381 (5) it was held where a tenant who
carries on a business in the rented premises transfers the business to a third
party for a stipulated period without obtaining the landlord's consent in
writing, such transfer does not amount to sub- letting within the meaning of
section 9 of the Rent Restriction Act if the possession of the premises by the
transferee is only incidental to the transaction relating to the business.  
  
In the case of Devairakkam v. Samarasinghe, (6) the facts indicate that where
a tenant of rent-controlled premises, who carried on a business therein leased
the business to another person and moved to other premises, where he opened a
new business, it was held that the lease of the business did not amount to
sub- letting of the premises in which the business was carried on.  
  
In the case of Sediris Singho v. Wijesinghe (7) the facts indicate that the
plaintiff leased to the defendant for a period of three years the business of
a hotel carried on at certain premises, together with goodwill, shop fittings,
furniture, utensils and  implements of trade. At the expiry of the period of
three years the defendant was to yield up peaceful possession of the business
and premises to the plaintiff. The defendant claimed that what was leased to
him was a furnished apartment and that it was governed by the Rent Restriction
Act. It was held that the transaction between the parties was not a lease of a
building but of a business. The defendant's position while he was in
occupation of the premises was no more than that of a licencee. The Rent
Restriction Act, therefore, had no application to the case.  
  
Therefore when one considers the facts of the present case, the construction
of the document "A" and the circumstances indicated in the evidence clearly
establish that what the plaintiff did was merely to let the business carried
on by him to the defendant and therefore there is no sub-letting. The
plaintiff had handed over the business to the defendant as a going concern and
the defendant had to give it back to the plaintiff on the

**92**

termination of the agreement in similar conditions. In order to achieve this
object the defend  had not been given on the basis of a tenancy. The defendant
was only occurring the premises as a licencee enabling him to conduct the
business during the stipulated period. The clause in the agreement "A" that
the defendant was to pay the electricity bills in this case in the name of the
plaintiff is clearly indicative of the fact that the defendant was only in the
premises as a licencee of the plaintiff. Clause 4 of the agreement further
indicated that if there were any rents due to the landlord it was the party of
the first part, that is the plaintiff who shall pay the same. Further the
clause 6 of the agreement indicates that it was the plaintiff who had to
fulfil all the requirements in connection with the buildings of this business
and the defendant had agreed not to come to any agreement with the owners of
the building. The stipulations in the agreement clearly indicate that
occupation of the premises in suit by the defendant was in the nature of a
licensee under the plaintiff and does not confer any tenancy rights in respect
of these premises to the defendant.  
  
I am therefore of the view that the Court of Appeal has come to the correct
finding in respect of matters in issue in this case and the defendant's appeal
in this case must necessarily fail. I accordingly dismiss the appeal with
costs.  
  
**SAMERAWICKRAME, J. - I** agree.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J. - I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_  

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/21.html_  

