##  Karunathilaka and v. Jayalath De Silva and Others - SLR - 35, Vol 1 of
2003 [2002] LKSC 21; (2003) 1 Sri LR 35 (25 November 2002)

**35**

**KARUNATHILAKA AND ANOTHER**

**v.** ****

**JAYALATH DE SILVA AND OTHERS**

** **

 SUPREME COURT

S.N.SILVA, CJ.

BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND

YAPA, J.

SC APPLICATION 334/2002

22ND AND 28TH OCTOBER, 2002

AND 6TH NOVEMBER, 2002

_ _

_Fundamental Rights - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution -The principle of
fair­_ _ness - School admission - Executive action - Arbitrary exclusion of a
child from admission to a school._



At the material time the 1st respondent was the Principal, Dharmashoka Maha
Vidyalaya, Ambalangoda.



The 1st petitioner, a teacher, is the mother of the 2nd petitioner. As a
teacher she had to serve in Puttalam with effect from 1.1.1990, an uncongenial
area where she had to serve for 5 years. However, in fact she served there for
11 years. After much effort she obtained a transfer to Dharmashoka Maha
Vidyalaya, Ambalangoda, her native place with effect from 15.6.2001. The 2nd
petitioner was born in 1991 and was schooling in a school in Puttalam which
had classes only up to Grade 5. Ever since she made attempts to have the 2nd
petitioner admitted to Dharmashoka Maha Vidyalaya to which her second son was
admitted to year 1 in the year 2000.



The Education authorities refused to admit the 2nd petitioner to Dharmashoka
Maha Vidyalaya contrary to the relevant rules and the law, on arbitrary
grounds. The 2nd petitioner could have been admitted to that school which was
only 500 meters from his residence under Clause 13 of the relevant Circular
which required such admission to grade 5, a facility available to public
servants or parents on change of residence.  


Clause 16 of the Circular requires the Education authorities to find a
suitable school for children who had passed grade 5. This was not done.
Instead the 2nd petitioner was refused entry to Grade 6 of Dharmashoka Maha
Vidyalaya as he had obtained only 139 marks at the Grade 5 scholarship
examination when the cut off point for the said Vidyalaya was 148. Instead a
student had been admitted to Grade 6 of the school on the orders of the
Ministry. The fact that the said student had obtained 158 marks was irrelevant
in view of rule 13

36



which limited students in any class to 40. But it was proved that all Grade 6
classes 6A to K had more than 40 students in each class.



Section 37 (a) of the Education Ordinance, No. 31 of 1939 also provides
com­pulsory education for children between 5-16 year of age. The Minister has
to make regulations for that matter. This too required the authorities to find
a school for the 2 nd petitioner but he was without a school since January
2002.

**Held :**



The refusal to admit the child to Dharmashoka Maha Vidyalaya was not on a
reasonable basis, but was a decision that rested on arbitrariness violative of
the 2nd petitioner's rights under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.

'The basic principle governing the concept of equality is to remove unfairness
and arbitrariness. It profoundly forbids actions which deny equality and
there­ by become discriminatory. The hallmark of the concept equality is to
ensure that fairness is out ............... "

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Vasana Wickramasena_ for petitioners

_S. Barrie._ State Counsel for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._



November 25, 2002

**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The 2nd petitioner in this application is an 11 year old boy, represented by
his next friend: the 1st petitioner, who is the moth­er of the child.
Presently the child is without a school and accord­ing to the submissions
made, is at home striving hard to study in whichever the limited way it is
conceivable. By the numerous letters which are filed of Record, it appears
that the 1st petitioner, a teacher by profession, has made every endeavour,
for her son to obtain admission to G/Dharmashoka Vidyalaya, Ambalangoda, which
is a mere 500 meters away from her permanent residence, to no avail.

37

The 1st petitioner joined the Government service as a teacher in September
1979, and was attached to Jinaratne Maha Vidyalaya, a school situated in
Galle. During the period 1988-1989 she underwent training at the Balapitiya
Teachers' Training College and was transferred to Attavilluwa Medhananda
Government School in Puttalam with effect from 01.01.1990. This transfer was
effected on the basis of compulsory service for teachers in difficult or
uncongenial areas in the country, which is generally limited to a period of 5
years. The 2nd petitioner was born in February 1991, while she was serving in
puttalam and became eligible to be admit­ted to the year 1 in January 1997\.
Since June 1995 the 1st peti­tioner had been requesting for a transfer to
Ambalangoda, admit­tedly, that being her native place. The documents marked P2
dated 19.06.1995, P3 dated 07.08.1996, P4 dated 01.11.1998 and P5 dated
28.11.2000, bear ample testimony for her unremitting efforts to obtain a
transfer to a place closer to her native place. Meanwhile the 2nd petitioner
commenced his studies at St. Andrew's Primary School in Puttalam in January
1997: admittedly a school with class­es upto Grade 5. Meanwhile the 1st
petitioner was transferred to Dharmashoka Vidyalaya, Ambalangoda with effect
from 15.06.2001 P10. Since then, the 1st petitioner had been making
applications to the 1st respondent, seeking admission for the 2nd petitioner
to the said school.



The petitioners claim that the 1st to 4th respondents have acted contrary to
Clause 15 (a) and/or Clause 16 of the Circular No. 2001/15 (P22) and thereby
infringed the 2nd petitioner's funda­mental right to equality and equal
protection of the law guaranteed to him by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.



This Court granted leave to proceed for the alleged infringe­ment of Article
12 (1) of the Constitution.



It is not disputed that, the 2nd respondent is in charge of National schools
as the Director of Education attached to the Ministry of Education. He on the
grievances of the 2nd petitioner, has taken the position that 1st petitioner's
transfer does not _per se_ qualify the 2nd petitioner to be admitted to the
same school, in terms of Clause 13 of the currently applicable School
Admission Circular No. 2001/15. His explicit submission was that the maxi­mum
number of students per class in a Government school had to

38

be maintained at 40 and if that number is exceeded, no further admissions
should be made from the date of the publication of the said Circular. Due to
the above position, the 2nd respondent sub­mitted that there were no vacancies
in year 5 of Dharmashoka Vidyalaya and the application to admit the 2nd
petitioner to Grade 5 in the year 2001 was therefore rejected.



Concerning the admission to Grade 6, he submitted that Clauses 14 and 15 of
the Circular No. 2001/15, regulate such admissions. The students who pass the
Grade 5 scholarship exam­ination were entitled to apply for entrance to a
different school wherein all such applications will be processed and
selections made by the School Affairs Division of the Ministry of Education.
For the Grade 5 scholarship holders to obtain entrance to a new school, a cut
off mark would be worked out by the Ministry of Education based on the
aggregate marks of all the applicants who have chosen the school, which
results in the cut off mark differing from school to school. Consequently, the
cut off mark for Dharmashoka Vidyalaya for admission to year 6 for the year
2002 was 148. The 2nd respondent took up the position that as the 2nd
petitioner obtained only 139 marks (P7) he was not eligible for admission to
the said school. Referring to the 6th, 8th and 10th respondents, who were
admitted to Dharmashoka Vidyalaya, the 2nd respondent stated that they were
entitled to have a legitimate expectation of being admitted to the said school
upon the marks they had obtained at the Grade 5 scholarship examination. He
fur­ther took up the position that if the 2nd petitioner was admitted to Grade
6 of Dharmashoka Vidyalaya, that would cause grave preju­dice to numerous
other applicants, who have applied, but not selected as they have fallen short
of the cut off mark by a few marks.

Admittedly the 2nd petitioner studied in a school at Puttalam, which had
classes only upto Grade 5. Circular No. 2001/15 dated 29.05.2001 provided for
such situations and Clause 16 specifically states that the Provincial Director
of Education / Zonal Director of Education should provide alternative school
for all students who have got through Grade 5 in such school. In such
circumstances, it cannot be disputed that the educational authorities were
responsi­ble in allocating a school for the 2nd petitioner. Clause 16 referred



39



to Circular No. 2001/15, does not specify any obligation on the part of a
parent to take any action for the purpose of such child gaining admission to a
school.



No material was placed before this Court to establish that either the
Provincial Director of Education for the North Western Province or the Zonal
Director of Education for Puttalam, took any action to locate a suitable
school for the 2nd petitioner. From a practical perspective it should have
been the Provincial Director of Education for the Southern Province or the
Zonal Director of Education for Ambalangoda, who should have allocated a
school for the 2nd petitioner, as his mother was transferred to Dharmashoka
Vidyalaya in June 2001. Admittedly, no steps were taken by any person in
authority in compliance with Clause 16.



Learned State Counsel for the respondents took pains to submit that in terms
of Clause 13.1 of Circular No. 2001/15, dated 29.05.2001, that the number of
students in a class of a Government school cannot exceed 40. The said Clause
states that, at the time the Circular was issued, if there were more than 40
students no more new students should be admitted to those classes. Indeed it
is a laudable decision not to overcrowd the class rooms, which would permit a
better environment that would be conducive for the students in Government
schools. However, it appears that the 1st respondent has paid no heed to the
contents of this Clause. His let­ter dated 14.03.2002 to the 2nd respondent,
which gives the breakdown of the number of students, as given below,
demon­strates that all 10 classes of Grade 6 had more than 40 students, at a
time well after the relevant Circular had come into effect:



6A-44

|

6G-44  
  
---|---  
  
6B-45

|

6H-45  
  
6C-44

|

6J-44  
  
6D-45

|

6K-45  
  
6E-45

|

  
  
6F-44

|

  
  
In the circumstances it is revealing to note that the 8th respondent was
admitted to Dharmashoka Vidyalaya on the basis of a letter, dated 08.05.2002,
issued by a Director of Education (School Affairs) of the Ministry of
Education. If I may reiterate, the

40

1st respondent, informed the 2nd respondent by letter dated 14.03.2002, that
they are not having any vacancies, as all classes are accommodating more than
40 students. However, the Ministry issued a letter in order to admit the 8th
respondent ignoring the fact that all classes by that time had more than 40
students. It is also pertinent to note that the 8th respondent was moving from
Sangamitta Girls School to Dharmashoka Vidyalaya. Admittedly, she had obtained
158 marks at the scholarship examination. However, Clause 13.1 does not refer
to any special circumstances that should be taken into consideration in
exceeding the maximum number of students in a class. It is thus clear that the
40 students limit in each class has been observed in the breach.

It is common ground that the 1st petitioner was endeavour­ing to admit the 2nd
petitioner to Dharmashoka Vidyalaya since mid 2001. At that time the 2nd
petitioner was studying in Grade 5 and the basis for such admission was the
transfer of the mother, the 1st petitioner, from Puttalam to Ambalangoda. In
this kind of a situation, the 1st respondent should have applied the
guidelines enumerated in Clause 13 of the Circular No. 2001/15.



Clause 13 of the said Circular dated 29.05.2001, provides for the following:-

"Vacancies in Grade 2 to 11 (excluding Grade six) should be filled from the
students in the following categories:

(A) students, whose parents/lawful guardian, who are public servants and have
come to reside in the area  
where the school is situated at;

(B) students whose parents/lawful guardian who has changed their/his permanent
residence to the area  
where the school is situated at.

It is not disputed that the 2nd petitioner falls into both cate­gories as the
1st petitioner was transferred and at the same time the 1st petitioner shifted
her permanent residence from Puttalam to Ambalangoda. The 1st and 2nd
respondents could have, thus con­sidered the admission of the 2nd petitioner
on the basis of Clause 13 of Circular No. 2001/15 to Grade 5.

41

The 1st petitioner was compelled to work in Puttalam, con­sidered an
uncongenial area as an administrative requirement in the service. She has
served more than double the required period of 5 years. The 2nd petitioner,
being the child, had to remain with the mother and receive his education in
the same area, nearly 200 kilometers away from his native place. When the
mother received the benefit of a transfer to her native place after more than
a decade, it is only reasonable that the child should also receive the benefit
of obtaining a school in the same area. Clause 13 vests the authorities with
ample power to grant such benefits to the child. Instead of looking at the
situation in a realistic and humane way, they have unreasonably refrained from
acting in terms of Clause 13.



The significance of Clause 16 of the said Circular, which is referred to
earlier, could be seen with reference to section 37(2) of the Education
Ordinance, No. 31 of 1939. This section refers to the powers conferred to the
Minister to make Regulations for any mat­ter referred under that section. The
items under reference include the compulsive need for a child between the ages
of 5 to 16 to attend school, and thus it reads as follows:



"(s) requiring, subject to such exemptions and qualifications as may be
contained in such regulations, the parent of any child not less than five and
not more than sixteen years of age residing within such area, to cause such
child to attend a school unless he has made adequate and suitable provi­sion
for the education of such child...."



Two broad aspects strike my mind on a consideration of the totality of the
point at issue: firstly, a child at the tender age of 11 years falling prey to
diffident decisions of the relevant authorities for no fault of his and
secondly, having been made to approach the apex Court in the country to obtain
redress for his grievance. These two matters, in my view speak volumes on the
lackadaisical attitude of the authorities concerned in this extraordinarily
important sphere of service.



The basic principle governing the concept of equality is to remove unfairness
and arbitrariness. It profoundly forbids actions, which deny equality and
thereby becomes discriminative. The hall

**42 **



mark of the concept of equality is to ensure that fairness is meted out.
Article 12(1) of the Constitution, which governs the principles of equality,
approves actions which has a reasonable basis for the decision and this Court
has not been hesitant to accept those as purely valid decisions.



However, situations such as the instant case under review cannot be applauded,
as the question in issue itself indicates clear­ly, that the refusal to admit
the child to the school was not on a rea­sonable basis, but is a decision that
rests on arbitrariness. At the time the 1st petitioner was transferred from
Puttalam to Ambalangoda, the authorities should have acted in terms of Clauses
13 and 16 of the said Circular. To reiterate; Clause 13 enu­merates a parent's
transfer and/or the change of residence as the basis for filling up vacancies
in the Grades 2 to 11, excluding Grade 6, whereas Clause 16 stipulates a
mandatory duty on the Educational authorities to allocate an alternative
school for a child who has been studying in a school which has classes only up
to Grade 5.



Considering the circumstances of this case, the following points are not in
dispute: the 1st petitioner served in an unconge­nial area for 11 years; she
obtained a transfer to Dharmashoka Vidyalaya in June 2001, her present
residence is a mere 500 meters away from the said school, her younger son was
admitted to year 1 of Dharmashoka Vidyalaya in March 2002, the 2nd peti­tioner
obtained 139 marks at the Grade 5 scholarship examination, he was attached to
a school which has classes only up to Grade 5 and since January 2002, he is
without a school.

It was Joseph Addison, in "The Spectator" who referred to the value of
Education, in the following words:



"Education is a companion which no misfortune can depress, no crime can
destroy, no enemy can alienate, no despotism can enslave. At home a friend,
abroad an introduction, in soli­tude a solace, and in society an ornament. It
chastens vice, it guides virtue, it gives at once, a grace and government to
genius.

43

Without it what is man? A splendid slave, a reasoning savage."



The 2nd petitioner has been denied his cherished companion of education and
compelled to languish at home whilst, the 1st peti­tioner, his mother teaches
other children in the school located with 500 meters from his home. This was
due to unreasonableness and arbitrariness in executive and administrative
action in the failure to take a necessary action in terms of Clauses 13 and 16
of Circular No. 2001/15, at the appropriate stage.



For the aforementioned reasons, I hold that the 2nd petition­er's fundamental
right guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been infringed by
the State. I have made the State responsible, as the liability of this
infringement cannot be attributed to any single officer of the Ministry of
Education. The 2nd respondent is directed to make necessary arrangements for
the 2nd petitioner to be admitted to the Grade 6 of the G/Dharmashoka Maha
Vidyalaya, Ambalangoda, forthwith. The State is directed to pay a sum of Rs.
25,000/- to the 2nd petitioner as compensation and costs, for being deprived
of formal education at a vital stage in his life. This amount is to be
deposited, within a month from today, in a "Hapan" Childrens' Savings Account
at the National Savings Bank, Ambalangoda Branch in the name of the 2nd
petitioner and the 1st petitioner as the guardian for such account.

**S.N. SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.  
**YAPA, J.   ** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/21.html_  

