##  Senasinghe v. Karunatilleke, Senior Superintendent of Police, Nugegoda and
Others - SLR - 172, Vol 1 of 2003 [2001] LKSC 21; (2003) 1 Sri LR 172 (7
September 2001)

172

**SENASINGHE**

**v.** ****

**KARUNATILLEKE, SENIOR SUPERINTENDENT**

**OF POLICE,** ****

**NUGEGODA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

GUNASEKERA, J. AND

WIGNESWARAN, J.

SC NO. 431/2001 (FR)

3rd DECEMBER, 2002 AND 6th JANUARY, 2003

_Fundamental Rights - Protest march against prorogation of Parliament
-Referendum on Constitutional proposal - Articles 70 and 86 of the
Constitution- Police action to disperse the procession - Section 45 of the
Referendum Act-Violation of the right to freedom movement of the petitioner \-
Excessive shooting of rubber bullets - Arrest of petitioner - Articles
14(1)(h), 11 and 13(1) of the Constitution - Jurisdiction of the court to
review validity of the Referendum._

173

By a Proclamation dated 10.7.2001 under Article 70 of the Constitution the
President prorogued Parliament until 7.9.2001. By another Proclamation of the
same date acting under Article 86 of the Constitution read with section 2 of
the Referendum Act she directed the Commissioner of Elections to hold a
Referendum of the people on the need of a "New Constitution." According to
media information a group of opposition parties decided to hold a protest
rally at Maradana. Permission for the march was refused by the then Inspector
General of Police Laki Kodituwakku (now deceased) under section 45 of the
Referendum Act. One such march was to commence at the Nugegoda junc­tion and
to proceed on the High Level Road to Maradana.



The evidence does not establish that the petitioner was a participant in the
march. He was an attorney-at-law who had been on his way to Wijerama South of
Nugegoda to obtain second hand spare parts. Due to the gathering of protesters
at the Nugegoda junction he could not proceed. So he parked his car near the
"Park' N Shop" North of the Nugegoda junction where he bought a packet of
potato chips.Then he proceeded southward towards the Nugegoda junction in
search of a restaurant for refreshments.



The police acted solely under section 45 of the Referendum Act which
prohib­ited processions during the Referendum period and not for want of
notice of the march under section 77 of the Police Ordinance. Nor did they act
under section 78 of the Ordinance which empowered the police to maintain
public order or to prevent a breach of the peace or obstruction of the
streets. The pro­cession marched along the High Level Road notwithstanding an
oral prohibi­tion by the 1st respondent Senior Superintendent of Police.

At that stage the police fired tear gas which struck the petitioner. When he
wanted to return to his car police officers ordered him to go towards the
Nugegoda junction where there were protestors. At that stage there were
pedestrians on both sides of the road as proved by a photograph. The
peti­tioner identified himself as an attorney-at-law but on the orders of the
1st respondent the police officers shot at his face with rubber bullets. He
was arrested and released due to his injuries for which he was hospitalized
for two weeks. He had pellets in his head, arms and spinal area and other
injuries above his feet which were caused by the shooting which was carried
out con­trary to the relevant Police Rules.

**Held :** ****

1\. The proposed Referendum was invalid as the question submitted to the
People was incapable of an intelligible and meaningful answer. Hence section
45 of the Referendum Act under which the police acted had no application. The
court has the jurisdiction to review the legal aspects of the Referendum,
particularly as the Parliament which could question the political aspects of
the Referendum had been prorogued.

174

2\. By preventing the petitioner from returning to his car, the 1st
respon­dent infringed his right to freedom of movement under Article 14(1 )(h)
of the Constitution. By ordering his subordinates to fire at the peti­tioner
and to injure him the 1st respondent infringed the petitioner's rights under
Article 11 of the Constitution; and by ordering his arrest the 1st respondent
infringed Article 13(1) of the Constitution.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

_"_ As I observed ten years ago "stifling the peaceful expression of
legiti­mate dissent today, can only result, inexorably, in the catastrophic
explosion of violence some other day. Democracy requires not merely that
dissent be tolerated, but that it be encouraged and the oblig­ations of the
Executive is expressly recognized by Article 4(d), so that the police too must
respect, secure and advance the right to dissent....."

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights

**Cases referred to :**

1.                     _Wickramabandu v Herath -_ (1990) 2 Sri LR 348,358

2.                     _Premachandra v Jayawickrama -_ (1994) 2 Sri Lr 90,107-111

3.                     _State of Rajasthan v Union of India -_ AIR 1977 SC 1361,1413

4.                     _Dinesh Chandra v Charan Singh_ AIR \- 1980 DELHI 114

5.                     _Adegbebro v Akintola -_ (1963) 3 ALL ER 544

6.                     _Ramupillai v Festus Perera -_ (1991) SRI LR 11

7.                     _Perera et al v Pathirana -_ SC 453/97 SCM 30.1.2003

8.                     _Karunatilleke v Dissanayake -_ (1999) 1 Sri LR 157

9.                     _Amaratunga v Sirimal_ \- (1993) 1 Sri LR 264,271

10.               _Wijeratne v Perera -_ SC 379/93 SCM 2.3.94

11.               _West Virginia State Board of Education v Bamette -_ (1943) 319 US  
624,641

_Ikram Mohamed PC._ with _S. Jayawardena, F. Cassim _and _A.M. Faiz_ for
petitioner

_ _

_Manohara de Silva_ for 1st respondent

_ _

_P. Ranasinghe,_ State Counsel for 3rd and 4th respondents.

# Cur. adv. vult

**175**

March 17,2003

**FERNANDO, J.**



The Petitioner, an attorney-at-law, alleges that on 19.7.2001 between 10.30
a.m. and 10.50 a.m. his fundamental rights under Articles 11, 13(1) and 14
(1)(h) were infringed by the 1st Respondent, the Senior Superintendent of
Police ("SSP") Nugegoda, and other Police officers carrying out his orders in
rela­tion to a protest march.



On 10.7.2001, by Proclamation (Gazette 1192/14 of 10.7.201) under Article 70
of the Constitution the President pro­rogued Parliament until 7.9.2001.
Simultaneously, by another Proclamation (Gazette 1192/16 of 10.7.2001) under
Article 86 of the Constitution, read with section 2 of the Referendum Act, No.
7 of 1981, the President directed the Commissioner of Elections to conduct a
Referendum on 21.8.2001, specifying "the proposal to be put to the People at
such Referendum" (which I will refer to as the "Referendum Proposal") as:



"Is a new constitution as a matter of national importance and necessity needed
for the country?"

Article 86 provides:



"The President may, subject to the provisions of Article 85, submit to the
People by Referendum any matter which in the opin­ion of the President is of
national importance"



Article 87(2) required Parliament to provide by law, _inter alia,_ for the
matters relating to the procedure for the submission of Bills and of matters
of national importance to the People by Referendum. Parliament enacted the
Referendum Act, which pro­vides:

2\. (1) A Referendum in terms of Chapter XIII of the Constitution shall be
conducted by the Commissioner of  
Elections................ where the President has, by Proclamation pub­lished
in the Gazette, directed such Commissioner to con­  
duct a Referendum.

176

2) A Proclamation issued under subsection (1) shall -



(a) specify the proposal to be put to the people at the Referendum in the form
of a question which shall be answered by a "Yes" or a "No"....

45\. No person -



(a) Shall, at any time from the date of publication of the Proclamation in
respect of a Referendum and ending on the day immediately following the date
on which the result... is declared, conduct, hold or take part in any
procession other than a procession on May 1...."

**UNDISPUTED FACTS**

Some Opposition parties and groups, under the name "Alliance for the
Protection of Democracy", had orgainzed six protest marches for 19.7.2001 for
the purpose - according to the Petitioner - of protesting against the
prorogation of Parliament and of calling upon the Government to reconvene
Parliament and to uphold and preserve democracy. In his affidavit the 1st
Respondent claimed that the proposed march was not for a peaceful purpose and
"was being organized mainly against the holding of the Referendum". However,
he himself produced a _" Lankadipa" _news­paper report, dated 19.7.2001,
according to which UNP Deputy Leader Gamini Athukorale had informed the Police
of the proposed march under the theme _" Reconvene Parliament" _and had
request­ed Police protection, but had been told that permission had been
refused by the 3rd Respondent, the then Inspector-General of Police (now
deceased), under section 45 of the Referendum Act. No other reason was
mentioned. The six marches were to termi­nate at Maradana junction, where a
protest rally was to be held, after which there was to be a mammoth march to
the President's House. One such march was due to start from the Nugegoda
junc­tion and to proceed on the High Level Road to Maradana.



A large number of people had gathered at the southern end of the Nugegoda
junction by about 9.45 a.m. The 1st Respondent stated that he had been
informed by the Superintendent of Police ("SP") Nugegoda, that the latter's
request to the people to disperse

177



had not been obeyed, and that he had ordered the SP that "no force whatsoever
should be used, but to pursue his powers of per­suasion to stall the people
from proceeding until he arrived." He arrived at the Nugegoda junction at
about 10.20 a.m. and assessed the situation. At 10.29 a.m. he went up to the
protesters and spoke to Members of Parliament Ravi Karunanayake and Gamini
Athukorale, "who were leading the mob and requested them to advise their
supporters... to refrain from proceeding in view of the order made by the IGP
_in view of section 45 ". _Neither then nor later was any other reason given
for ordering the protesters to dis­perse. However, the two Parliamentarians
insisted that they would proceed with the march as planned. No proceedings
were institut­ed against those two leaders of the "mob" for any offence under
section 45.



A Police officer had been given the task of videotaping the activities of both
the Police and the protesters. The 1st Respondent produced the videotape and
several still photographs from the videotape. Together with Counsel we viewed
the videotape and it was then discovered that immediately after some
photographs taken at 10.48 a.m. there appeared photographs taken at 10.50 a.m.
\- so that all photographs taken at 10.49 a.m. (and perhaps a few taken even
before and after) were missing. The Police officer who had videotaped the
march stated in his affidavit that he had viewed the videotape before
presenting it to Court. However, in their affidavits, neither he nor the 1st
Respondent offered any explanation as to the missing minute in the videotape.



While there is some dispute as to what exactly happened between 10.30 a.m. and
10.50 a.m. photographs taken at 10.50 a.m. showed that the Petitioner had
received some injury. It is not disputed that shortly before 10.50 a.m. the
1st Respondent had ordered the SP Nugegoda, who was in charge of the Police
party, to order his subordinates to fire rubber bullets at the crowd, in
con­sequence of which the petitioner suffered injuries on the back of his
head, on the back of one arm and near his spine. He was hospi­talized, first
at Asiri Hospital in Colombo and then at the General Hospital, Kandy, and
underwent three surgical operations - to extract three pellets, from the head,
the arm and the spinal area. He was under treatment for a period of two weeks
thereafter.

178



 Supporting medical reports and X-rays proved that these were not superficial
injuries. Not only did he suffer pain, dizziness and loss of memory but he was
also unable to engage in his profession.



The Petitioner produced, without objection, what was described as Police
Departmental Orders applicable to the "Dispersal of crowds and unlawful
assemblies and the use of firearms on rioters", which provide as follows:

"Rules to be observed by the Police when compelled to use
firearms..............

2 . (iii) If the officer-in-command should be of opinion that a slight effort
would suffice, he will give the word of command to fire only to two specified
men. If a greater effort should be required, he will give the word of command
to the whole squad, or to as many of the squad as may be necessary to fire. He
will direct the firing party _to fire low_ i.e., below the knees of the
persons on whom they are ordered to fire.



(iv) Care is to be taken _not to fire upon persons separated_ _from the
crowd....._

**Civil Force**



When an armed party is brought on to the scene.... _as little_ _force must be
used and as little injury caused_ as is consistent with dispersing the
assembly and arresting and detaining the offend­ers



4\. To ensure that all Police officers are thoroughly cognizant of their
powers in using firearms they are required to learn by heart.... (the
following precis of their powers)....



'If I see a mob committing or attempting to commit any of the following crimes
-

(a)                  Murder or grievous hurt

(b)                  Robbery

(c)                  Burning or damaging by means of explosives..........

(d)                  Breaking into houses, shops .... by night

(e)                  (attacking?) houses, shops....in such a way as may

179

cause death of or grievous hurt to any inmate......... and if

there is no other way to stop the mob -



/ _am entitled to FIRE UPON THE MOB TO PROTECT THE PERSONS AND PROPERTY IN
DANGER....'_

Note - Whenever Police are compelled to use fire arms, a careful note is to be
made, when firing ceases, by the senior Police officer present of the number
of rounds actually fired. _The number of rounds fired must be recorded..._

**Amount of force that may be used.**

(a)       Fire should be opened only when such action is _absolutely_
_necessary to prevent the commission of the crimes men­_ _tioned above_ and it
is clear that the mob intends to persist in its action....

(b)       You may be so placed that an order to fire may involve risk to
innocent bystanders. _If peoples' lives are in danger how­  
ever, _and you cannot otherwise save them, _you are entitled  
__to take the risk of injuring these bystanders._

(c)       No more force must be used than is reasonable in the par­ticular
circumstances of each case...."(emphasis added)

**THE PETITIONER'S VERSION**



According to the Petitioner, after a consultation with a client, he left
Hulftsdorp at 9.30 a.m. with a friend for Wijerama, Nugegoda (which is south
of the Nugegoda junction) in order to purchase some second-hand spare parts.
On his way he parked his car at the "Park 'N Shop" supermarket (north of
Nugegoda junction) where he purchased a packet of potato chips. The machine-
printed receipt recorded the time of purchase as 10.17 a.m. Then, finding that
he could not proceed in his vehicle due to the gathering of pro­testers at the
Nugegoda junction, the Petitioner left his car at the supermarket and with his
friend walked towards the junction in search of a restaurant for refreshments.
People were freely moving around and there were Police officers on both sides
of the road, who were not restricting the free movement of people. This is con

180

firmed by a photograph taken at 10.23 a.m. which shows the Petitioner at the
northern part of the Nugegoda junction, close to group of Police officers but
nowhere near the protesters.



Although the 1st Respondent claimed that the Petitioner was a willing
participant in the protest, and not a mere bystander, it is clear that up to
10.23 a.m. he had no connection with the protesters.



The Petitioner claimed that the Police suddenly and arbitrar­ily fired tear
gas at random without any previous warning, towards the protesters at the
junction who were about 150 meters away. Several bystanders, including the
Petitioner and his friend, were caught in-between and had to take shelter from
the tear gas for about 15 minutes. The tear gas affected the Petitioner's
eyes, and caused him breathing difficulties, and he was thrown into a state of
confusion and shock. He decided to get back to his car at the supermarket.
However, a group of Police officers ordered him to turn back and go towards
the Nugegoda junction. The Petitioner explained that he and his friend were
not part of the protesters and were merely bystanders who wished to return to
their car. At this point the 1st Respondent came up. The Petitioner then
produced his lawyer's identity card and explained the reason for his presence
at the scene. Despite that explanation, the 1st Respondent threat­ened and
abused the Petitioner; and ordered him to run towards the protesters. No
details were given of the threats and abuse except that the 1st Respondent
barked out the words "get out". Upon seeing the Petitioner being accosted by
the 1st Respondent, two attorneys-at-law came up from among the protesters,
and inquired as to what was taking place. The Petitioner again explained to
the 1st Respondent and the two attorneys that he was only trying to get back
to his car. However, the 1st Respondent con­tinued to threaten the Petitioner
and ordered him to run towards the protesters. (This is supported by a
newspaper photograph, pro­duced by the Petitioner, which showed the Petitioner
and several Police Officers, including the 1st Respondent whose outstretched
arm was pointing towards the junction.) When the Petitioner refused to turn
back the 1st Respondent asked him, _" thamuseta bullet oneda?" _("Do you want
bullets?")The Petitioner then sug­gested that the 1st Respondent accompany him
to his car. Disregarding that request the 1st Respondent ordered his

181



subordinates to open fire on the Petitioner. Those officers, however, were
hesitant but when the 1st Respondent repeated his order they fired at the
ground close to the Petitioner. The Petitioner pleaded with the 1st Respondent
not to open fire but to take him into custody if necessary. The 1st Respondent
then screamed at his subordinates ordering them to shoot the Petitioner in the
face. When the Police officers aimed their guns at him, in fear the Petitioner
turned and went towards the protesters as ordered. Nevertheless, he says, he
was shot at a range of about 10 meters. One of the other attorneys-at-law too
sustained bullet injuries.



The Petitioner was outraged, but despite being in pain and bleeding, he
approached the 1st Respondent and asked why he had given orders to shoot.
(This is supported by a newspaper pho­tograph produced by the Petitioner as
well as a videophotograph taken at 10.50 a.m., both of which showed the
Petitioner with his hand pressed to the back of his head.) The 1st Respondent
then asked the Petitioner, _" Kewa madida, thawa bullet bassandada?"
_("Haven't you had enough, do you want more bullets?") The Petitioner
persisted in questioning the 1st Respondent who then ordered his arrest. (This
is supported by another newspaper pho­tograph which showed a Police officer
holding the Petitioner by his tie). He was then handed over to another group
of Police officers, who did not detain him any further. Video-photographs
taken at 10.50 a.m. showed the petitioner (holding the back of his head) and
one other civilian in close proximity to the Police officers, with no sign of
any other civilians in the vicinity.

**THE 1ST RESPONDENT'S VERSION**

The 1st Respondent stated that the 3rd Respondent had a meeting on 17.7.2001
with Deputy Inspector-Generals and SSP' s in charge in Divisions in Colombo.
At that meeting the 3rd Respondent directed those officers not to permit
protest marches in view of section 45 of the Referendum Act. That was the sole
rea­son, and it was not pleaded or contended that those directions were given
under section 77(3) of the Police Ordinance "in the interests of the
preservation of public order". The 2nd Respondent, DIG Western Province, was
discharged prior to the hearing.

182

On 19.7.2001, immediately after speaking to the two Members of Parliament, the
1st Respondent ordered that barri­cades be placed across the High Level Road,
at a point about 150 meters north of the Nugegoda junction, in order to
prevent the pro­testers from proceeding to Colombo. Nevertheless the
protesters commenced their march at about 10.30 a.m., brushing aside the
Police officers and disregarding repeated appeals to disperse "as they were
committing an offence under section 45". A video-photo­graph at 10.32 a.m.
shows the protesters calmly walking from the junction towards Colombo with no
sign of unruliness or violence. The 1st Respondent claimed that the Petitioner
appeared in that photograph, proving that he was an active and willing
participant in the protest, but the Petitioner denied that he was the person
depicted in the photographs, and we are unable to hold on a bal­ance of
probability that the 1st Respondent was correct.

At about 10.34 a.m., despite repeated warnings, the protest­ers grappled with
the Police, pushed down the barricades, and attacked the Police with missiles.
As the crowd was violent and as there was a breach of the peace, the 1st
Respondent ordered firing of tear gas, in consequence of which the crowd
dispersed and went back towards the Nugegoda junction. The 1st Respondent
con­tended that there was a footpath, by the side of the High Level Road,
along which the Petitioner could have got back to his own car without
confronting the Police.



The 1st Respondent stated that "rubber bullets were fired from a position
about 70 meters (away) only when the mobs were attacking the police and were
advancing towards them with mis­siles". He did not claim that the kind of
injury or damage referred to in the Departmental Orders has occurred or was
anticipated, nor that he had ordered firing below the knees. He also did not
give any further clarification as to how the Petitioner was injured, nor any
particulars as to the weapons and ammunition issued to the Police officers and
the number of rounds actually fired, but he did produce some internal
correspondence in which the opinion had been expressed that rubber bullets
_could be_ fatal at under 30 meters. He stated that he could not recall the
Petitioner being injured, but could remember giving instructions to the Police
officers to take a person who was injured to hospital; that he did not order
that the Petitioner

183

be arrested; and that he only wanted to help the Petitioner by order­ing the
Police officers to take him to hospital, but the Petitioner's friends
volunteered to do so.

##  

## CONTENTIONS

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner contended that the protest march was lawful
and peaceful; that the Petitioner was not a par­ticipant in that protest but
only a bystander; that by preventing him from retuning to his car the 1st
Respondent and other Police offi­cers had infringed his freedom of movement
under Article 14(1 )(h); that by shooting at and wounding him in the back,
while separated from the protesters, they had subjected him to cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment in violation of Article 11; and that his subse­quent
arrest on the 1st Respondent's order was an infringement of Article 13(1).

Learned Counsel for the 1st Respondent submitted that the protest march was
not peaceful and was unlawful by virtue of sec­tion 45 of the Referendum Act;
that the Petitioner was a willing par­ticipant; that he could have left the
place and returned to his car, but chose to remain; that despite police
warnings to the protesters to disperse they pushed down the barricades; that
when the crowd was advancing and throwing missiles, the 1st Respondent was
compelled to order his subordinates to shoot with rubber bullets at a distance
of over 50 meters; that the Petitioner "only suffered slight injuries"; and
that the Police did not arrest him.

In the course of the oral hearing it was pointed out to learned Counsel for
the 1st Respondent and to learned State Counsel that the prohibition on
processions imposed by section 45 seemed to apply only if a Referendum \- i.e.
a _valid_ Referendum, and not merely a _purported_ Referendum - had been duly
called under sec­tion 2, but not otherwise; and that, arguably, the Referendum
Proposal was outside the scope of section 2, because the question submitted
was not capable of being answered, unambiguously, "Yes" or "No". On those
issues, the 1st Respondent's position was stated thus in written submissions
filed after judgment was reserved:

  

184



"....................Whilst the President could have framed the question
differently it cannot be said that the question formulated is not legal. These
questions are political questions beyond the jurisdiction of the court. In any
event the 1st Respondent...in the position  
(in which he was placed) on the morning of 19.7.2001 could not have reasonably
(been) expected to scrutinize the legality or the propriety of the President's
question. The 1st Respondent was well entitled to presume that all official
acts are regularly performed. The 1st Respondent acted bona fide and therefore
did not act in violation of the Petitioners fundamental rights.



If the protest march was unlawful, the Police were entitled to use reasonable
force to disperse the crowd, and the issues in this case would then have
centred on whether they had used excessive force. It, however, the march was
lawful, peaceful and orderly, the issues would have been whether they were
entitled to use any force at all, and whether they were entitled to take any
risk at all injuring bystanders. It is therefore necessary to decide whether
the march was unlawful.



It was not the 1st Respondent's position that the march was unlawful by reason
of any failure to give notice under section 77 of the Police Ordinance, or
that it became necessary to disperse the marchers because of directions given
in the interests of public order or to prevent an apprehended breach of the
peace or obstruction of the streets (cf sections 77(3) and 78 of the Police
Ordinance).



### THE REFERENDUM

It is therefore necessary to examine several issues in regard to the validity
of the Proclamation and the Referendum Proposal.



1.      Did the prohibition on processions imposed by section 45 of the Referendum Act apply only where there had been a valid Proclamation under section 2?

2.      Does this Court lack jurisdiction to determine whether the Proclamation was valid and/or whether the Referendum Proposal had been duly formulated, because those were "political questions"?

185

3.                     If this Court does have jurisdiction, was the Proclamation invalid because the proposal for submission to the People  
by Referendum was not a question satisfying the require­ments of section 2?  


4.                     Even if the Proclamation was invalid for that reason, did the1st Respondent act _bona fide_ and in the reasonable belief  
that the Proclamation was valid and that section 45 was applicable to the
protest march, and was therefore not liable  
for any violation of the Petitioner's fundamental right?



1\. Articles 14(1)(a) and 14(1 )(b) recognize the freedom of citizens
peacefully to express their views and to assemble. They protect the right of
citizens to go in procession and to hold rallies, in order to manifest their
protests against acts and decisions, including those of the Government.
Section 45 of the Referendum Act constitutes a restriction on those rights.
Article 15 permits "restrictions" on fun­damental rights, but does not
contemplate or authorize _unreason­_ _able_ restrictions _(Wickremabandu v
Herath,(1)-_ Section 45 is thus an exercise by Parliament of the power to
impose reasonable restrictions. Accordingly, if there is some ambiguity as to
the scope of the restriction imposed by Parliament in section 45, that
inter­pretation should be preferred which would make such restriction
reasonable, rather than that which would make it unreasonable. In any event,
as a matter of general principle, restrictions on the rights of citizens must
be narrowly construed rather than broadly; and ref­erences by Parliament to
Proclamations, Referenda and other offi­cial acts, must be assumed to include
only lawful and valid acts. Finally, the fundamental rights are one
manifestation of the sover­eignty of the People, and the acts of all three
organs of Government must, as far as reasonably possible, be interpreted so as
to advance rather than to derogate from the fundamental rights, and the
Judiciary, as part of the State, is committed to achieving "the full
realization of the fundamental rights and freedoms of all persons" (of
Articles 4(d) and 27(2)(a)).



For all those reasons, I hold that the prohibition in section 45 only applies
where there has been a valid Proclamation in respect of a valid Referendum
Proposal.



2\. The argument that this Court lacks jurisdiction to determine questions
relating to the exercise of executive powers simply



186



because they are "political questions" was firmly rejected in _Premachandra v
Jayawickrama_ (2). That decision dealt with the power of Provincial Governors
(under Article 154F) to appoint Chief Ministers. In dealing with that
argument, I cited the observations of Bhagwati, J, (as he then was), in _State
of Rajasthan v Union of_ _India_ (3).



"....So long as a question arises whether an authority under the Constitution
has acted within the limits of its power or exceeded it, it can certainly be
decided by the Court. Indeed, it would be its constitutional obligation to do
so.... No one howsoever highly placed and no authority howso­ever lofty can
claim that it shall be the sole judge of the extent of its power under the
Constitution or whether its action is within the confines of such power laid
down by the Constitution. This Court is the ultimate interpreter of the
Constitution.... It is for this Court to uphold the constitution­al values and
to enforce the constitutional limitations. That is the essence of the Rule of
Law...."



Reference was also made to the fact that the Courts did not decline to review
even the appointment and removal of the Prime Minister, in India (in _Dinesh
Chandra v Charan Singh.W_ and in Nigeria (in _Adegbenro v Akintola(5))._



It is now firmly established that all powers and discretions conferred upon
public authorities and functionaries are held upon trust for the public, to be
used reasonably, in good faith, and upon lawful and relevant grounds of public
interest; that they are not unfettered, absolute or unreviewable; and that the
legality and pro­priety of their exercise must be judged by reference to the
purpos­es for which they were conferred.



In accordance with those principles, this Court has reviewed the acts of the
entire Cabinet of Ministers inclusive of the President _(Ramupillai v Festus
Perera (5); Perera et al. v Pathiranap)_ SC 453/97 SCM 30.1.2003), and of the
President _{Wickremabandu v_ _Herath; Karunatilleke v Dissanayake,(7)_ despite
Article 35 which only provides a shield of _personal_ immunity from
proceedings _in_ _courts and tribunals,_ leaving the impugned acts themselves
open to judicial review.

187

There is another aspect of the "political questions" argument. The exercise of
many powers, Constitutional and statutory, would have both legal and political
aspects. While it is appropriate that the Judiciary should review only the
legal aspects, the question arises whether the political aspects are
reviewable at all, except by the People themselves at the next election. It
appears to me that in that respect the role of Parliament - as the elected
representatives of the People - has been recognized in Articles 42 and 43,
which essentially ensure the responsibility of the Executive to Parliament for
the due exercise of all powers, Constitutional and statutory. Article 35 has
no application to proceedings in _Parliament_ under Articles 42 and 43. Hence
the "political questions" argument is only correct to this extent: questions
of legality are for the Judiciary alone to determine, and political questions
are left for the People and their elected representatives.



It must also be remembered that in this case when the Referendum was called
for on 10.7.2001, Parliament was simulta­neously prorogued until 7.9.2001 -
more than a fortnight _after_ the scheduled date of the Referendum.
Consequently, Parliament was denied the opportunity of exercising whatever
powers it has under Article 42. In that background, declining jurisdiction on
the basis of the "political questions" argument would have served to place the
Proclamation beyond review, thus undermining the Rule of Law.



I therefore hold that this Court does have jurisdiction to con­sider whether
the Proclamation and the Referendum Proposal were in conformity with the
Constitution and the Referendum Act.

3\. I have now to consider the validity of the Referedum Proposal as set out
in the impugned Proclamation. Section 2(2)(a) requires that a Proclamation
"shall specify the proposal to be put to the People at the Referendum in the
form of a question which shall be answered by a 'Yes' or a 'No'..."

A Referendum is an electoral process that is little different to any nation-
wide election, in respect of the enormous expenditure of public funds and the
disruption of day-to-day life involved - includ­ing danger to life and limb,
and damage to property. It cannot light­ly be assumed that Parliament intended
that process to be used except in a manner which would yield an intelligible,
meaningful and useful result.

188

Article 3 defines the sovereignty of the People as including the powers of
government; and Article 4(a) defines one component of sovereignty to be the
legislative power, which shall be excercised by Parliament and by the People
at a Referendum. A Referendum is, _prima facie,_ an exercise of legislative
power, and a Referendum under Article 85 is clearly a part of the legislative
process. However, Article 86 is in wider terms, and a Referendum under that
Article does not appear to be necessarily a part of the legislative process,
although it may be a prelude to legislation. But even a Referendum under that
Article would be a costly exercise in futility unless it yields a meaningful
result, conveying the opinion of the People with a sufficient degree of
clarity and precision as to constitute a man­date for future governmental
action.



In my opinion, section 2(2)(a) permits submission for Referendum only of
questions the answer to which - whether "Yes" or "No" \- would convey clear,
intelligible and meaningful informa­tion on issues relevant to future
governmental action.

The impugned proposal must now be scrutinized. The answer "No" would have been
somewhat ambiguous, and could accurately have been given by three different
groups of persons: those who thought that a new Constitution, though needed,
was not of national importance and necessity, as other matters were more
urgent and important; those who thought a _new_ Constitution was not needed,
but that the existing one needed amendment; and those who thought neither a
new Constitution nor amendments were needed.



The answer "Yes" would have been even more ambiguous, and could have been
given by several different groups of persons, agreed only upon the need for a
new Constitution, but holding whol­ly divergent views as to what that
Constitution should provide. Thus those in favour of a new _unitary_
Constitution as well as those in favour of new _federal_ Constitution would
vote "Yes", and a major­ity "Yes" vote would therefore fail to reveal what
number of voters favoured each alternative. Furthermore, there would have been
even more confusion on that issue, because some voters who pre­ferred a
unitary Constitution could also have accurately have voted "No". Hence on the
issue - _" unitary" _or _" federal"? - _the result would have been
inconclusive and ambiguous. There would have been



189



 similar divergent views on other issues: such as, _Presidential_ _Executive,_
or _Parliamentary Executive?_ Elections according to Proportional
Representation, or the old _Constituency System,_ or some other system? Thus a
"Yes" vote would have lumped togeth­er, for example, those who desired a
Federal system with a Parliamentary Executive elected on the Constituency
system, as well as their most vigorous opponents who favoured a Unitary
sys­tem with a Presidential Executive and elections by Proportional
Representation. There are other important aspects of a new Constitution: the
sharing of governmental powers, judicial review of legislation and executive
action, fundamental rights and their enforcement, appointments to high posts,
etc. The purpose of a Referendum is to obtain the verdict of the People, and a
series of questions should (and could) have been so formulated that a majority
"Yes" vote would have clearly disclosed at least the main features which the
majority of the electorate agreed should be incorporated in the new
Constitution; and so that a "No" vote would have disclosed without ambiguity
why a new Constitution was not desired.

I hold that the impugned proposal did not satisfy the require­ments of section
2(2)(a) of the Referendum Act, and the Proclamation was therefore invalid, and
section 45 did not apply to the protest march.

If, and to the extent that, that march and the intended rally were a peaceful
protest against the Referendum and prorogation of Parliament, and a plea for
the reconvening of Parliament and the restoration of democracy, they were a
legitimate exercise of the freedoms of speech and expression, and of peaceful
assembly, under Articles 14(1)(a) and (b). Although section 45 was not
oper­ative, yet those freedoms were subject to inherent and intrinsic
lim­itations, in that they should not have been exercised on public streets
and pavements so as to deny or infringe the rights of other users of such
streets and pavements. There is no evidence of any such infringement or
interference, and whatever inconvenience was caused could probably have been
avoided if the Police had allowed the march to proceed, and regulated and
controlled its con­duct using the powers conferred by sections 77 and 78 of
the Police Ordinance, as indeed they do in regard to the many processions,

190

peraheras, marches and walks which are a part of the Sri Lankan scene.

4\. If the 1st Respondent had acted _bona fide_ that would have been a
mitigatory factor which, however, would not exempt him from liability.

**FINDINGS OF FACT**

The evidence establishes that the protesters had assembled peacefully in
preparation for a lawful protest march at Nugegoda junction; that the Police
on the instructions of the 1st Respondent had unlawfully prevented them from
proceeding on their march, probably resulting in some obstruction to the
streets; that when they commenced their march at 10.30 a.m. the Police had
unlaw­fully attempted to stop them, using tear gas as well; that the
pro­testers were thereby pushed back south of the Nugegoda junction; that the
Police acted on the sole ground that section 45 was applic­able, and not on
account of any actual or apprehended breach of the peace, or obstruction of
the streets, or to prevent the commis­sion of any of the offences specified in
the Police Departmental Orders; that the protesters then resorted to throwing
sticks and stones at the Police; that the Petitioner was not a participant in
the protest march; that the 1st Respondent prevented the Petitioner from
leaving the scene and proceeding towards his car, and peremptorily directed
him to go towards the protesters; that the Petitioner was probably unaware of
any footpath by the side of the High Level Road and/or that this led to the
supermarket, and after a heated argument trurned and went towards the
protesters as ordered; that nevertheless the 1st Respondent callously ordered
his subordinates to open fire, but without directing them to fire low; that
the Petitioner received injuries from behind, whilst he was mov­ing away from
the Police officers; that such injuries were inflicted when the Petitioner was
about 10 meters away from the Police offi­cers, and so far separated from the
protesters that such firing was not related to any genuine attempt to disperse
the protesters, or to prevent any specified offence, and was without due
regard to the risk of injury to bystanders; that alternatively, even assuming
as claimed by the 1st Respondent that the Petitioner was then over 50 meters
away from the Police, he was not advancing towards the

191

Police, and such firing was unrelated to any attempt to disperse the
protesters; that such firing was in all material respects contrary to the
clear provisions of the Police Departmental Orders, and, in the circumstances,
not capable of being excused or mitigated by any _bona fide_ belief that the
protest was unlawful; that thereafter the Petitioner was arrested on the 1st
Respondent's orders, but released almost immediately; and that the Petitioner
suffered seri­ous injuries requiring surgery and hospitalization, and
consequen­tial loss and damage.



Even if I were to assume _both_ that the protest march was unlawful, _and_
that the Petitioner was a willing participant, yet in the circumstances the
use of firearms (especially directed above the knees) was unjustified,
unreasonable, excessive and in violation of the Departmental Orders (which re-
iterated the applicable legal provisions).

**ORDER**

I hold that by preventing the Petitioner from returning to his car, the 1st
Respondent infringed his freedom of movement under Article 14(1)(h); that by
causing his subordinates to open fire on, and to injure, the Petitioner, the
1st Respondent subjected him to cruel and inhuman treatment in violation of
Article 11; and that by ordering the Petitioner's arrest, the 1st Respondent
infringed his fundamental right under Article 13(1).

As for compensation, the infringement of Article 11 was par­ticularly grave
and reprehensible because the 1st Respondent not only acted with high-handed
disregard for the Departmental Orders but displayed a callous indifference to
human suffering, while sup­pressing a democratic protest. As I observed ten
years ago, "sti­fling the peaceful expression of legitimate dissent today can
only result, inexorably, in the catastrophic explosion of violence some other
day" _(Amaratunga v Sirimal (9)._ Democracy requires not merely that dissent
be tolerated, but that it be encouraged, and that obligation of the Executive
is expressly recognized by Article 4(d), so that the Police too must respect,
secure and advance the right to dissent _{Wijeratne v Perera (10)_ for as
cautioned in _West Virginia_ _State Board of Education v Barnette,_ (11),
"those who begin coercive

192



elimination of dissent soon find themselves exterminating dis­senters".



I therefore award the Petitioner compensation in a sum of Rs 200,000 for the
infringement of Article 11 and in a sum of Rs 10,000 for the infringement of
Articles 13(1) and 14(1)(h), together with costs in a sum of Rs 25,000,
payable on or before 31.5.2003. While the infringements were the consequence
of improper governmental decision for which the 1st Respondent was not
responsible, he nev­ertheless acted in bad faith, and in excess and abuse of
his pow­ers. I therefore order the 1st Respondent personally to pay a sum of
Rs 20,000, and the State to pay the balance. I also direct the Registrar to
forward a copy of this judgment to the National Police Commission.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** **** \- I agree.

**WIGNESWARAN, J.** **** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/21.html_  

