##  Jayaratne v. Fernando and Others - SLR - 69, Vol 3 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 21;
(2000) 3 Sri LR 69 (14 July 2000)

**69**

**JAYARATNE  
v.  
FERNANDO AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 333/98  
27TH APRIL. 2000  
  
_Fundamental rights - Allocation of government quarters - Allocating Authority
\- Power of the Minister - Necessity to have a written record of Ministerial
orders - Cancellation of an allocation of government quarters without reasons,
notice or hearing - Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner was a clerk working in the Railway Department. The allocation
of government quarters in the petitioner's sub-department was done by the 2nd
respondent (Chief Mechanical Engineer) as Allocating Authority acting on the
recommendations of the House Allocation Board. (The Housing Committee) of
which the 1st respondent (Chemist, Chief Mechanical Engineer's office) was the
Chairman.  
  
In June 1997 in anticipation of quarters No. G 3/2 Ratmalana falling vacant,
the petitioner requested the Housing Committee to allocate it to her. On 06.
06. 97 the Committee decided in her favour as she was eligible and was the
first in the waiting list. The 9th respondent also claimed the said quarters
stating that the flat which had been allocated to her in June 1992 was too
small for her. But the 9th respondent's claim was not accepted as she was not
eligible for a period of five years having been in occupation of quarters for
five years. The 9th respondent appealed first to the 5th respondent (General
Manager of Railways) and then to the 8th respondent (the Minister of Transport
and Highways). Consequently the matter was investigated on several occasions
with the result that by 14. 10. 97 there were six reports re-affirming the
decision of the Housing Committee made in favour of the petitioner which
decision was in accordance with the criteria laid down by the Director of
Establishments.  
  
The disputed quarters fell vacant on 27. 10. 97 but it was not allocated to
the petitioner as the 5th respondent stated that the Ministry had called for a
report. But no report had been sent to the 8th respondent (Minister) although
the 1st respondent had submitted a detailed report to the 5th respondent in
favour of the petitioner. Finally as a result of intervention

**70**

of the 7th respondent (Deputy Minister of Transport and Highways, who was then
the Acting Minister). The 1st respondent acting on the instructions of the 2nd
respondent issued a letter dated 06. 11. 97 allocating the quarters to the
petitioner.  
  
The very next day, the allocation was cancelled without reasons, without
notice and without hearing the petitioner purportedly on the orders of the 8th
respondent, and she was ordered to vacate. The 2nd respondent sent the
petitioner a letter dated 11. 11. 97 stating that the 5th respondent informed
that the 8th respondent had made such order. The same position was taken by
the 3rd respondent who alone filed an affidavit. By his letter dated 17. 12.
97, the 5th respondent also had informed the Director of Establishments that
the 8th respondent had ordered the allocation of the disputed quarters to the
9th respondent. But no proof of any order by the 8th respondent was produced.
In fact some other quarters were allocated to the 9th respondent, even though
she was not eligible for quarters. At the same time the petitioner was charged
penal rent, with effect from 11. 11. 97, for staying in the disputed quarters
which had been allocated to her, and a quit notice was served on her on 31.
03. 98 under the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of
1969.  
  
**Held:**  
  
(1) The evidence did not establish that the 8th respondent gave an order for
the cancellation of the petitioner's allocation. Where an order given by a
Minister in the due discharge of his functions is not in writing, it should be
contemporaneously translated by the recepient into words in a document.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
**" The failure to have proper documentary evidence of Ministerial orders,
would encourage public officers to evade responsibility for their own acts,
merely by claiming that they acted upon unrecorded Ministerial orders."  
**  
2\. In any event, the 8th respondent had no power under the Establishments
Code to order the allocation of quarters or the cancellation of an allocation;
any such order would not be binding on the Allocating Authority and would not
justify such allocation or cancellation.  
  
3\. There was a valid allocation of the quarters to the petitioner and the
cancellation of that allocation infringed the petitioner's right under Article
12(1) of the Constitution.

**71**

**Case referred to :  
**  
1\. Mallows v. Commissioner of Income Tax (1962) 66 NLR 321  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
Elmore Perera with Prince Perera for Petitioner.  
  
S. Rajaratnam, SSC for the 1st to 8th and 10th Respondents.  
  
9th Respondent absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 14, 2000.  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The petitioner, is a clerk who has been working in the Railway Department
since 1980\. On 06. 11. 97 Railway quarters No. G. 3/2 at Ratmalana ("the
disputed quarters") were allocated to her, and she went into occupation. On
11. 11. 97 that allocation was cancelled pursuant to an alleged Ministerial
order, and she was ordered to vacate. She did not. On 03. 12. 97 she was told
that she would be charged penal rent with effect from 11. 11. 97. That was
done. Her complaint is that the cancellation of that allocation was arbitrary,
capricious and unreasonable. She asks for a declaration that her fundamental
right under Article 12(1) had been infringed, for the quashing of the
decisions ordering the vacation of the quarters and the deduction of penal
rent from her salary, for an order that she be granted legal possession of the
quarters for five years, for the repayment of the penal rent deducted upto
date, and for compensation in a sum of Rs. 900,000.  
  
**ESTABLISHMENTS CODE  
**  
There is always keen competition for the limited number of Government quarters
available. Chapter xix of the Establishments Code (read with the Railway
Departmental Instructions) governs the allocation of Government quarters, and.
the grading of quarters (from grade 1 to grade 5A) in relation to the various
categories of officers who are eligible for them. There is a separate waiting
list for each category of

**72**

officers who have applied for quarters. The place of each officer on that
waiting list depends on the number of points he has earned, and the criteria
and points for each criterion are laid down. Neither the validity of the
scheme nor the allocation of points has been questioned. The procedure for
application and allocation is also laid down, and provision is made for a
Housing Committee to advise the Allocating Authority. The following provisions
of Chapter xix are relevant  
  
1\. Classification. The term "Government Quarters" includes any type of
accommodation at the disposal of the Government and allocated for the purpose
of residence.  
  
4.4 Housing Committee - The Allocating Authority may, if he considers (it)
necessary, constitute and consult a Housing Committee in the matter of making
selections.  
  
The Housing Committee may recommend deviations from the point system only
where the mechanical application of the system results in a grave and obvious
injustice.  
  
4:4.1 The Allocating Authority may deviate from the principles of selection
outlined above for very special reasons with the prior approval of the
Director of Establishments.  
  
5.5 Officer sharing quarters - Two or more officers can be allowed to share
Government Quarters at the discretion of the Allocating Authority ...  
  
6.1 Period - The occupant should be allowed to remain in quarters of grades
5A, 5 and 1 until the time of his transfer of his ceasing to be a public
officer. The period in respect of grades 4, 3 and 2 quarters will be 5 years
...  
  
6.1.1 An officer who has enjoyed the privilege of occupying Government
Quarters in a station for more than half the full period permitted in this
Code would not be eligible to be considered for such quarters, in the same
station for a period of five years from the date of completion of the earlier
period of occupation of quarters.

**73**

6.3 They may be occupied only by the officer to whom they are allocated and by
his wife, children and dependants. No portion of any Government Quarters may
be regularly occupied by any others without the sped approval of the
Allocating Authority.  
  
6.9 Where two or more officers have been permitted to share quarters, the
officer to whom the quarters was originally allocated, or if. both were
allocated the quarters simultaneously, one of them, as may be named by
Allocating Authority, will be held responsible as tenant of the quarters for
compliance with all the conditions on which the quarters were allocated. All
correspondence in regard to the quarters will be conducted only with that
officer.  
  
6.15 An officer should vacate quarters at the end of the period of tenure or
when ordered to do so by the Allocating Authority.  
  
7.1 If an officer fails to vacate quarters when ordered to do so, he should be
evicted under the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of
1969, as amended by Act, No. 3 of 1971 and Act, No. 40 of 1974.  
  
7.2 He should be charged for the period he overstays his tenure, a penal rent,
a sum equivalent to the current open market rent of the quarters as assessed
by the Chief Valuer plus 8% (eight) of the officer's salary. (emphasis added)  
  
The relevant Railway Departmental Instructions make similar provisions. The
dispute here involves the allocation of quarters to clerks, who are eligible
for quarters of grades 2 to 4.  
  
**THE ISSUES  
**  
The Petitioner contends that she was eligible for quarters and was the first
on the relevant waiting list; that there was a valid allocation of the
disputed quarters to her by letter dated 06. 11. 97, in terms of which she
duly went into occupation; that the summary cancellation of that allocation,
without reasons, without notice, and without hearing her, was void;

**74**

that her continued occupation was lawful; and that the recovery of penal rent
was unlawful.  
  
Mr. Rajaratnam, SSC, on behalf of all the Respondents (other than the 9th),
submitted that the Petitioner had been in occupation of other Government
quarters (No. T.3/7) for over four years, and had thereby become ineligible
(under section 6.1.1) for another allocation until September 1999; and that
therefore the allocation was irregular, and its cancellation was lawful and
justified. In any event, no allocation should have been made because an appeal
dated 14. 09. 97, submitted by the 9th Respondent, another clerk, to the 8th
Respondent, the Minister of Transport and Highways, against the decision to
make that allocation was still pending on 06\. 11. 97. Finally, he urged, the
deduction of penal rent was consequential upon a valid cancellation.  
  
It is also necessary to consider two other matters. First, whether the
cancellation of the Petitioner's allocation was valid because it was said to
have been ordered by the 8th Respondent-Minister, and second, whether the
rival claimant, the 9th Respondent, was ineligible for quarters.  
  
**ALLOCATING AUTHORITY  
**  
The Petitioner averred in her affidavit that "the General Manager of the
Railway is the sole authority for allocating Railway Quarters". However, in
the only affidavit filed on behalf of the Respondents, the 3rd Respondent (the
Senior Administrative Officer in the General Manager's Office) stated that
"the House Allocation Board makes recommendations, which recommendations are
duly considered by the allocating authority concerned". and that "the
allocation of quarters in the Petitioner's sub-department is within the
purview of the 2nd Respondent" (namely, the Chief Mechanical Engineer): and
that appears to have been the practice, going by the documents produced in
this case.

**75**

Our attention was not drawn to any provision conferring on the General Manager
of Railways (who is the 5th Respondent) or the relevant Minister any power to
entertain appeals against, or to review or to vary, the decisions of the
Allocating Authority.  
  
**THE FACTS  
**  
There is hardly any dispute about the facts. The Petitioner had duly applied
for Government quarters in 1986 and had been placed on the relevant waiting
list. In 1997 she was occupying rented premises. Her landlord gave her notice
to quit by the end of the year. In June 1997, learning that the disputed
quarters would soon be falling vacant, she asked the Housing Committee (also
referred to as the "House Allocation Board") to allocate those quarters to
her. The Chairman of the Committee was the 1st Respondent, the Chemist,
attached to the Chief Mechanical Engineer's Office, Ratmalana. In its report
dated 06. 06. 97 the Committee decided in her favour observing that she was
the first on the waiting list (having 57 points, while the next officer, the
9th Respondent had 54 points), and that there was no reason to deny her that
allocation.  
  
The 9th Respondent - who had applied for quarters only in 1991 - appealed
against that decision by letter dated 09. 06. 97 (addressed to the 5th
Respondent, through the 2nd Respondent). She said that she was already in
occupation of Railway quarters No. A.4 - a small flat at Ratmalana which had
been allocated to her in June 1992 - which was too small for her, and pleaded
that the disputed quarters be allocated to her. She also claimed that the
Petitioner was ineligible for allocation of quarters. The reason she urged was
that the Petitioner had gone into occupation of Railway quarters No. T.3/7
(also at Ratmalana) in February 1990 on the basis of sharing them with one Mr
G to whom those quarters had been allocated; that Mr G was actually residing
elsewhere (which the Petitioner did not concede); that, consequently, the

**76**

Petitioner was the sole occupant of those quarters until September 1994; and
that having occupied them for more than two and a half years, section 6.1.1
made her ineligible for another allocation of quarters for five years from
September 1994.  
  
The eligibility of the rival claimants and the merits of their claims were
reviewed on several occasions thereafter.  
  
(i) On 13. 06. 97 when forwarding the 9th Respondent's appeal to the 5th
Respondent, the 2nd Respondent observed that persons occupying flats (like the
9th Respondent) were eligible to apply for (clerical) quarters, but that she
was third on the waiting list. He reported that the Petitioner had shared
quarters with Mr G with permission, and had duly vacated them when required to
do so; and accordingly she had neither violated nor been punished for any
violation of regulations. He added that the sharing of quarters did not take
away an officer's right to apply for quarters in her own right; that the
Petitioner was first on the waiting list; and that the Committee had decided
to allocate the next vacant quarters to her.  
  
(ii) The 5th  Respondent directed that the Housing Committee should reconvene
and review the facts, and on 27. 06. 97 the Committee re-affirmed the
Petitioner's eligibility and claim.  
  
(iii) On 02. 07. 97 the 2nd Respondent asked the 1st Respondent to take action
on that recommendation. Nevertheless - it is not clear why on 07. 07. 97 the
2nd Respondent appointed another committee to investigate the matter. That
committee reported on 30. 09\. 97 that the original decision should stand.
Citing a letter dated 18. 05. 87 from the Director of Establishments, it added
that the 9th Respondent was not eligible for another allocation until the
expiry of five years, because she had been in occupation of the flat A.4 for
five years.

**77**

(iv) In the meantime, in response to the 5th Respondent's request the 1st
Respondent reviewed several pending request for clerical quarters, and
reported, on 23. 07. 97, that there were only seven officers then eligible,
the Petitioner being the first; the 9th Respondent was not among them.  
  
(v) The 9th Respondent submitted a petition dated 17. 09. 97 to the 8th
Respondent, requesting that the disputed quarters be allocated to her. Among
the several claims she made was that she was the most suitable; that the 5th
Respondent had twice directed the 2nd Respondent to cancel the allocation to
the Petitioner; and that disciplinary action had been ordered against Mr G and
the Petitioner. The 8th, Respondent made an endorsement dated 19. 09. 97: "G.
M. R. P1 give her a hearing and report". On 22. 09. 97, the 5th Respondent
referred this petition to the 1st Respondent, using a cyclostyled form
intended for forwarding to his subordinates letters referred to him by the
Minister. He directed the 1st Respondent to prepare a draft reply, in English,
to be sent to the Minister. On 01. 10. 97 the 1st Respondent submitted a draft
reply re-iterating the factual position: in regard to the 9th Respondent, that
she was not the most suitable, that she was ineligible under section 6.1.1
according to the Director of Establishments' letter dated 1 8. 05. 87, and
that the 5th Respondent had never directed an allocation to her; and, in
regard to the Petitioner, that she was in first place and should be allocated
the disputed quarters, and that disciplinary- action had never been initiated
against her.  
  
(vi) On 14. 10. 97, the 1st Respondent submitted yet another report to the 5th
Respondent, in response to an oral request made on 03\. 10. 97. That report
dealt in great detail with several issues connected with the allocation of the
disputed quarters, which by now were about to fall vacant. It explained how
the 9th Respondent came into occupation

**78**

of the quarters A.4: in June 1992 it was one Pushpa Ranjini (who was then the
first in the relevant waiting list) who was entitled to those quarters, but in
violation of her rights those quarters had been taken over by the 9th
Respondent secretly and forcibly. The report made reference to the General
Manager's letter dated 29. 10. 85, according to which section 6.1.1 applied
even to officers who had been allocated flats for five years. As for the
allegation that Mr G had not been in occupation of quarters T. 3/7, the 1st
Respondent observed that the report of the flying squad of the Railway
Protection Service had been made belatedly on 17. 02. 93, eight months after a
surprise check made on 17. 06. 92; that the report was contradictory; and that
the then Chief Mechanical Engineer had directed that no action be taken on
that report because it was vitiated by several flaws. One was that the flying
squad officers had wanted to take revenge on Mr G, by putting him into
trouble, because he had discharged his duties honestly regardless of threats.
Another was that those officers had been prohibited from checking quarters,
but had done so without authority. There was also suspicion that they
themselves had fabricated the anonymous petition on the basis of which the
quarters had been checked. Further, they had also alleged, without making
inquiries, that Mr G had sublet the quarters to the Petitioner.  
  
I must refer at this point to some of the documents produced by the
Respondents. By letter dated 02. 02. 90 the Petitioner was granted permission
to share quarters T. 3/7 with Mr G as chief occupant, on the condition that
she would observe the relevant regulations, and that she would vacate the
premises upon Mr G vacating them or upon receipt of notice to vacate. More
than one year after the surprise check, a notice dated 30. 07. 93 was sent to
Mr G alleging that he had sublet the quarters to the Petitioner and asking him
to vacate. That notice was not copied to the Petitioner, nor was she then
asked to vacate. Almost one year later, another notice dated

**79**

03\. 07. 94 was sent (copied to the Petitioner), cancelling the first notice,
alleging that Mr G was not in occupation since 17. 06\. 92, and requiring both
to vacate on or before 04. 10. 94. Neither of them denied the allegation of
non-occupation by Mr G, and it is common ground that they duly vacated by 08.
09. 94 - four years and seven months after allocation.  
  
The 1st Respondent also reported on 14. 10. 97 that it was due to the shortage
of accommodation that the Railway permits officers to share quarters, and that
such sharing was not regarded as a ground for reducing points or for denying
an officer the right to be allocated quarters; and that when the Petitioner
was given permission to share quarters T. 3/7 she was not informed of any such
condition.  
  
Having referred to and endorsed the Housing Committee's previous
recommendations, the 1st Respondent concluded by stating that he was awaiting
the 5th Respondent's speedy approval for allocation to the Petitioner.
Nevertheless, the 5th Respondent neither sent a reply to the 8th Respondent
nor informed the Petitioner and the 9th Respondent what his views were in
regard to the allocation.  
  
The reason which the 3rd Respondent now gives for that default is disturbing.
He claimed that the draft reply prepared by the 1st Respondent (on 01. 10. 97)
had been given to him by the 5th Respondent for his consideration, on 06. 10.
97: but that "no reply has been sent to the Minister; since this application
was filed by the Petitioner before [he] could recommend a suitable reply to
the 8th Respondent Minister". Since the Petitioner's application was filed in
June 1998, that means that (if the 3rd Respondent was truthful) eight months
was not enough for him to consider what should be said to the Minister. Had
the allocation of the disputed quarters to await that reply, those quarters
would have remained vacant for well over seven months, depriving an eligible
public officer a legitimate employment benefit of a tenancy at a modest
rental. I think it far more likely that the 3rd Respondent did not dare

**80**

to make any recommendation - despite the flurry of correspondence during the
last quarter of 1997 - because he was unable to find a reason to deny the
Petitioner's claim.  
  
Thus by mid-October the position was that the Petitioner's claims and the 9th
Respondent's allegations and counter-claims had been scrutinised repeatedly
and in great detail. The Housing Committee had twice decided (on 06. 06. 97
and 27. 06\. 97) in favour of the Petitioner; another differently constituted
committee had agreed (on 30. 09. 97). Upon the 9th Respondent's first appeal,
the 2nd Respondent had reported (on 13. 06. 97) to the 5th Respondent
adversely to her. As for her second appeal, to the Minister, the 1st
Respondent had submitted (on 01\. 10. 97) at the 5th Respondent's request an
exhaustive draft of the reply to be sent to the Minister as well as a later
full report (on 14. 10. 97) - both confirming the Petitioner's entitlement.
There were thus in effect six reasoned written reports, all favourable to the
Petitioner's claim, but as yet no sign of a final decision. It seemed as if,
paradoxically, a surfeit of "due process" was about to operate so as to deny
justice to the Petitioner!  
  
On 27. 10. 97 the disputed quarters fell vacant. Since they were not allocated
to the Petitioner, she met the 5th Respondent on the 30th or the 31st together
with her husband. What transpired appears primarily from the affidavits of her
husband. and herself. They averred that the 5th Respondent informed them that
he had looked into the matter carefully and would not cause any injustice to
her, but that the Ministry had called for a report and that a report had to be
sent; and that he had no objection to their making inquiries at the Ministry.
In what is virtually a contemporaneous letter dated 12. 11. 97, she also said
that on that occasion the General Manager (Administration) as well as the 3rd
Respondent had agreed that she was entitled to the allocation. The 3rd
Respondent did not deny this, and merely pleaded ignorance; and as there are
no affidavits from the 5th Respondent, and the General Manager
(Administration), there is no denial of those averments. There

**81**

is no reason to disbelieve the Petitioner. Indeed, her version is corroborated
by another contemporaneous letter which she wrote to the Director of
Establishments on 03. 11. 97, complaining that, as a result of improper
influence exerted by the 9th Respondent, there was an attempt to get
instructions from the Ministry in order to cause injustice to her. That letter
was copied to the 2nd and 5th Respondents as well as the 6th, the Secretary to
the Ministry.  
  
This is therefore not a case in which the Petitioner decided to meet the
Minister of her own volition: it was, rather, the 5th Respondent who virtually
induced her to do that, not only by what he told her but also by his
unreasonable delay in replying to the Minister.  
  
When they went to the Ministry on 04. 11. 97 they found that the Minister was
abroad; and so they met the 7th Respondent (the Deputy Minister, who was then
the acting. Minister), who checked the relevant documents, and wrote to the
2nd Respondent, the same day, as acting Minister. He drew attention to the
fact that the Petitioner was first in the waiting list, and requested that
necessary action be taken to have the disputed quarters promptly allocated to
her. The 2nd Respondent thereupon directed the 1st Respondent, the Chairman of
the Housing Committee, to "implement accordingly". The 1st Respondent issued
the letter of allocation dated 06. 11. 97, which stated that if she did not go
into occupation within ten days it would be presumed that she did not require
the quarters, in which event her allocation would be cancelled, and she would
be charged one month's rent. She gave up possession of her rented premises,
and entered into occupation of the disputed quarters on 10. 11. 97.  
  
The very next day - without any reason, without any opportunity of showing
cause, and without any notice - that allocation was cancelled and she was
ordered to vacate.. She did not, and submitted an appeal to the 2nd Respondent
on 12. 11. 97. On 03. 12. 97 she was told that she would be

**82**

charged penal rent with effect from 11. 11. 97. Again she appealed, on 04. 12.
97, to the 2nd Respondent. She received no response.  
  
The Respondents' position is that that cancellation was because of a
Ministerial order. There is a great deal of uncertainty and confusion about
that order: Was such an order given? What was the Minister told before he gave
that order? To whom was that order given - to the 4th Respondent or to the
5th? Was it an order (a) for the cancellation of the Petitioner's allocation,
OR (b) only for an allocation to the 9th Respondent?  
  
The alleged Ministerial order was not in writing, and there is no
contemporaneous record of it. Reference has been made to it in correspondence
and in the 3rd Respondent's affidavit.  
  
The first reference to such an order is in a letter dated 11. 11. 97 signed -
by the 3rd Respondent in which the 4th Respondent's name has merely been
typed. That letter stated that the 8th Respondent had ordered the cancellation
of the allocation, but did not state to whom that order had been given.  
  
The next reference is in a letter which the 2nd Respondent wrote to the
Petitioner on 11. 11. 97, stating that because the 5th Respondent had informed
him by letter dated 11. 11. 97 that the 8th Respondent had ordered the 5th
Respondent to cancel the allocation, the allocation made by his letter dated
06. 11\. 97 was cancelled. No letter from the 5th Respondent to the 2nd
Respondent bearing the date 11. 11. 97 has been produced.  
  
The third reference is in a letter dated 17. 12. 97 to the Director of
Establishments in which the 5th Respondent stated that the 8th Respondent had
ordered the allocation of the disputed quarters to the 9th Respondent. He did
not say to whom that order had been given, and he did not claim that there was
an order for the cancellation of the Petitioner's allocation.

**83**

Finally, in his affidavit the 3rd Respondent claimed that the 8th Respondent
"had telephoned the 4th Respondent (i. e. the Additional General Manager,
Administration) and told him by phone to cancel the letter of allocation". The
4th Respondent did not tender a supporting affidavit. The 3rd Respondent added
that he discussed the matter with the 4th Respondent, and that they sent the
2nd Respondent a letter dated 11. 11. 97, "signed by the 4th Respondent . .
.". In fact that letter was not signed by the 4th Respondent, nor did it state
to whom the order was given.  
  
On 12. 11. 97, the Petitioner appealed to the 2nd Respondent. Thereupon the
1st Respondent (on behalf of the 2nd Respondent) advised the 5th Respondent on
18. 11\. 97 that the allocation had been made lawfully; that the Petitioner
was in lawful possession; and that it was neither lawful nor equitable to
cancel that allocation without notice and without reasons. He added that the
9th Respondent had no right to the allocation of the quarters next falling
vacant, and that such an allocation would be contrary to the Establishments
Code. The 5th Respondent's reaction was to direct the 2nd Respondent to inform
the Petitioner that steps would be taken for her ejectment and the recovery of
penal rent; that the 2nd Respondent did by his letter dated 03. 12. 97. The
Petitioner appealed. Despite a reminder dated 16. 12. 97 the Petitioner
received no reply to either of her appeals. Penal rent (namely, an additional
Rs. 1,500 p.m.) was recovered from January 1998, with effect from 11. 11. 97,
by deduction from her gross salary of Rs. 6,050 p.m. That penal rent not only
amounted to 25% of gross salary, but was more than 50% of her take-home pay.  
  
I have already referred to the Director of Establishments' letter dated 18.
05. 87, which indicated that the 9th Respondent was not eligible for
allocation of quarters. When the Director of Establishments received the
Petitioner's letter of 03. 11. 97, he asked the 5th Respondent for his
observations. In his reply dated 17. 12. 97, the 5th Respondent referred to

**84**

advice given by the Director of Establishments in 1985 that the five-year rule
in section 6.1.1 applied to the occupation of flats as well. However, he
claimed that that was not being followed, and that accordingly the 9th
Respondent was entitled to the disputed quarters, and that the 8th Respondent
had ordered their allocation to the 9th Respondent. The Director of
Establishments replied on 27. 01. 98 that if flats fell within the definition
of "Government Quarters", section 6.1.1 would apply, and action contrary
thereto would require Cabinet approval.  
  
However, on 19. 01. 98, even before the 5th Respondent got the Director of
Establishments' reply, quarters No. T. 3/5 at Ratmalana were allocated to the
9th Respondent. Consequently, the disputed quarters were no longer needed for
her. Nevertheless, the Petitioner was sent a notice to quit, dated 31. 03. 98,
issued under the Government Quarters (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of
1969\. That was received by her only on 13. 05. 98, whereupon she filed this
application.  
  
**MINISTERIAL ORDERS  
**  
The 2nd Respondent cancelled the Petitioner's allocation, stating (in his
letter dated 11. 11. 97) that the Minister had ordered the 5th Respondent to
do so. Neither the 2nd nor the 5th Respondent has filed an affidavit to that
effect. Further, what the 5th Respondent said, in his letter dated 17. 12. 97,
was that the Minister had ordered allocation to the 9th Respondent. There is
thus no acceptable evidence of a Ministerial order (a) given to the 5th
Respondent, (b) for cancellation of the Petitioners allocation.  
  
The 3rd Respondent, in his letter dated 11. 11. 97, did not say to whom the
Minister gave the order for cancellation. Although in his affidavit he claimed
that it was given to the 4th Respondent, that is only hearsay; it was not
supported by an affidavit from, or even a document signed by, the 4th
Respondent.

**85**

When there are such contradictions, inconsistencies and omissions as to the
person to whom the Minister gave an order, and what that order was, it is
difficult to hold that the Minister did in fact give an order for
cancellation.  
  
Even if I were to assume that the 8th Respondent did communicate with the 5th
Respondent or one of his subordinates, there is uncertainty as to what exactly
he had been told, and what exactly he "ordered". It may well be that he was
not told that the Petitioner's allocation had been made after the matter had
been reconsidered in October and after the 7th Respondent had looked into it.
I cannot lightly presume that he directed cancellation or allocation
regardless of legality or propriety.  
  
There is no satisfactory evidence that the 8th Respondent had directed the
cancellation of the Petitioner's allocation; and that he had in mind
cancellation regardless of legality and propriety.  
  
The question whether or not there was a Ministerial order cannot be left to
speculation. There must be certainty both as to the fact of such order, and as
to its contents, and that can only be ensured by having such orders properly
documented. The observations in Mallows v. Commissioner of Income Tax, (1) are
apposite. Dealing with a statutory provision that certain consequences would
flow from the "opinion" of the Commissioner, it was held that:  
  
. . . The opinion must not only be entertained generally, so to say, in the
mind of the Commissioner, but the matter must be taken a step further and
translated into words in a document so as to serve as evidence to guide those
functionaries (who have to act on the basis of that opinion.]."  
  
The alleged Ministerial order for the cancellation of the Petitioner's
allocation involved her vested rights. If that order was not conveyed in
writing by the Minister, it should have

**86**

been translated by the recipient into words in a document, which would
thereafter have been available in the relevant file, to serve as evidence to
guide any one who had to deal with that allocation or its cancellation. All
concerned would know with certainty what the Minister had said, without having
to depend on any one's recollection. In this case, one of several things
should have happened. Whoever received the order should have made a
contemporaneous minute on the file; or the Ministerial order should have been
acknowledged in writing; or correspondence pursuant to that order should have
been copied to the 8th Respondent, making an appropriate reference to his
order.  
  
If a responsible Minister gives an order in the due discharge of his
functions, he could have no objection to that order being placed on record in
that way by the public officer to whom it is addressed. The failure to have
proper documentary evidence of Ministerial orders, would encourage public
officers to evade responsibility for their own acts, merely by claiming that
they acted upon unrecorded oral Ministerial orders.  
  
In these circumstances. I hold that the evidence does not establish that the
8th Respondent gave an order for the cancellation of the Petitioner's
allocation.  
  
I hold further that, in any event, the 8th Respondent had no power under the
Establishments Code to order the allocation of quarters or the cancellation of
an allocation; that any such order would not have been binding on the
Allocating Authority, and would not have justified such allocation or
cancellation. Consequently, the 1st to 5th Respondents must take
responsibility for whatever they did in connection with allocation and
cancellation, and cannot take cover behind Ministerial orders.  
  
It follows that the pendency of the 9th Respondent's appeal to the Minister,
in respect of a matter in which he had no legal authority, did not invalidate
the allocation made on 06. 11. 97.

**87**

**ELIGIBILITY  
**  
Section 1 defines "Government Quarters" to include "any type of accommodation"
allocated for the purpose of residence. A flat is a "type of accommodation".
Accordingly, the flat occupied by the 9th Respondent was "Government
Quarters", and section 6.1.1 made her ineligible for another allocation for
five years.  
  
The allegation that the Petitioner was not eligible was based on her
occupation \- sole or shared - of quarters No. T. 3/7 from February 1990 to
September 1994.  
  
It is not disputed that those quarters were allocated to Mr G, and that the
Petitioner was granted permission to share them, from the outset in February
1990\. The allegation made on 03. 07. 94, that Mr G was not in occupation at
the time of the flying squad inspection on 17. 06. 92, was not denied either
by Mr G or by the Petitioner. Indeed, by promptly vacating the quarters they
accepted that position. That shows that the Petitioner was the sole occupant
for two years and three months, from June 1992 to September 1994\. The
disqualification created by section 6.1.1 arises only upon occupation "for
more than half the full period permitted". Since the full period permitted (by
section 6.1) is five years, sole occupation for less than two and a half years
did not operate as a disqualification.  
  
There is no material on which this Court can conclude that Mr G was not in
occupation for any period prior to 17. 06. 92. The question of eligibility was
for the Allocating Authority to determine, and the 1st Respondent as Chairman
of the Housing Committee dealt with that matter exhaustively in his report
dated 14\. 10.97. The 1st and 2nd Respondents have not sought to go back on
those findings, and Senior State Counsel who now appears for them can hardly
be heard to question his clients' findings. In any event, even if this Court

**88**

is entitled to review those findings, the Respondents have failed to produce
the flying squad report, and the related documents, except for a photocopy of
a handwritten statement said to have been made by the Petitioner, which is
partly illegible, and partly ambiguous. They have produced extracts from
electoral registers for 1993 and 1994 - which are not relevant to the period
before June 1992.  
  
There remains the submission that mere occupation for over four years -
whether shared or sole - disentitled the Petitioner to an allocation in her
own right.  
  
Section 6.1 guarantees to an officer, who is allocated quarters of grades 2 to
4, a period of five years occupation. Section 6.15 imposes an obligation on
him to vacate at the end of that "period of tenure". Although it adds "or when
ordered to do so by the Allocating Authority", that does not give the
Allocating Authority an absolute or unfettered right to evict an occupant.
That only means that if the Allocating Authority has a right, aliunde, to
order vacation (e. g. for breach of some regulation or condition) and calls
upon the occupant to vacate, then the occupant must vacate, and section 7.1
indicates the remedy for default. Subject to that, section 6.1 guarantees a
tenure of five years.  
  
Section 6.1.1 is in the nature of a proviso to section 6.1 Section 6.1 confers
an entitlement on officers allocated quarters of grades 2 to 4: the right to
remain in occupation for five years. Section 6.1.1 imposes a disability on
those who enjoy that right (or privilege) for at least half that period. That
disability cannot be extended to the wider category of those who were not
granted the right of occupation for that period, although they might in fact
have occupied quarters for that period. An officer who is allowed to occupy
quarters on the terms that he was obliged to vacate on demand does not come
within section 6.1, and hence is not subject to section 6.1.1. An officer will
not be subject to the disability unless he has first enjoyed the privilege.

**89**

A situation in which quarters are occupied by more than one officer may come
about in several different ways. Section 6.9 provides that two officers may be
simultaneously "allocated" the same quarters; and that one officer having been
originally "allocated" quarters, another officer may later be permitted to
"share" them. Further, section 6.3 provides that one officer may be
"allocated" quarters, and the Allocating Authority may grant specific approval
to another officer to "regularly occupy" a portion of such quarters.  
  
Clearly, there was no "allocation" of quarters No. T. 3/7 to the Petitioner.
Whether it was a case of her being allowed to "share" those quarters, or
"regularly occupy" them, the letter dated 02. 02. 90 set out the terms of her
occupancy. It is manifest that she had no right of occupation for five years;
and that she was obliged to vacate not only if Mr G vacated, but even if Mr G
continued in lawful occupation. She never had a right of occupation in terms
of section 6.1, and she was therefore never subject to the disability created
by section 6.1.1  
  
**ALLOCATING TO THE PETITIONER .  
**  
The Petitioner was eligible for allocation and was the first in the waiting
list; the pendency of the 9th Respondent's appeal to the Minister was no bar
to the allocation made to her.  
  
The question arises whether that allocation was vitiated by the 7th
Respondent's "request" that necessary action be taken to have the disputed
quarters allocated to her - for just as the Minister had no authority to order
cancellation of an allocation, the acting Minister had no power to order an
allocation.  
  
The Petitioner did not seek Ministerial intervention. There is no doubt that
the 1st and 2nd Respondents were about to make an allocation in her favour,
and would have done so but

**90**

for the 5th Respondent's intervention. Not only did he unreasonably delay
submitting the report which the 8th Respondent had called for, but he
virtually compelled the Petitioner to approach the Minister. In the
circumstances, although the allocation was made after the 7th Respondent's
letter, it was not made because of that letter. In a sense, the 7th
Respondent's letter merely negatived the delay caused by the 8th Respondent's
request for a report.  
  
In the circumstances, I hold that there was a valid allocation in favour of
the Petitioner, duly made on 06. 11. 97 by the 2nd Respondent acting in the
exercise of his discretion, and not upon the dictates of the 7th Respondent.  
  
**CANCELLATION OF THE PETITIONER'S ALLOCATION  
**  
The allocation being valid, the Code contains no provision empowering or
justifying its cancellation. Section 6.15 does not deal with cancellation, but
with an order to vacate made by the Allocating Authority. The case before us
does not involve an order to vacate - for which, in any event, there were no
grounds.  
  
Even if it can be argued (which I doubt) that the 2nd Respondent as Allocating
Authority had an implied power to cancel an allocation, his views on the
cancellation were promptly conveyed by the 1st Respondent, on his behalf, to
the 5th Respondent: that the cancellation was neither lawful nor equitable. It
is clear therefore that he acted on the directions of the 5th Respondent - who
was acting in purported pursuance of an unproved Ministerial order - and not
in the proper exercise of whatever discretion he may have had.  
  
Another matter which vitiates the cancellation is that it was without reasons,
without notice, and without hearing the Petitioner.  
  
It is necessary to consider the 5th Respondent's conduct. He knew that the
allocation to the Petitioner had been

**91**

recommended and decided upon, over and over again. His letter dated 17. 12. 97
shows that he nevertheless wanted the 9th Respondent to have the disputed
quarters even though he knew full well that she was not eligible. Further,
even after the 9th Respondent no longer needed the disputed quarters, he did
not discontinue the efforts to evict the Petitioner and to levy penal rent. It
is not surprising that he refrained from submitting a report to the Minister
and from replying to the Petitioner's appeals.  
  
**ORDER  
**  
I grant the Petitioner a declaration that her fundamental right under Article
12(1) has been infringed by the 3rd and 5th Respondents. I quash the order
cancelling the allocation of the disputed quarters, the order charging penal
rent from her, and the notice to quit dated 31. 03.98 served on her. The
allocation dated 06. 11. 97 will stand, and she will be entitled to continue
in occupation of those quarters in terms of the Establishments Code paying
rent in terms of the Code, and to the refund, on or before 31. 08. 2000, of
all penal rent deducted from 11. 11. 97 to date.  
  
I turn to the determination of compensation. The Petitioner had already
vacated the premises which she had taken on rent. Summary cancellation and a
demand for immediate vacation was therefore wholly unreasonable and
oppressive. The failure to give her a little time to find other accommodation
points to malice. The levy of penal rent would have resulted - both to herself
and to her children \- in hardships which a refund, even with interest, can
never adequately compensate. The public are entitled to expect efficient
service from public officers like the Petitioner - but denying public officers
fair treatment in relation to their employment and employment benefits results
in demotivating them. In these circumstances, I award the Petitioner a sum of
Rs. 100,000 as compensation, payable by the State on or before 31. 08. 2000.
In regard to costs, the 3rd Respondent will

**92**

personally pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 5,000, and the 5th Respondent will
personally pay her a sum of Rs. 25,000, on or before 31\. 08. 2000.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Relief Granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/21.html_  

