##  Deshapriya v. Rukmani, Divisional Secretary, Dodangoda and Others - SLR -
412, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 21; (1999) 2 Sri LR 412 (24 September 1999)

**412**

**DESHAPRIYA  
v.  
RUKMANI, DIVISIONAL SECRETARY,  
DODANGODA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. (SPL)  
APPLICATION NO. 118/97  
AUGUST 20, 1999.

_Fundamental Rights - Suspension of a Samurdhi Niyamaka - Articles 12 (1) and
12 (2) of the Constitution._

The 3rd respondent the Deputy Speaker of Parliament and a Member of Parliament
for the Kalutara District summoned the petitioner, a Samurdhi Niyamaka and all
other Samurdhi Niyamakas in the Dodangoda Divisional Secretary's Division for
a meeting at which the 3rd respondent asked the Samurdhi Niyamakas to canvass
among the people, support for the People's Alliance candidates at the
Pradeshiya Sabha elections due to take place on 21. 03. 97. The petitioner
said that the People's Alliance candidates were not the best candidates and
declined to canvass for them; whereupon, the 3rd respondent reprimanded the
petitioner and said that all Samurdhi Niyamakas within the area had been
appointed on his recommendation, hence, it was their duty to act according to
his wishes. The 3rd respondent followed it up with a letter marked 'A'
addressed to the Minister of Samurdhi complaining that the petitioner had
declined to support the SLFP and he also had information that the petitioner
was supporting the JVP. The 3rd respondent requested urgent disciplinary
action against the petitioner.

Thereafter, on the Samurdhi Minister's direction, the 2nd respondent
(Commissioner- General of Samurdhi) directed the 1st respondent (Divisional
Secretary) to suspend the petitioner. Upon that direction, the 1st respondent
suspended the petitioner.

**Held:**

1\. The suspension of the petitioner was not just a case of a suspension for
which there was no reason but unlawful and a gross abuse of power to the
knowledge of the 2nd respondent. The 3rd respondent instigated the suspension;
and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents infringed the petitioner's rights under
Article 12 (1).

413

_Per_ **Fernando, J.**

"The 2nd respondent may have acted - as he says in his affidavit - only
because he was ordered to do so by the Minister of Samurdhi, but he should
have known that that was an unlawful order which it was his duty to refuse to
obey.'

2\. The 2nd and 3rd respondents also infringed the petitioner's rights under
Article 12 (2) in that the suspension was the result of hostile discrimination
on the ground of political opinion. Those respondents become personally '"
liable for such infringement.

Per Fernando, J.

'I hold that the use of the resources of the state - including human resources
- for the benefit of one political party or group, constitutes unequal
treatment and political discrimination because thereby an advantage is
conferred on one political party which is denied to its rivals.'

3\. The suspension of the petitioner's service is null and void.

**Case referred to:**

_1\. Faiz v. Attorney-General - (1995) 1 Sri LR 372, 383._

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Srinath Perera for the petitioner._

_U. Egalahewa, SC for the respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 24, 1999.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

By a letter dated 9. 4. 95 signed by the Divisional. Secretary of Dodangoda
(the 1st respondent), the petitioner was informed that, pursuant to a decision
of the Ministry of Youth Affairs, Sports and Rural Development, in regard to
the Samurdhi Programme, he had been appointed as a full-time Samurdhi Niyamaka
for the Neboda West Grama Seva Division, and that he was entitled to a monthly
allowance of Rs. 2,000 for his services. The 1st respondent informed the
petitioner, by letter dated 13. 5\. 97 (P2), received by him on 15. 5\. 97),
that in accordance with letter dated 2\. 5. 97 from the Commissioner General
of Samurdhi (the 2nd respondent), his services had been suspended with
immediate effect. No reason was given. By another

**414**

letter dated 10\. 6. 97, the 1st respondent asked the petitioner to hand over
all the files and documents in his possession. His complaint is that his
fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (g) had been
infringed by the suspension of his services.

The circumstances leading up to that suspension were these. The petitioner
received a letter dated 28. 2. 97 (marked P4) signed by the 3rd respondent,
the Deputy Speaker and Member of Parliament for the Kalutara District. That
letter, written on what appears to be the official letter-head of the Deputy
Speaker of Parliament, summoned him for a meeting to be held at the Matugama
Auditorium on 5..3. 97 (a working day) at 10.00 am; he was told to consider
his presence as compulsory because it was for a special reason.

The petitioner averred that all the Samurdhi Niyamakas of the Dodangoda
Divisional Secretary s Division were present at that meeting, at which the 3rd
respondent presided; that "the meeting was convened for canvassing support and
other organisational matters connected with the election campaign of the
People's Alliance candidates contesting the Dodangoda Pradeshiya Sabha
election on 21. 3\. 97"; and that "the 3rd respondent asked the Samurdhi
Niyamakas to canvass among the people they work, support for the People's
Alliance candidates . . ." He said that at that meeting "he expressed the view
that the candidates put forward by the People's Alliance for the Dodangoda
Pradeshiya Sabha were not the best candidates within the People's Alliance and
therefore he was unable to go to the people and canvass for them"; that,
thereupon, "the 3rd respondent reprimanded the petitioner saying that the
petitioner and other Samurdhi Niyamakas [within that area] were appointed on
his recommendations and therefore it was the duty of all of them to act
according to his wishes"; and that the petitioner was the only person who
spoke against the views of the 3rd respondent, while others who shared the
petitioner's sentiments remained silent due to the consequences they might
have to face.

The petitioner contended that "the 3rd respondent who is a politician cannot
dictate terms to the petitioner as to how he should behave"; that he was the
only Samurdhi Niyamaka from that Division who was dismissed (actually,
suspended); that he had been singled out and victimized because he expressed
his opinions at that meeting; and that his suspension was a consequence of
ill-will on the part of the 3rd respondent.

415

Although notices were served by registered post more than once on the 1st and
3rd respondents, they did not file any objections or affidavit. However, they
were represented at the hearing by learned State Counsel.

The 3rd respondent not only failed to deny the petitioner's version of the
events of 5. 3. 97, but corroborated it in a letter dated 6\. 3. 97 to the
Minister of Samurdhi, Youth Affairs and Sports (which was copied to the 2nd
respondent, who produced it marked "A"). That letter was also written on the
official letter-head of the Deputy Speaker of Parliament. In it the 3rd
respondent stated that the meeting of 5. 3. 97 was held to explain matters
connected with the Pradeshiya Sabha election; that a principal reason for
holding that meeting was that after the initial meeting regarding the
elections he had received reports that a handful of Niyamakas had neglected
these election activities; that at that meeting the petitioner, in the
presence of about 300 Niyamakas, had publicly stated that he would not support
the SLFP candidates, and would support only the candidates of his choice; and
that he had attempted to incite others to follow suit. The 3rd respondent
added that he had information that the petitioner was supporting the JVP. He
urged that if immediate action was not taken in this connection, this might
become an example to others; if so, it would not be possible to achieve the
objectives of this programme; and thereby serious harm would result. He
requested that urgent disciplinary action be taken against the petitioner.

It was only the Commissioner-General of Samurdhi (the 2nd respondent) who
filed an affidavit. There was a bare denial of the petitioner's averments in
regard to the letter "P4" and the events of 5. 3. 97. That denial is of no
value because he had no personal knowledge of those matters, and because the
3rd respondent, who did have personal knowledge, substantially corroborated
the petitioner in his letter "A". Despite that denial, he did state that:

"Samurdhi Movement is the major poverty alleviation programme of the
government . . . it requires to be impartially implemented. Accordingly, ail
the officers who are engaged in the Samurdhi Programme (including Niyamakas)
have been instructed to perform their duties devoid of politics; . . .

[the 3rd respondent] has informed the Hon. Minister of Samurdhi, Youth Affairs
and Sports, by his letter dated 97. 3. 6 that [the petitioner] had espoused
his political opinions at a public meeting held on 97. 3. 5. The Hon. Deputy
Speaker. has complained of the said

416

Upon those allegations, the Hon. Minister of Samurdhi has directed the [2nd
respondent] to remove the petitioner from his office as a Samurdhi Niyamaka .
. .

[The 2nd respondent] by his letter dated 97. 5. 2 has directed [the 1st
respondent] to suspend the services of the petitioner. . .

[The 1st respondent] has acted accordingly by [her] letter dated 97. 5. 13
(P2).'

He did not produce copies of the Minister's letter to him and of his letter
dated 2. 5. 97 to the 1st respondent.

There is thus no dispute, and I hold, that the 3rd respondent required the
petitioner to attend the meeting held on 5. 3. 97 and called on him to support
one set of candidates at the forthcoming election; that the petitioner
lawfully refused to do so, and asserted his legal right to support the
candidates of his choice; that because he had expressed his political opinion
and was reported to be a JVP supporter, the 3rd respondent had requested the
Minister of Samurdhi that disciplinary action be taken against the petitioner;
that upon the Minister's direction to remove the petitioner from office, the
2nd respondent had directed the 1st respondent to suspend him; and that upon
that direction the 1st respondent suspended the petitioner.

The Minister of Samurdhi was not made a respondent in these proceedings, and I
make no finding as to his responsibility.

ARTICLE 12 (1)

The petitioner claimed in his petition that the suspension of his services was
without any reason, and therefore violative of Article 12

(1). Not only was no reason given, but the circumstances made it clear that
the suspension was arbitrary and capricious.

As far as the 2nd and 3rd respondents were concerned, it was not just a case
of a suspension for which there was no reason, but one which they knew full
well was for a wholly bad reason. That reason was, unashamedly, stated in the
letter 'A', and it was obvious to them that a suspension for that reason was
both unlawful and a gross abuse of power. The 2nd respondent may have acted -
as he says in his affidavit \- only because he was ordered to do so by the
Minister of

**417**

 Samurdhi, but he should have known that that was an unlawful order which it
was his duty to refuse to obey.

The 1st respondent acted upon the direction of the 2nd respondent. While that
does not absolve her from personal responsibility, there is no evidence that
she knew the real reason.

There is no doubt that the conduct of the 1st and 2nd respondents, in regard
to the suspension of the services of the petitioner, constituted "executive or
administrative action". However, the 3rd respondent wrote the letters "P4" and
"A" in his capacity as Deputy Speaker and Member of Parliament, and perhaps
his conduct might not have been "executive or administrative action".
Nevertheless, it was he who instigated, and was primarily and principally
responsible for, that suspension, and for the reasons which I have fully
stated in Faiz v. Attorney-General(1) that is enough to make him liable in
these proceedings.

I, therefore, hold that the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents have infringed the
fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 12 (1).

ARTICLE 12 (2)

The 2nd and 3rd respondents knew that the suspension was improper and unlawful
because it was wholly motivated by political considerations: because the
petitioner had openly declined to support the candidates of the 3rd
respondent's choice, and insisted on supporting those of his own choice, and
because the petitioner was a supporter of a rival political party. The
suspension of his services was thus the result of hostile discrimination of
the ground of political opinion.

I, therefore, hold that the 2nd and 3rd respondents have infringed the
fundamental right of the petitioner under Article 12 (2) as well.

There were aggrvating circumstances. The 3rd respondent's letter "A" reveals
that 300 Samurdhi Niyamakas - all persons engaged to render services to the
public, for which payment was out of public funds - were being diverted to
serve partisan political purposes. Obviously, that would have hindered the
performance of the public functions for which they were being paid - "the
major poverty alleviation programme of the government [requiring] to be
impartially implemented", devoid of politics. But, another important question
of principle arises. Can persons paid out of public funds, collected directly

**418**

or indirectly from citizens of all shades of political opinion, be used to
advance the interests of those of one political persuasion alone? If public
funds are paid to one political party while being denied to others, beyond
doubt that would be both a denial of equal treatment and discrimination on the
ground of political opinion. It makes no difference whether public funds are
directly paid to one political party (or a group, such as a list of
candidates), or whether public funds are indirectly used for the benefit of
one party or group, as for instance by the diversion to it of equipment,
facilities and the like, paid for out of public funds. I hold that the use of
the resources of the State - including human resources - for the benefit of
one political party or group, constitutes unequal treatment and political
discrimination because thereby an advantage is conferred on one political
party or group which is denied to its rivals.

It is unnecessary to decide whether the petitioner would have been entitled to
complain merely in his capacity as a member or supporter of the group
prejudiced thereby. Here the petitioner himself was directly affected; a
wrongful attempt was made to compel him to participate in political activity
contrary to his beliefs, and he was illegally penalized (by the virtual
deprivation of his livelihood) for giving expression to his legitimate
dissent.

There is also the circumstance that what happened was not merely connected to
political opinion in a general way, but was directly in relation to a pending
election. I will assume that Articles 4 (e) and 93 of the Constitution do not
apply to Pradeshiya Sabha elections. Nevertheless, in a democracy elections
must always be free, fair and equal, and Articles 12 (1) and (2) give
constitutional force to those requirements of fairness, equality and non-
discrimination.

The 3rd respondent's letter "A" makes it plain that the discriminatory action
taken against the petitioner was on account of his political opinion - because
he differed from the 3rd respondent's and persisted in his own; and that, too,
in probable derogation of the fairness and equality of a pending election to a
representative body forming part of the democratic structure of Sri Lanka. Not
only was free competition among beliefs thereby stifled, but the profession of
a particular opinion was punished by the virtual deprivation of livelihood.
Democracy without dissent is a delusion. Democracy can never prohibit lawful
dissent. Indeed, a fundamental characteristic of true democracy is that it not
only protects dissent, and tolerates it, but genuinely cherishes dissent -
recognising that it is only through a peaceful contest among competing
opinions that the ordinary citizen will perceive the truth.

419

What has been established in this case, therefore, is a grave violation of the
petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12.

ARTICLE 14 (1) (g)

While it is true that the petitioner's lawful occupation was affected by the
suspension of his services, nevertheless, that was entirely the consequence of
acts which - as I now hold - were infringements of Article 12. There is no
suggestion that there was any other distinct or independent act or omission
constituting an infringement of Article 14 (1) (g). Consequently, whatever
wrong or injury the petitioner suffered will be fully redressed by granting
him relief in respect of his claims under Article 12. It is, therefore,
unnecessary to consider whether the suspension of his services was a violation
of Article 14 (1) (g) as well.

ORDER

I grant the petitioner declarations that his fundamental right under Article
12 (1) has been infringed by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents, and that his
fundamental right under Article 12 (2) has been infringed by the 2nd and 3rd
respondents.

Consequently, I declare the suspension of the petitioner's services to be null
and void. Accordingly, the petitioner must be deemed for all purposes to have
continued to be in service as a Samurdhi Niyamaka from 13. 5. 97 without a
break in service. He will be entitled to all arrears of pay, as well as all
other benefits which his colleagues received during that period - in the form
of salary, allowances, increments, permanency, promotions, etc.

In the initial affidavit which the petitioner sent to the Chief Justice, he
claimed Rs. 100,000 as compensation. However, in the formal petition which was
filed after the matter was referred to the Bar Association of Sri Lanka, there
was only a bare averment that "the petitioner is entitled to be compensated' -
with no amount being stated, no prayer for compensation, and no request to the
Court to fix the amount of compensation. Those omissions are inexcusable, but
are not sufficient to deny the petitioner compensation, because in his initial
affidavit he did claim Rs. 100,000 as compensation.

420

The violation was serious, and was aggravated by the circumstances I have
referred to above. I award the petitioner a sum of Rs. 75,000 as compensation.

I see no reason why, in this case, compensation should be paid out of public
funds. The 2nd and 3rd respondents could not possibly have thought that the
petitioner's suspension was even remotely connected to the objectives of the
Samurdhi Programme or any other public purpose; it was plainly motivated by
extraneous and improper political considerations. I, therefore, direct the 2nd
respondent personally to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 5,000, and the 3rd
respondent personally to pay him a sum of Rs. 70,000. Those payments shall be
made, and proof of payment submitted to the Registrar of this Court, before 1.
12. 99, failing which this application will be listed for an order of Court as
to enforcement. Although it is no justification that the 1st respondent merely
carried out the orders of her superior, I do not direct her to pay any
compensation. Instead, I direct her to pay a sum of Rs. 500 to the petitioner
as costs.

I direct the Registrar to forward copies of this judgment -

(a) to the Public Service Commission so that it may consider what disciplinary
action, if any, should be taken against the 2nd respondent on account of his
conduct in regard to the suspension of the petitioner;

(b) to the Attorney-General so that he may consider whether the conduct of the
2nd and 3rd respondents constitutes "corruption" (within the meaning of
section 70 of the Bribery Act as amended by Act, No. 20 of 1994) or any other
offence, and take appropriate consequential action; and

(c) to the Auditor-General so that he may consider the regularity (in the
light of the applicable financial, administrative and other regulations) of
the deployment of Samurdhi Niyamakas for political purposes, particularly in
relation to elections, and take appropriate consequential action.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._  


* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/21.html_  

