##  Sahul Hameed Abdul Munaf v. Mohamed Lebbe Mohamed Yusuf Alias Ahamed
Mohamed Yusuf - SLR - 76, Vol 2 of 1999 [1998] LKSC 21; (1999) 2 Sri LR 76 (26
November 1998)

**76**

**SAHUL HAMEED ABDUL MUNAF  
v.  
MOHAMED LEBBE MOHAMED YUSUF ALIAS AHAMED  
MOHAMED YUSUF**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 168/97  
C.A. (LA) NO. 291/96  
D.C. KANDY NO. 11820/P  
NOVEMBER 19 AND 20, 1998

_Civil Procedure Code - Failure to file list of witnesses in time - Section
121 (2) and the first proviso and section 175 (1) of the Code._

Where the District Court upheld an objection taken by the plaintiff to the
defendant calling a material witness on the ground that the defendant had
failed to file his list of witnesses 15 days before the date fixed for trial
as required by section 121 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code -

**Held:**

The first proviso to section 175 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code vests the
discretion in the trial judge to permit the witness to be called ''if special
circumstances appear to it to render such a course advisable in the interests
of justice'. There was a total lack of 'special circumstances' postulated in
the proviso to section 175 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code. The trial judge
was right in refusing to exercise has discretion in favour of the defendant.

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Girantha v. Maria_ 50 NLR 519 distinguished.  
  
2. _Kandiah v. Wiswanathan_ (1991) 1 SLR, 269 at 278.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Faiz Musthapha,_ PC with _Amarasiri Panditharatne_ and _Ms. Faiza Musthapha
Markar_ for the defendant-appellant.

_Shibly Aziz,_ PC with _A. L. M. Mohamed, Farook Thahir_ and _Nazli Buhari_
for the plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**77**

November 26, 1998.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.**

This is a partition action. The plaintiff sought to partition the land and
premises bearing No. 45, King Street, Kandy. In his plaint he averred that he
and the defendant were co-owners, each entitled to a half-share of the corpus.
The defendant, however, in his statement of claim, pleaded prescriptive title
to the entirety of the corpus.

The trial commenced on 17. 1\. 96. Admissions and points of contest were
recorded. After the evidence of the plaintiff was led, the case for the
plaintiff was closed, reading in evidence P1 to P6. On the application of the
defendant, the case was postponed for 16\. 02. 96, the reason being that the
defendant had failed to bring to court certain documents. At this point it is
relevant to note that the case had been fixed for trial on three occasions
prior to 17. 1. 96. The trial could not be resumed on 16. 2. 96 owing to the
illness of the defendant. The trial was ultimately resumed on 27. 8. 96 when
the defendant called his first witness, Manoon. After the evidence of Manoon
was concluded further trial was postponed for 5th November, 1996, once again
on the application of the defendant.

When the trial was resumed on 5th November, 1996, the defendant moved to call
witness Siddeek but the plaintiff objected to this witness being called on the
ground that the defendant's list of witnesses had not been filed at least 15
days before the date fixed for trial. (section 121 (2) of the Civil Procedure
Code). The objection taken before the District Court was on the basis that the
defendant's list of witnesses was filed only on 10. 1. 96, the trial having
commenced on 17. 1. 96. The submission before the District Court was that the
defendant's list of witnesses was filed only 7 days before the date of trial
and this was clearly contrary to the provisions of section 121 (2) of the
Civil Procedure Code. This objection was upheld in the District Court. The
defendant's application to the Court of Appeal for "leave to appeal" against
the order of the District Court was refused. Hence the present appeal by the
defendant to this court.

78

The principal submission of- Mr. Musthapha for the defendant appellant was
that the trial judge has failed to address his mind to the first proviso to
section 175 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code. Section 175 (1) reads thus:

"175 (1) - No witness shall be called on behalf of any party unless such
witness shall have been included in the list of witnesses previously filed in
court by such party, as provided by section 121.

Provided, however, that the court may in its discretion, if special
circumstances appear to it to render such a course advisable in the interests
of justice, permit a witness to be examined, although such witness may not
have been included in such list aforesaid;

Provided also that any party to an action may be called as a witness without
his name having been included in any such list."

Relying on the judgment of Gratiaen J. in _Girantha v. Maria_ ,(1) Mr.
Musthapha strongly urged before us that the sole object of filing a list of
witnesses is to avoid "the element of surprise" and that the court should have
permitted witness Siddeek to be called in the interests of justice. It was
counsel's submission before us that Siddeek was a very material witness to
establish the defendant's plea of prescriptive possession. It was also pointed
out to us that it was almost eleven months after the plaintiff had notice of
the defendant's list of witnesses, that the application was made to call
witness Siddeek.

The first proviso to section 175 (1) vests the discretion in the trial judge
to permit the witness to be called "if special circumstances appear to it to
render such a course advisable in the interests of justice". As submitted by
Mr. Shibly Aziz for the plaintiff-respondent, the finding of the trial judge
was that the counsel for the defendant was unable to give any "acceptable" or
'reasonable" explanation for the admitted delay in filing the list of
witnesses. Upon a scrutiny of the proceedings of 5th November, 1996, it is
manifest that this finding

79

of the trial judge is correct. What is more, there was no indication whatever
of the nature, content, and relevance of the evidence sought to be led through
witness Siddeek. This is a very significant fact which clearly distinguishes
the present case from Girantha v. Maria (supra). Literally there was nothing
on record to show that Siddeek's evidence was vital to the case for the
defendant. There was a total lack of material to suggest any "special
circumstances" postulated in the proviso to section 175 (1) of the Civil
Procedure Code. I accordingly hold that in the facts and circumstances of this
case the trial judge was plainly right in refusing to exercise his discretion
in favour of the defendant.

For these reasons the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.
1,000.

Before I part with this judgment I would commend the observations made by
Wijeyaratne J. in _Kandiah v. Wiswanathan_ (2) : "It happens frequently in
District Court trials that material witnesses and documents have not been
listed as required by law. The failure to do so entails considerable hardship,
delay and expense to parties and contributes to laws delays. It should be
stressed that a special responsibility is cast on attorneys-at-law, who should
endeavour to obtain full instructions, from parties in time to enable them to
list all material witnesses and documents as required by law".

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/21.html_  

