##  Jayaratne and Another v. Premadasa and Others - SLR - 340, Vol 1 of 2004
[2004] LKSC 22; (2004) 1 Sri LR 340 (13 February 2004)

**340**

**JAYARATNE AND ANOTHER  
 v  
 PREMADASA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S .N. SILVA, C.J.  
ISMAIL.J.AND  
WEERASURIYA, J.  
S.C.APPEAL NO. 20/2003  
C.A.L.A. NO. 28/2002  
D.C. RATNAPURANo. 940/P  
17 NOVEMBER, 2003

_Partition_ \- Preliminary survey discloses much larger land than claimed
-Decree for the larger extent - Power of the court to order partition of the
larger land and thereafter on a petition by strangers to vary the corpus to 30
acres - Court's power to give relief under section 48(4) of the- Partition
Law.  
  
The original plaintiff filed an action for a partitioning of a land of 30
acres. The surveyor who did the preliminary survey produced a plan for 71
acres 1 rood and 30 perches. At the trial judgment was delivered without a
contest which was followed up with an interlocutory decree and further steps
were taken to partition the larger land, on a Final Plan.  
  
Thereafter three persons who were not parties to the action applied to set
aside the judgment or alternatively to vary the corpus to 30 acres and for
rights to that land.

**341**

The surveyors had after the preliminary survey failed to seek directions from
court: and no steps to amend the plaint and _lis pendens_ were taken.  
  
**Held:  
**  
      (1) The court had no jurisdiction to vary the judgment. The decree is final subject to appeal under section 48(1) and also revision or _restitutio in integrum._ The court may also vary the judgement under section 48(4) only in respect of the parties and in the limited circumstances prescribed by that section of the law as amended by Act, No.17of1997.  
  
     (2) The proceedings of the District Court leading up to the trial and interlocutory decree were bad and should be set aside.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
**Case referred to:  
  
      **1\. _Somawathie v Madawala_ (1983) 2 SRI  LR 15   
  
        _Manohara de Silva_ for 2nd plaintiff-appellant.  
  
The petitioners respondents and 3-8 plaintiff-respondents absent and
unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult_

February 13, 2004  
  
**WEERASURIYA, J.  
**  
      The original plaintiffs instituted action in the District Court of Ratnapura seeking to partition the amalgamated lands called Galinnhena, Abeyhena, Imbulehena, Pitaowitehena, Kehelella, Paragahahena and Kadjugahahena in extent about 30 acres. S. Ramakrishnan, Licensed Surveyor who was commissioned to do the preliminary survey, surveyed an extent of 71 Acres 1 Rood 20 Perches as forming the corpus and submitted his plan and report bearing No. 1020, dated 05.04.1976. The trial which commenced on 29.06.1983 was concluded without a contest and the judgment was delivered on the same day allowing a partition of the land as depicted in the preliminary plan containing an extent of 71 Acres 1 Rood an 20 Perches. The interlocutory decree was entered in terms of the judgment and a commission was issued to prepare the final plan and after a long delay, Commissioner C. G. Punchihewa submitted his final plan and report bearing No.487 on 05.03.1999. On 19.03.1999 the petitioner-respondent-respondents filed an application seeking to set

**342**

aside the judgment and the interlocutory decree or in the alternative to
restrict the corpus to 30 acres. Learned District Judge after hearing the
parties, by his order dated 27.01.2000, allowed the application to vary the
judgment and the interlocutory decree by restricting the corpus to 30 Acres.  
  
  The Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal on the application by the
appellants and thereafter upon the conclusion of the hearing by its order
dated 07.03.2002, dismissed the appeal and affirmed the order of the District
Judge.  
  
   The appellants sought special leave to appeal from the order of the Court
of Appeal on 07.03.2003, and this Court granted them leave on the following
questions of law as set out in paragraph 19 of their petition.  
  
         1\. Did the Court of Appeal err in upholding the order of the District Court, when the District Court lacked jurisdiction to make such order and/or to alter the judgment and interlocutory decree entered by Court?  
  
         2\. Did the Court of Appeal err in upholding the order of the District Court made in 940/P D.C. Ratnapura which limited the extent of the corpus to 30 acres without identifying the same?  
  
        3\. Did the Court of Appeal err in upholding the said order of the District Court when the District Court had misdirected itself in allowing the respondents' application to limit the corpus to 30 acres inasmuch as the said respondents had only made a claim to 9 3/4 acres from the surveyed land?  
  
      4\. Did the Court of Appeal err in upholding the order of the District Court when the respondents had failed to show, trace or prove their title to the land which they were seeking to exclude from the corpus?  
  
    5\. Did the Court of Appeal err in upholding the order of the District Court when the respondent's application was totally misconceived in law inasmuch as they were not entitled to have and maintain an application under section 48 of the Partition Law and/or section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code?  
  
    6\. Did the Court of Appeal err in upholding the order of the District Court when the respondents were estopped in law from making their application?

**343**

   7\. Did the Court of Appeal misdirect itself in not properly considering
the grounds of appeal set out in paragraph 16 of the petition made to the
Court of Appeal and the questions of law formulated in the written submissions
of the petitioners.  
  
   It is convenient to deal with questions 1-5 together since they concern
with the scope and content of section 48(4) of the Partition Law and its
applicability to the circumstances of this case.  
  
   The Court of Appeal has sought to justify the order of the District Judge
by reference to the inherent powers of the District Court in terms of section
839 of the Civil Procedure Code. It is apparent that the learned District
Judge had acted solely in terms of the provisions of section 48 of the
Partition Law since he made express reference to it in the course of his order
and made no mention of section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code. Even the
petitioners had failed to plead the invocation of the provisions of section
839 of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
   Section 48(4) of the Partition Law as amended by Act, No. 17 of 1997 makes
provision for a party to a partition action, as enumerated hereinafter whose
right, title or interest in respect of the land has been extinguished by
reason of the entering of the interlocutory decree or otherwise prejudiced by
the interlocutory decree to make an application for special leave to establish
the right, title or interest in respect of the land. This provision seeks to
provide such relief to a limited category namely to a party (a) who has not
been served with summons or (b) being a minor or a person of unsound mind who
has not been duly represented by a guardian ad litem or (c) being a party who
has duly filed his statement of claim and registered his address fails to
appear at the trial. Any application for such relief shall be by petition
supported by an affidavit setting out the nature and extent of his right,
share or interest to the land and shall specify to what extent and in what
manner the applicant seeks to have the interlocutory decree amended, modified
or set aside and the parties affected thereby.  
  
The application of the petitioner-respondent-respondents dated 19.03.1999 was
to set aside the judgment and interlocutory decree entered or in the
alternative to restrict the corpus to 30 acres as described in the schedule to
the plaint. It would be clear that this application was outside the scope of
section 48(4) of the Partition Law for several reasons, namely (a) it was not
made by the parties to the

**344**

action, (b) it was intended to set aside the interlocutory decree or in the
alternative to restrict the corpus to 30 Acres, (c) it did not set out the
nature and extent of the right, share or interest of the parties to the land
to which the action relates and (d) it did not specify to what extent and in
what manner the parties seek to have the interlocutory decree amended,
modified or set aside. It must be noted that a party could make an application
to set aside the interlocutory decree only where the party is entitled to the
entirety of the property.  
  
   It is significant that section 48(1) of the Partition Law gives final  and
conclusive effect to the interlocutory decree subject to the decision on any
appeal which may be preferred therefrom and sub section (4) as referred to
earlier. Having regard to the stringent provisions of section 48 of the
Partition Law which had as their object the finality of the interlocutory
decree it is obvious that learned District Judge had acted in blatant
disregard of the provisions of section 48.  
  
On a consideration of the above material it would be manifest that District
Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the application of the petitioner-
respondent-respondents to seek the relief they prayed for and the application
was misconceived. The Court of Appeal has taken the no erroneous view that
notwithstanding the provisions of section 48, learned District Judge was
justified in restricting the corpus to 30 acres using the inherent powers of
Court in terms of section 839 of the Civil Procedure Code. For the foregoing
reasons I hold that the Court of Appeal has erred in affirming the order of
the District Judge which was patently outside his jurisdiction. Therefore, I
set aside the order of the District Judge dated 04.11.1998 and the order of
the Court of Appeal dated 07.03.2002.  
  
The petitioner-respondent-respondents were not parties to the action and
therefore no question of estoppel would arise in respect of  their application
to claim relief.  
  
It is not necessary to consider the material referred to in question No.7,
since most of the matters arising from paragraph 16 of the petition of appeal
presented to Court of Appeal had been dealt with in discussing the other
questions.  
  
The revisionary powers of the Appellate Court are unaffected although section
48 of the Partition Law invests interlocutory decrees entered under the
Partition Law with finality. Thus the exercise of pow-

**345**

ers of revision and restitution in integrum to set aside partition decrees
when it is found that the proceedings were tainted by what has been  called
fundamental vice is available to the Appellate Court.C1)  
  
Licensed Surveyor Ramakrishnan who was commissioned to do the preliminary
survey had failed to locate and identify the amalgamated lands as described in
the schedule to the plaint. By surveying an extent of 71 Acres, which exceeded
the extent he was commissioned to survey by 41 Acres, the Commissioner had
failed to comply with the terms of the commission. The Commissioner should
have reported the fact that he was unable to locate a land of about 30 Acres
and asked for further instructions from the District Judge. It is unfortunate
that even the learned District Judge who heard the case had failed to give due
consideration to the wide discrepancy in the extent. On a perusal of the
supplementary report of the Commissioner it would appear that on a
superimposition of lot 33 of F. V. P. 259 on the preliminary plan certain lots
would fall outside lot 33 and therefore certain exclusions had been
recommended from the corpus. At the trial contents of the supplementary report
appear to have received scant attention of the Court.  
  
On the above material, I hold that the District Court had acted wrongly in
proceeding to trial in respect of what appeared to be a larger land than that
described in the plaint and not properly identified. In any event the
peremptory steps relating to an amendment of the plaint, the registration of a
new lis pendens and the fresh declaration in terms of section 12 have not been
complied with. Therefore, I set aside the proceedings in the District Court
leading up to the trial and the judgment and the interlocutory decree.
However, I make no order as to costs.  
  
**S .N. SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.           ** \- I agree.  
  
  
_Appeal allowed.  
_  


* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/22.html_  

