##  Gunaratne and Others v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation and Others - SLR -
315, Vol 1 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 22; (1996) 1 Sri LR 315 (31 July 1996)

**315**

**GUNARATNE AND OTHERS  
****v** **.  
CEYLON PETROLEUM CORPORATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 99/96.  
13 JUNE AND 05 JULY, 1996.

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution‑
Dealership Agreement granting authority to sell, supply and distribute
petroleum ‑ Summary termination of Dealership Agreement ‑ Should concept of
executive or administrative action in relation to a contract be confined only
to the "threshold stage"?_

For many years before 1994 the 1st Petitioner had ‑ as an individual ‑ a
Dealership Agreement together with the requisite authority under section 5 E
of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation Act, No. 28 of 1961 as amended (by Act No.
5 of 1963) for running a filling station for the sale, supply and distribution
of petroleum. The same filling station was taken over by the petitioners in
partnership on a Dealership Agreement signed by the Petitioners on 23.3.94 and
by 1st Respondent on 26.10.94 and the petitioners were granted authority with
dealer discounts to sell, supply and distribute Lanka Two Star Petrol, Lanka
Diesel and lubricants under section 5 E of the Act. By letter dated 4.1.96
signed by the Marketing Manager of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation (9th
Respondent) the said Dealership Agreement was terminated. The authority was
thus cancelled.

Clause 12B of the Agreement and section 5H (4) of the Act had provisions for
the termination of the Agreement.

The Board of the Corporation had passed a resolution to terminate the
dealership of the Petitioners and to grant the Dealership authority to one B.
K. Sarath Wickramasiri (11th Respondent). The resolution was implemented
without notice to the Petitioners. The resolution did not indicate any reason
for the Board's decisions. However according to the letter of termination
dated 4.1.96 the Board had considered the contents of five warning letters
dated 23.2.81, 21.11.84, 19.5.86, 27.10.88 and 29.6.93 and had decided to
terminate, with immediate effect the Petitioners' Agreement and authority,
acting under Clause 12 B and section 5H (4). The Corporation had a Marketing
Manual setting out the procedure for the appointment of new dealers

**316**

but this procedure was not followed. The 11th Respondent stated had made an
application for a dealership in or about August 1995 and an interview had been
held in the 9th Respondent's office and he was aware the Corporation's
officials had made investigations into his application. There were however no
pleadings or prayer in respect of the 11th Respondent's dealership.

The 9th Respondent had tendered a Board paper dated 8.12.95 wherein he
mentioned the five warning letters and stated that although in the last
warn­ing, the dealer had been cautioned that any further act of misconduct
would result in termination, considering the said serious lapses, he
recommends to the Board of Directors to terminate the dealership.

**Held:**

(1) It is not only at the "threshold" stage ( ie at or before the time the
contract was entered into) that the Board's action could be regarded as
executive or administrative action but also during the subsistence of the
contract, The impugned resolution was administrative or executive action
although it in­volved a contract and was in violation of Article 12(1).

(2) The Board was not entitled to cancel the authority or to terminate the
Agreement without reasons. Further the Board was not made aware that four of
the five warnings brought to its notice had occurred long before the current
agreement and authority, and that the 2nd to 4th Petitioners were not involved
in them; these should not have been taken into consideration. The fifth
warning was in respect of an incident (defective pump) which had been dealt
with, and was in any event insufficient to justify the termination, having
regard to the Corporation's responsibility to supply and maintain equipment.

(3) The Agreement and the authority were intimately linked, and were in fact
dealt with together and the first limb of the impugned resolution was
therefore not severable. That part of the resolution was bad. However the
second limb of the resolution (appointing 11th Respondent) was distinct and
severable.

(4) There being no pleadings and prayer in respect of the appointment of the
11th Respondent it is not just and equitable to make any order affecting that
appointment.

(5) The Petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12(1) have been
vio­lated by the 1st to 8th Respondents by the termination of the agreement
and the cancellation of the authority.

**317**

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Roberts v. Ratnayake _(1986) 2 Sri L.R. 36.

2\. _Wijenaike_ _v. Air Lanka_ (1990) 1 Sri LR 293.

3\. _Dahanayake_ _v. De Silva_ (1978‑79‑80) 1 Sri LR 47, 53‑54.

**APPLICATION** for relief in respect of infringement of fundamental rights
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

_Tilak_ _Marapana P.C._ with _Nalin_ _Ladduwahetty , Jayantha Fernando and
Anuja Premaratne _for Petitioners.

_A. A. de Silva _ with _Mahinda_ _Ralapanawe_ for 1st to 9th Respondents, _J.
C. Weliamuna_ for the 11th Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult_

July 31, 1996.

**FERNANDO, J.**

The 1st Respondent, the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, entered into a
Dealership Agreement ("the Agreement") for the sale of petro­leum products
with the four Petitioners (who were carrying on business in partnership) in
respect of the Kottawa Lanka Filling Station. That Agreement was signed by the
Petitioners on 24.3.94 and by the 1st Respondent on 26.10.94.The Petitioners
were granted authority to sell, supply and distribute petroleum under and in
terms of section 5E of the Ceylon Petroleum Corporation Act, No. 28 of 1961,
as amended. The Petitioners complain of the infringement of their fundamental
rights under Article 12(1) by the 1st Respondent and the 2nd to 8th
Respond­ents (the Chairman and Directors of the 1st Respondent) by reason of
the summary termination of that Agreement, communicated by letter dated 4.1.96
signed by the Marketing Manager, the 9th Respondent, in consequence of which
possession was taken on the same day; and the filling station was handed over
to the 11th Respondent, the new dealer. There was no plea or prayer in respect
of the cancellation of that authority.

For many years before 1994, the 1st Petitioner had ‑ as an individual ‑ a
Dealership Agreement, together with the requisite authority under section 5E,
in respect of the same filling station.

**318**

Clause 12B of the Agreement, and section 5H(4) of the Act, make the following
provisions for the termination of the Agreement, and the statutory authority,
as follows:

Clause 12B: If the Dealer does not in the opinion of the General Manager
perform his duties and obligations as a Dealer of petroleum products of the
Corporation faithfully, diligently and efficiently or if he defaults in
complying with the terms, covenants and conditions of this Agreement or the
terms and conditions under which commissions and allowances are payable to him
referred to in paragraph 12 above, the Corporation shall be entitled to
terminate agreement without any notice whatsoever. The Corporation shall also
be entitled to terminate this Agreement after three months' notice in writing
to the Dealer and the Dealer is entitled to terminate this Agreement after
three months' notice in writing given to the Corporation. The three months'
notice by the Dealer shall commence to run from the date on which the
Corporation acknowledges the Dealer's written notice. Notwithstanding the
above the Board of Directors may by a resolution passed at e meeting of the
Board of Directors terminate this Agreement **without notice and without
assigning any reasons whatsoever.'**

Section 5H: "The following provisions shall be applicable in the case of the
exercise of the power to grant a written authority conferred on the Minister,
any authorized officer or the Board of Directors by any of the sections 5B,
5E, 5F and 5G :........

.............(4) The Minister, such officer or such Board may, in his or its
**absolute discretion,** decide at any time to cancel such authority"

In an affidavit sworn on behalf of the 1st Respondent, the Deputy Marketing
Manager produced the following Board resolution, which he said had been passed
on 2.1.96:

"BOARD PAPER of 8.12.95 ‑TERMINATION OF DEALERSHIP OF.. KOTTAWA LANKA FILLING
STATION ‑ from Manager Marketing.

Board decided :

**319**

i) to terminate the dealership of Kottawa Lanka Filling Station at the
Corporation Controlled Lanka Filling Station situated at Kottawa and cancel
the authority granted to him under section 5H(4) of Ceylon Petroleum
Corporation Act, No. 28 of 1961 as amended by Ceylon Petroleum Corporation
(Amendment) Act, No. 5 of 1963 read with section 12(b) [sic] of the Dealership
Agreement to sell, supply and distribute Lanka Two Star Petrol, Lanka Auto
Diesel and Lubricants.

ii) to appoint Mr. B. K. Sarath Wickramasiri of No. 201, Janarajaya Mawatha,
Divulapitiya, Boralesgamuwa and grant him authority under section 5E of Ceylon
Petroleum Corporation Act, No. 28 of 1961 as amended by Ceylon Petroleum
Corporation (Amendment) Act, No. 5 of 1963, read with the terms and conditions
set out in the Dealer Agreement to be signed hereinafter to sell, supply and
distribute Lanka Two Star Petrol, Lanka Auto Diesel and Lubricants and grant
him Corporation Controlled Dealer discounts."

The document produced, though certified as a true copy, regrettably failed to
indicate that it was in fact an extract from the Board minutes, and the date
of the Board meeting. Mr. A. A. de Silva for the 1st to 9th Respondents
submitted that the Board meeting had been held on 12.12.95. Although there was
some uncertainty as to the date of the Board Meeting, learned President's
Counsel for the Petitioners did not dispute the fact that the Board had passed
that resolution. It had been implemented without any notice to the
Petitioners. That resolution did not indicate any reason for the Board's
decisions. However, according to the letter of termination dated 4.1.96, the
Board had con­sidered the contents of five warning letters dated 23.2.81,
21.11.84, 19.5.86, 27.10.88, and 29.6.95, and had decided to terminate, with
immediate effect, the Petitioners' Agreement and authority, acting un­der
clause 12B and section 5H(4).

When this matter was taken up for hearing on 13.6.96, we pointed out to Mr. A.
A. de Silva that there was no material to indicate why the Board had decided
to terminate the Petitioners' Agreement and to appoint the 11th Respondent in
their place. When the hearing was resumed on 5.7.96, he tendered a copy of the
Board paper, dated 8.12.95, submitted by the 9th Respondent. This stated that
the Dealership was

**320**

operated by the 1st Petitioner in the name and style of Kottawa Lanka Filling
Station; that there were four partners in the partnership; that there had been
instances of "complaints against **the incumbent dealer " **and that
disciplinary action had been taken, mentioning only those five warning
letters; and concluded:

"Although in our last warning, we have cautioned the dealer that any further
act of misconduct would result in the termination of the dealership,
considering the above serious, lapses on their part, I recommend to the Board
of Directors to terminate the dealership."

It further stated that the 11th Respondent had sought a dealership of a
Corporation‑controlled outlet. Board approval was requested in terms identical
to the resolution subsequently passed.

There was no information as to how the 11th Respondent had come on the scene.
The 11th Respondent stated that he had made an application for a dealership in
or about August 1995, and that an interview was held in the 9th Respondent's
office. He added that he was aware that officials of the 1st Respondent had
made investigations into his application. Although the Petitioners originally
made allegations of improper political influence, involving the 10th
Respondent, a Member of Parliament, in regard to the selection of the 11th
Respondent, learned President's Counsel conceded at the hearing that these
could not be maintained. We therefore reject those allegations but as the 10th
Re­spondent did not file papers, and was absent and unrepresented at the
hearing, an order for costs is not justified.

The Petitioners contended that the 1st Respondent's Marketing Manual set out
the procedure for the appointment of new dealers. The Manual required the Area
Supervisor to obtain at least three applications, and to forward these to the
Area Manager with certain information relevant to financial capacity and
standing as well as his own comments; and the Area Manager to interview each
candidate and scrutinize certain documents, and to submit full particulars of
all candidates with his recommendation to the "Head of Function", who was then
required to-

**321**

"Prepare a Board Paper recommending the candidate whom he considers best
suited for appointment or leave it to the Board to make their selection if
more than one candidate is equally eligible and suitable for appointment."

The Respondents do not deny that this procedure was not followed. They state
that the Board was vested with authority to appoint dealers, and that "the
manual referred to has been prepared purely as a guideline in case of
selection for appointment of **new** dealers for **new** areas". However, they
do not explain how the 11th Respondent was selected. Whether it was for an
existing filling station, or for a new filling station, the interests of the
1st Respondent and the public required that care be exercised when selecting a
new dealer; and I find it difficult to accept, in the absence of clear
provision to that effect in the Manual, that less care was required for
selection of a new dealer for an existing station.

Learned President's Counsel contended on behalf of the Petitioners that the
termination of the Agreement was wrongful because the Respondents were not
entitled to rely on matters which had occurred before the Agreement had been
entered into; because the Board had not been made aware that four of the five
warnings were in respect of past incidents for which the 2nd to 4th
Petitioners were not responsi­ble; because the fifth incident was one which
had been inquired into and concluded six months earlier, and could not be
reopened; and because in any event that incident did not justify termination.

Mr. A. A. de Silva contended that:

(1) the action taken by the Board to terminate the Applicant and the authority
under section 5E did not constitute "executive or administrative action"
within the meaning of Article 126; firstly, because the Board took a
commercial decision in respect of a purely commercial transaction; secondly,
because it was an act done taken in the exercise of the 1st Respondent's
contractual rights under a concluded contract and it was only at the
"threshold" stage (i.e. at or before the time the contract was entered into)
that, if at all, it could be regarded as "executive or adminis­trative
action". He cited _Roberts v. Ratnayake,_ (1) __ and _Wijenaike_ _v. Air
Lanka,_ (2) and some of the Indian cases mentioned therein.

**322**

(2) the Board was entitled to terminate the Agreement and the authority,
without notice and without any reason;

(3) because the Petitioners had claimed no relief in respect of the
cancellation of the authority, this Court could not grant any relief;

(4) the Board was entitled to rely on past incidents, the 1994 partnership was
between the original dealer, the 1st Petitioner, and members of his family;
and there were also other incidents, not mentioned in the Board paper, which
had taken place before and after the 1994 Agreement, which justified the
termination.

Mr. Weliamuna, on behalf of the 11th Respondent, contended that the
Petitioners were required by Rule 44(1) (d) of the Supreme Court Rules, 1990,
to specify the reliefs claimed; that the Petitioners neither pleaded that the
appointment of the 11th Respondent was wrongful, nor prayed for relief (by way
of declaration, quashing or otherwise) in respect of that appointment; and
that whatever relief this Court might grant in regard to the termination of
the Petitioners' Agreement, it should not interfere with the 11th Respondent's
appointment.

Section 5B of the Act confers a monopoly on the 1st Respondent in respect of
the right to import, export, sell, and distribute petrol, kerosene, diesel oil
and furnace oil (and petroleum of any other class or description specified by
the Minister in a vesting order under section 5C). No person can deal in such
products except with the written authority of the Board of Directors of the
1st Respondent. Section 5F prohibits the establishment and maintenance of
facilities and equipment for the sale, supply and distribution of such
petroleum products, by any person who does not have the written authority of
the Board under section 5E. Although prior to 1961, the State was not engaged,
directly or through a State agency, in the provision of petroleum prod­ucts
for the community, that is now part of the service provided by the State for
the people; even the pricing of such products is influenced by Government
policy and is not solely on commercial considerations. The supply, sale and
distribution of petroleum products is thus a function of the Executive.
Samarakoon, C.J., said in _Dahanayake_ _v. de Silva_ , (3): ****

**323**

"Political ideology at the time considered that, petroleum being an essential
service for the community, it should be the responsibility of and the sole
business of the Government of the country ......Petroleum has ceased to be a
mere consumer item of private trade and is now the concern of governments at
both national and international levels ......... ............when [the
Corporation] enters into contracts for services for the sale and distribution
of petroleum products, it does so as agent of the State."

Similarly in Perera v. U. G. C.,(4) it was held that University education was
a governmental function, which had been assigned to the University Grants
Commission, as an organ or delegate of the Government, and the selection of
students for admission was "executive or administrative action". The grant of
authority under section 5E is plainly a statutory function. A dealership
agreement is not a distinct, or severable, matter, but intimately connected
with that authority. Indeed, it seems to be referable to section 5F Entering
into such agreements and granting such authority ‑ and cancelling them ‑
cannot be regarded as purely commercial decisions in commercial transactions:
it constitutes executive or administrative action.

Mr. de Silva argued, however, that it was only at the "threshold" stage of
entering into a dealership agreement that "executive or administrative action"
was involved. When he was reminded that there were numerous decisions in which
this Court had given relief in respect of acts done in relation to contracts
long after the "threshold" stage had been passed, he submitted that that was
in regard to contracts of employment, and maintained that the position was
different in regard to other contracts.

I cannot accept this contention. The principle of equality embodied in Article
12 does not make any exception, in regard to contracts in general, or
particular types of contracts, or the stage at which a con­tract is. Indeed,
the proviso to Article 12(2), as well as Article 12(3), militate against the
contention that contracts are excluded. As for the submission that action
taken after a contract has been entered into ceases to be executive or
administrative action, that would give rise to a host of anomalies. That
submission, while acknowledging that dis-

**324**

crimination (e.g. on the ground of race, religion, or political opinion) at
the stage of awarding or granting a contract, dealership or licence, can be
remedied under Article 126, leaves it open, soon thereafter, to cancel that
same contract, dealership or licence on the very same grounds doing indirectly
that which could not have been done directly. Another consequence of Mr. de
Silva's submission that the "threshold" restriction does not apply to
contracts of employment would be that if the Corporation appoints employees to
manage some filling stations, and dealers to manage others, the act of
terminating the services of the former would be "executive or administrative
action", but the termina­tion of a dealership for identical reasons would not.

In view of Mr. de Silva's concession that the distinction as to the
"threshold" stage does not apply to contracts of employment, it is unnecessary
to refer to _Wijenaike_ _v. Air Lanka,_ except to point out that it concerned
a contract of employment. The majority decision in _Roberts v. Ratnayake_
appears to have been based on the principle that the termination of the
contract in that case was not done under any statutory provision, and that
equality before the "law" only ensured equality in respect of protection under
statutory provisions, (see pp. 43, 48, 118, 119). The present case is
distinguishable because the Petitioners' Dealership was not a purely private
contract, but is referable to section 5F; it was inextricably connected to the
authority granted under section 5E, and was not severable; and there was a
single act of termination which was primarily referable to section 5H(4).
Further, with respect, the majority decision seems to have proceeded upon a
narrow view that Article 12 is restricted by the definition of "law" (as
meaning a statute), and I take the broader view that the principle of equality
before the law embodied in Article 12 is a necessary corollary of the concept
of the Rule of Law which underlies the Constitution _(Perera v. Jayawickrema_
(4)) _._ Article 12 therefore prohibits arbitrary, capricious and/or
discriminatory action. Since I entertain no doubt as to the scope of Article
12, I must respectfully decline to examine other decisions from other
jurisdictions with a view to importing restrictions which are plainly lacking.

It is now well settled that powers vested in the State, public officers, and
public authorities are not absolute or unfettered, but are held in trust for
the public, to be used for the public benefit, and not

**325**

for improper purposes. Even assuming that the Board of the 1st Respondent was
not obliged initially to disclose the reasons for its decision, nevertheless
when that decision is being reviewed in the exercise of the fundamental rights
jurisdiction of this Court, the burden is on the Respondents to establish
sufficient cause to justify that decision, and this Court can scrutinize the
grounds for the decision.

To justify the termination, the Respondents relied on a number of alleged acts
of misconduct and/or inefficiency on the part of the Petitioners (in addition
to the five letters mentioned in the Board paper and the letter of
termination) and these included acts done both before and after the 1994
Agreement was entered into.

In my view neither clause 12B nor section 5H(4) empowers the Board to
terminate a dealership or cancel an authority on account of matters which
occurred before that dealership or authority was granted (except possibly
where they were not known at that time). To hold oth­erwise would penalise the
2nd to 4th Petitioners for acts done at a time when they had no control or
responsibility for them. I hold that allega­tions in respect of the period
prior to March 1994 cannot be relied on in justification.

In regard to matters occurring after March 1994, the Respondents have referred
to two or three instances in which, upon a routine inspection, pumps have been
found to be delivering less than the proper quantity. However, admittedly,
those pumps are the 1st Respondent's property; it is its responsibility to
calibrate them correctly; and a dealer must not meddle with them. Mr. de Silva
contended that it was the Petitioners' responsibility to test the pumps every
day. If such tests had been done, and the pumps were found to be defective,
the Petitioners should have reported the matter to the 1st Respondent, and any
such complaint should have been recorded in the log book maintained by the
Petitioners. The Petitioners' log book was taken over by the 1st Respondent on
4.1.96, and despite an order made by this Court on 2.2.96 directing the 1st
and 2nd Respondents to produce it, it was not made available at the hearing.
Further, some of the inspection reports produced by the Respondents also
showed instances where the pumps were over delivering. In any event, it was
primarily the responsibility of the 1st Respondent to supply pumps of good
quality

326

and in working order, and the Petitioners cannot be held solely or mainly
accountable for their defects. It would have been unreasonable for the Board
to have terminated the Dealership on account of such defects in these
circumstances; and in fact the relevant Board paper made no reference to them,
and the Board could not have taken them into con­sideration.

The Respondents also produced photocopies of six cheques is­sued by the
Petitioners (drawn on the Seylan Bank, Kottawa) to the 1st Respondent in
payment for goods supplied, for sums aggregating to Rs 662,126/19, dated
29.12.95, 30.12.95, 31.12.95 and 3.1.96, which had not been honoured upon
presentation. Although the entries are not clear, it would seem that these
were presented on 4.1.96 and subse­quent dates. It is not known when each of
these cheques were received by the 1st Respondent, and it would seem that the
normal course of clearing ensured that cheques issued by the Petitioners would
be presented only after two or three days to the Petitioners' bank ‑at
Kottawa. The matter has not been clarified, but it is quite possible that the
cheques were presented after the Petitioners were compelled to hand over the
filling station on 4.1.96. Mr de Silva strenuously con­tended that the
Petitioners had acted improperly in issuing those cheques because, he argued,
they did not have funds in their account at the time of issue; we do not know
what funds they had at the time of issue, but even if they did not then have
sufficient funds their obliga­tion was to ensure that there were sufficient
funds at the time of pres­entation; and if in consequence of the takeover,
they did not deposit funds, or make other arrangements to enure that the
cheques drawn in favour of the 1st Respondent would be met, they can hardly be
faulted. The letter of 4.1.96 expressly stated that payment would be made for
stocks taken over; Mr de Silva admitted that no payment had been made, and
that the value of the stocks taken over was Rs 577,587. He also conceded that
the 1st Respondent had not taken any action in respect of the dishonoured
cheques. The dishonouring of those cheques was not a matter which in any way
influenced the decision of the Board, and perhaps occurred after the takeover,
and the 1st Respondent can­not now rely on it to justify the termination of
the Agreement.

The only allegation which remains for consideration is that referred to in the
warning letter dated 29.6.95. On Saturday, 27.5.95, one pump

**327**

was found to be defective, in that occasionally it did not return to zero
after recording a delivery of fuel. According to the relevant page of the log
book, a photocopy of which page alone the Petitioners had kept, probably in
connection with the inquiry into that incident, this defect had been reported
by telephone at 3:10 p.m. that very day. Similar complaints were made on
9.5.95, 29.5.95 and 20.6.95. On Sunday, 28.5.95, an employee of the 1st
Respondent who had come to pur­chase fuel, found that the pumper was about to
commence delivery although the pump had not returned to zero after the
previous delivery. The Petitioners were asked to submit an explanation; this
they did, saying that the pumper was a trainee, who had been dismissed in
consequence, and asking for forgiveness. By letter dated 29.6.95, the
Petitioners were warned that although disciplinary action could have been
taken in terms of the Agreement, no such action would be taken in that
instance, but that any future irregularity would be reported to the Board for
action in regard to the Dealership Agreement. Being its equipment, the 1st
Respondent was under an obligation to ensure that it was in proper working
order, and we have been given no explanation as to why it was not.

The 1st Respondent was not entitled to rely on that incident, since it had
been dealt with; in any event, having regard to the circumstances in which it
happened, it did not justify termination; and the Board was not made aware
that four of the five warnings referred to in the Board paper had occurred
before the Dealership Agreement came into operation. If the Directors had been
asked to terminate the Agreement and the authority on account of that single
incident, it is likely that the Directors, as fair and reasonable persons,
would at least have probed the matter more deeply, and perhaps given the
Petitioners an opportunity to state their position. Had they been asked to
terminate the Agreement and the authority, summarily and without any reason,
it is possible that they might have refused. However, I need not speculate
about those matters, because none of the Directors have sworn affidavits
asserting that they would have terminated on account of that single incident
or without any reason; nor has the 9th Respondent ventured any explanation in
that regard.

The Board resolution was in two parts. The first terminated the Agreement and
the authority; the second appointed the 11th Respond-

**328**

ent as the new dealer. To that extent, the resolution was severable. However
the first limb of the resolution was not severable, particularly as the
dealership and the authority were so intimately connected. I hold that the
first limb of the resolution was in violation of the Petitioners' rights under
Article 12(1), and though they have not specifically asked for it, it follows
that they are entitled to a declaration that their fundamental rights under
Article 12(1) have been infringed by the cancellation of the authority as well
as by the termination of the Agreement.

I uphold, Mr. Weliamuna's contention that the Court ought not to make an order
which would affect the 11th Respondent's dealership in the absence of the
necessary pleadings and prayer‑ not because of the technical defect, but
because the case presented by the petitioners did not make it sufficiently
clear to the 11th Respondent that his dealership was in jeopardy; and the
failure of the 1st Respondent to place the necessary material in regard to the
preliminary steps taken prior to the appointment of the 11th Respondent might
have been due to that lapse. It would not be just and equitable to compel the
11th Respondent to surrender his dealership. The Petitioners have averred that
they had a yearly turnover of around Rs 61 million and a yearly profit of
around Rs 2 million.

In the counter affidavits filed on behalf of the Respondents this has not been
denied. The 1st Respondent was in a position to place documentary evidence, as
to the value of the petroleum products supplied to the Petitioners, and their
margin of profit. I accept the Petitioners assessment of the loss caused to
them.

To sum up, I hold that passing the impugned resolution was "ad­ministrative or
executive action", although it involved a contract, and was in violation of
Article 12(1); the Board was not entitled to cancel the authority or to
terminate the Agreement without reasons; further, the Board was not made aware
that four of the five warnings brought to its notice had occurred long before
the current Agreement and author­ity, and that the 2nd to 4th Petitioners were
not involved in them; these should not have been taken into consideration; the
fifth warning was in respect of an incident which had been dealt with, and was
in any event insufficient to justify the termination, having regard to the 1st
Respond-

**329**

ent's obligations to supply and maintain equipment; the Agreement and the
authority were intimately linked, and were in fact dealt with together, and
the first limb of the impugned resolution was therefore not severable. That
part of the resolution was bad. However, the second limb of that resolution
was distinct and severable; there being no pleadings and prayer in respect of
the appointment of the 11th Respondent, it is not just and equitable to make
any order affecting that appointment.

I grant the Petitioners a declaration that their fundamental rights under
Article 12(1) have been violated by the 1st to 8th Respondents by the
termination of the Agreement and the cancellation of the authority, and award
them compensation and costs in a sum of Rs 75,000. Had the Agreement been
terminated with notice in terms of clause 12B, the petitioners would have made
profits for a further period of three months, and that according to their
uncontradicted assessment would have been Rs.500,000. I therefore further
direct the 1st Respondent, at its option, **either** to grant the Petitioners
(within six months from today) a dealership in respect of the same or another
mutually acceptable filling station **or** to pay them compensation in a sum
of Rs 500, 000.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.** ‑ I agree.

**_Relief granted._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/22.html_  

