##  Esquire (Garments) Industries Limited. v. Bank of India - SLR - 130, Vol 1
of 1993 [1993] LKSC 22; (1993) 1 Sri LR 130 (19 March 1993)

**130**

**ESQUIRE (GARMENTS) INDUSTRIES LIMITED** **  
v.** **  
BANK OF INDIA**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J., KULATUNGA, J.

AND RAMANATHAN, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 53/92  
CA REV. APPLICATION, NO. 1019/91 WITH

CA LA NO. 224/91  
DC COLOMBO, NO. 92958/M  
19 MARCH, 1993.

_     Civil Procedure - Execution of decree pending appeal - Settlement
Security - Can defendant retract from it - Sections 23 of the Judicature Act
and 763 (1) and (2) of the Civil Procedure Code._

1\. When an application for execution of a decree pending appeal is made in
the exercise of rights conferred under section 23 of the Judicature Act and
section763 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code the District Judge may make any of
the following orders

a). Order execution or stay it, if he sees fit to order a stay, subject,
however, to the appellant furnishing a bond to abide the judgment of the Court
of Appeal upon the appeal (s. 23 Judicature Act).

b). Order execution; and if sufficient cause is shown by the appellant,
require security to be given for the restitution of the property which may be
taken in execution or the payment of the value of such property and for the
due performance of the decree or order of the Court of Appeal (s. 763 (1) of
the C.P.C.).

c). Order stay of execution upon such conditions as it may deem fit, where -

i. the judgment-debtor satisfies the court that substantial loss may result to
him unless an order for stay of execution is made ; and

ii. the judgment-debtor gives security for the due performance of the decree
or order as may be ultimately binding on him. (s. 763 (2) of the C.P.C.).

2\. Where after two abortive attempts to execute the decree pending execution,
the parties arrived at a settlement on 01.08.91 whereby they agreed that the
execution of the decree be stayed subject to the defendant tendering security
by a bank guarantee before the end of 30.10.91 and if no such security was
tendered, execution could proceed without further notice, and the defendant
without tendering such security attempted to reagitate the matter urging that
it

131

was not possible to furnish a bank guarantee and that if writ was issued
without adequate security payable by the plaintiff irreparable loss and damage
would be caused to the defendant.

**Held**

(a) There was no accidental slip or omission on the part of the District Court
in making its order dated 01\. 08. 91 when it failed to require the plaintiff
to give security prior to writ being issued.

(b) The defendant-appellant could not be permitted to retract from the
settlement; and the District Judge had no power to vary it.

(c) The object of the defendant-appellant in neglecting to give security and
making further applications was to delay execution of the writ and obtain
undue advantage at the expense of the plaintiff-respondent.

**Case referred to**

_Sumanadeva v. Sediris (1990) 1 Sri LR 27 (CA)._

**APPEAL** from order of the Court of Appeal.

_S. Mahenthiran_ for defendant-appellant. _  
_  
_I. S. de Silva with Prasanna Jayawardena_ for plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 28, 1993.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

This appeal relates to a dispute concerning the execution of decree in the
above action pending appeal. Judgment was entered by the District Court
against the defendant (a garments manufacturing company) in a sum of Rs. 43
Million in favour of the plaintiff. An appeal to the Court of Appeal from the
said judgment is presently pending in that Court. In the meantime, on 06. 10.
89 the plaintiff applied to the District Court for execution of decree pending
appeal presumably in the exercise of his rights under s. 23 of the Judicature
Act and s. 763 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code. Upon such application it was
competent for the District Judge to have made any of the following orders

(1) order execution or stay it, if he sees fit to order a stay, subject,
however, to the appellant furnishing a bond to abide the judgment of the Court
of Appeal upon the appeal (s. 23 Judicature Act).

132

(2) order execution ; and if sufficient cause is shown by the appellant,
require security to be given for the restitution of the property which may be
taken in execution or the payment of the value of such property and for the
due performance of the decree or order of the Court of Appeal. (s. 763 (1) of
the C.P.C.).

(3) order stay of execution upon such conditions as it may deem fit, where -

(a) the judgment - debtor satisfies the Court that substantial loss may result
to him unless an order for stay of execution is made; and

(b) the judgment - debtor gives security for the due performance of the decree
or order as may be ultimately binding on him. (s. 763 (2) of the C.P.C.).

The defendant objected to the application for execution of decree and stated,
inter alia, that he is ready and willing to furnish security for the due
performance of the decree or order as may be ultimately binding on him. After
inquiry, the District Court by its judgment dated 08. 09. 90 allowed execution
of the decree. This was challenged by the defendant in the Court of Appeal.
Acting in revision, the Court by its judgment dated 08. 01. 91, set aside the
District Judge's order holding that substantial loss may result to the
defendant having regard, inter alia, to the danger to the economic viability
of his company and the loss of employment to the employees which may occur by
the closure of the factory upon execution of the decree. The Court directed
that execution be stayed provided security is given; and directed the
defendant to give security by a bank guarantee in an amount considered
necessary by the District Judge in terms of s. 763 (2) of the C.P.C.

When the record was returned to the District Court, the learned District Judge
after further inquiry made order dated 08. 02. 91 that security be given in
Sri Lankan Rupees equivalent to the value of US Dollars in the decree "to be
determined by the valuation of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka at the time".
This order was challenged by the defendant by way of revision on the ground
that it was contrary to law, and vague; and that the District Court had failed
to quantify

133

or nominate security. The Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 16. 05. 91,
agreed that the District Judge had failed to specify and quantify the amount
to be furnished as security, set aside the impugned order and sent back the
record to the District Judge to nominate the amount of security to be
furnished by the defendant by way of a bank guarantee.

When the matter came up before the District Judge on 01. 08. 91, parties came
to a settlement whereby they agreed, inter alia, that the execution of decree
be stayed subject to the defendant tendering security by a bank guarantee in a
sum of Rs. 20 Million, before the end of 31.10.91; if no such security was
tendered on or before 31. 10. 91, parties agreed that the plaintiff was
entitled to take out writ without further notice to the defendant. The Court
ordered that execution of decree be stayed accordingly and allowed execution
in the event of a breach of the conditions of settlement.

Instead of tendering security as agreed, the defendant filed an application
dated 17.10.91 stating

(a) that in making its order dated 01.08.91 nominating security to be given by
the defendant, (for stay of execution) the Court had by an error failed to
require the plaintiff to give security prior to writ being issued, for the due
performance of the decree or order of the Court of Appeal in the event of the
defendant being successful in appeal ;

(b) that in terms of s. 763 (1) of the C.P.C. it was imperative to require the
plaintiff to give such security ;

(c) that despite several efforts in that behalf the defendant had not been
able to obtain a bank guarantee ; and

(d) that if writ was issued without adequate security, irreparable loss and
damage would be caused to the defendant.

In the circumstances, the defendant prayed that in the event of writ being
issued, the plaintiff be directed to tender security in a sum of Rs. 40
Million by cash or a bank guarantee.

134

On a motion by the defendant's Attorney-at-Law, the said petition was called
and supported before the Roll Court on 21. 10. 91 when the Additional District
Judge ordered notice to issue to the plaintiff, returnable on 02.03.92.

On 15.11.91 a motion was filed on behalf of the plaintiff moving for the issue
of writ of execution. It was supported by Counsel on 19.11.91 in Court No. 2
in which Court Counsel for the defendant was also present. Counsel for the
plaintiff submitted that as the defendant had failed to give security in terms
of the settlement dated 01.08.91, the plaintiff was entitled to the writ of
execution, without further notice to the defendant. Counsel for the defendant
submitted that if writ was to issue, it was imperative in terms of s. 763 (1)
of the C.P.C. to require the plaintiff to give security; that the Court had
already issued notice on that question for 03.02.92 and moved for time to make
further submissions. The Court ruled that in view of the settlement between
the parties it had no power to make a different order and directed writ to
issue.

The defendant sought leave to appeal to the Court of Appeal from the said
order of the District Court and also applied to have it set aside by way of
revision. The Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 02.06.92 dismissed the
revision application for the failure by the defendant, in breach of Rule 46 of
the Supreme Court Rules, to file a copy of the impugned order of the District
Judge or even to apply under Rule 50 for permission to rectify his default.
The Court also upheld the order made by the District Judge and refused the
application for leave to appeal. The defendant appealed to this Court.

At the hearing before us the learned Counsel for the defendant-appellant
submitted that in the event of an order for execution of decree pending appeal
being made, s. 763 (1) of the C.P.C. enjoins the judgment \- creditor to give
security for restitution in the event of the appeal being successful ; that in
making its order dated 01. 08. 91 pursuant to a settlement, the District Court
had overlooked the fact that the defendant-appellant is entitled under s. 763
(1) to be so secured ; and that this was an error which that Court had the
power under s.189 read with s. 839 of the C.P.C. to correct as it was an
accidental slip or omission. He cited in support the decision in _Sumanadeva
v. Sediris_ (1).

135

Learned Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent submitted that in every
proceeding held in relation to the plaintiff-respondent's application for
execution of decree pending appeal, ending with the settlement dated 01. 08.
91, the defendant-appellant consistently sought a stay of execution subject to
the giving of security by him; that he obtained an order from the Court of
Appeal to that effect; that the requirement as to the plaintiff-respondent
giving security was never the subject matter of relief sought in the Court of
Appeal; that the requirement for the judgment - creditor to give security
contained in s. 763 (1) is a protection, which the judgment \- debtor may
waive; that in the instant case the defendant-appellant had by his conduct
waived this protection ; that in the circumstances, the order made in terms of
the settlement agreed to on 01.08.91 was final and binding and could not be
varied particularly for the reason that the said order gave effect to a
direction by the Court of Appeal; and that as such the order dated 19.11.91
made by the learned District Judge and the Judgment of the Court of Appeal
which affirmed the said order are correct.

I am of the view that there is no accidental slip or omission here; nor is
there any deprivation of a right to which the defendant-appellant was entitled
in terms of s. 763 (1) of the C.P.C. The impugned order was the culmination of
efforts by the defendant-appellant himself in several judicial proceedings. It
was made by way of settlement, agreed to by the parties. The defendant-
appellant cannot be permitted to retract from the settlement and the District
Court had no power to vary it. If the said order was erroneous the proper
course was to challenge it in a higher Court. More particularly, it is to be
noted that the requirement of s. 763 (1) for the giving of security by the
judgment - creditor in the event of an order for execution is not automatic
but conditional upon the appellant showing sufficient cause therefor. Here the
appellant satisfied the Court that execution of decree may result in
substantial loss to him; having regard, inter alia, to the loss of employment
which would occur by the closure - of his factory in the event of execution.
On that basis, he obtained an order from the Court of Appeal for stay of
execution on condition of his giving security by way of a bank guarantee. If
he was unable to obtain a bank guarantee in the sum which he himself agreed to
do, the plaintiff-appellant was entitled to the issue of writ. In that event,
the defendant-appellant has no right to demand security

136

from the plaintiff-respondent; and in the circumstances, the defendant-
appellant must take the full consequences of the execution of the decree.

Before concluding this judgment, I wish to refer to the fact that the
defendant-appellant has not placed any material before the original Court or
the Court of Appeal or this Court in support of the averment that despite
several efforts in that behalf he was unable to obtain a bank guarantee. He
has not produced any documentary evidence eg. correspondence with banks. In
the written submissions filed on 22. 09. 92 on behalf of the defendant-
appellant, it is stated that his bank had liquidity problems and later
"crashed". This was repeated before us by learned Counsel for the defendant-
appellant. In the absence of proof of such facts, I am unable to consider this
submission. On the other hand, paragraph 16 of the affidavit dated 17.10.91
filed in the District Court on behalf of the defendant-appellant states that
the defendant company is a 100% export oriented garment industry and it has
several orders to the value of US Dollars 580,000 to execute. If so, the
defendant-appellant is a viable company with dependable sources of revenue,
and being thus creditworthy the defendant-appellant might have been able to
obtain a bank guarantee, if a genuine effort in that behalf was made. The
failure to give such security in such circumstances tends to give credence to
the allegation made in the written submissions filed on behalf of the
plaintiff-respondent against this appeal that the object of the defendant-
appellant in neglecting to give security and making further applications was
to delay execution of the writ and to obtain undue advantage at the expense of
the plaintiff-respondent.

For the foregoing reasons, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment of the
Court of Appeal with costs fixed at Rs. 5,000.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.

  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/22.html_  

