##  Shanthi Chandrasekeram v. D. B. Wijetunga and Others - SLR - 293, Vol 2 of
1992 [1992] LKSC 22; (1992) 2 Sri LR 293 (4 May 1992)

**293**

**SHANTHI CHANDRASEKERAM** **  
v.** **  
D. B. WIJETUNGA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
KULATUNGA. J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. 1/92.2/92,3/92  
4TH MAY, 1992.

_     Fundamental Rights - Reference to the Supreme Court by Court of Appeal
on the ground that was prima facie of infringement of Articles 11, 13(1) and
13(2) in three **habeas corpus** applications - Jurisdiction of Supreme Court
in matters of infringement of fundamental rights._

Article 126(1) confers sole and exclusive jurisdiction in respect of
infringement of fundamental rights; and Article 126(2) prescribes how that
jurisdiction may be invoked. Article 126(3) is not an extension of or
exception to those provisions; if a person who alleges that his fundamental
rights have been violated fails to comply with them, he cannot smuggle that
question into a writ application in which relief is claimed on different facts
and grounds, and thereby seek a decision from the Supreme Court. On the other
hand, there could be transactions or situations in which, on virtually the
same facts and grounds, a person appears entitled to claim relief from the
Court of Appeal through a writ application under Article 140 or 141, and from
this Court by a fundamental rights application under Article 126. Since those
provisions do not permit the joinder of such claims, the aggrieved party would
have to institute two different proceedings, in two different courts, in
respect of virtually identical "causes of action" arising from the same
transaction unless there is express provision permitting joinder. The
prevention in such circumstances, of a multiplicity of suits (with their known
concomitant) is the object of Article 126(3).

(2) The expression "such matter" in Article 126(3) does not refer to the
question of infringement but to the entire application.

(3) Article 126(4) empowers the Supreme Court, if it finds that there was no
infringement, to refer "the matter' back to the Court of Appeal. On the other
hand, if the Supreme Court finds that, there has been an infringement, there
is no requirement that the substantive writ application be sent back. The
Supreme Court may determine that as well. It may be that in an appropriate
case Article 126(4) may empower the Supreme Court to give a direction
requiring the

294

substantive application to be determined by the Court of Appeal, perhaps after
taking evidence. However Article 126(4) presupposes that the Supreme Court
would, in general, determine the entire application. The "matter" thus means
the application.

Since the word used in Article 126(3) is "matter" instead of "question", the
Article 126(3) manifests an intention to refer to something other than a
"question" and in the context this can only be the application itself.

The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court extends not only to the question of
infringement, but to the entire application.

(4)The alleged infringement of Article 11 could not have been the basis of
references under Article 126(3) firstly because there was only an assertion,
and no prima facie evidence of such infringements and secondly because there
was no averment or evidence that the infringement were by a party to the
habeas corpus applications.

(5) No valid reasons were given for the arrests and the arrests were in
violation of Article 13(1).

(6) While the Court will not lightly interfere with the subjective opinion,
bona fide held, of the competent authority, that is not to say that the Court
will surrender its judgment to that of the Executive, for that would imperil
the liberty of every citizen. Sufficient material must be placed before the
Court to satisfy the Court that the deprivation of liberty, not limited in
point of time, was not arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable. The unexplained
failure of the respondents to place any material whatsoever leads but to one
conclusion, that there was no such material, and therefore that the Detention
Orders were unreasonable and void.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Hirdaramani v Ratnavel 75 NLR 67  
_  
_2\. Wickremabandu v. Herath [1990] 2 Sri L.R. 348._

Reference to the Supreme Court under Article 126(3) of the Constitution.

_Faiz Mustapha, P.C. with Motilal Nehru, P.C. Jayampathy Wickremaratne, R.
Marzook and A. Vinayagamoorthy for petitioners in References 1/92 and 3/92.  
_  
_D. W. Abeykoon, E. Thambiah, Nimal Punchihewa,  
_  
_A. Vinayagamoorthy, S. G. Punchihewa, Miss C. Jayalath and S. Thevarajah for
the petitioner in Reference 2/92._  
_Hector Yapa, Deputy Solicitor-General for respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

295

29th June, 1992  
**FERNANDO, J.**

These three matters have been referred to this Court under Article 126(5) of
the Constitution. Article 126, having conferred on the Supreme Court "sole and
exclusive jurisdiction to hear and determine any **question** relating to the
infringement or imminent infringement by executive or administrative action,
of any fundamental right", goes on to provide:

"(13) Where in the course of hearing in the Court of Appeal into an
**application** for orders in the nature of a writ of habeas _corpus,
certiorari, prohibition, procedendo, mandamus, or quo warranto,_ it appears to
such Court that there is prima facie evidence of an infringement or imminent
infringement of the provisions of Chapter III or Chapter IV by a party to such
application, such Court shall forthwith refer such **matter** for
determination by the Supreme Court."

"(14) The Supreme Court shall have power to grant such relief or make such
directions as it may deem just and equitable in the circumstances in respect
of any petition or reference referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3) of this
Article or refer the matter back to the Court of Appeal if in its opinion
there is no infringement of a fundamental right or language right."

In the course of hearing habeas corpus applications filed by the three
Petitioners in August 1991, the Court of Appeal considered that there was
prima facie evidence of the infringement of Articles 11, 13(1) and 13(2), and
made these References on 13.1.1992.

**Preliminary Questions**

Two preliminary questions arose in regard to the nature of the jurisdiction
and powers of this Court upon a reference under Article 126(3): firstly,
whether upon such reference this Court was required to determine the
application, including the question of the infringement of fundamental rights,
or only the latter question; and secondly, whether a reference was permissible
only in respect of an infringement having a close connection with the facts
and grounds

296

which gave rise to the principal application (the habeas corpus application in
this instance), or even in respect of an infringement having no such nexus.

1\. If Article 126(3) is considered in isolation, "such matter" may be
understood to refer either to the writ application, or to the question of
infringement (of which there was prima facie evidence). However, for several
reasons, I am of the view that this expression does not refer to the question
of infringement, but to the entire application.

Article 126(4) empowers this Court, if it finds that there was no
infringement, to, refer "the matter" back to the Court of Appeal. Thus if the
question whether there was an infringement is answered in the negative, the
matter must-be sent back to the Court of Appeal; obviously, that matter cannot
be the question of infringement, which has already been decided, but that
which yet remains to be determined, namely the application. On the other hand,
if this Court finds that there has been an infringement, there is no
requirement that the substantive writ application be sent back; hence this
Court must determine that as well. It may be that in an appropriate case
Article 126(4) may empower this Court to give a direction requiring the
substantive application to be determined by the Court of Appeal, perhaps after
taking evidence. However, Article 126(4) presupposes that this Court would, in
general, determine the entire application. The "matter" thus means the
"application".

Other provisions reinforce this view. Where in the course of proceedings in
any court or tribunal any "question" of interpretation of the Constitution
arises, Article 125(1) requires such "question" to be referred to this Court.
Similarly, Article 126(1) refers to any "question" relating to the
infringement of a fundamental right. By using the term "matter" instead of
"question", Article 126(3) manifests an intention to refer to something other
than a "question", and in the context this can only be the application itself.
Article 128(1) refers to a "matter or proceeding" involving a "question" of
law, again pointing to a difference between the two expressions; thereby
confirming that

297

"matter" refers to the entire subject-matter of the litigation rather than to
a mere question or issue arising therein.

I therefore hold that our jurisdiction extends not only to the question of
infringement, but to the entire application.

2\. It is possible that a party to a writ application may raise questions of
violation of fundamental rights totally unconnected with the substance of that
application. However any such question would be irrelevant to the
determination of such application, and the Court would have to refrain from
considering or adjudicating upon such question as it could have no relevance
to its ultimate order. In my view it is not to such questions that Article
126(3) refers, but to a question of infringement **properly** arising in the
course of hearing a writ application, just as Article 125(1) would apply to a
question relating to the interpretation of the Constitution, **properly**
arising in the course of the proceedings of any court or tribunal, and not one
which is irrelevant or of purely academic interest.

Article 126(1) confers sole and exclusive jurisdiction in respect of
infringements of fundamental rights, and Article 126(2) prescribes how that
jurisdiction may be invoked. Article 126(3) is not an extension of or
exception to those provisions; if a person who alleges that his fundamental
rights have been violated fails to comply with them, he cannot smuggle that
question into a writ application in which relief is claimed on different facts
and grounds, and thereby seek a decision from this Court. On the other hand,
there could be transactions or situations in which, on virtually the same
facts and grounds, a person appears entitled to claim relief from the Court of
Appeal through a writ application under Article 140 or 141, and from this
Court by a fundamental rights application under Article 126. Since those
provisions do not permit the joinder of such claims, the aggrieved party would
have to institute two different proceedings, in two different courts, in
respect of virtually identical "causes of action" arising from the same
transaction, unless there is express provision permitting joinder. The
prevention, in such circumstances, of a multiplicity of suits (with their
known concomitants) is the object of Article 126(3).

298

**Infringement of Article 11**

Each of these habeas corpus petitions was filed by the wife of the detenu
concerned, and each Petitioner expressed "fear for the life and limb of the
corpus", who was being kept incommunicado. The Court directed that Attorneys-
at-Law and relatives be given access, and thereafter each of the three
detenues filed affidavits making the following allegations of torture:

"I was blindfolded for 3 days after my arrest and subjected to torture and
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. I still have a healing wound on my
nose."

". . . after l was arrested I was blindfolded and subjected to torture and
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment. At one stage when I was mercilessly
assaulted I became [sic]"

" . . . I was blindfolded continuously for three days and kept in the record
room of the Dematagoda Police Station and subjected to torture and cruel,
inhuman and degrading treatment after I was taken into custody."

These are assertions of "torture and cruel inhuman and degrading treatment";
specifically, however, what is alleged is blindfolding, and by the 3rd detenu,
a "merciless assault" with unstated consequences. No particulars have been
given as to the nature of the treatment; there was no attempt to identify the
persons responsible and there is no suggestion that any of the Respondents
were involved. Reports later made by the J.M.O. set out the examinee's history
as related by him; although some particulars have been stated therein, the
detenues have not, in subsequent affidavits, sworn to those matters.

The alleged infringements of Article 11 could not have been the basis of
references under Article 126(3), firstly because there was only an assertion,
and no prima facie evidence of such infringements,

299

and secondly because there was no averment or evidence that the infringements
were by a party to the habeas corpus applications.

The Petitioners are not entitled to relief in respect of the alleged
infringements of Article 11.

**Arrest and detention in breach of Article 13**

According to I.P. Devasurendra, O.I.C. Crime Detective Bureau, Slave Island,
on information received in the course of investigations into the bomb blast at
the J.O.C. Headquarters, he arrested S. Balachandran of Kotahena; in
consequence of information received from Balachandran, he proceeded to
Talawakelle, on 3.7.91, and arrested the three detenues at the office of the
Upcountry People's Front, a political party. Chandrasekeram (the "1st detenu")
was the President, both of that party, and of a registered trade union, the
"Upcountry Workers' Front". Tharmalingam (the "2nd detenu") was a school
Principal and an elected member of the Nuwara Eliya Pradeshiya Sabha; he was
the Vice-President of that party. Bawa Abdul Cader (the "3rd detenu") was the
Secretary of both the party and the trade union. According to the affidavits
filed by the wives of the 1st and 3rd detenues, they had been arrested on
3.7.91 at 7.30 p.m. at the Talawakelle Police Station. In his own affidavit,
the 1st detenu says that at about 7.30 p.m. he was asked to come to the
Talawakelle Police Station, that from there he went to Colombo in a private
vehicle, and that he was arrested only on 4.7.91 at Colombo; the 3rd detenu
confirms his wife's version. In her original affidavit, the 2nd detenu's wife
stated that he had been arrested on 3.7.91 at his house; in her second
affidavit, she stated that he was arrested at the Talawakelle Police Station
at 8.00 p.m., and this is supported by his own affidavit. In view of these
conflicting affidavits, it appears more likely that the detenues had been
arrested on 3.7.91 at Talawakelle, probably at the party office.

Devasurendra says that he informed the detenues of the reasons for their
arrest, but he has not disclosed those reasons in his affidavits; the detenues
state that no reasons were given. Since the information obtained by him from
Balachandran and others has also not been disclosed, I am unable even to draw
any inference as to those reasons. Devasurendra further states that on being
questioned

300

each of the three detenues had admitted "his links and participation. in
giving protection to Nadarajah Varadan, one of the main suspects in the said
bomb blast", and that "on information provided by them [he] managed to
surround the safe house of Varadan during the same night"; but their
statements have not been produced. This is denied by the detenues; the 3rd
detenu admits that he knew Varadan; the 2nd detenu admits that he gave all
necessary assistance and information to the police, and assisted them to trace
the house where Varadan stayed. The only material before us in regard to any
link between the detenues and Varadan is that the 2nd detenu knew him to be a
"paper reporter"; if so, it would not have been unusual or suspicious for
Varadan to have had contacts with the political party and the trade union in
the course of his legitimate journalistic activities. To avoid arrest, Varadan
swallowed a cyanide capsule and committed suicide. In these circumstances it
is probable that some reason was given by Devasurendra for the arrest of the
detenues, but what that reason was I cannot say. Since the Respondents have
not produced any of the contemporaneous documentary material, (such as notes
of investigation and the statements of Balachandran and others, and even of
the detenues), it is not possible for me to come to any finding that there was
credible information or a reasonable suspicion that the detenues were in any
way involved in criminal activity, or that valid reasons were given for their
arrest. It may well have been the case that the premature disclosure of such
material might have been prejudicial to the investigations into the J.O.C.
bomb blast, or to national security. However, that position was never taken up
by, the Respondents; it could not have been taken up at the hearing, for by
that time, we were told, indictments had been filed in the High Court of
Kandy, in which event much of that material would have been disclosed there. I
therefore hold that their arrests were in violation of Article 13(1).

It does not necessarily follow that their subsequent detention was unlawful.
The successful tracing of Varadan, Varadan's suicide by means of a cyanide
capsule, and the (alleged) admissions that they had links with Varadan, may
well have justified the detention of the detenues for a short period pending
further investigation, if there had been some evidence of criminal activity by
Varadan. Detention Orders under Emergency Regulation 19(2) were issued by
S.P.,

301

Crime Detective Bureau, on 4.7.91 authorising the detention of all three
detenues for 90 days for the purpose of further investigations. The detenues
were duly produced before a Magistrate within 30 days. Upon the expiry of that
period, Detention Orders under Emergency Regulation 17 were issued by the
Secretary, Defence, on 1.10.91; learned Counsel for the Petitioners
concentrated their attack on these Orders. In his affidavit dated 11.10.91,
the 2nd Respondent (Director, Crime Detective Bureau) claimed that as this was
the first occasion on which "the Police had arrested an upcountry politician
involved in harbouring L.T.T.E. cadres, it was necessary to investigate the
involvement of the said organisation and the leaders including the
[detenues]", and "since the [detenues were] involved in Estate Unions it is
not possible to expedite an investigation due to lack of information received
by the investigators". He added that the investigators are taking all steps to
complete the said investigation within a reasonable period, and therefore . .
. the detention of the [detenues] ... is helpful to continue with the said
investigation"; and "after submitting facts before the Secretary to the
Ministry of Defence, the Secretary had authorised the detention of the
[detenues]" under Emergency Regulation 17(1). Those Detention Orders were
issued, **after** the habeas corpus applications were filed, on 1.10.91. We do
not know what "facts" were submitted to the Secretary, Defence, nor do we have
an affidavit from him (or anyone else) as to the material on the basis of
which he formed the requisite opinion under Emergency Regulation 17, or
explaining how or why he formed that opinion. After these References were
made, the 2nd Respondent filed a further affidavit dated 14.4.92 in this
Court, but furnished no clarification. While this Court will not lightly
interfere with the subjective opinion, bona fide held, of the competent
authority (see _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ ,(1) _Wickremabandu v. Herath_ ,(2))
that is not to say that this Court will surrender its judgment to that of the
Executive, for that would imperil the liberty of every citizen. Sufficient
material must be placed before the Court to satisfy us that the deprivation of
liberty, not limited in point of time, was not arbitrary, capricious or
unreasonable. The unexplained failure of the Respondents to place any material
whatsoever leads but to one conclusion, that there was no such material, and
therefore that the Detention Orders were unreasonable.

302

For these reasons at the conclusion of the hearing, on 4.5.92, we held that
the Detention Orders were void. As the proceedings in the High Court of Kandy
were scheduled to commence on 18.5.92, Counsel agreed that the question of
custody pending trial should be determined by the High Court and that (as they
had no desire to avoid standing trial) the detenues may remain in the custody
of the Respondents until they were produced in the High Court on 18.5.92. It
was further agreed that if indictments were duly filed and served on them, the
question of their custody pending trial according to law, should be determined
by the High Court, and that if such indictments were not filed or served on or
before 18.5.92, the detenues would be released forthwith. We therefore did not
have to consider making an order for the release of the detenues, but directed
the Respondents to release them forthwith if no such indictments were filed
and served.

I grant the Petitioner in each case a declaration that the detenu had been
arrested in violation of Article 13(1), and detained in violation of Article
13(2). I order the State to pay to each Petitioner, on behalf of the detenu
concerned, a sum of Rs. 2,500/- as compensation and Rs. 2,500/- as costs.

In respect of the Habeas Corpus applications, I confirm the direction to the
Respondents to produce the detenues before the High Court of Kandy to enable
that Court to determine their custody pending trial, according to law, and to
release them forthwith if indictments have not been filed and served on or
before 18.5.92.

**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**WADUGODAPITYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Petition granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/22.html_  

