##  Jayasuriya v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation - SLR - 379, Vol 2
of 1995 [1991] LKSC 22; (1995) 2 Sri LR 379 (6 May 1991)

379

JAYASURIYA **  
v.  
SRI LANKA STATE PLANTATIONS CORPORATION **

SUPREME COURT.

DR. AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 9/89  
S.C. SPE. LA NO. 215/88  
C.A. NO. 449/83  
L.T NO. 10/4032/32  
MAY 06, 1991.

_     Industrial Disputes - Rules of the Supreme Court, Rule 35 - Failure to
comply with Rule 35 - Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1950 S. 31D - Question
of Law - Meaning of "perverse" \- Circumstances when compensation rather than
reinstatement will be awarded for wrongful termination - Calculation of
compensation - Determining the multiplier. _

The written submissions of the respondent required to be filed in 30 days by
Rule 35 of the Rules of the Supreme Court were delayed and the excuse given
was that the Counsel concerned generally practised in the outstations and had
periodically fallen ill. The petitioner (Jayasuriya) was a planter and
employed by the Respondent (Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation) as
Superintendent of Blackwater State Plantation, Ginigathena. Ten charges were
framed against him and he was found guilty of charges 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and
10 and dismissed with effect from 03 February 1981. On 10 April 1981
petitioner applied to the Labour Tribunal for re-instatement with back wages
and/or compensation for wrongful dismissal. The respondent took up the
position that petitioner's services were terminated for gross misconduct and
mismanagement and that in any event the respondent had lost confidence in him.
Before the Tribunal six of the 10 charges were given up from time to time and
only four charges were relied on by the respondent: viz double payments,
employment of excess labour, replacement of tyres, and questionable conduct
(interference with the estate administration) of his wife. The President of
the Labour Tribunal held that these four charges had been established and that
the dismissal was justified as the acts established involved moral
turpitude/(gross misconduct) and mismanagement. In appeal the Court of Appeal
held that the charge in respect of the misuse of labour had not been proved
but declined to go further and dismissed the appeal and affirmed the decision
of the Tribunal. On appeal to the Supreme Court.

380

**Held:**

1\. Respondent's excuse for delay to file the written submissions in
compliance with Rule 35 of the Rules of the Supreme Court was inexcusable and
he could not be heard.

2\. In the context of the principle that the Court of Appeal will not
interfere with a decision of a Labour Tribunal unless it is "perverse" it
means no more that the court may intervene if it is of the view that, having
regard to the weight of evidence in relation to the matters in issue, the
Tribunal has turned away arbitrarily or capriciously from what is true and
right and fair in dealing evenhandedly with the rights and interests of the
workman, employer and, in certain circumstances, the public. The Tribunal must
make an order in equity and good conscience, acting judicially, based on legal
evidence rather than on beliefs that are fanciful or irrationally imagined
notions or whims. Due account must be taken of the evidence in relation to the
issues in the matter before the Tribunal. Otherwise, the order of the Tribunal
must be set aside as being perverse.

3\. The Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1950 S. 31D states that the order of
a Labour Tribunal shall be final and shall not be called in question in any
court except on a question of law. While appellate courts will not intervene
with pure findings of fact, they will review the findings treating them as a
question of law: if it appears that the Tribunal has made a finding wholly
unsupported by evidence, or which is inconsistent with the evidence and
contradictory of it; or where the Tribunal has failed to consider material and
relevant evidence; or where it has failed to decide a material question or
misconstrued the question at issue and had directed its attention to the wrong
matters; or where there was an erroneous misconception amounting to a
misdirection; or where it failed to consider material documents or
misconstrued them or where the Tribunal has failed to consider the version of
one party or his evidence; or erroneously supposed there was no evidence.

The Supreme Court, in terms of the Constitution, has wide appellate powers
with regard to what is meant by a question of law.

Where the Court of Appeal fails to evaluate the recorded evidence but merely
endorses the findings of the Tribunal, the Supreme Court will set aside the
decision not because the Court of Appeal has been unwilling to substitute its
own view of the facts for that of the Tribunal but because it has failed to
evaluate the evidence so as to decide whether the Order of the Tribunal was,
in the established circumstances of the case, just and equitable.

4(a). When the double payments had been made mistakenly and not fraudulently a
finding that there was moral turpitude (gross mismanagement) is not justified.
Transgressing Circular instructions was explained by the petitioner. Payments
had been made only after computation by the

381

Assistant Clerk and verified by the Chief Clerk who had assured the petitioner
that the Circular, instructions had been complied with. The loss caused to the
Corporation was fully recovered. The Court of Appeal and the President were in
error both with regard to the question at issue, namely whether the Petitioner
had caused a loss and the relation of the evidence to that charge.

(b) In regard to the purchase of 11 tyres the charge was not that the
purchases had caused a loss to the respondent but that petitioner was guilty
of making unjustifiable purchases from improper sources and failure to enter
or cause to be entered the fact of the purchases in the stock book of the
Plantation. There was no evidence to justify the conclusion that the
petitioner had caused a loss to the respondent by his negligence. The reasons
for the excessive wastage which necessitated the purchases had been
established and clearly showed an absence of any culpability on his part.

(c). The evidence did not support the inference that the petitioner's wife
interfered with the management of the plantation. Nor was there satisfactory
evidence to link the petitioner with the alleged acts of interference. The
alleged acts related to the petitioner's household and not to the plantation -
an important distinction that was overlooked.

The order of the President of the Labour Tribunal was perverse and not just
and equitable. The Court of Appeal failed to evaluate the evidence on record.

5\. Even where the dismissal is unlawful, reinstatement will not invariably be
ordered where it is not expedient or where there are unusual features. In such
event an award of compensation instead of reinstatement will meet the ends of
justice. Considering the petitioner's uneasy relationship with the Trade
Unions and the likelihood of industrial strife if he is reinstated and the
fact that the employer had alleged a lack of confidence in the petitioner,
compensation rather than reinstatement would be the appropriate remedy.

6\. In determining compensation what is expected is that after a weighing
together of the evidence and probabilities in the case, the Tribunal must form
an opinion of the nature and extent of the loss, arriving in the end at an
amount that a sensible person would not regard as mean or extravagant but
would rather consider to be just and equitable in all the circumstances of the
case. There must eventually be an even balance of which the scales of justice
are meant to remind us.

While the expressed loss, in global terms of years of salary may in certain
cases coincide with losses reckoned and counted and settled by reference to
the relevant heads and principles of determining compensation, it is
preferable to have a computation which is expressly shown to relate to
specific heads and items of loss. It is not satisfactory to simply say that a
certain amount is just and

382

 equitable. There must be a stated basis for the computation taking the award
beyond the realm of mere assurance of fairness. For a just and equitable
verdict the reasons must be set out in order to enable the parties to
appreciate how just and equitable the verdict is. Where no basis for the
compensation awarded is given, the order is liable to be set aside. The
matters to be considered should be:

1\. There should be at least an approximate computation of immediate loss i.e.
loss of wages and benefits from the date of dismissal up to the date of final
Order or Judgment.

2\. Prospective future loss. This is not continuing damages.

3\. Loss of retirement benefits based as far as possible on a foundation of
solid facts given to the Tribunal by the facts.

The essential question is the actual financial loss caused by the unfair
dismissal because compensation is an indemnity for the loss. What should be
considered is financial loss and not sentimental harm.

The burden is on the employee to adduce sufficient evidence to enable the
Tribunal to decide the loss.

Once the incurred losses have been computed any wages or benefits paid by the
employer after the termination as well as remuneration from fresh employment
must be deducted. If the employee had obtained equally beneficial or
financially better alternative employment, he should receive no compensation
at all for he suffers no loss.

When the petitioner after his dismissal remains unemployed the manner of his
dismissal is a relevant consideration in considering the petitioner's loss.
This is simply because the manner of dismissal may be tied to pecuniary loss.
It is not a punishment of the respondent for what he did.

Once the employee's past earnings and benefits have been ascertained they must
be multiplied by the period from the date of the final Order or Judgment - the
multiplier being fixed by answering the question for how many days, weeks,
months, or years from the date of the Order or Judgment, as the case may be,
could the Tribunal or Court reasonably expect the loss to continue. The usual
date of retirement or extended date of retirement where it is probable could
be adopted. The possibility of the balance period being reduced by death;
closure of business, retrenchment, resignation to seek other employment could
be taken into account only on express findings.

383

**List of Cases Referred to:**

_1\. Samarawickreme v. Attorney-General [1983] 1 Sri Kantha's Law Reports 47.  
_  
_2\. Mylvaganam v. Reckitt & Colman SC 154/87 - SC Minutes of 08.07.1987._  
  
_3\. Mendis v. Rajapakse SC 49/88 - SC Minutes of 03.11.1981.  
_  
_4\. Kiriwanthe and Wimalawathie v. Navaratne SC Appeal No. 16/90 - SC Minutes
of 16.10.1990.  
_  
_5\. Coomasaru v Leechman & Co. SC 27/73 - SC Minutes of 26.05.1976.  
_  
_6\. Caledonan (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. V. Hillman (1977) 79(i)
NLR 421,436,437,438.  
_  
_7\. Somawathie v Baksons Textile Industries Ltd. (1973) 79(1) NLR 204.  
_  
_8\. Thevarayan v. Balakrishnan [1984] 1 Sri LR 189.  
_  
_9\. Nadarajah v. Thilagaratnam (1986) 3 CALR 303.  
_  
_10\. Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe (1970) 72 NLR 76.  
_  
_11\. Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers Union (1972) 75
NLR 182.  
_  
_12.Ceylon Oil Workers' Union v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation [1978-79] 2 Sri
LR 72.  
_  
_13\. Reckitt & Colman of Ceylon Ltd. v. Peiris [1978-79] 2 Sri LR 229.  
_  
_14\. United Industrial Local Government & General Workers' Union v.
Independent Newspapers Ltd. (1973) 75 NLR 529.  
_  
_15\. Hayleys Ltd. v. De Silva (1963) 64 NLR 130.  
_  
_16\. Ceylon Transport Board v Samastha Lanka Motor Sevaka Samithiya (1964) 65
NLR 566.  
_  
_17\. Virakesari Ltd. V. Fernando (1965) 66 NLR 145.  
_  
_18\. Carolis Appuhamy v. Punchirala (1963) 64 NLR 44.  
_  
_19.Ceylon Workers' Congress v Superintendent, Kallebokke Estate (1962) 63 NLR
536.  
_  
_20\. Ceylon Steel Corporation v. National Employees' Union (1969) 76 CLW 64.  
_  
_21\. Albert v. Veeraiatipillai [1981] 1 Sri LR 110.  
_  
_22\. Collettes Ltd. v. Bank of Ceylon [1982] 2 Sri LR 514.  
_  
_23\. Sithamparanathan v. People's Bank [1986] 1 Sri LR 411 (CA) set aside in
[1989] 1 Sri LR 124 (SC).  
_  
_24\. Walker Sons & Co. Ltd. v. Fry (1966) 68 NLR 73, 99.  
_  
_25\. Municipal Council of Colombo v. Munasinghe (1969) 71 NLR 223, 225.  
_  
_26\. Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v Tea, Rubber, Coconut & General Produce
Workers' Union (1975) 77 NLR 6, 11. _

384

_27\. Urban Council Panadura v. Cooray (1971) 75 NLR 236, 238.  
_  
_28\. Ceylon Transport Board v Thungadasa (1971) 73 NLR 211.  
_  
_29\. United Industrial Local Government & General Workers Union v.
Independent Newspapers Ltd. (1972) 75 NLR 529, 531.  
_  
_30\. Ceylon Ceramics Corporation v Weerasinghe SC 24/76 - SC Minutes of 15
July 1978.  
_  
_31\. Ceylon Workers' Congress v Poonagala Group SC 120/71 - SC Minutes of 28
November 1972.  
  
32\. Glaxo Allenburys' (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Fernando SC 250/71 - SC Minutes of 22
October 1974.  
_  
_33\. Ceylon Transport Board v. Wijeratne (1975) 77 NLR 481, 498-9.  
_  
_34\. Belgama v Co-operative Wholesale Establishment SC 64 and 73/71 - SC
Minutes of 13 December 1974.  
_  
_35\. Central Transport Board v Loku Banda (1986) 2 Colombo Appellate Law
Reports 339.  
_  
_36\. The Governing Body of Educational Institutions founded by the Church
Missionary Society in Ceylon, Ladies College v.  
 Panuthevan Thuraimugam - SC 222/73; SC Minutes of 22 January 1976.  
_  
_37\. Cyril Anthony v. Ceylon Fisheries Corporation SC 57/8; SC Minutes of 6
March 1986.  
_  
_38\. Abeysundera v Samel et al SC 113 - 123/67; SC Minutes of 6 December
1968.  
_  
_39\. Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v Tea, Rubber, Coconut and General Produce
Workers' Union (1975) 77 NLR 6.  
_  
_40\. Adam's Peak Tea Estates Ltd. v. Duraisamy SC 11/69 - SC Minutes of 26
October 1969.  
_  
_41\. Woolcombers of India Ltd. v Woolcombers Workers' Union 1973 Labour &
Industrial Cases of India p. 1613.  
_  
_42\. Nanayakkara v. Hettiarachchi (1971) 74 NLR 185.  
_  
_43\. Henderson & Co. v. Wijetunga SC 33/73; SC Minutes of 21 March 1975._  
  
_44\. Liyanage v. Weeraman SC 235/72; SC Minutes of 31 January 1974.  
_  
_45\. Nidahas Karmika Saha Velanda Vurthiya Samithiya v. The Continental
Motors Ltd. cited in Abeysekera's Industrial Law Vols 3 and 4 p. 1543.  
_  
_46\. Raymond v. Ponnusamy SC 57/69; SC Minutes of 10 December 1969._

  
_47\. Silva v Kuruppu SC 182/69; SC Minutes of 14 October 1971.  
_  
_48\. Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. v. Jayasinghe [1982] 2 Sri LR 595,
600.  
_  
_49\. Pathinayake v Karmika Ha Samanya Kamkaru Samithiya (1971) 74 NLR 237.  
_  
_50\. Sri Lanka Asbestos Products Ltd. v Tampoe SC 142/73; S.C. Minutes of 5
November 1974._

385

_51\. Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. v. Mervyn Perera CA 39:1 and
393(79; Court of Appeal Minutes of 25 September 1981.  
_  
_52\. Adda International Ltd. v Curcia [1976) 3 All ER 620, 624.  
_  
_53\. The Manager, Nakiadeniya Group v. Lanka Estate Workers' Union (1969) 77
CLW 52  
_  
_54\. Ceylon Tea Plantation Co. Ltd. v Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union SC 211/72;
SC Minutes of 15 May 1974._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_H. L. de Silva PC with P. M. Ramawatte and Janaka Silva for the Petitioner.  
_  
_A. S. Nicholas with K. K. Suresh Chandra and Miss M. Aluwihare for the
Respondent_

_Cur. adv. vult._

30 May, 1991\.  
**DR. AMERASINGHE, J.**

Before he commenced his submissions on the merits of the appeal to this Court,
learned President's Counsel for the Appellant pointed out that, since the
Respondent's written submissions were lodged on 14 June 1989, although special
leave to appeal had been granted on 9 February 1989, they were not lodged
within the thirty days specified by Rule 35 of the Rules of the Supreme Court.
The Respondent was therefore, in terms of Rule 35(b) "not entitled" to be
heard.

In _Samarawickreme v. Attorney-General_ (1) and in _Mylvaganam v Reckitt &
Colman _(2) the appeals were dismissed for failure to comply with Rule 35.

While in Samarawickreme's case, the Court was of the view that the provisions
of Rule 35 were "imperative", in Mylvaganam's case the Court dismissed the
appeal after considering the fact that there was no excuse made for the delay.
In _Mendis v Rajapakse_ (3) , where the question related not to the failure to
lodge submissions in time, but to the failure to give appropriate notice of
the lodging of written submissions, the Court considered both these decisions
and concluded that "The Rule contemplates that this Court will proceed to

386

hear the appeal; all that the Rule does is to disentitle the party in default
from claiming a **right** to be heard, but preserves the undoubted
**discretion** of this Court to give such a party such hearing as it thinks
appropriate."

In _Kiriwanthe and Wimalawathie v. Navaratne_ (4), which was concerned with
the failure to comply with Rule 46, Fernando, J. considered the decisions in
Samarawickreme, Mylvaganam, and Mendis. His Lordship also considered the
decision in _Coomasaru v. Leechman & Co_.(5), where the matter for
consideration was the interpretation of Rule 26 of the Appeal Procedure Rules
of 1972 which stated that only such authorities and legislation (except those
that came into existence afterwards) cited in the submissions could be relied
upon at the hearing of the appeal. It was held by the majority, (Tennekoon,
C.J., Vythialingam, Sharvananda and Colin Thome, JJ., Rajaratnam, J.
dissenting), that where an appellant had failed to comply with the Rule
without excuse, the appeal should be dismissed. It should be dismissed
because, the Court, having shut out the appellant for non-compliance with the
Rule, would then be left to "carry out a study of the appellant's case unaided
by adversary argument by counsel at grave risk of misleading itself in regard
to authorities and legislation which the parties had no opportunity of
discussing before the Court."

The line of reasoning in the Coomasaru case, Fernando, J. said, did not appeal
to him. His Lordship explained that

"Rule 26 would deprive the Court of the benefit of Counsel's assistance in
regard to authorities not cited in the Appellant's written submissions, but
the Court would nevertheless have to study that aspect of the Appellant's case
to which the omitted authorities relate, despite the same risk of misdirecting
itself in regard to those authorities; Rule 26 would not permit a dismissal of
the appeal for non-compliance. It is also difficult to see how this principle
could be applied to cases where it was the respondent who failed to file
submissions, and thus deprived the Court of the benefit of the assistance in
regard to authorities in support of his case. In any event, Tennekoon, C.J.,
does not

387

indicate what the position would have been had an excuse been submitted; would
relief have been granted despite Rule 26. That decision is distinguishable for
two reasons: Rule 26 finds no counterpart in the present Rules, and it dealt
with a case of continuing non-compliance for over two years without excuse or
explanation."

"The weight of authority that favours the view that while all these Rules must
be complied with, the law does not require or permit an automatic dismissal of
the application or appeal of the party in default. The consequence of non-
compliance (by reason of impossibility or for any other reason) is a matter
falling within the discretion of the Court, to be exercised after considering
the nature of the default, as well as the excuse in explanation therefor, in
the context of the object of the particular Rule."

In the case before us, on 7 June 1989, while filing the written submissions of
the Respondent, his Attorney-at-Law explained that the delay in lodging them
was because the learned Counsel to whom a draft of those submissions were
tendered "generally practices in the outstations and has periodically fallen
ill in the last few months." This is not good enough. I am of the view that
the Respondent's failure to comply with Rule 35 is inexcusable. In the
circumstances, I refuse to hear him. I do so with regret. On the one hand I
cannot ignore the existence of Rule 35 and agree to hear counsel for the
respondent when the failure to comply with the Rule cannot be excused. On the
other hand, the prescribed penalty for default deprives a party of his most
elementary right, namely, the right to be heard. It also deprives the court of
the very assistance which written submissions were meant to give. Where no
authorities or some authorities are not cited, the Court may, albeit
cautiously, nevertheless take due account of them. But when it shuts out the
benefit of counsel's assistance, it takes on a heavy burden merely because
Rule 35 imposes it on the Court.

l now proceed to consider the appeal. The Petitioner was employed by the
Respondent as the Superintendent of Blackwater State Plantation, Ginigathhena.
The following complaints made

388

against him by the Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union and the Ceylon Worker's
Congress, on the basis of a "disciplinary inquiry", were said by the
Respondent in a letter dated 9 January 1981, to have been "established"

1\. Attempting to bring about rift and disharmony among the employees of
Blackwater, S. P. leading to a breach of peace, during the latter part of
1980.

2\. Misusing or appropriating to yourself Corporation funds amounting to about
Rs. 6,293/83 by utilizing labour in excess of your entitlement of 4 labourers.

3\. Violating instructions of Circular No. 126 of 3rd January, 1980, by paying
or causing to be paid a sum of Rs. 1686/26 by way of Budgetory Relief
Allowances in excess of Rs. 55/ allowed to each individual, worker and thereby
causing a loss to the corporation.

4\. Purchasing 11 new tyres purported to be for the official vehicle allocated
to you between August and October, 1980, within a period of 3 months, from
outside sources without justification and failing to enter or causing them to
be entered in the Stock Book of the Plantation.

5\. Making exaggerated and untruthful representations to the Regional
Corporation Office on 1st November, 1980, with regard to the alleged damage to
the quarters of Jayasinghe and field terraces.

6\. Allowing your wife to interfere in the administration of the Plantation
and to provoke members of the staff by insult that led to strike on the
Plantation in November, 1980.

7\. Acting maliciously against the employees of the Plantation and mismanaging
the affairs of the Plantation."

In view of this, the Petitioner was asked to show cause why he should not be
dismissed. In his letter dated 20 January 1981 (R10), the

389

Petitioner stated that there was in fact no proper disciplinary inquiry
against him, since he had not been charged with any misconduct, the Trade
Unions could not frame charges against him, he was given no opportunity of
meeting the charges, and because the inquirer was prejudiced. The Petitioner,
in his closely spaced letter of seven pages, (R10), suggested reasons for the
allegations made against him and explained each of the alleged acts of
misconduct referred to by the Respondent.

On 3rd February 1981, the Respondent informed the Petitioner that with
reference to the preliminary inquiry" held against him and the "explanations"
contained in his letter of 20 January, he was "interdicted with immediate
effect" without remuneration. A "charge sheet" dated 2 February 1981 was
annexed to the letter of interdiction on the ground that the Petitioner's
explanations were "not satisfactory". The seven charges set out above were
repeated in this "charge sheet". Three additional charges were added during
the course of the inquiry.

On 29 December 1981 the Respondent informed the Petitioner that he had been
found guilty of charges 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 10 and that he was dismissed
"with effect from the date of interdiction, i.e. 3rd February 1981."

When the Planters Society, to which the Petitioner belonged, requested a copy
of the inquiring officer's report, it was informed that the document was
"privileged"; and since the Respondent's defence in the event the Petitioner
filed an action in the Labour Tribunal would be based on that report, the
request was refused.

The Petitioner on 19 April 1982 applied to the Labour Tribunal for relief by
way of reinstatement with back wages and/or compensation for wrongful
dismissal. In its answer, the Respondent took up the position that the
Petitioner's services were terminated for "gross misconduct and mismanagement"
and that "in any event the Respondent has lost confidence" in him.

Six of the ten charges had been given up by the Respondent, from time to time,
as and when it realized that there was nothing the Corporation possessed
either by way of a reasonable ground for belief in the guilt of the Petitioner
or of anything which it saw tended to prove those six charges.

390

In the proceedings before the Tribunal, the Respondent Corporation relied upon
four grounds, namely, those contained in charges 2, 3, 4 and 6 above. On 20
May, 1983. The President of the Tribunal of Hatton delivered his Order. He
found that "double payments" were made on account of the "misconduct" of the
Petitioner and that, therefore, the charge (No. 3 above), had been
established. He also found that charges 2, 4 and 6 relating respectively to
the matter of the employment of excess labour, the replacement of tyres and
the questionable conduct of his wife, had also been established. The President
of the Labour Tribunal concluded that "in examining all the facts, and taking
into consideration the position and responsibilities held by the "Petitioner",
his experience, the acts involving moral turpitude/(gross misconduct) and
mismanagement, I have to hold that his dismissal from service is not too
severe and therefore dismiss the application."

The Petitioner's appeal to the Court of Appeal was argued on 22 June and 18
July 1988 and decided on 7 November 1988. On the basis that there was no
evidence to support such a finding, the Court of Appeal held that the charge
with regard to the alleged misuse of labour had not been proved. The Court of
Appeal however, declined to go further. It dismissed the appeal and affirmed
the decision of the Tribunal. The Court said:

"This being an appeal from an order made by a Labour Tribunal, an appeal lies
to this Court only on a question of law, and an applicant who seeks to have a
determination of fact, by a Labour Tribunal set aside must satisfy this Court
that there was no legal evidence to support the conclusion of facts reached by
the Labour Tribunal or that the finding was not rationally possible and is
perverse even with regard to the evidence on record, ( _Vide Caledonan
(Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman_ (6)

In the instant case, I am unable to contribute to the view that the findings
of the learned President are capricious or unreasonable in respect of the
allegations (2), (3), and (4). The legislature designed the Labour Tribunal as
the proper Tribunal to determine the facts, and this Court cannot seek to
substitute its own view of the facts for that of the Tribunal even though it
may on a review of the evidence be inclined to accept counsel's criticism of
the findings.

391

The learned President has in this case, held that having regard to the
totality of the evidence adduced, the termination of the appellant's service
by the Respondent was justified, I am unable to state that there was no legal
evidence in this case to support this conclusion reached by the learned
President or that his finding was not rationally possible, and is perverse
with regard to the evidence on record. I would accordingly dismiss the appeal
without costs."

The Industrial Disputes Act No. 43 of 1950 states in section 31 D that the
order of a Labour Tribunal shall be final and shall not be called in question
in any Court except on a question of law. While appellate courts will not
intervene with pure findings of fact e.g. see _Somawathie v Baksons Textile
Industries Ltd_.(7); Caledonan (Ceylon) Tea and _Rubber Estates Ltd. v.
Hillman_ (6); _Thevarayan v. Balakrishnan_ (8) _Nadarajah v. Thilagaratnam_
(9)'; yet if it appears that the Tribunal has made a finding wholly
unsupported by evidence _Ceylon Transport Board v. Gunasinghe_ (10) _Colombo
Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers' Union_ (11); _Ceylon Oil
Workers' Union v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation_ (12)', or which is
inconsistent with the evidence and contradictory of it _Reckitt & Colman of
Ceylon Ltd. v. Peiris _(13), or where the Tribunal has failed to consider
material and relevant evidence _United Industrial Local Government & General
Workers' Union v. Independent Newspapers Ltd_.(14), or where it has failed to
decide a material question _Hayleys Ltd. v. De Silva_ (15) or misconstrued the
question at issue and has directed its attention to the wrong matters Colombo
Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers' Union (supra), or where there
was an erroneous misconception amounting to a misdirection Ceylon _Transport
Board v. Samastha Lanka Motor Sevaka Samithiya_ (16), or where it failed to
consider material documents or misconstrued them ( _Virakesari Ltd. v.
Fernando_ (17) or where the Tribunal has failed to consider the version of one
party or his evidence _Carolis Appuhamy v. Punchirala_ (18); _Ceylon Workers'
Congress v. Superintendent, Kallebokke Estate_ (19) or erroneously supposed
there was no evidence Ceylon Steel _Corporation v. National Employees' Union_
(20) the finding of the Tribunal is subject to review by the Court of Appeal.
In any event, on further appeal to the Supreme Court, this court, in terms of
the Constitution, has wide appellate powers with regard to what is meant by a
question of _law See Albert v. Veeraiatipillai_ (21); _Collettes Ltd. v Bank
of Ceylon_ (22). And where the Court of Appeal fails to evaluate

392

the recorded evidence but merely endorses the findings of the Tribunal, as it
has done in this case, the Supreme Court would, as it has done before e.g.
_Sithamparanathan v. People's Bank_ (23)' set aside the decision of the Court
of Appeal. The decision will be set aside not because the Court of Appeal has
been unwilling "to substitute its own view of the facts for that of the
Tribunal", but because it has failed to evaluate the evidence so as to decide
whether the Order of the Tribunal was, in the established circumstances of the
case, just and equitable.

Admittedly a Labour Tribunal, in being required by section 31C of the
Industrial Disputes Act to make "such order as may appear to the tribunal to
be just and equitable", has a very wide power. It may be that the Tribunal is
not required to give a verdict with regard to the charges made by an employer,
_Per Rajaratnam, J. in Somawathie v. Baksons Textile Industries Ltd._ (7). Yet
Labour Tribunals do not possess an unfettered power. _As H. N. G. Fernando, J.
(as he then was) observed in Walker Sons & Co. Ltd. v. Fry_(24), a Labour
Tribunal does not have the "freedom of the wild ass". (Cf. _Municipal Council
of Colombo v. Munasinghe_ (25) "freedom of a wild horse" per H. N. G.
Fernando, J. in relation to an arbitrator). Considerations of justice and
equity must necessarily control and limit the powers of Labour Tribunals. (
_Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Tea, Rubber, Coconut & General Produce Workers'
Union _(26) . The Order of a Tribunal must not, as the Court of Appeal says,
be perverse. "Perverse" is an unfortunate term, for one may suppose obstinacy
in what is wrong, and one thinks of Milton and how Satan in the Serpent had
corrupted Eve, and of diversions to improper use, and even of subversion and
ruinously turning things upside down, and, generally, of wickedness. Yet, in
my view, in the context of the principle that the Court of Appeal will not
interfere with a decision of a Labour Tribunal unless it is "perverse", it
means no more than that the court may intervene if it is of the view that,
having regard to the weight of evidence in relation to the matters in issue.
the tribunal has turned away arbitrarily or capriciously from what is true and
right and fair in dealing evenhandedly with the rights and interests of the
workman, employer and, in certain circumstances, the public. The Tribunal must
make an order in equity and good conscience, acting judicially, based on legal
evidence rather than on beliefs that are fanciful or irrationally imagined
notions or whims. Due account must be taken of the evidence in relation to the
issues in the matter before the Tribunal. Otherwise, the order of the Tribunal
must be set aside as being perverse.

393

Notwithstanding the Judgment of the Court of Appeal to the contrary, the
Petitioner, it seems much to the annoyance of some, insisted that the Order of
the Tribunal was perverse and on 9 February 1989 he was granted special leave
to appeal to this Court. I do not think the Petitioner was guilty of
pertinacity: I think, rather, that his obstinacy and stubbornness, was
righteous.

The residual part of the Respondent's case has three charges. There is the
charge that the Petitioner, had acted in violation of Circular instructions in
authorizing the payment of Budgetary Relief Allowances and thereby caused a
loss to the Corporation. This, the President of the Tribunal erroneously
surmised, was an allegation that the Petitioner had acted **" fraudulently."
**He misconstrued the question at issue. It was never the Respondent's case,
and there was not a word of evidence to even hint at the suggestion, that the
Petitioner was guilty of any form of deception or deceit or that he acted in
violation of the Circular instructions to obtain any unjust advantage or to
injure the Respondent by causing loss. The President of the Tribunal, found
that any sums of money paid to the workers, had, according to his
understanding of the evidence, been paid **mistakenly** and not
**fraudulently**. He says: "It is proved from the evidence that the double
payments had been made as a result of the applicant's mistakes." But having
found that the charge of acting in violation of the Circular had been
established, the President of the Tribunal concludes that there were "acts
involving moral turpitude/(gross mismanagement) and mismanagement" for which
dismissal was "not too severe" a punishment. The Petitioner may have
transgressed Circular instructions and, therefore, in that sense have been
**mistaken**. But that is quite obviously different from finding that the
Petitioner was guilty of fraud and misconduct involving "moral turpitude" for
which he deserved to be dismissed. And as for what the Court of Appeal
described as a "lapse", it might be observed that in his letter to the
Respondent dated 20 January 1981, (R10) the Petitioner explains that he
certified the payments only after the payments computed by the Assistant Clerk
had been verified by the Chief Clerk who had also assured the Petitioner that
the Circular instructions had been complied with.

394

The President, it seems to me, completely misunderstood the nature of the
charge. He misconstrued the question at issue and misdirected himself and then
went on to arrive at conclusions with regard to his wrongly assumed charge
which had no relation whatever to the evidence before him. This is a matter of
law in which this Court might, and ought, to intervene. _Cf. Colombo
Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers Union (Supra), Urban Council
Panadura v. Cooray_ (27)

The gravamen of the Respondent's charge was that toss had been caused to the
Corporation by the Petitioner's failure to comply with the instructions, given
in the circular. The Petitioner in his letter dated 20 January 1981 to the
Respondent (R10) explained that a sum of Rs. 1223.65 out of the total
excessive payment of Rs. 1686.26 had already been recovered and that he would
"recover the balance shortly." The whole sum paid as a result of the
Petitioner's alleged glide into error, greased by the activities of his
subordinates, had been recovered from the workers. And so, there was no loss.
The President in his Order states as follows:

"Further the evidence indicates that these overpayments had been recovered
from the workers and refunded to the Corporation. However, I have to hold that
double payments were made due to the applicant's misconduct."

The Court of Appeal was of the view that, because the overpayments were caused
as a result of the introduction by the Petitioner of a Cash Works Register in
addition to the Checkroll, and because the Petitioner had certified the
payments, it was unable "in this state of the evidence" to hold that the
President was in error when he held that this charge had been proved. "The
fact that the overpayments have been recovered does not", the Court of Appeal
held, "mitigate the lapse" on the part of the Petitioner.

With great respect, I am of the view, for the reasons stated, that the Court
of Appeal as well as the President of the Tribunal were in error

395

both with regard to the question at issue, namely whether the Petitioner had
caused a loss, and the relation of the evidence to that charge.

In connection with the question of loss, it might also be pointed out that in
his letter R10, the Petitioner said he had reduced the losses of the
plantation by 50%. (In his evidence he said that at the time he took charge of
the Plantation there was a loss of Rs. 832,000 which in a year he had reduced
to Rs. 449,000). Edirimanasingham, the Internal Auditor of the Respondent,
admitted in his evidence before the Tribunal that the Petitioner had reduced
the losses of the Plantation by Rs. 350,000. Among the steps he had taken in
this connection was curtailing Overtime payments by about 75%, a measure that
could hardly have made him popular with the workers, yet one, which the
Respondent Corporation, which was complaining of a loss of Rs. 1686.26, might
have taken into account in deciding whether the Petitioner was the sort of
person who acted in reckless disregard of the interests of the Respondent and
deserved to be dismissed. The Petitioner, understandably, concludes his letter
to the Respondent by expressing the hope that "far from being found fault
with", he should be "highly commended." I am inclined to agree with him.

What the Court of Appeal describes as "the more serious allegation" against
the Petitioner was that he had during the period August 1980 to October 1980
purchased eleven tyres "purported to be for the official vehicle allocated",
"from outside sources, without justification" and failed "to enter or cause
them to be entered in the Stock Book of the Plantation." Although the charge,
by referring to the purchase of tyres for the "purported" use of the
Petitioner's official vehicle suggests that they were not in fact so used, the
President found that "the 11 tyres which were purchased had been fitted to the
vehicle and used." Neither the Tribunal in its Order nor the Court of Appeal
in its Judgment says a word about the allegation of purchases from "outside
sources without justification." Nor does the Tribunal say anything about an
additional ingredient it mistakenly supposed the charge to have contained,
namely, that quotations had

396

not been called for the purchases. And it is only as almost an afterthought
that the Tribunal in its Order mentions the failure to make entries in the
stock book. The Petitioner had explained that the purchases were made by
monthly vouchers and that the Respondent was aware of the purchases and that
the failure to make entries in the stock book was due to the fact that the
tyres were purchased from time to time for immediate use. The President noted
that the Corporation had taken up the position that it had not been informed
of the purchases but does not state whether the Petitioner had failed to
comply with an obligation and what the effect should be. The Court of Appeal
does not mention at all the failure to enter the purchases in the stock book.

Both the Tribunal and the Court of Appeal were primarily concerned with the
purchase of so many tyres within such a short period, to cover a small
mileage. This, the Court of Appeal held, was conduct on the part of the
Petitioner that "undoubtedly caused loss to the Corporation." Causing loss is
a neutral event upon which the Petitioner's dismissal could not have been
justly based: Whether there is a **culpable** loss for which the Petitioner
was to blame is another matter. The Tribunal found that the loss was caused
**negligently**. Both the Tribunal and the Court of Appeal misunderstood the
nature of the charge. A charge of causing loss, negligently or otherwise, by
the purchase of tyres was one that was never made against the Petitioner by
the Respondent. The charge was not that the purchase of the eleven tyres had
caused a loss to the Respondent but that the Petitioner was guilty of two
procedural irregularities, namely, **(1) making unjustifiable purchases from
improper sources and (2) the failure to enter or cause to be entered the fact
of the purchases in the stock book of the plantation.** Since both the
Tribunal and the Court of Appeal were driven to a point of distraction by the
loss caused by the use of as many as eleven front wheel tyres to run a mere
4003 miles in three months, and especially since the Tribunal attributed the
loss to the Petitioner's negligence, an examination of the evidence deserves
to be made.

397

The Respondent gave the Petitioner one car and then another when the first was
found to be unsatisfactory. The second car too was unsatisfactory and, in the
same year, a third car, an old Volkswagen after a major engine repair, was
given for his official use on 15 August 1980. The Reports from the Volkswagen
Agents make it quite clear that this ear too was yet in need of further
attention. Among other things, it had serious defects in the front axle and
steering and suspension on account of which there was "heavy tyre wear" in the
front. This appears in the report of the Volkswagen Agents dated 19 February
1981. This was not a new discovery of which the Petitioner and Respondent were
ignorant. Edirimanasingham, the Respondent's Internal Auditor, admitted in his
evidence before the Tribunal that the Petitioner had given information with
regard to the excessive wastage of tyres. On 18 August 1980, when the
Volkswagen Agents had reported (A3) "excessive play" in the front axle and
steering and they had advised the dismantling and checking of the assembly,
the Petitioner had communicated this to the Respondent by his letter dated 19
August 1980 (A1). The Petitioner was, by the Respondent's letter dated 26
August 1980 (A2), castigated for taking the car to the Agents, when the
Petitioner had been advised to test the car himself and then take it to
Kotiyagalle State Plantation where a "comprehensive job" on the vehicle was
said to have been done. Now that he was aware of the defects, the Petitioner
was advised to communicate with the Superintendent of Kotiyagalle State
Plantations "by prior appointment ascertaining whether he is in a position to
undertake the rest of the repairs enumerated by "the Petitioner". On 30 August
1980 the Petitioner wrote to the Respondent explaining why he had taken the
car to the Agents in Kandy (R3). He also informed the Respondent that he had
the car examined by the Colombo agents when he was on leave in Colombo on 27
August 1980, "as the tyre wastage (front) was very severe" and that they had
in their Defect Report (A10) confirmed the findings of the Kandy branch. He
enclosed copies of the Defect Reports obtained from the Kandy and Colombo
branches of the Agents. When the Petitioner communicated with the Kotiyagalle
Superintendent by his letter dated 30 August 1980, the Petitioner was informed
that he was unable to undertake the repairs. With his letter

398

dated 6 September 1980 (R11) the Petitioner sent the Respondent a copy of the
Kotiyagalle Superintendent's letter and pointed out the need to effect the
repairs to prevent even more major repairs and referred to the high tyre
wastage and the cost of replacing the front tyres. In his evidence, the
Petitioner explained that he had been asked by the Assistant Manager, the
Resident Director and the Visiting Agent of the Respondent to postpone repairs
until financial provision for doing so was made in the following year. Since
he was precluded from taking the car to the Agents for repairs, as the
Petitioner explains in his letter dated 20 January 1981 (R10) to the
Respondent, he had "no choice but to continue to use" the vehicle, replacing
the tyres when it became necessary to do so.

In his Order, the President of the Tribunal refers to the Petitioner's
explanation that the wastage was due to a mechanical defect. He also refers to
the fact that the Reports from the Agents, A3 and A10, had been communicated
to the Respondent, but finds that the reports did not attribute the wastage to
the defects in the steering and axle. The Court of Appeal agreed with the
President of the Tribunal that the Defects Reports, A3 and A10, "did not refer
to the question of tyre wastage at all". With great respect, the Court of
Appeal failed to note that the President ignored the vital evidence of
Ranasinghe, the Service Manager of the Volkswagen Agents, who had issued, A3.
Ranasinghe had said in his evidence that the wastage in the tyres was due to
the mechanical defects specified in the report he issued. The Court of Appeal
also failed to note that the President did not take account of the fact that
Petitioner in his letters to the Respondent had explained the relationship
between the mechanical defects referred to in A3 and A10 and the tyre wastage.
The Petitioner in his evidence called attention to the fact that "time and
again both orally and in writing" he had complained of these defects to the
Respondent. This was also overlooked by the Court of Appeal. By failing to
take account of the evidence of Ranasinghe and the Petitioner and the
explanations given by the Petitioner in his letters to the Respondent, the
President misconstrued A3 and A10 which were documents of vital significance
to the matter in issue.

399

The President then goes on to discuss the separate question of whether the
Respondent had been informed of the purchase of the tyres and then refers to
the evidence of Ranasinghe, the Service Manager of the Volkswagen Agents, that
a tyre on the Ginigathhena road should "if fitted to a Volkswagen in good
condition, driven by a good driver should run 7000 miles. The President then
draws the inference that, since the Petitioner had used eleven tyres to run
4003 miles, there appears to be a disparity". He then quotes Ranasinghe as
saying that he advised the Petitioner that unless the defect was rectified, it
would get worse and that he had said that the front axle and steering had to
be dismantled for repairs. The President then says: "it would be seen from
this evidence that in spite of being advised by this witness the applicant had
negligently used the tyres, as a result of which a loss was caused to the
Corporation. Furthermore, the applicant has admitted that he has not brought
these tyres into the stock book."

I am of the opinion that there was no evidence to justify his conclusion that
the Petitioner had caused a loss to the Respondent by his negligence. The
evidence in the case points in the opposite direction which, however, the
President of the Tribunal failed to notice because he did not consider the
relevant evidence given by Service Manager Ranasinghe and the Petitioner
orally and through the correspondence between him and the Respondent and
because he misconstrued the Defects Reports (A3 and A10).

The President of the Tribunal and the Court of Appeal were aware that the
normally expected mileage was subject to the condition that the vehicle was in
a **good condition,** but lost sight of the fact that there was abundant
evidence of the fact that the vehicle assigned to the Petitioner was in a bad
condition and that the excessive wastage of tyres was attributable to its
detective state.

After stating that Ranasinghe had observed that a "tyre should do an average
mileage of around 7000 miles provided the vehicle was in good condition," the
Court of Appeal notes that the President had

**400**

reached the conclusion that the Respondent had not been notified of the
inordinate frequency with regard to the replacement of the tyres.
Edirimanasingham, the Internal Auditor of the Respondent, in his evidence,
while admitting that the Respondent had been informed by the Petitioner of the
excessive wastage, and that the cause of the wastage, namely mechanical
defects in the vehicle, had been personally explained to him by the
Petitioner, in his re-examination stated that in the letters in which
excessive wastage was complained of by the Petitioner, no mention had been
made that "tyres had been obtained within a short period."

The Court of Appeal states that "having regard to the evidence of witness
Edirimanasingham and the version given by the appellant, the Tribunal has held
that this conduct on the part of the appellant has undoubtedly caused loss to
the Corporation." The President uses Edirimanasingham's evidence only to
establish the fact that the Petitioner's car had been fitted with eleven tyres
to run 4003 miles from 15 August to the end of October. As for the
Petitioner's evidence, had it been examined, it would have been seen to
adequately explain the reasons for the wastage and clearly show an absence of
any culpability on his part.

There remains the Respondent's charge that the Petitioner allowed his wife "to
interfere in the administration of the Plantation and to provoke members of
the staff by insult that led to a strike on the Plantation in November 1980."
The gravamen of the charge of which the Petitioner was found guilty and
dismissed by the Respondent was that the permitted misconduct of the
Petitioner's wife was of such a serious nature as to cause a strike. The
President of the Tribunal did not find that there was a strike related to the
Petitioner's wife's misconduct. Having accepted the evidence of three
employees of the Plantation that in four documents, R6, R7, R8, and R9, the
Petitioner's wife had "called for explanations from them in regard to official
work," the President of the Tribunal found that the Petitioner had "allowed
his wife to interfere into the management of the estate." "I have therefore
arrived at the conclusion that this amounts to mismanagement", states the
President of the Tribunal. The Court of

401

Appeal notes that the President had concluded that the Petitioner had
permitted his wife to interfere in the work of the Plantation, that the
Petitioner's wife had failed to give evidence and that the evidence of
Pandian, one of three employees who gave evidence on this matter, with regard
to the authenticity of R6, R7, R8 and R9 had gone "completely unchallenged."

The authenticity of the documents was earlier disputed by the Petitioner. In
this connection it must be observed that section 36(4) of the Industrial
Disputes Act provides that in the conduct of proceedings under that Act, a
Labour Tribunal shall not be bound by any of the provisions of the Evidence
Ordinance. Tribunals are not fettered by the Evidence Ordinance, although they
ought not to make orders ignoring the rules of evidence in the guise of making
just and equitable orders. (See per Alles, J. in Ceylon Transport Board v.
Thungadasa (28). Pandian's evidence was that he received R7 from the
Petitioner's wife. Pandian had nothing to do with R6, R8 and R9. With regard
to R6, Dorairaja, said that it was the only letter he had, received from the
Petitioner's Wife and did not answer the question how he recognized her
handwriting. With regard to R8 and R9, Ramanathan said in his evidence that he
received them from the Petitioner's wife. The President examined the documents
and was satisfied that the handwriting was similar and because the
Petitioner's wife was not called as a witness, he accepts the evidence of
Dorairaja, Pandian and Ramanathan.

Learned President's Counsel did not find it necessary to deal with the
question of authenticity. He submitted that the documents, if they were
written by the Petitioner's wife, did not warrant a charge of interference in
the management of the affairs of the plantation. In any event, there was no
evidence to show that the interference complained of was permitted by the
Petitioner. With this submission, I agree.

402

The first document (136) was a note addressed to Dorairaja. It reads as
follows:

"Dorairaj, please explain as to why you did not send the paper and the letter?
Are you the new Superintendent? Send the paper and the letters immediately,
without trying to be funny."

D. Jayasuriya

The Petitioner had explained to the Respondent in his letter of 20th January
(R10) that his wife was expecting an item of clothing by post which she
required to wear on a special occasion. When she had sent a servant to the
plantation's office (where mail was received) for the collection of the item,
Assistant Clerk Dorairaja had said that it had not been received. When the
Petitioner's wife was informed by the Post Office that the item had, in fact
been delivered, she sent this note to Dorairaja. Whatever one may think of her
manner of expressing herself and the fact that it may have used Dorairaja to
put up his hackles, the inference by the President of the Tribunal that there
was an interference with the management of the plantation was altogether
unwarranted. In any event, even if it is assumed that this amounted to an
interference with the management of the plantation, there is no evidence at
all to indicate that the **Petitioner allowed** , as the President of the
Tribunal found, such an interference. He overlooks the fact that the
Petitioner had explained to the Respondent in his letter (R10) that when the
letter R6 was sent, he was away at the Respondent's Board Office; and that,
according to the evidence of Dorairaja, when the Petitioner came to know of
this letter, he had been summoned to the Petitioner's bungalow and told by the
Petitioner that his wife could not write such letters. The Tribunal and the
Court of Appeal overlooked all this vital evidence which stood in the way of a
finding that the alleged interference was allowed by the Petitioner.

403

The second document, R7, is as follows:

5kg Flour |  26.00  
---|---  
11/2 kg Sugar  | 19.80  
5 kg Flour | 26.00  
1 kg Dhall  | 12.50  
  
16 Pkts Tea

| 32.00  
  
1 kg Sugar

| 13.20  
  
5 kg Flour  

| 26.00  
  
5 Pkts L'Spray

| 42.50  
1 kg Sugar  | 13.20  
  |  211.20  
  
S.K

Please explain as to how you entered 3 kg of sugar in your book, and you sent
me only 1 1/2 kgs. which I wanted, through Siripala, Hereafter maintain your
book properly and make it a point not to enter others bills onto my account as
I too have a book on my own, you are not efficient enough to hold that post,
as this is the second time you did this sort of thing, so please be careful
and cautious (sic.)

D. Jayasuriya

"P.S. Please show this to the Manager when he comes.

D. Jayasuriya

The man to whom this note, R7, was addressed was Pandian, the Storekeeper of
the plantation. In his brief stay in the witness box, Pandian said that during
his six-year stint at the plantation he had never before been called upon to
give an explanation to the wife of a Superintendent, and that this lady had no
reason to state that he was inefficient in his work. In cross-examination
Pandian said that he was the brother of Dorairaja, and that although two
inquiries had been conducted against the Petitioner, he had no part in them
and that R7 was now produced for the first time. He said he went on strike,
but never said that it had any thing to do with R7 or with the Petitioner or
his wife. There was not a word out of him to support an allegation of
interference with the management of the plantation. How does R7 in any way
whatsoever support the President's inference? It does not.

404

Perhaps the Petitioner's efforts at economy and being watchful over
expenditure had touched his wife also, in relation to the domestic scene. But
that is all R7 shows. In any event, there is nothing to show that the
Petitioner ever knew of the existence of R7 until it was produced at the
Tribunal.

In R8, the Petitioner's wife said:

K.P

I hope you are not marking name to Gandhi from the 6th. He has kept away from
work in the bungalow and you are not to offer him work in the field as he was
brought from Galle only as an allowance, Periasamy came to work yesterday and
you may continue giving him name. Doraisamy have been working from 8th and you
may continue, Yesu has not being coming for work from the 7th up to now. Do
not mark name till I send a chit. Give name to Mary Soma from the 6th in lieu
of Gandhi.

D. Jayasuriya

Gandhi was an "allowance" \- plantation jargon for a household servant. He was
therefore not to be given ordinary plantation work, such as work in the field.
The Petitioner's wife was keeping the domestic scene quite distinct from the
plantation. K. P. was the Head Kanaka Pulle, Ramanathan. In his evidence he
stated that the Petitioner fell out with him in June 1980 because he had
refused to continue collecting money from workers for the milk supplied by the
Petitioner's wife's private herd of cattle. She had sent him the note R8. The
Petitioner's wife was legitimately concerned about people assigned to work in
the Petitioner's residence. Who would have known better about Ghandhi not
turning up for work in the bungalow? This was not concerned with workers
employed in the field or in the factory and, therefore, the inference that
there was an interference with the management of the plantation was
unwarranted. In any event, there is not a single word in the evidence to link
the Petitioner with the communication in question. How then did he allow his
wife to interfere?

405

And in R9 the Petitioner's wife says:

K.P.

Please do not give the name to the boy who came yesterday, as he too didn't
follow instructions and I was compelled to send him away. He is supposed to be
one Ramaiya. From today send the name of our cook Ramaiya. Our usual bungalow
watcher's brother has to give me Rs. 2.50 for the milk he bought from the
7th-10th. After several reminders he still has failed to pay. So please. get
him to pay immediately.

D. Jayasuriya

R9 was produced by the Kanaka Pulle in support of his claim that the
Petitioner's wife was giving him instructions with regard to work on the
plantation. As in the case of R8, the instructions related to domestic staff
assigned to work in the Petitioner's household and not in the plantation, on
the field or in the factory, an important distinction which the Tribunal
overlooked. In any event there was nothing to link the Petitioner with this
document.

For the reasons explained in my judgment I am of the opinion that the order of
the President of the Labour Tribunal was perverse and not just and equitable.
With great respect, the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal, in my opinion,
came to a different conclusion because his Lordship failed to evaluate the
evidence on record. I therefore set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal
and the Order of the Labour Tribunal and hold that the termination of the
employment of the Appellant by the Respondent was wrongful.

Although the Petitioner's dismissal was wrongful and it may be ordered that he
be reinstated., as Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) observed in Caledonan
Estates v. Hillman (Supra) at p. 435, see also per Siva Supramaniam, J. in
United Industrial Local _Government & General Workers' Union v. Independent
Newspapers Ltd_.(29) that remedy is "not absolute or of universal application.
There can be

406

cases where it might not be expedient, because of the presence of unusual
features, to direct reinstatement, and a Tribunal may think the grant of
compensation instead may meet the ends of Justice.' Considering the
Petitioner's uneasy relationship with the Trade Unions and the likelihood of
industrial strife if he is reinstated cf. _Ceylon Ceramics Corporation v.
Weerasinghe_ (30); cf. also _Ceylon Workers' Congress v. Poonagala Group_ (31)
and the fact that the employer had alleged a lack of confidence in the
Petitioner cf. _Glaxo Allenbury's (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Fernando_ (32), I am of the
view that compensation, rather than reinstatement is the appropriate remedy in
this case.

What would be a just and equitable amount by way of compensation?
_Vythialingam, J. pointed out in Ceylon Transport Board v. Wijeratne_ (33)
that "Although the Industrial Disputes Act provides for the payment of
compensation in lieu of reinstatement it does not lay down the basis on which
it is to be computed." Vythialingam, J. said that "the amount not be
mechanically calculated on the basis of the salary he should have earned till
he reached the age of super annuation. "These observations were quoted with
approval by Sharvananda, J. (as he then was) in the Caledonan (Ceylon) Tea and
Rubber Estates Ltd. v Hillman (Supra). With these observations, I respectfully
agree. Sharvananda, J. added that:

"The Legislature has wisely given untrammelled discretion to the Tribunal to
decide what is just and equitable in the circumstances of each case. Of
course, this discretion has to be exercised judicially. It will not conduce to
the proper exercise of that discretion if this Court were to lay down hard and
fast rules which will fetter the exercise of the discretion, especially when
the Legislature has not chosen to prescribe or delimit the area of its
operation, Flexibility is essential. Circumstances may vary in each case and
the weight to be attached to any factor depends on the context of each case."

407

While I respectfully agree that the amount of compensation should not be
"mechanically" calculated and that Labour Tribunals have a wide discretion,
there is, it seems to me, no power conferred by the Legislature on Labour
Tribunals to act without unhampered restraint. Their power has been, with
soundness of judgment, curtailed by the legislature. They have no
"untrammelled" power, in the ordinary sense of the word. The legs of those who
feign to enjoy the freedom of the quadruped H.N.G. Fernando, J. referred to,
have been fastened together. Indeed, as Sharvananda; J_ himself pointed out in
the Caledonan Estates Case at p. 436, Labour Tribunals have an obligation to
act judicially.

"Compensation" is derived from the Latin root compensate, and what is expected
is that after a weighing together of the evidence and probabilities in the
case, the Tribunal must form an opinion of the nature and extent of the loss,
arriving in the end at an amount that a sensible person would not regard as
mean or extravagant, but would rather consider to be just and equitable in all
the circumstances of the case. There must eventually be an even balance, of
which the scales of justice are meant to remind us. The Tribunal must
endeavour to give each man that which is his right: Sum clique tribuere", as
the Roman Law, to which our legal systems owe so much, felicitously phrased
that concept.

Our Tribunals and Courts have often used a given number of years' salary as
global compensation. For example, in _Belgama v. Co-operative Wholesale
Establishment_ (34), and in _Central Transport Board v Loku Banda_ (35) , one
years' salary was considered just and equitable. Five years salary was deemed
to be just and equitable in The Governing Body of Educational Institutions
founded by the Church Missionary Society in Ceylon, Ladies' _College v.
Panuthevan Thuraimugam_ (36). Seven years' salary was awarded in _Cyril
Anthony v Ceylon Fisheries Corporation_ (37) , the Supreme Court being of the
view that one years' salary awarded by the Tribunal was grossly inadequate.
Sharvananda, J. in the Caledonan Case (supra) at

408

p. 438 thought that seven years' salary was a just and equitable award and
reduced the award of ten years' salary awarded by the Tribunal.

With great respect, while, in the circumstances of those decisions, the
expressed loss, in global terms of years of salary, may in fact have coincided
with losses reckoned and counted and settled by reference to the relevant
heads and principles of determining compensation, it is preferable, in my
view, to have a computation which is expressly shown to relate to specific
heads and items of loss. It is not satisfactory in my view to simply say that
a certain amount is just and equitable. There ought, I think, to be a stated
basis for the computation, taking the award beyond the realm of mere assurance
of fairness. This would enable the parties and anyone reading the Order to see
that it is, all in all, just and equitable. In _Abeysundera v. Same_ (38); cf.
also _Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Tea, Rubber, Coconut and General Produce
Workers' Union_ (39) the Court said: "For an order to be just and equitable it
is not sufficient for such order merely to contain a just and equitable
verdict. The reasons for such verdict should be set out to enable the parties
to appreciate how just and equitable the order is. In the absence of reasons,
it would not be a just and equitable order." Indeed, as _De Kretser, J.
pointed out in Adam's Peak Tea Estates Ltd. v. Duraisamy_ (40) the failure to
give reasons might lead a party to conclude that the order was arbitrary.
Giving reasons would also lead the Tribunal to address its mind to the
relevant considerations leading to its award. As the Supreme Court of India
observed in _Woolcombers of India Ltd. v. Woolcombers Workers' Union_ (41),
the very search for reasons will lead the tribunal to give reasons, which will
be regarded as fair and to disregard others. Wade (Administrative Law, 5th Ed.
at p. 486) observes that "the giving of reasons is required by the ordinary
man's sense of justice and is also a healthy discipline for all who exercise
power over others. "Where no basis for the compensation awarded is given, the
Order of the Tribunal. is liable to be set aside. (See _Nanayakkara v.
Hettiarachchi_ (42)).

409

In any event, it would not be satisfactory to impose arbitrary ceilings on the
compensation to be awarded, whether by reference to years of salary or
otherwise. In _Ceylon Transport Board v. Wijeratne_ (33), Vythialingam, J.
placed a limit of three years salary on the total amount of compensation to be
awarded. There was no basis for selecting a three year period and, it came
without surprise, that Vythialingam, J. was compelled to review his three year
limit. In _Henderson & Co. v. Wijetunge _(43), Vythialingam, J. awarded five
years salary as compensation. In the Caledonan Estates Case, Sharvanada, J.
said (at p 436) that His Lordship was unable to subscribe to Justice
Vythialingam's proposition that the amount "should seldom, if not never,
exceed a maximum of three years' salary". Sharvananda, J. said that
"flexibility is essential" and pointed out that "circumstances may vary in
each case and the weight to be attached to any particular factor depends on
the context of each case."

I respectfully agree with those observations. However, there are certain
parameters. There is data which is necessary to determine the orbit of every
Tribunal, so as to prevent it from straying off its course. What are the
matters to be considered? There ought to be at least an approximate
computation of immediate loss, i.e loss of wages and benefits from the date of
dismissal up to the date of the final Order or Judgment, and another with
regard to prospective, future loss, and a third with regard the loss of
retirement benefits, based as far as possible on a foundation of solid facts
given to the Tribunal by the parties.

While it is not possible to enumerate all the circumstances that may be
relevant in every case, it may be stated that the essential question, in the
determination of compensation for unfair dismissal, is this: What is the
actual financial loss caused by the unfair dismissal?, for compensation is an
"indemnity for the loss". (Per Soza, J. in _Associated Newspapers of Ceylon
Ltd. v. Jayasinghe_ (48)). Now, losses can be of various kinds; but the matter
for consideration in this kind of case is the **financial loss** , and not
sentimental harm caused by the employer. In his petition to this Court, dated
25, September

410

1990, the Petitioner refers to the fact that he was "undergoing hardships,
both financially and mentally."

I am of the view that privations caused by injured feelings, anguish,
unpleasantness, loss of face or inconvenience, do not, in the absence of
evidence that they could be translated into calculable financial loss, enter
into the computation of compensation in this case. They are, in the realm of
industrial law, remote. Emotional suffering by itself is not compensatable.
There is no suggestion in this case of mental hardship that could be
translated into calculable financial loss. Therefore, I do not take the
Petitioner's alleged mental hardship into account in deciding what
compensation ought to be awarded.

With regard to financial loss, there is, first, the loss of earnings from the
date of dismissal to the determination of the matter before the Court, that
is, the date of the Order of the Tribunal, or, if there is an appeal, to the
date of the final determination of the appellate court. The phrase "loss of
earnings" for this purpose would be the dismissed employee's pay (net of tax),
allowances, bonuses, the value of the use of a car for private purposes, the
value of a residence and domestic servants and all other perquisites and
benefits having a monetary value to which he was entitled. The burden is on
the employee to adduce sufficient evidence to enable the Tribunal to decide
the loss he had incurred. For instance, if an employee claims that he would
have earned more than his basic salary, he must adduce supporting evidence
such as the fact that there was a general wage increase from which he would
have benefited, and/or that he was on a regular ladder of promotion along
which he would have progressed, and/or that he had special qualifications or
opportunities which would have led to an improvement in his conditions of
service during the relevant time. Otherwise, it must be assumed that he would
continue to earn at the same rate as at the time of the termination of his
services.

The Petitioner in his evidence stated that he was earning Rs. 1295 without
allowances. There is no evidence before us of how much he

411

was entitled to by way of allowances, bonuses and other payments. It was in
evidence that he was given the use of car, a residence and domestic help:
However, there is no evidence with regard to the value of these benefits. Did
he have to pay something, albeit a token amount, for these benefits? If so,
how much? Was he entitled to unlimited private travel, if not, what was he
entitled to? What was the reasonably estimated value of this facility in
monetary terms? In the absence of evidence with regard to losses other than
those relating to his basic salary, I am unable to compute the Petitioner's
losses under this head, except those with regard to basic wages. Since the
Petitioner has failed to adduce evidence in support of a claim for other
benefits, he shall be confined under this head of assessment to the losses of
which he has given evidence, viz., his basic wages. The Petitioner was
dismissed on 3 February 1981. The maximum sum he is entitled to under this
head is Rs. 160,580, i.e. his monthly salary multiplied by the number of
months from the date of his termination to the date of this Order, that is 124
months.

Once the incurred, i.e., the ascertainable past, losses have been computed, a
Tribunal should deduct any wages or benefits paid by the employer after
termination, as well as remuneration from fresh employment. (See _Liyanage v.
Weeraman_ (44); Ceylon Transport Board v. Wijeratne (Supra)). If the employee
had obtained equally beneficial or financially better alternative employment,
he should receive no compensation at all, for he suffers no loss. (e.g. see
_Nidahas Karmika Saha Velanda Vurthiya Samithiya v. The Continental Motors
Ltd._ (45) cited in Abeysekera's I **ndustrial Law** Vol. III & IV at p.
1543). And compensation should be reduced by the amount earned from other,
less remunerative employment. The principle is this: He is entitled to
indemnity and not profit.

According to his Petition to this Court dated 25 September 1990, the
Petitioner remained unemployed up to that date. At the hearing before us
learned President's Counsel stated that the position remained unchanged. The
question then is whether the Petitioner failed to mitigate his loss because of
his own fault. A dismissed

412

employee must mitigate his loss by taking any offer of employment that is
reasonably offered to him, acting as if he had no hope of seeking compensation
from his previous employer. I hold that the failure to mitigate the loss was
not due to the Petitioner's fault. It is a fact recognized by this Court that
persons like the Petitioner, who are engaged in the business of running
plantations, find it difficult to obtain alternative employment. (e.g. see
_Caledonan Estates Ltd. v. Hillman (supra) at p. 437, Raymond v. Ponnusamy_
(46). The fact that he was dismissed for certain acts of serious mismanagement
and misconduct and causing disaffection and strife among the workers in the
plantation might well have exacerbated the problem. I am of the view that the
manner of dismissal in this case, blackened the Petitioner's name in the
plantation sector and rendered him unfit for immediate re-employment and that
the loss caused by unemployment is entirely attributable to the Respondent.
The manner of dismissal is a relevant consideration in considering the
Petitioner's loss. In _Silva v. Kuruppu_ (47) the fact that the employer had
made a false allegation of theft against the employee, thus preventing her
from obtaining other work of a suitable nature, was taken into account in
awarding compensation. This is simply because the manner of dismissal may be
tied to pecuniary loss. It is not a punishment of the Respondent for what he
did. (Cf. _Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. v. Jayasinghe_ (48) . There is
no element of exemplary or punitive damages contained within an order of
compensation for unfair dismissal made by a Labour Tribunal.

Since there was no evidence that the Petitioner received any money or monetary
benefits from the Respondent after his dismissal, and since he remains
unemployed through no fault of his own, no deduction is made from his
immediate losses.

The Petitioner is also entitled to be compensated for the loss of **future**
earnings and benefits. This is not "continuing damages" of the sort which
Sirimane, J., with great respect, correctly refused to sanction in
_Pathinayake v Karmika Ha Samanya Kamkaru Samithiya_ (49). Once the employee's
past earnings and benefits have

413

been ascertained, they must be multiplied by the period from the date of the
final Order or Judgment. The Tribunal has to fix a "multiplier'': This is
fixed by answering the question for how many days, weeks, months or years,
from the date of the Order or Judgment, as the case may be, could the Tribunal
or Court reasonably expect the loss to continue?

This is a very troublesome question, for it involves uncertain, conjectural
and, in a sense, imponderable factors. As a result, there is, lamentably, yet
inevitably, a degree of speculation and a lack of desirable precision.
Nevertheless, in my view, the question must be answered with stated reasons. I
have already explained the need for this.

The usual date of retirement, and if there be evidence to show that it was
probable that his date of retirement would be extended, then that extended
date of retirement would, I think, represent the outside limit. The date of
retirement has been taken in some, decisions to be the relevant date up to
which the computation of future losses have been made. (e.g. see Raymond v.
Ponnusamy (Supra); _Sri Lanka Asbestos Products Ltd. v Tampoe_ (50);
_Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. v. Mervyn Perera_ (51)). It is a good
starting point. However, as Vythialingam, J. pointed in Ceylon Transport Board
v. Wijeratne (Supra) the usual date of retirement ought not to be
"mechanically" adopted. Vythialingam, J. was, it seems, unwilling to
automatically, in every case, use a period terminating with the age of
expected retirement because of the risks and vicissitudes of an employee's
life. His Lordship said "He may die. His services may be terminated for
misconduct or on account of retrenchment. The business may cease to exist or
close down."

While I respectfully agree that consideration should be given to the
possibility that the balance period may be reduced by death, closure of
business, retrenchment, resignation to seek other employment and so on, these
matters ought not to be merely mentioned and left, as it were, in the air. It
is not sufficient to recite a sort of litany of factors to which Presidents of
Labour Tribunals who are making computations are supposed to respond. The
matters to which they must respond, in

414

the circumstances relevant to the case before them, ought, for the reasons I
have given, be considered and decided upon and expressed.

To assume for certainty all the disadvantageous possibilities and to take no
account of the advantageous, seems hardly fair. Unless there are stated
reasons supported by evidence to arrive at such conclusions, I am of the view
that they run the risk of being described as arbitrary, and, therefore, being
set aside.

With regard to premature death, for example, why should the normal expectation
of life, officially announced from time to time by the Government's
statistical department, be ignored, in the absence of evidence to the contrary
in a specific case? There is no evidence in this case that the Petitioner is
in such a state of poor health that he is not likely to live up to the date of
normal retirement of 55 years, which is well below the national expectation of
life. I therefore assume that he would live up to the age of retirement, but I
do not take any period beyond that age into account, for there is no evidence
with regard to probable extensions of service.

What were the chances of retrenchment or the business of the Respondent
closing down before the Petitioner reached his age of retirement? If these
things were likely to happen, when were they likely to happen? And if it would
be reasonable to assume that they would happen by a certain date, would the
Petitioner have been entitled then to certain monetary benefits? If so to what
amount, for the figure computed for future loss must take that into account.
There is no evidence to show that the Respondent's business was likely to
close down or that the Petitioner would be retrenched before retirement: I,
therefore, hold that retrenchment and closure should not in this case be used
to discount the period for which future earnings should be computed.

Was it likely that the Petitioner would have resigned to seek other
employment? This is essentially a question of marketability. I have no
evidence of his academic or professional attainments. However, there

415

is evidence of his experience. This is in a limited area of activity. He
worked in the Private sector for twelve years and for the State Plantations
Corporation for seven years, managing plantations. He has then remained
unemployed. Having regard to local conditions, including the labour market, it
is unlikely that he will be able to obtain employment of a similar nature in
his particular job market. His name has now been cleared. But it took ten
years, through no fault of his own, to do so. He is now 45 years old and, in
my view it is unlikely that he will find alternative employment; even outside
the plantation sector, having failed to do so when he was younger.

In the circumstances of this case, I hold that the expected age of retirement.
55 years, should be regarded as indicating the date up to which prospective
loss ought to be calculated. There is evidence that the Petitioner is 45 years
old, but there is no evidence of his exact date of birth. The multiplier for
the purpose of computing prospective loss is, therefore, taken to be 120
months. Under this head, therefore, the Petitioner is entitled to receive Rs.
1295 multiplied by 120, i.e., Rs. 155,900.

There is no evidence with regard to the loss of retirement benefits, and
therefore, no compensation is awarded under that head. As the Employment
Appeal Tribunal observed in Adda International Ltd. v Curcia (52), "The
tribunal must have some thing to bite on and if an applicant produces nothing
for it to bite on, he will have only himself, to blame if he gets no
compensation".

This Court has considered it appropriate for Tribunals to take into account
the capacity of the employer to pay compensation, (e.g. see Beigama v. Co-
operative Wholesale Establishments (Supra); Ceylon Transport Board v.
Wijeratne (supra). This is in keeping with the general obligation that the
Tribunal must be fair by all parties, including the employer. (Cf. The
_Manager Nakiadeniya Group v. Lanka Estate Workers' Union_ (53); _Ceylon Tea
Plantations Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union_ (54); Somawathie v.
Baksons Textile Industries Ltd. (Supra). There is no evidence in this case
that the

416

Respondent has any difficulty in paying compensation, and I, therefore, do not
need to take that matter into account.

The future income of the Petitioner has been accelerated and ordinarily I
should award only the present value of that income. However in the absence of
evidence with regard to the appropriate rate of interest I should take into
account in ascertaining the present value of the future income due to the
Petitioner, I make no adjustment.

For the reasons stated in my Judgment, the Order of the Labour Tribunal and
the Judgment of the Court of Appeal are set aside. The Respondent shall on or
before 30 June 1991 pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 315,980 by way of
compensation and Rs. 10,000 as costs.

**DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree.  

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/22.html_  

