##  Chandra Kalyanie Perera and Another v. Captain Siriwardena and Others -
SLR - 251, Vol 1 of 1992 [1990] LKSC 22; (1992) 1 Sri LR 251 (9 July 1990)

**251**

**CHANDRA KALYANIE PERERA AND ANOTHER** **  
v.** **  
CAPTAIN SIRIWARDENA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 27/90  
30 AND 31 JANUARY, 1991

_     Fundamental Rights - Illegal arrest - Illegal detention - Emergency
Regulations 19(2), 18, 17, 24, 26, 27 and 28 \- Excessive detention under
Regulation 17 - Constitution, Articles 11, 13(1) and (2)._

The 1st petitioner is a married woman with three male children. She was
engaged in a transport business in Badulla District and owned several
vehicles. Her husband is a processing engineer at Abu Dhabi.

The list petitioner was detained on 29.1.90 under Regulation 19(2) of the
Emergency Regulations for alleged offences under Regulations 24, 27 and 28 at
Beragala Army Camp (where 1st respondent Capt. Siriwardena was the Commander)
until 12.03.90. Thereafter she was detained at the Badulla Police Station
until 11.04.1990 on which date she was transferred to the Badulla Prison. All
such detentions were imposed under Orders signed by the 6th respondent (Asst.
Superintendent of Police). Later on, the police forwarded to the 8th
respondent (Superintendent of Prisons, Badulla) a detention order under
Regulation 17(1) of the Emergency Regulations signed by the Secretary to the
State Minister for Defence bearing the date 01.04.1992. The 2nd petitioner who
is the eldest son of the 1st petitioner had been arrested along with her but
was released on 30.01.1990.

The events which culminated in the arrest of the petitioners are linked to the
murder of one Ratnasiri, a former driver of the 1st petitioner on or about
07.02.90 by a gang led by one Jinadasa said to be a well-known member of the
Janatha Vmukthi Peramuna (J.V.P.) and close associate of 1st petitioner, who
it is alleged supported the subversive activities of the J.VP by providing
funds. Ten days after the deceased driver Ratnasiri left the services of the
1st petitioner, her house was burgled and cash and jewellery worth Rs.
450,000% stolen.

The first petitioner complains of being manacled, beaten with a hose, hung by
her manacles and beaten until she confessed. In addition 1st respondent wanted
to have sex with her.

252

The 1st respondent had left the army on 04.08.1990 and gone abroad.

The impugned arrest had been made under Regulation 18(1) of the Emergency
Regulations.

**Held:**

(1) In terms of Article 13(1) of the Constitution, any arrest has to be
"according to the procedure established by law" and the person arrested has to
be informed of the reason for his arrest.

(2) The principles to be applied in determining the validity of an arrest are
as follows:

(a) It is not the duty of the Court to determine whether on the available
material the arrest should have been made or not. The question for the Court
is whether there was material for a reasonable officer to cause the arrest.

(b) Proof of the commission of an offence is not required. A reasonable
suspicion or a reasonable complaint of the commission of an offence suffices.
The test is an objective one. A suspicion is proved to be reasonable if the
facts disclose that it was founded or matters within the police officer's own
knowledge or on the statements made by other persons in a way which justify
him giving them credit.

(c) During a period of emergency, a wider discretion is vested in the police
in the matter of arrest as it would otherwise inhibit them from the due
performance of their duties which ensure the safety of the State and the
protection of the general public against armed attack or subversion.

The above principles would equally apply to an arrest by the army.

3\. The 2nd petitioner was arrested because he had accompanied his mother the
1st petitioner when she showed her deceased driver to Jinadasa. He was however
released on the next day, 30.01.1990. No order against the respondents in
respect of his arrest is therefore necessary.

4\. In justification of the arrest of the 1st petitioner, the State relies on
the bare statements in the affidavit of the 6th respondent (Asst.
Superintendent of Police, Badulla) that she was arrested for instigating the
murder of her driver by the J.V.P. and for assisting subversive activities.
They also rely on the statements of three persons, two of whom are self-
confessed accomplices to the murder of the driver. These statements have been
recorded after the filing of the present application and would not constitute
objective criteria for justifying 1st petitioner's arrest.

253

The only material relevant to the arrest has been produced by the 9th
respondent (one Mendis of Esco Tyre Traders, Bandarawela):

(i) the statement of the deceased driver's mother Julia Nona dated 20.2.89 to
the effect that the 1st petitioner had shown the deceased driver to an
unidentified man later identified as his killer;

(ii) the statement of one Kirthi dated 18.2.89, a former driver of the 1st
petitioner to the effect that she offered him money to murder a Buddhist Monk
(a professional charmer) with whom she had fallen out;

(iii) the statement of one Janaka dated 18.2.89, a former cleaner in the
service of the 1 st petitioner to the effect that she offered him money to
kill the 9th respondent with whom she was angry;

(iv) the 1st petitioner's own statement which shows that she had more intimate
knowledge of the man who killed her driver than she has disclosed in her
petition.

There was thus creditworthy material to arrest the 1st petitioner on suspicion
of being involved in an offence under the Emergency Regulations even though
such material may be insufficient to warrant a charge against her. Causing
death to any person with any weapon is an offence under Regulation 24(1)(b);
and even if the army failed to inform the 1st petitioner of such reason at the
moment of her arrest, they made it known to her immediately upon her arrival
at the army camp.

Therefore her arrest was lawful.

5\. (a) Detention in terms of Regulation 19(2) can be justified only if it is
for the purpose of search or further investigation. Even assuming the right to
detain the 1st petitioner for instigating the offence under Regulation 24,
there is no justification for detaining her for offences under Regulations 26,
27 and 28 which refer to sedition and incitement, display of slogans and
distribution of leaflets respectively: Although she was detained under
Regulation 19(2) for over two months the State has not furnished any evidence
of investigations carried out during that period.

Even for the detention until 11.4.90, in the Badulla Police Station, the State
has not produced proof of any investigations, during such detention. But the
1st petitioner's own statement shows that she had been closely examined on all
matters relevant to the murder. This constitutes investigation and the
detention under Regulation 19(2) can be justified.

Even though the detention can be justified, it is vitiated by the failure to
produce the 1st petitioner before a Magistrate not later than 30 days from the
arrest as

254

required by Regulation 19(1). Therefore the detention under Regulation 19(2)
was unlawful and violative of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

(b) Detention under Regulation 17(1) is to prevent the 1st petitioner from
acting in any manner prejudicial to the national security or the maintenance
of public order. No charges were framed against her presumably because there
was no evidence to establish the commission of any offence by her and hence
she was placed under preventive detention. Such detention can be validly
imposed even if no offence is proved, nor any charge formulated. The essential
concept of preventive detention is that the detention is not to punish the
person for something he has done but to prevent him from doing it. The basis
for detention is the satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable probability
of the likelihood of the detenu acting in a manner similar to his past acts
and preventing him by detention from doing so. A preventive detention order
under Regulation 17(1) is made on the subjective satisfaction of the
Secretary. However the power to make such an order is not unfettered. Where
the order is challenged, the Court is competent to consider whether the
Secretary did in fact form the requisite opinion by applying the test of
reasonableness in the broad sense. To enable the Court to do so, the grounds
for the order must be disclosed, even though the Court will not inquire into
the sufficiency of such grounds.

Although the Secretary has filed no affidavit disclosing the grounds for his
order, the affidavit of the 6th respondent and the other material indicate
that the said order was made in view of the 1st petitioner's association with
an alleged J.VP member who was responsible for her driver's murder. Hence the
Secretary was competent to make the order.

(c) In terms of Regulation 17(5) it is the duty of the Secretary to afford the
earliest possible opportunity to the detenue to make representations to the
President against the order and to ensure that he is informed of his right to
make representations to the Advisory Committee. Whilst there is no provision
in Regulation 17 for serving on a detenu, a copy of the detention order at the
time of his arrest, he should at least be informed of the fact of his arrest
on such order except where the exigencies of the case preclude it and a copy
of the order should be given to the detenu. In the instant case it is more
probable this was not done. A person's liberty cannot be deprived of in this
manner. The detention in such circumstances is unlawful.

Assuming the petitioner was lawfully detained from 1.4.90, her detention now
exceeds one year and is excessive and unlawful. An order under Regulation 17
is liable to be reviewed for excessiveness.

The petitioner can no longer be regarded as a threat to national security or
the maintenance of public order. Her continued detention is unlawful and
violative of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

255

6\. There is no doubt that the 1st petitioner was subjected to severe
interrogation and confrontation in the course of which she would have been
treated roughly and even insulted. But the acceptable evidence does not go
beyond and establish that degree of grave inhuman treatment which constitutes
an infringement of Article 11 of the Constitution.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Wijewardena v. Zain S.C. Application No. 202/87 - S.C. Minutes of
24.7.89.  
_  
_2\. Withanachchi v Cyril Herat, Leelaratne v Cyril Herat S.C. Nos 144-145/86
S.C. Minutes of 01.7.1988.  
_  
_3\. Joseph Perera v Attorney-General (1992) 1 Sri LR 199.  
_  
_4\. Gunasekera v. de Fonseka 75 NLR 246.  
_  
_5\. Muttusamy v. Kannangara 52 NLR 324, 327.  
_  
_6\. Yapa v. Bandaranayake (1988) 1 Sri LR 63, 73, 75.  
_  
_7\. Henry Perera v. Nanayakkara (1985) 2 Sri LR 374.  
_  
_8\. Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam (1985) 1 Sri LR 100, 118.  
_  
_9\. Rex v. Halliday (1917) AC 260, 269.  
_  
_10\. Vjaya Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe FRD Vol. 2 p. 347  
_  
_11\. Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herat S.C. 27/88 S.C. Minutes of 6.4.90  
_  
_12\. W. M. K. de Silva v Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation (1989) 2 Sri
LR 393, 400, 404, 405.  
_  
_13\. Nallanayagam v. Gunatilleke (1987) 1 Sri LR 293, 298._

**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Ran Banda Seneviratne with Miss Pushpa Waidyasekera and B. S. Amarasiri for
petitioners.  
_  
_R. Arasacularatne, S.S.C. with J. Jayasuriya, S.C. for 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th,
8th and 10th respondents.  
_  
_Peter Jayasekera with Sarath Liyanage and Miss Shanthi Karunasekera for 9th
respondent._

_Cur adv vult._

11th March, 1991.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

The 1st petitioner is a married woman with three male children of whom the 2nd
petitioner is the eldest son. At the time of her arrest by the army on
29.01.90 she was engaged in business in the Badulla district. She was a
private bus owner. She also owned a lorry, a pickup double cab, a van and a
car. Her husband is employed in Abudhabi as a processing engineer in an oil
installation. According to the affidavit of Captain Susantha Dhammika
Attanayake (6R10) she was initially detained pending investigations into
"alleged subversive connections".

The 1st petitioner was detained under Regulation 19(2) of the Emergency
Regulations for alleged offences under Regulations 24, 26, 27 and 28.
According to the respondents she was so detained at the Beragala army camp
until 12.03.90. Thereafter, she was detained at the Badulla Police Station
until 11.04.90 on which date she was transferred to the Badulla Prison. All
such detentions were imposed under orders signed by the 6th respondent (Asst.
Superintendent of Police). Later on, the police forwarded to the 8th
respondent (Superintendent of Prisons, Badulla) a detention order under
Regulation 17(1) of the Emergency Regulations signed by the Secretary to the
State Minister for Defence bearing the date 01.04.90. She continued to remain
in detention on this last order and at the time of the hearing of this
application she had completed one year of detention. The 2nd petitioner who
had been arrested along with the 1st petitioner was released on 30.01.90. The
petitioners have since filed this application for alleged infringements of
their fundamental rights under the Constitution.

It would appear that the events which culminated in the arrest of the
petitioners are linked to the murder of one Ratnasiri who had been employed by
the 1st petitioner as a driver, on or about 07.02.89 by a gang led by one
Jinadasa said to be a well-known member of the Janatha Vmukthi Peramuna. It is
alleged that the 1st petitioner was a close associate of Jinadasa and assisted
the J.V.P. in subversive activities by providing funds. A few days prior to
the murder, she had pointed out the house of the deceased to the murder
suspect Jinadasa. According to the deceased's mother Julia

257

Nona (9R3), at about 12.30 a.m. on 07.02.89 an armed gang came home and
removed the deceased. In the morning the deceased was found shot dead. The
case for the respondents has been presented in this background. However, the
case for the petitioners as set out by them is as follows.

In 1988, the petitioners were resident in Bandarawela. One day the deceased
driver left his employment with the 1st petitioner but he used to visit her.
Ten days after he left, her house was burgled by an armed gang. They removed
cash and jewellery worth Rs. 450,000/-. This was generally understood to be
the work of the J.V.P. This was in October, 1988. Later another person whom
she identifies as a brother of a Buddhist priest in a nearby temple approached
her and said he knew the burglars and that the deceased driver was an
accomplice; he also said that he would try and retrieve the goods and wanted
her to show the house of the driver. She says that "unsuspectingly" she showed
the driver's house to the said person; and sometime thereafter several persons
were found murdered in Bandarawela and among the dead bodies there was the
body of the said driver; and that the killings were attributed to the J.V.P.
and the cause was said to be burglaries committed by the dead in the name of
the J.V.P.

The 1st petitioner said thereafter she left Bandarawela and settled in Badulla
being apprehensive of the repetition of the incidents which occurred, viz. the
burglary and the murders; she also says that she feared the 9th respondent an
ex-army officer and the owner of a tyre shop who had become her enemy due to
her refusal to accede to his requests for intimacy and threatened to create
trouble using his connections. At Badulla she continued to ply her buses and
attended to her other business.

At about 10.30 p.m. on 29.01.90 when- she returned home she found that her
house has been surrounded by a group of army men led by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents. They arrested her and took her along with the 2nd petitioner to
the Bandarawela army camp. They also removed her car, 16 Sri 6612 Toyota
Corolla wagon. On the morning of 30.01.90 the said three respondents abused
the petitioners calling them murderers and questioned the 1st petitioner

258

about involvement in the murder of the driver. The 1st respondent said that he
had learnt from the 9th respondent that the 1st petitioner had hired an
assassin for Rs. 6000/- to murder the driver, which she denied. They began
assaulting her. The 2nd petitioner was also assaulted and was released and was
allowed to go home. She was manacled, beaten with a hose, hung by her manacles
and beaten until she agreed to confess. She was bleeding. She was then brought
down and her confession was recorded. That night the 1st respondent took her
and left her at the Bandarawela Police Station where she told the police
matron about her ill-treatment by the army and showed the injuries to Sub-
Inspector Mahanama.

Until 04.02.90 the 1st petitioner was being taken to the army camp for the day
and brought to the Police Station for the night. The 1st respondent suggested
to her from time to time that she has sex with him promising to end her
suffering; this she refused. On 05.02.90 she was brought to the Beragala army
camp where the 9th respondent visited several times. Whilst she was there one
Corporal Kapila apprehended the alleged murderer of her driver and brought him
to the camp. He made a confession but denied any involvement of the 1st
petitioner in the murder.

On 01.03.90 the mother of the deceased came to the Beragala camp and there at
the instigation of the 1st respondent assaulted the 1st petitioner with a
slipper all over her body; she developed a fever and was taken to the
Haletathenna hospital where she was treated by a doctor. On instructions given
at the camp she told the doctor that she had fallen from a staircase and
sustained injuries. About three days thereafter she was taken to the "torture
chamber" of the camp where she saw the murder suspect hung with his head
shaven; he was manacled and was dripping with blood; the 1st respondent beat
him with a hose and asked him to say that the 1st petitioner paid him Rs.
6000/- to kill the driver but the suspect said that the driver was killed as
he engaged in burglaries in the name of the J.V.P. and that the 1st petitioner
had nothing to do with. Ultimately the 1st respondent slapped her and sent her
back.

The petitioners also allege that while the 1st petitioner was in detention the
1st respondent with his men visited her house,

259

 threatened the caretaker one Mohideen and removed valuable articles and two
vehicles belonging to her, L 300 Delica van (unregistered) and Datsun pick-up
truck No. 27 Sri 420. An affidavit from Mohideen (P4) has been produced in
support of this allegation. As per documents Pla, P1b and P1c, the vehicle No.
27 Sri 420 has been returned by the army on 26.06.90. According to the
affidavit of the 1st petitioner's husband filed on 30.07.90 the L 300 Delica
van is presently unusable and is lying in the Diyatalawa army camp whilst the
Toyota Corolla wagon No. 16 Sri 6612 (which was taken at the time of the
petitioners' arrest) is being used by Brigadier Abeyratne at Diyatalawa.

Captain Attanayake in his affidavits (6R10, 6R12) states that the 1st
respondent (Captain Siriwardena) who was the Commanding Officer of the
Beragala camp during the relevant period left the army on 04.08.90. As regards
the 2nd and 3rd respondents he states that there were no persons answering to
their descriptions attached to the Beragala army camp. At the hearing of this
application the learned Senior State Counsel complained that the 1st
respondent left the country on 28.08.90; he has gone to Switzerland; and hence
the only person who could speak to the arrest is not available. However,
notice of this application had been despatched to the 1st, 2nd and 3rd
respondents by registered post through the 4th respondent (The Commander of
the Army) on 25.07.90; the matter was fixed for 29.08.90 for argument; and no
reason has been given as to why he has failed to file his objections before he
left the country. Even thereafter it could not have been beyond the resources
of the State to have traced him but the State does not appear to have made any
attempts thereat; instead they have relied upon Captain Attanayake (who was
the second in command at the Beragala army camp during the relevant period) to
answer the allegations. As such, I see no merit in the explanation of the
S.S.C.

Leave to proceed was granted to the petitioners for alleged infringements of
Articles 11 and 13 of the Constitution. I shall first consider the validity of
the arrest. The petitioners have failed to file this application within one
month of the arrest but the Counsel for the State very properly did not object
to it on the ground of the bar under Article 126(2) of the Constitution in
view of the fact that having regard

260

to the conditions of the 1st petitioner's detention, they were not free to
have recourse to this Court until the filing of this application. It is clear
from the detention orders 6R2, 6R3 and 6R4 that the impugned arrest had been
made under Regulation 18(1) of the Emergency Regulations which provides inter
alia that any member of the Sri Lanka Army may arrest without a warrant any
person whom he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in or to
have committed any offence under Emergency Regulations. In terms of Article
13(1) of the Constitution any arrest has to be "according to the procedure
established by law" and the person arrested has to be informed of the reason
for his arrest.

In _Wijewardena v. Zain_ (1) the principles to be applied in determining the
validity of an arrest under Regulation 18(1) have been summarised thus:

"As held in _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herat, Leelaratne v. Cyril Herat_ (2) it is
not the duty of the Court to determine whether on the available material the
arrest should have been made or not. The question for the Court is whether
there was material for a reasonable officer to cause the arrest.

Proof of the commission of the offence is not required; a reasonable suspicion
or a reasonable complaint of the commission of an offence suffices. The test
is an objective one. Joseph _Perera v. Attorney-General_ (3) _Gunasekera v. de
Fonseka_ (4). A suspicion is proved to be reasonable if the facts disclose
that it was founded on matters within the police officer's own knowledge or on
the statements made by other persons in a way which justify him giving them
credit _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (5). See also _Yapa v Bandaranayake_ (6) ".

There is also the consideration that during a period of emergency a wider
discretion is vested in the police in the matter of arrest as it would
otherwise inhibit them from the due performance of their duties which ensure
the safety of the State and the protection of the general public against armed
attack or subversion - Joseph Perera v. Attorney-General (supra) per
Wanasundera, J. The above principles would equally apply to an arrest by the
army.

261

Now the allegation is that the army arrested both petitioners. The 6th
respondent in his affidavit which is supplemented by several annexes including
an affidavit of Captain Attanayake admits the arrest of the 1st petitioner. He
denies the allegation of torture but does not deny the arrest of the son, the
2nd petitioner. I therefore regard his arrest as proved. Neither the police
nor the army has preferred any allegation of subversive connections against
him. However, in 9134, the statement of Julia Nona dated 20.02.89 produced by
the 9th respondent (Mendis), there is reference to the 1st petitioner's eldest
son as having accompanied her on the day she showed the deceased driver to the
suspect Jinadasa. It is possible that the said information was available to
the army and this led to the arrest of the 2nd respondent. However, he was
released forthwith, there being no material to justify further proceedings
against him. In the circumstances, I do not think it necessary to make any
order against the respondents on account of his arrest.

In justification of the arrest of the 1st petitioner, the State relies on the
bare statements in the affidavit of the 6th respondent that she was arrested
for instigating the murder of her driver by the J.V.P. and for assisting
subversive activities. They also rely on the statements of three persons. Two
of them are self-confessed accomplices to the murder of the driver who claim
to have heard from the killer Jinadasa that the murder was committed at the
request of the 1st petitioner. The other person states that he accompanied the
1st petitioner on the day she took the killer and showed him the driver. All
these statements have been recorded after the filing of this application and
hence would not constitute objective criteria for justifying the 1st
petitioner's arrest.

Quite ironically, the only material relevant to the arrest has been produced
by the 9th respondent, Mendis defending himself against the allegation that he
was responsible for the impugned arrest and detention. This consists of -

(a) 9R4, the statement of Julia Nona dated 20.02.89 referred to above to the
effect that the 1st petitioner had shown the deceased driver to an unknown man
later identified as his killer;

262

(b) 9R5, the statement of one Kirthi dated 18.02.89. He had been employed as a
driver in the transport service of the 1st petitioner and says that she
offered him money to murder a Buddhist monk (a professional charmer) with whom
she had fallen out;

(c) 9R6, the statement of one Janaka dated 18.02.89. He had been employed as a
cleaner under the 1st petitioner and says that she offered him money to kill
the 9th respondent with whom she was angry.

These statements have been recorded by the Bandarawela Police in the course of
investigations into the murder of the driver.

The 9th respondent admits the existence of enmity between him and the 1st
petitioner but denies that he instigated her arrest. He alleges that she was
out to harm him. It is his case based on the above statements that she is a
person of violent disposition. In confirmation he has also produced 9R7, the
1st petitioner's own statement dated 25.03.90 recorded by the Bandarawela
Police. 9R7 shows that she had a more intimate knowledge of the man who killed
her driver which she has failed to disclose in her petition. She told the
police that he is the brother of Reverend Nandawimala of Asokaramaya; that on
the request of the monk she met him at a place close to his boutique in
Karagahawela when he promised to help her to recover the valuables which were
burgled from her house; and that at the Beragala army camp she learnt that he
is one Jinadasa.

It is probable that sooner or later such information surrounding the murder of
the 1st petitioner's driver had reached the army who were engaged in anti-
subversive activities in the area. Their conduct in treating the 1st
petitioner as a "murderer" from the moment of her arrest confirms this. It
therefore seems to me that there was credible material to arrest the 1st
petitioner, on suspicion of being concerned in an offence under Emergency
Regulations even though such material may be insufficient to warrant a charge
against her. Causing death to any person with any weapon is an offence under
Regulation 24(1)(b); and even if the army failed to inform the 1st petitioner
of such reason at the moment of her arrest, they made it known to her

263

immediately upon her arrival at the army camp. In these circumstances, I hold
that her arrest is lawful and is not violative of Article 13(1) of the
Constitution.

The next question is the validity of the impugned detention. It is the
respondent's position that until 11.04.90 she was detained first at the
Beragala army camp and thereafter at the Badulla Police Station on orders made
by the 6th respondent in terms of Regulation 19(2) for offences under
Regulations 24, 26, 27 & 28\. However, the petitioner states that until
05.02.90 she was kept at the Bandarawela army camp by day and Police Station
by night. Even if this were not correct, the more relevant question is whether
her detention for the alleged offences is justified. Such detention can be
justified only if it is for the purpose of search or further investigation.
_Henry Perera v. Nanayakkara_ (7) In view of the murder of the driver the
invocation of Regulation 24 can be justified. The said murder had occurred on
07.02.89 and hence the police had ample time to investigate it or to make an
arrest. Nevertheless, I shall, in all the circumstances, assume the right of
the law-enforcing officers to arrest and detain the 1st petitioner even at a
later stage, for investigating the offence under Regulation 24. However, I see
no justification for detaining her for offences under Regulations 26, 27 and
28 which refer to sedition and incitement, display of slogans and distribution
of leaflets respectively.

Although she was detained under Regulation 19(2) for over two months the State
has not furnished any evidence of investigations carried out during that
period. As regards her detention upto 12.03.90 at the Beragala army camp, the
only available information furnished by the State is the bare statement of
Captain Attanayake that she was so detained pending investigations into
"subversive connections". However, the 1st petitioner gives an account of what
transpired in that camp in support of which she relies on the affidavits of
Lurdu Mary (Matron) and Nandawathie another detainee (P4, P5). According to
her, she had been questioned regarding the murder of her driver. Thereafter,
she was transferred to the Badulla Police Station where she remained until
11.04.90, on which date she was transferred to the Badulia Prison. Once again,
the State has not produced proof of any investigations during such detention.
However, it is clear from her statement 9R7 that during that period she had

264

been closely examined on all matters relevant to the murder. This constitutes
investigation. As such the detention under Regulation 19(2) can be justified.

Even though the said detention can be so justified, it is vitiated by the
failure to produce the 1st petitioner before a Magistrate not later than
thirty days from the arrest as required by Regulation 19(1). As Wanasundera,
J. said in _Edirisuriya v. Navaratnam_ (8)

"Such a requirement is always considered a salutary provision to ensure the
safety and protection of arrested persons. It is more than a mere formality or
an empty ritual, but is generally recognised by all communities committed to
the Rule of Law as an essential component of human rights and fundamental
freedoms".

The learned Counsel for the petitioners complained without contradiction by
the State that the 1st petitioner was never produced before a Magistrate.
Accordingly, I hold her detention under Regulation 19(2) to be unlawful and
violative of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

According to the 6th respondent, the detention orders made by him was followed
by a detention order under Regulation 17(1) made on his recommendations. This
was to prevent the 1st petitioner acting in any manner prejudicial to the
national security or the maintenance of public order. No charges were framed
against her presumably because there was no evidence to establish the
commission of any offence by her and hence she was placed under preventive
detention. Such detention can be validly imposed even if "no offence is
proved, nor any charge formulated" _Rex v. Halliday_ (9) Shukla in "The
Constitution of India" 7th Ed. 134 states

"The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of a
person is not to punish him for something he has done but to prevent him from
doing it. The basis for detention is the satisfaction of the executive of a
reasonable probability of

265

the likelihood of the detenu acting in' a manner similar to his past acts and
preventing him by detention from doing' so".

(See also _Vijaya Kumaranatunga v. Samarasinghe_ (10) FRD(2) 347, Yapa
v.Bandaranayake(supra)).

A preventive detention order under Regulation 17(1) is made on the subjective
satisfaction of the Secretary. However, the power to make such order is not
unfettered. Thus where the order is challenged the Court is competent to
consider whether the Secretary did in fact form the requisite opinion by
applying the test of reasonableness in the broad sense. To enable the Court to
do so, the grounds for the order must be disclosed, even though the Court will
not inquire into the sufficiency of such grounds. _Wickremabandu v. Cyril
Herat_ (11) .

In, the instant case, there is no' affidavit from the Secretary disclosing the
grounds for his order. However, the affidavit of the 6th respondent and the
other material indicate that the said order was made in view of the 1st
petitioner's association with an alleged J.V.P. member who was responsible for
her driver's murder. I am therefore satisfied that the Secretary was competent
to make the order; but the learned Counsel for the 1st petitioner, relying on
certain official entries on the detention order, alleges that there was no
such order at the place of detention and the 1st petitioner was not shown any
such order; that it has been sent there after the filing of this application
on 06.07.90. On that basis, he submits that the 1st petitioner's detention is
unlawful. This is a serious allegation which the Court must consider. The
following facts are relevant in this connection.

(a) The order 6R7 is dated 01.14.90. However; the 8th respondent informed this
Court on 17.07.90 that the 1st petitioner was first produced before the Prison
Authority by-the Badulla Police on 11.04.90 along with 'the order 6R4 made by
the 6th respondent; and that later the police sent the order 6R7. The 8th
respondent has not filed any affidavit in particular for clarifying the actual
date on which the said order was received; nor is there any explanation in the
matter either from the 6th respondent or from the Secretary.

266

(b) There appears on the face of 6R7 an official date stamp for 09.07. It has
the words "" which indicates its receipt at the prison on 9th July.

(c) In her affidavit, the 1st petitioner states that she was never shown the
detention order. The 6th respondent denies this but has not adduced any proof
that the order was shown to her.

In terms of Regulation 17(5) it is the duty of the Secretary to afford the
earliest possible opportunity to the detenu to make representations to the
President against the order and to ensure that he is informed of his right to
make representations to the Advisory Committee. Particularly for that reason
this Court has, in the case of Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herat (supra), expressed
the view that whilst there is no provision in Regulation 17 for serving on a
detenu a copy of the detention order at the time of his arrest, the detenu
should at least be informed of the fact of his arrest on such order except
where the exigencies of the case preclude it; and that a copy of the order
should be given to the detenu. In the instant case, it is more probable than
not that this has not been done; I am satisfied that the order was not sent to
the prison until 09.07.90. I do not think it to be the law that a person's
liberty can be deprived of in that manner. I therefore hold that the 1st
petitioner's detention in such circumstances is unlawful.

Assuming that the 1st petitioner was lawfully detained from 01.04.90 on 6R7, I
am of the view that her detention which now exceeds one year is excessive and
hence unlawful. Her detention has been continued from month to month by virtue
of the provisions of S.2A of the Public Security Ordinance (Cap. 40) which
provides that where a further proclamation is made under S.2(2) inter alia
every order made under any Emergency Regulation and in force prior to such
regulation "shall be deemed to be in force" with the coming into operation of
such further proclamation.

An order under Regulation 17 is liable to be reviewed by this Court for
excessiveness. Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herat (supra). On the basis of the
available material, it seems to me that the 1st petitioner's association with
Jinadasa who is alleged to be a member of the J.V.P.

267

was motivated more by her anxiety to recover the property burgled from her
house than any desire to assist subversive activity. She was herself a victim
of the unsettled conditions in the area. She is a business woman. There is no
evidence of any political or ideological links between her and the subversive
movement. Viewed in that light her motive for flirting with Jinadasa is very
much personal. The only statements which allege general support by her to the
J. V. P. are those of two self-confessed assassins recorded after the filing
of this application. Even they do not speak from personal knowledge but repeat
remarks attributed to Jinadasa their leader that she had funded the J. V. P.
Further, no explanation has been given for the delay in recording the
statements under reference. As such, I am unable to rely on these statements.

Thus it is on the basis of her limited involvement with an alleged J. V. P.
man that the 1st petitioner's detention may be justified. In the meantime her
Bandarawela residence had been burgled. She says that her Badulla residence
was ransacked and vehicles removed. She has languished in prison long. I do
not think that she could any longer be regarded as being a threat to national
security or the maintenance of public order and be detained on that ground.
Accordingly, I determine her continued detention to be unlawful and violative
of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

The next question is the alleged infringement of Article 11. The 1st
petitioner's statement 9R7 produced by the 9th respondent substantially
corroborates her version on all matters except on the alleged involvement of
the 9th respondent and the nature of the ill treatment by the army. It
supports her position that the suspect Jinadasa had been apprehended and was
brought to the army camp where he was tortured. I accept her statement that
Jinadasa had been arrested and brought to the camp and that he was
interrogated there. It is difficult to accept the respondent's version that
Jinadasa who appears to be a well-known man was not arrested.

In support of the allegation of inhuman treatment, the 1st petitioner produced
an affidavit from the matron Lurdu Mary and Nandawathie,

268

a J.V.P. detainee. In a subsequent affidavit which Lurdu Mary has given to the
respondents she has gone back on the first affidavit. I am unable to rely on
Nandawathie's affidavit in view of her antecedents. The 1st petitioner's own
statement 9R7 only states that the army assaulted her during the
interrogation. No further details of the alleged inhuman treatment appear. She
also states that the deceased driver's mother slapped her in the presence of
Captain Siriwardena. It is possible that such assault was inflicted by an
enraged mother on her own and not necessarily at the behest of Captain
Siriwardena. There is no doubt that the 1st petitioner was subjected to severe
interrogation and confrontation in the course of which she would have been
treated roughly and even insulted; but the acceptable evidence does not go
beyond and establish that degree of grave inhuman treatment which constitutes
an infringement of Article 11 of the Constitution. See Mrs. W. M. K. de Silva
v. Chairman, C _eylon Fertilizer Corporation_ (12). I hold that the alleged
infringement of Article 11 has not been established.

Finally I turn to the alleged taking of the 1st petitioner's vehicles by the
army. The petitioners state that the car No.16 Sri 6612 was taken on 29.10.90.
L 300 Delica van (unregistered) and vehicle No. 27 Sri 420 were removed while
she was in detention. The last of three vehicles has been returned by the
army. However, the other two vehicles are still with the army. The respondents
have not denied these allegations; nor have they sought to justify the
requisitioning of these vehicles. I am therefore satisfied that the army had
removed them and that the 1st petitioner is entitled to recover the same.

The allegation that the 9th respondent instigated the arrest and detention of
the 1st petitioner has not been established. Accordingly an order against him
is not justified. The application against him is accordingly dismissed without
costs.

On the question of relief arising upon the infringement of Article 13(2), in
one case where the unlawful detention was under Regulation 19(2) of the
Emergency Regulations, this Court granted a sum of Rs. 5,000/- for three days
of unlawful detention. _Nallanayagam v. Gunatilleke_ (13).

269

"Article 13(2) embodies a salutary principle safeguarding the life and liberty
of the subject and must be exactly complied with by the executive. In our view
this provision cannot be overlooked or dismissed as of little consequence or
as a minor matter".

In _Withanachchi v. Cyril Herat, Leelaratne_ v. Cyril Herat (supra), another
case of unlawful detention under Regulation 19(2) there were two detainees.
One of them who had been detained for 46 days was granted Rs. 10,000/- whilst
the other who had been detained for 46 days was granted Rs. 25,000/-.

In Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herat (supra), the detention was under Regulation
17(1). This Court. held that a- period of 4 months detention was excessive and
granted Rs. 15,000/- as compensation taking into consideration the fact that
inter alia the impugned detention had been affected in the background of a
widespread insurrection.

The question of relief would depend on the facts and circumstances of each
case. In the instant case, I have held the detention to be unlawful in respect
of orders made under Regulations 17(1) and 19(2). I take into consideration
the suffering the 1st petitioner had to undergo during her incarceration for
over one year which is vitiated by serious non-compliances. The 6th respondent
is responsible for such non-compliances for which the State becomes liable. I
think it just and equitable to grant her compensation in a sum of Rs. 20,000/-
(Rupees Twenty Thousand) and a further sum of Rs. 2000/- (Rupees Two Thousand)
as costs, payable by the State. I direct that the payment be made accordingly.
I also direct the 8th respondent to release the 1st petitioner from detention
and the 4th respondent to return to her the two vehicles which are with the
army.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/22.html_  

