##  Dayawathie and Peiris v. Dr. Fernando, S.D.M. and Others - SLR - 314, Vol
2 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 22; (1988) 2 Sri LR 314 (12 December 1988)

**

314

DAYAWATHIE AND PEIRIS  
v.  
DR. S. D. M. FERNANDO AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
JAMEEL, J.  
M. FERNANDO, J.- AND.  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 4/88 Spl.  
S.C APPLICATION NO. 5/88 Spl.  
OCTOBER 18, 19, 26 and 27, 1988.

_

Contempt of Court - Disobedience to judgment of Court -Compromise after
judgment - Relevance, of obtaining legal advice. \- Bona, fides, -, Standard
of proof - Apology .

_

Miss. Dayawathie and Mrs. Peiris were nurses in Government Service. They along
with several nurses had been excluded from selection to follow a Basic
Training Course for promotion n on Me", ground that they by doing on strike
had defied an essential services order made under the Public Security
Ordinance. These nurses filed. application No. 37/88 in the Supreme Court
alleging discrimination and Supreme to their fundamental right of equality. On
25.4.1988 the Supreme Court: made order setting aside the selections already
made and directing fresh selections to be made on the basis of the marks
obtained at the examination_ without any disqualification on the ground of
trade union action between 18.3. 1986 and 17.4.1986.

Immediately upon the, passing of-this order the 1st respondent (Secretary to
the' Ministry of Health) suspended the training course which by then had been
begun on 1.4.1987 and been under way for 13 months' With only I or 4 months to
go. The, 1st respondent also prepared 2 fists one listing those wrongly
included and already following the course and the other listing those eligible
on the bait of the Supreme Court Order. Further on 27.4.88 the respondents
filed a motion: seeking clarification from the Supreme. Court. -The matter of
this

**315**

motion was mentioned in Court on 9.5.1988 and on 6.6:1988, the court stated it
was functus and merely recorded the submissions. On 1.6.1988 a course was
started for those eligible in terms of the S. C. order but who had not been
selected for the course '.begun on 1.4.1987. On 6.6.1988 a purported agreement
was filed in court.

By this agreement both parties were satisfied that a new, course had been
started for those eligible but earlier left out and both groups i.e. the group
already following the course due to end in about 3 months and the group that
began their training on 1.6.1988 would sit one common examination.

The petitioners then sought an order of Court that the agreement to continue
the old course did not permit inclusion of those who did not have the
requisite marks but this controversy was left unresolved and on 16:6.1.988 the
court terminated the proceedings thus leaving its original order intact and
having on record the agreement of 6-6.1988.

The petitioners" Attorney-at-law wrote a letter to the 1st respondent
threatening contempt proceedings. The 1st respondent always sought the advice
of the D. S. G. which finally (on 16.6.88) was that there is no objection to
proceeding with the first course which was suspended which included, nurses
who were substituted in place of those dropped owing to trade union activity.
On the basis of this advice the 1st respondent directed the Director-General
Health Services to commence the old course from 20.6.88.

Thereafter on 8.7.1988 Miss Dayawathie filed S.C. Application 4/88 and Mrs.
Peiris S.C. Application 5/88 moving the court to deal with-the respondents
(1st respondent Secretary. Ministry of Health, 2nd respondent Director-General
of Health Services and 3rd respondent Principal of the Basic Training School)
for contempt by acting in defiance of and wilfully refusing to obey the order
and judgment of the court. The petitioners alleged that the respondents were
trying to circumvent the court order and they had acted with a dishonest and
collateral motive viz to further the prospects of those nurses who had not
gone on strike and to penalise- those who had struck work. The two cases were
consolidated and, heard together.

**

Held:

**

(1) The ' Court had firstly set aside" the selections and thus prohibited the
`continuation of the training course` for persons- held to be disqualified and
secondly directed fresh selections to be made Without any disqualification,
for trade union action.

The order was (a) partly declaratory in-nature in that  it formally announced
that the petitioners had been discriminated against and set aside-the
selections: (b) partly mandatory in that it gave, directions and instructions
to make fresh

**316**

selections on the basis of marks obtained; (c) partly prohibitory in that it
ordered the respondents to refrain from disqualifying those who participated
in trade union action between specified dates:

Of the order it was part (a) that was disregarded and gave rise to these
proceedings.

(2) The respondents understood the order of court perfectly well and made new
lists of those eligible but in re-commencing the course for all those who had
been selected earlier regardless of whether they were qualified or not in
terms of the order of Court, there is no doubt that they disobeyed the order
of court.

(3) There is a difference between disobedience to injunctions and undertakings
given to court and disobedience' to a declaratory order or a judgment or
decree of court.

In the former case there is strict liability. Where the order is coercive
every diligence must be exercised to observe it to the letter. In such
circumstances there is no need to show that the person charged with contempt
was intentionally contumacious or that he intended to interfere with the
administration of justice. Unless the act was accidental, casual. or done
unintentionally. it is culpable. .

In the latter case mere disobedience without more is insufficient. A party
cannot sacrifice his right of appeal nor is it permissible to obtain execution
in the guise of contempt proceedings. Where the law expressly provides for the
execution of decrees contempt proceedings cannot be resorted to. In the latter
type of disobedience the contemner should have acted in defiance of the order
or wilfully refused to obey it. Deliberate disdain of the court or a disregard
for or defiance of the court and its decree is required:

(4) Notwithstanding the judgment entered. in a civil case it is permissible
for the parties to enter into a compromise of their rights under the decree.

(5) Even if a contempt is not a crime it bears a criminal character and it
must be satisfactorily proved, that is, beyond reasonable doubt.

(6) The plea that the act was done after obtaining legal advice is not
conclusive, but it may be a mitigatory factor and relevant in certain
circumstances to prove bona fides.

(7) As soon as the court gave its decision the course was stopped and a fresh
course was arranged for those who were qualified but dropped for their trade
union activities. Being in doubt as to whether the order of the court
permitted continuation of the old course for the entire old batch
clarification was

**317**

sought  but the court declined intervention declaring itself, functus. ;A
compromise of ambiguous connotation was recorded. The respondents sought the
advice of the Deputy Solicitor General and acted in terms of his advice. The
acts of the respondents were wilful in the sense that, they were not casual;
accidental or unintentional. But there was no conscious or deliberate
disregard of the order of the Court. Their conduct' does no savour of contempt
or favour the drawing of, an inference of mala fides or improper or collateral
motivation. The respondents did not act defiantly. They acted erroneously
owing to a misapprehension of what they were entitled to do. Hence they were
not guilty of contempt.

(8) Regarding the question that no apology was tendered the law' is that an
apology must be offered at the earliest possible opportunity. A late apology
will not show contrition which is the essence of the purging of a contempt Yet
a man may-stake his all on proving he is not in contempt and may take the
risk. The respondents ran the gauntlet of such risk and fairly succeeded.

**

Cases referred to

** _

1\. Re Young and Marston 31 Ch. D. 174

2\. Elliot v. Furner 13 Sim 485

3\. Wheeler v. New Merton Board Mill (1932) 2 KB 669

4\. Lomas v. Peate (1947) 2 All E0574, 57E

5\. Gayford v Chouler (1898) 1 QB 316

6\. Edgyll v Alward (1902) 2 KB 239

7\. Sibery v Connolly 94, L T. 198

8\. Whitchead v. Reader (1901) 2 KB 48

9\. OReilly v Drayman 25 LJ KB 492

10\. Stancombe G. Towbridge, Urban District Council (1910.) 2 Ch D-387:; 11.
A. G. v. Walthamstowe 1 TLR 533

12\. Lewis v. Newport Railway Co. et al 55 TLR- 203 13. Stenier v. Steiner
(1966) 2 All ER 387

14\. The Mileage Conference Case (1982)-2. All ER (HL) 532 (16) 1981 2 All ER
QBD (CA) 349

15\. Home Office v. Harman (1982)1 All ER (HL) 532: (16)

16\. Home Office v. Harman (1981) .2 All ER (CA) 349

17\. Heatons Transport (1972) 3 All ER HL 1101

_

**318**

_

18\. Worthington v. Ad Lib Club (1954) 3 All ER 674: 68.3

19\. The Rena Case (1961)3 All ER 428

20 Knight v. Clifton (1971) 2 AII ER 379,381

21\. Odhams Case (1956) 3 AII ER 494

22\. In re Bramblevale (1969) 3 All ER 1012: (1969) 3 WLR 1062, 1063.

23\. Comet Products U.K. Ltd. V Hawkrs Plastics Ltd. (1971) 1 All ER 1.141

24\. R v.. Senior (1899) 1 OR 289

25\. High Wycombe Corp. v. River Thames Development Contractor (1898) 781T.463

26\. Smith v Wemis Coal Co. Lid. (1972) 27 BWCC 483

27\. Wheeler v. New Merton Board Mills Ltd. (1933) 2 KB 669 CA

28\. Caldwell v. Canadian National Railways (1940) 3 WWR 24 29. Goodman v. R
(1951-2) 2 W W R 12 7

30\. Babington v.. Inland Revenue Commissioners (1958) NZLR 152 31. Jakson v.
Butterworth (1945) 3 AITR 294

32\. Re East India Dock Junction RailwayAct er parte Bradshaw. (1848) 16 Sim
174

33\. O'Sullvain v. Harford (1936) SQSR 115

34\. Abdul Kareen v. Prakash AIR 1976 SC 859, 866

35\. Sathyandra Nath Mithra v. Supdt. of Police AIR 1963 Cal 336

36\. Sahakari Sonstha v. State of Maharanhtra 1977 Cri LJ 1809. 1815. 1816.
1817

37\. Prakash Chand v. Grewal 1975.Cr LR 679. 684 to 686, 688 ,

38\. Roy v. State of Orissa AIR 1960 S.C. 190: 1960 Cr U.282

39\. Kar v. Chief Justice of Orissa AIR 1961 SC 1367

40\. Mottur Hajee v. Dy. Commissioner. Tan 'Officer AIR 1967 Mad 232

41\. Debabrata v. The State of West Bengal AIR 1969 S.C. 189, 193

42\. Ragunath Rai v. Satrai 1968 G. L. J. 704, 706. 707. 708

43\. Ismail v. Ismail (1920) 22 NLR 190.'191

44\. De Alwis v. Rajakaruna (1964) 68 NLR 180

45\. !n re Cader (1963) 68 NLR 293

_

**319**

_

46\. Arumugam v.. Karirgampillai (1963) 68 NLR 506

47\. Velayuthan v.. Hon. A.C.A. Alles 75 NLR 268

48\. Gunaratne v. People's Bank (1986) 1 Sri LR 338

49\. Ganeshanathan v. Vivienne Goonewardena and three others (1984) 1 Sri LR
319

50\. Reginald Perera v. The King (1951) 52 NLR 293. 296 (P.C.).

51\. Reg. v. Gray (1900) 2 08036

52\. Webster v. Southwork London Borough Council (1983) 2 WLR 217, 222, 223,
224.

53\. Seaward v. Peterson (1897) 1 Ch 545. 554

54\. Amarasekera v. Gunawardena (1914) 1 Bal N.C. 52, 53 '

55\. In the matter of a Rule on A. F. Molamure (1 935) 37 NLR 33

56\. Silva v. Appuhamy (1990) 4 NLR 178

57\. Eastern Trust Co. v. Mckenzie Mann & Co. Ltd. AIR 1915 P.C. 106(2)

58\. De Alwis v. Rajakaruna (1984) 68 NLR 180

59\. In re P. K. Ensa (1954) 62 NLR 509. 51 1

60\. Hardinge v. Tingey (1864) 12 WR 684

61\. Hewith Transport v. Transport and General Workers' Union 1973 1 CR 10

62\. Perera Y. Abdul Hamid (1931) 1 CLW 14 7.

63\. Knight v Clifton (1971) 2 All ER 378. 393

64\. Stancombe v. Towbridge U D .C. (1910) 2 Ch 190. 194

65\. Heaton's Transport (St. 'Helens) Ltd. v. Transport and General Workers'
Union (1972)-3 All ER 101, 116.1.17-,

66\. Fairolough & Sons v. Manchester Ship Canal (No. 2) (1897) 41 Sol Jo. 225

67\. Gian Chand Bali v L. P. Singh (1968) Delhi LT 135.

68\. Badoordeen v. Dingiri Banda et al (1931) 1 CLW 74

69\. P. A. Thomas & Co. v. Mould (1968) 1 'All ER 963

70\. Re agreement of the Mileage Conference group. of the Tyre Manufacturer
Conference Ltd: (1966) 2 All ER 849, 862

71\. Gopal Bosl v. State of Bihar AI R 1969 Patna 72

_

**320**

_

72\. Re the Agreement between the Newspaper Proprietors Association Ltd and
the national Federation of Retail Newsagents, Booksellers and Stationers
(1961) 3ALL ER 428, 445

73\. In the matter of a Rule issued under Section 47 of the Courts Ordinance.

_ **

APPLICATIONS** for rule nisi 'on respondents to show cause against being
punished for contempt of court.

_

H. L. de Silva P. C. with H. Wittanachchi and Miss. N. Gunawardena for
applicant in application No. 4/88 Spl.

E. D. Wickremanayake with K. S. Tillakaratne and Miss. N. Gunawardene for the
applicant in application No. 5/88 Spl.

k. N. Choksy AC. with  Perera and Britto - Muttenayagam for 1 to 3 respondents
in both applications.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

December 12, 1988 **  
JAMEEL, J

**

The same three Respondents have been named by the two Applicants, in the two
Applicants in the **two** cases. Each  similar result, namely, the conviction
of all three Respondents for contempt of this court account of their,
disobedience to the judgment of this court, in Case No. Appln. 37/87. K. K.
Dayawathie et. al. vs S. D., M. Fernando.

In this Case No. 37/87 which was an application under Articles 17 and 126 of
the Constitution -the present applicant in St. 4/88 was the 1st Petitioner
while the present applicant in S.C. 5/88 was the 5th Petitioner, The 1st
Respondent in that Case No. 37/87 is the 1st Respondent in both cases before
us today.

The aforesaid Case No. 37/Q7. had been filed to rectify, a situation that,
arose as a result of the several Petitioners in that Case not being treated
equally with other nurses and of being discriminated against in respect of
selection to follow the Post Basic

Training Course.

**321**

Nurses from Class 11 had to be selected to undergo a course of training for
promotion to Grade 1: There were a limited number of vacancies in that grade.
The selection was on two criteria, namely,' Seniority and Limited Competitive
Examination. There were-vacancies for Grade 1 Sisters in the wards as well as
in the Public Health Service.

In that case No. 37/87 the court held on 25.4.1988 (Judgment produced, marked
"X') that there had been unequal treatment in the selections made in respect
of the course which had started on 1.4.1987. By its judgment the court made
order directing, -

"That all selections made for the said Training Course - as for instance set
out in 'P10' and "P1 1" - as Grade 1 Nursing Officers (Hospital Services) be
and the same are hereby set aside: That fresh selections: be made on the basis
of the marks obtained by those who presented themselves for the examination
(including the - Petitioners and the Added Petitioners) without any
disqualification being imposed upon them on the "ground of participation in
any Trade Union action between 18.3.1986 and -17.4.1986." .

According to the Affidavit filed by the 1st Respondent in both these Cases
Nos. 4/88 and 5/88 there had been 175 (should read 173) vacancies for the said
Training Course. Of these, 64 were to be selected as Ward Sisters on the,
basis of Seniority, and 46 on the basis' of a Limited. Competitive
Examination. The balance 43 were to be selected for training as Public Health
Sisters but on the basis of a Limited Competitive Examination.

The present Petitioners concede that as a result of the Judgment in S.C.
37/88, which was delivered on 25.4.1988 the Training Course which had been .
started on 1-:4.1987 was suspended and the participants disbanded.

It appears from the evidence before us that, that course which was abandoned
after running for 13 months had only a few months more for completion.
Presumably for that reason and presumably on-instructions -of the 1st.
Respondent, the Attorney

**322**

at-Law for_ the :1-3 `Respondents in S.C. 37/88 filed a motion dated 27.4.1988
in that case (Produced marked 'P3') seeking a 'CLARIFICATION' from the court.
They sought the permission of court to. carry onto completion the course
started on 1.4.1987. (All 163 Trainees) while promising to start a fresh
course for those decreed to have been discriminated against. This was objected
to, among others, by the present Petitioners. According to the Petitioners the
court had,: on 29.4.1988 declared that it was functus and that any:
difficulties that had arisen or were envisaged should be resolved. by the
agreement of parties. Perhaps because there was a possibility of adjustment
the court, by consent of parties nominated the 9th of May 1.988 as the next
date on which the case was to be mentioned. Another reason alleged for the
grant of that date will be adverted to later.

In between these two dates the Ministry of Health, of which the 1st Respondent
is the Secretary; had, in accordance with the judgment of this court in S.C.
37/88, prepared Two Lists - marked 'P4A' and 'P4B' .- respectively, denoting
those who had, according to the judgment, been :wrongly included in the 'Old
Course' which started on. 1.4.1987 (who for convenience of reference will in
the course` of this judgment be referred to as 'The Ineligibles') and those
who were. wrongly excluded (hereinafter referred, to as 'The New Eligibles').
(Those of. the trainees in the old course who had been rightly there will be
referred to as 'The Old Eligibles').

The motion 'P3' filed by and on behalf-of the Respondents in that case was for
a 'Clarification' as to whether the- Old Course could be carried on to
completion for the 163 nurses, while a new course was to be started for the
New Eligibles. That application had been 'Strenuously' opposed by the
Petitioners.

The evidence before us reveals that in fact a new course was started for the
New Eligibles on 1.6.1988:

On 6.6:1988 the Case S.C. 37/88 was once again mentioned in, the Supreme Court
and that day's proceedings (marked 'P5') shows:-

That both parties were AGREED-

**323**

(1) That the new course had started on 1.6.1988, and

(2) That there would be only one examination -for BOTH GROUPS - though each
would follow separate classes:

According to the record of the proceedings this word: 'BOTH' was, of consent,
understood. to mean 'THE GROUP ALREADY FOLLOWING THE COURSE WHICH WAS DUE TO
END IN ABOUT THREE MONTHS" and "THE GROUP WHICH COMMENCED ON 1.6.1988."

Apparently, these. Training Courses were of about 15 to 16 months in duration.
Of the two groups referred to above one of them had by then only a few months
left for completion while the other would have had to go on till about
September 1989. What was agreed on was that one examination would then be held
for both groups.

According to the Petitioners, as per their motion (marked 'P7') dated
10.6.1988 filed in that Case No. S.C. 37/87., at Paragraph 6, when the case
was mentioned in open court on 9.5. 1988 the . parties were unable to teach
finality regarding this question of 'BOTH' courses. Learned Deputy Solicitor
General (hereinafter referred to as D. S. G.) had informed court that the
course for the New Eligibles will start on 1.6.1988, while counsel for the
Petitioners had informed court that they had no objection to the Old Eligibles
continuing with the old course. It was in this state of the discussions that
the parties had agreed to have .the case called again on 6.6.1988. On that
date the agreement aforesaid had been recorded. Thus, it appears that the
parties were not at variance as, to the conducting of a separate course for
the New Eligibles as from 1.6.1988, nor for that matter, to . the continuance
of the old course -to` completion. The` point of variance, according to the
Petitioners, was, as to whether the Old Course should be continued only for

The Old Eligibles or with the Ineligibles as well. That is to' say the ENTIRE
BATCH.

According to paragraph 10 of P7 Counsel for the Petitioners had, on 6/6/88,
submitted to Court, while the Court was recording the agreement P5, that the.
word "BOTH" should be

**324**

clarified to read as 'THE NEW GROUP' and 'THE OLD GROUP' EXCLUDING THOSE WHO
HAD NOT OBTAINED THE REQUISITE MARKS'. According to the latter half of
paragraph 3 of the letter 1 R2 the Learned D.S.G. has stated:

"I also recall the Petitioner's Counsel stating that 'only those who were
eligible-to be selected in the old batch would be permitted' to which I
responded that 'only the persons eligible were selected and that in any event
we should not have this recorded as agreement had already been reached between
the parties on the lines recorded by Court' ".

Learned. President's Counsel appearing for the Petitioners in these
proceedings before us did not challenge the accuracy of the statements. as
narrated by the Learned -D. S. G. in the 3rd paragraph of his letter 1 R2.

It is in this context that the Court had been called upon to and did record
those agreements on 6%61/88. Thus it would appear that notwithstanding
disagreement as to who and who should be permitted to complete the Old Course
Learned- Counsel appearing for the Petitioners had permitted and consented to
the recording, that the parties are agreed that BOTH GROUPS would sit one
examination.

Subsequent events indicate that the legal advisers of the Petitioners had
realised than what had been an unambiguous direction given by the Court in its
judgment` dated 25/4/88 had become or at least could be construed as having
become equivocal by reason of the agreement recorded on 61/6/88.

Thereon, and on that very day itself, the Registered Attorney-at-Law for the
Petitioners forwarded 'the letter, now marked P6, to the. 1st Respondent (with
copies to the Hon A. G:, Addln. S/H and the D. S. G:) emphasising the position
of the Petitioners that-

"It was also agreed between the parties that those (Who are qualified and had
obtained the requisite marks) should

**325**

continue to follow the 'OId Training Course' (that is the course that
commenced on 1 /4/87).. . ."

A comparison of what is stated in P6 as having-been agreed to between the
parties, with. what' was stated to court and so recorded by Court in P5, shows
the extent of the ambiguity created by the non inclusion into the record of
the-agreement in P5, of the parenthetical clause in P6, viz:-(Who are
qualified and had obtained. the requisite marks).

No doubt that that was what led the Learned` A: A. L. of the Petitioners to
address P6 to the 1st Respondent. P6 exhorts the Respondents to
adhere''-strictly to the arrangements stated therein, on pain of punishment
for contempt in case of default.

On receipt of P6 the 1st Respondent, on that very day itself, addressed: 1R1
to the Learned D. S. G. and sought advice on matters pertaining to the OLD
BATCH, viz:-

(1) "Whether we can continue the ENTIRE BATCH in. training with immediate
effect?" and

(2) "Whether we have to make any modifications in the Batch to continue their,
training?". -

The learned D. S. G's reply. to this is the letter 1R2, dated 10/6/88 and
referred to earlier.

It is significant that in the original motion dated 27/4/88 (P3) as well as n
the letter 2R1 reference is to a batch of.163 nurses who had already
completed: 13 months of training, which had started on 1 /4/87: This same
number is repeated at paragraph 5 in each of the petitions-before us. The
Petitioner states-that this number was revealed in -the course of the
proceedings in S.C. 37/8. and that that was the number of vacancies available.

By 1 R2 the Learned D. S. G. has informed the 1st Respondent that in his
opinion, any action that maybe taken to proceed with the Old Course will not
amount to Contempt of the Supreme

**326**

Court because of the subsequent agreement reached between the parties and
recorded in the Court's proceedings.

The 1st Respondent must be taken as having. concluded that he could continue
the Old Course without modification for, according to paragraph 13 of P.7 he
is said to have told the Rev. Ananda Thero, the President oil the P. S. Nurses
Union on 7/6/88 .(that. is before he received the repay 1 R2 to the letter 1 R
1) that the Old Course would continue without dropping those who had been
disqualified and that the Supreme Court had sanctioned such a procedure.

On 8/6/88 (as per paragraph 14 of P7) counsel for the Petitioners- protested
to the, D. S. G. against any deviations from the procedure set forth in both
P4A and P4B.

Not quite satisfied that matters could be rectified by such means, the
Petitioners went into court on the motion P7 asking for, a CLARIFICATION of
the proceedings of 6/6/88. by including in the record that:

"Counsel for' the Petitioners submit that those who had. not obtained the
requisite marks, should be excluded".

(in fact, by mistake, the prayer reads "included' for 'excluded')

They further moved that:-.

"The record be amended to include the provision that those who are not
qualified would not be permitted to follow the course".

That motion carne up before the Supreme-Court on 16/6/88. Learned President's.
Counsel who appeared-in support of that motion moved to have the proceeding's
of 6/6/88 rescinded on the footing that the record does not correctly reflect
the position of the petitioners, in that the counsel who had appeared for the
Petitioners had SOUGHT : TO SUBMIT that the on going course should be confined
to those initially qualified 0 follow that course arid accordingly he
submitted that the reference to the term. BOTH COURSES in the proceedings of
6/6/88 should be confined to those

**327**

so qualified. He had further submitted that as recorded the terms did not
correctly reflect what the counsel for the Petitioners had INTENDED TO'
SUBMIT. The basis on which the Counsel for the Petitioners had intended to
enter into an' agreement had been set out in the paper dated 13%6/88 and filed
by "the Petitioners. Counsel had 'therefore moved that the proceedings. of
6/6/88 be' rescinded. (the emphasis is mine.)

Taking' the words 'sought to submit' and 'intended to submit' together with
the contents of the 3rd paragraph of 1 R2 referred to above, it appears that,
that learned Counsel did not inform Court on 6/6/88 that he wished to have the
limitations now contended for placed on the words BOTH GROUPS. Had he done so
I have no doubt- that His Lordship the Chief Justice would have so recorded
it. The contents of the 3rd paragraph of the letter 12 (Which was admitted, by
the Learned President's Counsel who appeared before us for the Petitioners, as
correctly recording what had happened 'in Court that day) shows that there had
been some discussion between Counsel that day on the lines 'indicated in that
letter, but that- what had been finally communicated to Court was (as agreed
:on between the parties):-

"That BOTH GROUPS i.e. the group already following the course which is due to
finish in about three months time, and the group which commenced their course
on 1 /6/88 will both sit one common examination"

A matter of some concern is whether this 'agreement' was reached. between
Counsel in Court on 6/6188 and, if so, whether on instructions from or without
reference to their respective clients (for the 1st Respondent has stated in
his affidavit that- he had not been present in Court-on that day) or whether
it was a settlement reached between the parties outside court and merely
communicated to court by counsel.

At one stage of his submissions Learned Presidents Counsel for the present
Petitioners' did suggest: that not only did P5 not record -correctly the
agreement: reached, but that the parties, namely, the Petitioners and/or their
Representatives or their

**328**

Union on, the one hand and the Respondents or any Ministry Official on the
other hand, had never met and settled or come to an, agreement with each
other.. Indeed the- Learned President's Counsel for, the Petitioners
challenged as, incorrect the statement in I R2 (2nd paragraph) viz:-

"On the next day the undersigned (i.e. the D.S.G.) was informed by you that
AGREEMENT WAS REACHED to proceed with the old course and that a new course had
already started."

The` non-challenge of the correctness of the facts in paragraph 3 of 1 R2 when
taken together -with the very wording of the recorded proceedings of 6/5/88
points to the possibility that the agreement to hold only one examination had
been, arrived at outside 'court. Had it not been so there could and should
have been an affirmative statement from the -Learned. Counsel who had appeared
for the Petitioners that day In the absence of any such evidence to the
contrary it would appear that the.. record made on_ 6/6/88 was the record of
an agreement entered into between the parties earlier, and later intimated to
Court through their Counsel. His Lordship the Chief Justice has stated:

".......but is merely the record of the proceedings that took place in the
presence of the parties on that day. and which was communicated to this Court,
by the parties." (at page 5 of P8)

His Lordship. has gone onto add:-

'As the parties have not been able to agree as to what took. `place in Court
and as to why what was communicated to Court on 6/6/88 was so communicated,
'this Court does not propose to continue any further in regard to this matter
- and these proceedings are now terminated.".

As per P8 several different Counsel have appeared for the various Petitioners
on 1616/88: of these only one of, them had appeared for all the Petitioners
and all the Added Petitioners on 6/6/88: He had not, intimated to court,' then
why or how that communication came to be made:

**329**

Consequent on .the incidents that had occurred in Court on 16/6/88. the 1st
Respondent had addressed the Learned D. S. G. by: his letter 1 R3 of even
date, querying as to whether he could take back the ENTIRE BATCH which had
been suspended. To this the Learned D.S.G. had replied on the same day that
there would be no objections to his doing so, as:-

"The Supreme Court today made order terminating the proceedings in S. C.
37/87. This means that the Judgment of the Supreme Court and the Agreement
recorded in the proceedings on 6/6./88 would determine the position of the
parties to this application."

The learned D. S. G.. gave it as his opinion that. the INELIGIBLES too could
be included and the course continued to completion.

On the face of 1R4 itself the 1st Respondent made an endorsement to the 2nd
Respondent to re-commence the course from 20/6/88. This was done and that
course continued till it was stopped on 27/6/88 consequent on an order of the
Supreme Court in some collateral proceedings bearing No: S.C. 109/88.

On 8/7/88 the present Petitioners filed these two applications against all
three Respondents to have them dealt with for Contempt for disobeying the
Judgment of the Court in S.C.- 37/88. However. this Court issued the following
Rule only as against the 1st and 2nd Respondents. Viz:- to wit ... (1)

"By re-opening and/or re-commencing on the 20/6/1988 the Post Basic Course for
Training of Grade 11 Segment A Nursing Officers as Grade I Nursing Officers
(Hospital Services) which commenced on 1/4/87 which had been set aside by the
Supreme Court by its Judgment in Supreme Court Application bearing No: S.C.
37/87 decided on 25/4/88 and which had further directed that fresh selections
be made on the basis of the marks obtained by those who had presented
themselves for the examination without any disqualifications being imposed on
them on the

**330**

ground of participation in any Trade Union action between 18-/3/86 and 17/4/86
and by holding classes and/or lectures; continuing to hold the said Training
Course from 20/6/88 to 25/6/88 at the Mulleriyawa Hospital and at the Kalutara
Hospital for those who had. been selected for the said Training Course and
which was' set aside by the said Judgment and thereby acting in defiance of
the said order and Judgment of the Supreme Court and wilfully refusing to obey
the. same."

(2) By deliberately and wilfully neglecting and/or refraining from complying.
with the Judgment and Order of the Supreme Court in Application. bearing No;
37/87 and decided on 25/4/88 by wilfully neglecting and/or failing to make
fresh selections for the Post Basic Training Course for training of Grade 11
Segment: 'A' Nursing Officers as Grade I Nursing Officers (Hospital -
Services) and Grade I Public Health Sisters as directed by the said Judgment
and order, of the Supreme Court."

At the commencement of the hearing before us both `cases Nos. 4/88 and 5/88
were consolidated, with the consent of -all the parties and their several
counsel in both cases. Counsel's agreement thereto' is recorded as follows:-
18/10/88.

"With- regard to the words CONCURRANCE and CONNIVANCE appearing in paragraph
26 of the Petition Mr. Choksy states that whether there was concurrence or
connivance or not is a matter for their Lordships to decide. It is now agreed
between both Mr. H. L. De Silva and Mr. Choksy that in fact the 1st Respondent
made the minute on the document 1R4 giving directions to the ,2nd Respondent
to send out directions, and as a result of which 173 including .90 who were
deemed to have been disqualified from attending the course which was resumed
on 20/6/88 and which was again stopped on the orders of this Court made in
Application No :,109/88 as from 25/6/88.

It is also agreed that the 2nd Respondent had transmitted the order given to
him to the:. 3rd respondent by the letter now marked 2R2.

**331**

Mr. Choksy also Wishes. it to be recorded that the reason why this- Court made
order in Case No. 109/88 :`Was not in consequence of anything arising in these
proceedings and that was for some other reason. Mr. De Silva agrees.

At this stage Mr. E. D. Wickramanayake, who appears for the Petitioners in
case No. 5/88 instructed by M: Goonawardane, which is also listed for-hearing
today, states that subject to his right to address the Court on .the: matter:
he has rib objection to both cases Nos. 4/88 and 5/88 being consolidated for
the purposes of hearing and that the facts in both cases are the same.

Mr. De Silva and Mr. Choksy agree to this amalgamation. Mr. De Silva files a
medical certificate in respect of the Petitioner in Case No. 4/88 and states:
that for reasons of illness she is not present in Court today:

Mr. Choksy, Mr. De Silva and Mr. Wickramanayake agree that no fresh markings
need be given to any of the documents that have already been filed acid that
the matters could be argued and disposed of on the Petitions, Affidavits and
the documents now filed of record.

The, 1st and 2nd Respondents are present in- Court

Petitioner in S.C. 5/88 is also present in Court.

By consent of Counsel witness need not remain in Court any longer, and they
are discharged."

In Count 1 the two Respondents are charged with having acted **IN DEFIANCE
OF** the said Order and Judgment of the Supreme Court, and **WILFULLY REFUSING
TO OBEY THE SAME,** , and -in Count 2 'with **DELIBERATELY** ' **AND**
**WILFULLY NEGLECTING AND/OR REFRAINING** by wilfully neglecting to and/or
failing to make, fresh selections  (The emphasis is mine)

We, thus, see that the acts complained of 'are said to have been done' **IN
DEFIANCE** and **REFUSING WILFULLY TO OBEY** (in

**332**

count -1) and DELIBERATELY AND WILFULLY NEGLECTING AND/OR REFUSING (in Count
2).

On the facts admitted and established there is no doubt that the 1st
Respondent directed the 2nd Respondent who in turn ordered the 3rd Respondent
to re-start the Old Course for the ENTIRE BATCH - including the Ineligibles
and that it was so restarted on' 20/8/88. The question is - Did each of them,
the 1st and the 2nd Respondents do it 'in defiance of the Court's Judgment'
or' Wilfully refuse to obey it or 'Deliberately and wilfully neglect and/or
refuse to comply with its directions?'

According to WEBSTER'S New Collegiate Dictionary:

**To Defy** (1)  (Archaic) To challenge to combat.

(2) To challenge . to do something impossible

(3) To confront with assured power of resistance. To disregard Public Opinion,

(4) To resist attempts at.- Withstand. Eg: They defy classification.

Defiance (1) -The act or an instance of defying,

(2) Disposition to.., resist or Contempt of Apposition.

**

In Defiance of** Contrary to. Despite..

**

Willful:** (1) Obstinately and often perversly self willed:

(2) Done Deliberately: Intentional (syn. Volantary)

In STROUD'S JUDICIAL DICTIONARY (1986 Ed.) P: 2858.

**

Willful** (1) Is a word of familiar -use in every branch of the - Law. It may
have a special, meaning: It generally, as used in Courts of Law; implies
nothing blameable, but merely that the person, of whose action; or. default
the expression is used, is a free

**333**

agent and that what has been done arises from "the spontaneous action of his
will. It amount's to nothing more than this, that he knows what he is doing
and intends to do what he is doing and is a free agent. (Per. Bowen L. J.- Re
Young & Narston,(1) 31 Ch. d. 1.74. Also see - Elliot vs. Turner- 13 Sim. 485.
(2)

**

Willful** (2) does not necessarily connote blame although the word is more
commonly used of bad Conduct than of good (Wheeler vs. New Merton Board Mills
- 1932-2. K B 66.9} (3)

(3) If a mar! permits a thing to be done, it means that he gives permission
for it to be done. And if a man gives permission for it to be done, he knows
what is to be done or is being done, and If he knows that, it is wilful.

(Lord Goddard C:J. - Lomas vs. Peate 1947 - ''A.E.R. 574/.575.) (4)

(4) What ever is intentional is wilful.

(Day J. G a y f o r d v s . C h o u l e r 1898-1.Q.B.316) (5)

The subsequent pages in Stroud's Dictionary deal with the word wilful or
wilfully in Conjunction with various other words as they appear in English .
Statutes. Among these there. appears. the combination "WILFUL DISOBEDIENCE" at
page 2860."

Here they deal with Wilful Disobedience. to a command by seamen and
apprentices. (See - Merchant Shipping Act) Lawful excuse or absence of
intention appear to have been held to be not wilful disobedience':

Edgyll vs. Alward  (6)

Sibery vs. Conyelly (7)

Whikhead vs. Reader (8)

O'Reilly vs. Drayman (9)

Another series of cases are discussed at page 2861." Some of those cases were
cited to us by Learned President's Counsel for

**334**

the Petitioners and strongly relied, on by him. They deal with 'Wilful
.Disobedience' by Corporations of Judgments or Orders made against them by
the-Courts. These came up mainly under the Old Rules of the Supreme Court
(England) Ord. 42 r. 31. (Ord. 45.x.5 which replaces it omits.. the word
'Wilful') In the event of such a disobedience the courts could order the
sequestration of the property of the Corporation. Under this Rule the words
'Wilful Disobedience' have been interpreted in a long line of cases and they
have acquired the meaning of being such disobedience as would, hot, be
described as or be excused for being CASUAL, ACCIDENTAL OR UNINTENTIONAL Vide:

Stancombs vs. Towbridge Urban District Courail - 1910-2. Ch.D. 387:: (10)

It did not entail obstinacy of an obstructive, kind, it meant an intentional
disobedience

A.G.Vs. Walthamstowe  l . T.L.R. 533. (11)

Lewis vs. Newport Railway Co. et. al. 55\. T.L.R. 203 (12)

Steiner vs. Steiner  1966\. 2.A.E.R. - Ch. D. 387 (13)

Milleage Conference Case. .  1966\. 2.A.E.R. - R.C. 849 (14)

Home Office vs. Harman 1982\. 1.A.E.R. - H.O.L. 532 (15)

Home office v. Harman 1981 2.A.E.R. O.B.D.) 349 (16) C.A.)

Heatons Transport 19723 A.E.R. H L. 1101 (17)

Worthington vs. Ad. Senb - 1956. 3.A.E.R. 674. (18) -

The Rena Case. 1961. 3,A.E.R. 428 (19)

In all these cases ,the contempts alleged were for disobedience either to an
injunction or to an undertaking- (given or implied) to court. Therefore, they
are not appropriate tests to be applied for the decision of the cases before
us. In-the cases before us there is one section of the Judgment under
reference which declares that the selection made in this instance is violative
of a FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT and accordingly' it sets aside that selection. The
other part of the Judgment goes on to direct the manner in which fresh
selections should be made.

The contempt charges are for disobedience of these Orders.

In the case of publication of material that is. scurrilous or

**335**

prejudicial the Law in England has, developed on the lines of Strict
Liability'

In Knight vs. Cliffon (197`1-2. A.E.R. 379.) (20)it was held:

In proceeding for committal for breach of an order of Court there is" no need
to prove that the Defend ant's co duct was wilful or contumacious. Thus, when
injunction prohibits an act that prohibition is absolute and is not related to
intent, unless otherwise stated on the face of the Order:"

In the leading case on IMPLIED UNDERTAKINGS. Home Office vs. Harman (Supra)
it' is seen that the Courts will not accept' anything short: of Strict
Compliance in respect of such undertakings given to or liable to be given to
Court.

In the case of publications - In Odhams' Case (1956- 3.A.E.R. 494.) (21) Lord
Goddard summarised the Law as follows:-

"Each of the Respondents (the owner;' the Editor and the Reporter of the, News
Paper) was ; guilty, of Criminal; Contempt of, Court since the test of guilt
was whether the matter complained of was CALCULATED to interfere with the
course of Justice, not whether that result was intended, and lack of KNOWLEDGE
that criminal proceedings against M had commenced was not material, except as
to penalty."

Thus, in respect of these two matters now before us these . English decisions
are not of much assistance. Some of them fall within the realm of decisions
which have come to be . termed Strict Liability Decisions. Others ., have been
developed mostly on the interpretation of the word 'WILFUL' DISOBEDIENCE' by
corporations and thereby attracting` an order for sequestration of their
property on account of the contempt arising from their disobedience, to the
injunctions and orders issued against them. These cases do not, deal with
disobedience 'to the Judgment of a' court. There is no doubt that as contended
for by Learned Presidents Counsel for the Petitioners that the -Judgment:  the
Courts of Sri Lanka are to be and must be followed and- scrupulously

**336**

conformed; to, especially by the Officers in the Public Service: The two
Respondents is both cases on whom the Rules have been issued are Public
Servants, appointed.. under the .,Constitution. They are governed by the
Establishment Code, which Rules, require them to seek, when needed, legal
advice from the Hon. Attorney General. Having received advice they are bound
to act, if they do act, in conformity, with that advice. That does not mean
that in all or in any particular matter the Public Servant can seek absolution
from the, consequences of his act by; merely claiming that he did so on the
advice of the Hon. Attorney General. For instance e a breach of a fundamental
Right will remain a breach and be culpable even if the Public Servant had
acted on the advice of the, Attorney General. So too in a matter which will
amount to a crime or be an illegal act. On the other hand it must not be
supposed that the Public Servant could act against, the, advice of the
Attorney General. Should he do so he does it at his own risk, for The Attorney
Genera( is the Chief Law Adviser of the State and the only Legal Adviser to
whom the Public Servant can have recourse.

Vide:-'E' Code (1985) Vol. I Ch. 32. Clause 1.

That is to say when he is being sued (not in his private capacity as. in:
these two cases) he must seek the- advice; of 'the Hon. Attorney General. He
can obtain private legal advice only if he is sued in his private capacity or
for breach of a Fundamental Right; in this fatter case if and only if the Hon.
Attorney General refuses to appear for him.

Except as stated above the Public -Servant is bound to follow the advice f the
Hon. Attorney General. The 'E'. Code and the

Conventions of the Public Service preclude him from acting otherwise.

Learned Counsel for both parties in each case concede that, (in the course of
their course of their argument) but for the fact that:-

(1) The old Course had been suspended immediately, and

(2) Both parties had called for clarification from the Court, and

**337**

(3) The correspondence 1 R 1 to 1 R4, and,

(4) Documents P4A and P4B . . . . both Respondents would have been guilty of
contempt of this Court for having re-started the Old Course for Training of
the ENTIRE BATCH on 20/6/88

Learned President's Counsel for the Respondents urged that the fact that the
Respondents had suspended that Course on the very next day following the
Judgment of this Court is an indication of a willingness to comply rather than
a desire to defy the orders of the Court.

Consequent on the suspension there came to be two groups of nurses, one the
'Old Eligibles' and the other the "Ineligibles". All of them had completed
about 4/5ths of the prescribed course. If these Old Eligibles had to join a
New Course with the New Eligibles then they would have had to repeat these 13
months of Training. Not merely to those Old Eligibles and to the service but
to the Exchequer itself this would have presented a problem. Those Officers
would have expended public time and public money in vain. It behoved a good
administrator to avoid such waste. Whenever and wherever possible repetition
and re-expenditure of public time and money have to be avoided. Conservation
of public time and money could well have been the motive for seeking ways and
means to continue the Old Course. Prudent Administrative Management would have
indicated this, at least in respect of the Old Eligibles. However learned
President's Counsel for the Petitioners contended that the TRUE motive was to
defy and to disobey the judgment. of this Court, because the Trade Union which
is opposed to the Trade Union to which the Petitioners belong, had Government
patronage, and accordingly that the two Respondents, even if they had not
actually been coerced, were, at least, more inclined to help that other Union
rather than the Petitioners" Union. Deducing intention from motive alone is at
all times a perilous task. Motive of course is very relevant and the burden of
proving the existence of the motive, as propounded is on the proponent. In
these cases on the Petitioners. Such proof must be done with "The strictness
as is consistent with the gravity of the offence charged". Per. Lord Denning.
(Vide. In Re. Brambelwell)(22)

**338**

"When there are two equally consistent possibilities it is not right to hold
that the- offence is proved beyond reasonable doubt.

Contempt proceedings even to punish-for civil contempt are in the nature of
criminal proceedings."

Comet Products _U.K. Ltd. vs. Hawkes Plastics Ltd._

Learned President's Counsel for the Respondents submitted further that the
action taken by the 1st Respondent to obtain the sanction of the Court to
conduct the Old Course to completion as planned and to provide a new course
for the New Eligibles was the clarification he had sought from the Court, by
means of the application made by his Legal Adviser, the Attorney General.
Learned President's Counsel contended that that was a legitimate exercise and
that it was done in deference to and not in defiance of the Order and Judgment
of the Court. From what learned Counsel who appeared for the 39th; 49th, 59th,
112th, 120th, 122nd, and 148th Respondents in S.C. 37/88;- has stated to Court
on 16/6/88 as recorded in P8, it appears that when the motion filed. by the
A.A.L. for the 1st to the 3rd Respondents came up before Court on 9/5/88 the
Court. had indicated that before any consideration could be given to the
motion the New Course for the New Eligibles should be started, and that the
learned D.S.G. had then informed Court that that would be done by 1/6/88.
Accordingly the case had been fixed for 6/6/88, and on which date it was
confirmed that the New Course had started. (Vide. P5).;

Thus, there appears to have been some discussion of the motion on 29/4/88 and
on 6/6/88, and according to the Counsel and the 1st Respondent (Vide. para.
7(b) of his affidavit) the case was put off 'Of Consent', to be mentioned on
6/6/88. According to Counsel for some of the other Respondents that
postponement was to ensure that the State did not, as in an earlier instance,
make promises which it did- not fulfill. According to the Petitioners the
State prepared to two lists P4A and P413 . on 30/4/88 and 5/5/88. (para. 12 of
the Petition.) On 9/5/88 the case .was put off for 6/6/88. (Vide. para. 16 of
the Petition.) as

**339**

there was -no agreement between the parties. The Petitioners state at
Paragraph 11 of the Petition that the Supreme Court had stated on 29/4/88
itself that it, was functus in relation to the substantive matter but that any
problems between the parties should be resolved by mutual agreement. It is .
quite apparent that some matters had been under discussion and as a result the
case was to be mentioned again to see if any. agreement could be reached.
Therefore, the Record of 6/6-/88 (p5) must be held to be the record of what
all the parties had in fact finally agreed on. No doubt that in the course of
negotiations the inclusion or otherwise of the Ineligibles too must have
cropped up for discussion. Whatever may or may not have been discussed and
similarly whatever may have been in the mind of Counsel for the Petitioners
that day, all that was communicated to Court that day as their agreement was
that:-

"One examination will be held for both groups . . .".

No elucidation, explanation or elaboration as to who were to comprise one of
these groups was given. As regards the other group there is no disagreement;`
and in fact it is so recorded, that it would consist of the New Eligibles who
started off their course on 1 /6/88. As regards the other group are they the
ENTIRE OLD GROUP or only the Old Eligibles? The parties are not agreed on
this. It is the position of the Petitioners that they never agreed to the
ENTIRE group being included. Although the clarification sought from court was.
on this very matter the record of the proceedings of 6/6/88 does not bring out
the uncompromising dissent of the Petitioners to such .a proposal. The same
Counsel who appeared-for these some other Respondents-on 6/6/88, on 16/6/88
went on to state that he could never have agreed to the terms recorded on
6/6/88 had there been any question of any one of the persons who had followed
the Old Course for 13 months being dropped off from that course:

Be that as it may, the direct result of the non-recording of what the exact
composition of this other group should be, was that ambiguity was allowed to
creep in where there was none earlier. The terms of the Judgment of 24/4/88
are by themselves quite clear and unambiguous. But, when this is coupled with
the proceedings that led up to 6/6/88, the record of proceedings

**340**

on 6/6/88 introduces an element of ambiguity as. to the composition of the
group that was to continue the course started on 1 /4/87. The letter P6 of
6/6/88, itself, is the best proof of the appreciation by the Petitioners and
their Legal Advisers of the possibility of two constructions being placed on
the word 'BOTH'. P6 must have been written within hours' of the recording of
the agreement on P5 for the 1st Respondent's letter 1R1 to the D.S.G. is also
dated 6/6/88.

What exactly was recorded on 29/4/88 and on 9/5/88 is not part, of the
evidence before us. We have not been briefed with the copies of those two days
proceedings. In terms of the agreement recorded in` the two cases in hand on
18/10/88 our considerations are restricted. to the documents -marked and
produced in these proceedings. Of course, we have the several affidavits of
the various persons, (now filed of record) but they are in a sense, all ex-
post facto and do. not help to elucidate either the existence of or the extent
of the ambiguity that prompted the writing of that warning note P6.

On receipt of P6 the 1st Respondent had, promptly sought the advice of the
A.G. on this specific question. The reply .1 R2 - that he had received could
have given the 1st Respondent the idea that, should the Ineligibles be
included, then, for the reason that the Court had been kept appraised of the
contemplated action and that permission was being sought, that the learned
D.S.G. was of the opinion that such action would not amount to Contempt of
Court. Having suspended the course the 1st Respondent Was not compelled to nor
was he, in law, compellable to re-commence it. His doing so was a matter
within his sole discretion. That is to say he need not have, either with or
without the ineligibles recommenced the Old Course. Yet, as a prudent
administrator and as Head of the Department he should always strive to save
public money and time. Had he recommenced the Old Course without modification
and had he. done so without legal advice first having been obtained then it
would have been his deliberate act. Then, since it is in conflict with the
decision of the Court it would have been wilful disobedience. But, in this
instance he had sought and obtained legal advice and that too, in the context,
from the only source available to him.

**341**

On the Petition P7 (filed after the writing of the letter P6 to the 1st
Respondent) The Supreme Court (on 16/6/88.) did not allow the application of
the Petitioners to 'RESCIND: the proceedings of 6/6/88. Those proceedings were
left intact. The Court declared that it was functus and terminated the
proceedings. Faced with this situation the Respondents again sought the advice
of the A.G. 'This was on letter 1 R3 to which he received- the. letter now
produced. marked 1 R4: It was on the basis of the reply received on the letter
1 R4 that the ENTIRE GROUP was recalled to' complete that which had been
started and then had had to be suspended.

It is in this context that learned President's Counsel for the Respondents
submitted that the actions of the Respondents were not wilful and should not
be treated as having been -done in defiance of or in disobedience to the
judgment of the Court. He submitted that their conduct was bona fide and on
legal advice had and obtained. Strange to say the situation of ambiguity and
uncertainty seems to have been created as a result of trying to obtain
'Clarification':

In support of the defence of bona fides learned Presidents Counsel cited
several Indian decisions and submitted that those decisions were more-in
accord with our Law than' the English decisions as they, as in the case of Sri
Lanka, have been developed from the English Common Law, which is the Law
obtaining in Sri Lanka.

As it was in India till recently, so it is even today in our country, there is
no definition of the words 'Contempt of Court'. Article 105(3) of our
Constitution vests in the Supreme Court a jurisdiction to punish for Contempts
of the Supreme Court itself, whether committed in the Court itself or
elsewhere. In various statutes, for example, in the Partition Act, the Codes
of Civil and Criminal Procedure and others, various acts of commission and
omission have been made punishable 'As for Contempt'. Yet, in no Act of our
Parliament is there a definition of the expression 'Contempt. of Court'. The
English Common Law concept has always been the basis on which our Courts have
acted. Thus, there is much force in the arguments of learned

**342**

President's Counsel for the Respondents that it would be more appropriate to
place greater reliance on and to give greater weightage to those Indian
decisions. which have been decided on the basis of the English Common Law,
rather than on the decisions of the English Courts which are based on English
Statute Law:

Before discussing the development of the law in India it may be useful to note
a few cases from England and other Commonwealth jurisdictions, on the meaning
they have attributed to the word 'Wilful'. For Eg:

Per Lord Russel of Killowen C.J. in R. vs. Senior. (24)

" 'Wilfully" means that the act is done intentionally and deliberately and not
by accident. or inadvertence, but so that the mind of the person who does the
act goes with it."

Per Kennedy J. in High Wycombe Corp. vs. River Lanes Development contractors
(25)

"I do not think that WILFULLY means wanton or carelessly, but I think you can
be wilful without being wanton for I think if you permit a thing not under
compulsion you do it wilfully."

Per Lord Carlyle (Lord President) in _Smith v. Wemis Coal Co. Ltd. (26)_

"An act is done willingly if it is done deliberately as distinct from
something done without thought, on the spur of the moment."

Per Talbot J. in Wheeler v. New Merton Board Mills Ltd. (27)

'" 'WILFUL ACT' is plain English, and I can entertain no doubt that the
installing of this machine without guard or fence for use in the factory was a
wilful act by someone . . . Wilful is more commonly used in modern speech of

**343**

bad conduct or actions than of good though it does not necessarily connote
blame."

Per Lord Goddard C.J. in. Lomas v. Peele (4)

"If a man permits a thing to be done it means .. . . . (Supra)

Per Bence D.C.J. in the CANADIAN case of _Caldwell vs. Canadian National
Railways(28)_ as quoted in WORDS and PHRASES LEGALLY DEFINED - 1972 Ed. Vol. v
page 335.)

"what may be negligence in one person may not be negligence in another, or
what may be negligence in one set of facts in the same person, may not be
negligence in some other state of facts, and it seems to be so with a WILFUL
ACT."

Per Robertson J. in the Canadian case of _Gooman vs. R(29)_

"To my mind the word WILFUL in Sec: 168 of the Ch m: Proc: Code (dealing with
obstructions to Police Officers) applies to a state of circumstances where the
person charged, knows that he is doing, and intends to do what he is doing and
is a FREE AGENT".

Per Turner J. in the NEW ZEALAND case of Babington vs. Inland Revenue
Commissioner(30)

Words and Phrases, when dealing with a Taxpayer being charged with wilfully
misleading in his tax Returns, quotes Fullage J. in Jakson v. Butterworth(31)
as follows:

"There must, in my opinion, be either knowledge of belief that what is omitted
is INCOME and an advertence to the possibility or probability that it is
income and a recklessness in the sense of not caring whether it is income or
not."

"That is the matter that must be `considered on the total-ity of the evidence
and if in all the evidence I am not satisfied that the necessary state of mind
is demonstrated., I ought, I think, to allow the appeal."

**344**

Per Shadwell.V.C. in the AUSTRALIAN case of Re EAST INDIA DOCK INGHAM JUNCTION
RAILWAY ACT Ex. Parte. BRADSHAW. (32): (Words and Phrases Vol. v.p.  340.)
dealing with the case of the wilful refusal of the party entitled to it to
receive money due from the Promoters ... states:

"The Legislature meant by the words 'Wilful Refusal' a refusal arising out of
the exercise of. mere will or caprice and not from exercise of reason."

Per Napier G.J. in the Australian case of O'Sullivan vs. Harford(33): (Words
and Phrases Vol. v.p. 340) dealing with a case of wilful obstruction to the
Police ... states:

" The natural meaning of wilfully can be satisfied, either by knowledge or by
a state of mind that admits to the possibility of the existence of the
attendant circumstances but forbears to make inquiry and wills to do the act
whether or no."

By his letter 2R3 dated 17/6/88 the 2nd Respondent had directed the 3rd
Respondent to re-start the course which had been suspended. The 3rd Respondent
had complied with that order, to the letter, and had re-commenced that course
on 20/6/88. By his letter of even date, P9, the registered A.A L. for the
Petitioners had informed the 3rd Respondent that should she re-start the
course she will be guilty of contempt. It is not clear from the evidence as to
whether the 3rd Respondent received P9 and its annexure, namely the copy of
the judgment in S.C. 37/87 before or after the course got under way.

According to the letter marked P2 the 3rd Respondent had informed one of. the
participants of that old course, that the course was being suspended on the
directions of the 1st Respondent.

This Court did not issue a rule on the 3rd Respondent.

Learned Presidents Counsel for the Respondents relied on the Indian decisions
to support his submissions that the Respondents had acted bona fide, after
consulting with and on

**345**

the advice of the A.G. and accordingly were not guilty of contempt.

Some of the cases cited by learned President's Counsel for the Respondents
cannot, in my opinion, be applied simpliciter to the facts of the cases before
us, for they deal with cases of disobedience to judgments of the Superior
Courts by the Judges of the Inferior Courts. In such cases the contemner is
also a judicial officer and thus strict proof of the existence of a motive to
defeat, obstruct or interfere with the due course of justice is required
before such an officer could be dealt with for contempt arising from
disobedience, of the order of the Superior Court. Vide:- Abdul _Kareen v.
Prakash(34)._ However this case itself lays down the general principle with
regard to disobedience to the Judgments of the Courts. Viz:-

" Wrong order or even a usurpation of jurisdiction committed by, a judicial
Officer owing to AN ERROR OF JUDGMENT OR. TO A MISAPPREHENSION of the CORRECT
LEGAL POSITION does not fall within the Mischief of Criminal Contempt."
(See-1975 A.I.R.-S.C.859.)

The same principle was recognised by Sera J. in _Sathyandra Nath Mithra vs.
Suptd. of Police(35)_ in respect of a Police Officer who in Good Faith had
acted under a mistaken impression of the Law.

The Nagpur Bench of the Bombay High Court in the case of A. _T. K. Sahakari
Soustha vs. State of Maharasthtra36._

In our opinion, if a person had acted bona fide in, a particular manner on the
basis of an advice, given by his lawyer, depending on the facts and
circumstances` of the case, he cannot be found guilty of wilful disobedience."

Even if it is,, as was urged by J earned Counsel for the Petitioners, that the
clear and unambiguous terms of the judgment dated 25/4/88 in S.C.37/87 were
not rendered

**346**

cloudy or equivocal by reason of the agreement recorded on 6/6/88 and that. it
was for that reason that the A.G. had made the guarded statement that he made
in the 1 R2 to the query by the 1st Respondent, yet, in the light of the
events that followed, this position cannot be sustained. The Petitioners"
application for clarification and their Counsel's request to have the Record
of the proceedings of 6/6/88 rescinded and the request for permission to
resile from that agreement on the ground of want of Consuming Ad Idem and the
non-grant of any of those reliefs by the Supreme Court on 16/6/88 have all
contributed to the making of 'a more specific reply, viz. 1 R 1, to the effect
that there would be no objection to re-commence the course that had been
suspended.

It is significant that it was only after the receipt of the reply 1 R4, that
the Respondents had taken steps to re-commence that course. They had not acted
on the earlier reply, 1 R2. In between they had shown every sign of having
complied with or at least willingness to comply with the Judgment of the
Court. They had suspended the old course and had prepared the lists P4A and
P4B.

Dharmaadhikari J. in SAHAKARI'S Case (Supra) added:

If the act or omission was not wilful, then it cannot be said that the
Officer, acting in good faith, on the basis of Legal Advice has deliberately
and wilfully disobeyed the Order of the Court."

Tuli J. sitting in the High Court of Pun jab and Haryana (Full Bench) in
_Prakash Chand vs. S.S. Growal 37)_ has quoted from the judgment of the
Supreme Court of India in the case of _S. S. Roy vs.. State of Orissa (38)._

" The error must be a wilful error proceeding from improper or corrupt motives
in order that he (A Govt. Servant) may be punished for Contempt of Court. On
the facts found, 'the Appellant could certainly be said to have acted without
proper care and caution, but there is nothing on the Record

**347**

to suggest any wilful culpability on his part and, it has been expressly held
by the High Court Judge that he was not actuated by any corrupt or dishonest
motive."

It was the submission of Learned President's Counsel for the Petitioners that
the 1st and 2nd Respondents had a dishonest or collateral motive, viz. To
further the prospects of those nurses who had not gone on strike ''and to
circumvent if possible the Decree of the Supreme Court. To penalise the nurses
who had gone on strike -was a decision of the 'Government. That was in
consequence of a policy decision; taken in respect of all Public Servants who
had gone on strike during that period. The 1st Respondent would have had to
implement that directive. It was according to that directive that the persons
who were to participate in the Old Course were chosen. The question that
arises is as to whether the 1st Respondent was attempting to continue to
implement that Policy Directive, which had been struck down by the Supreme
Court, as being violative of the Fundamental Rights of the Petitioners.

The immediate order given to suspend that course, the preparation of the lists
P4A and P4B and the queries and the guidance sought in the letters 1 R 1 and 1
R3 do not permit one to draw the inference that the 1st Respondent continued
to have such a motivation. The burden is clearly on the Petitioners to
establish the continued existence of such a wilful intent. It is trite law
that to a charge of Contempt, the plea of having taken action on legal advice
is, by itself, not a complete defence. As stated by Dharmaadhikari J. in
SAHAKARI'S case (supra):

.... There is certainly no general doctrine which saves a party from the
consequences of wrong advice. The matter will obviously stand on a different
footing if the person concerned is deliberately avoiding to obey the order by
using wrong and illegitimate reasons. Nobody can be permitted to disobey the
Orders of Court by putting forward some excuse, including an excuse based on
wrong legal advice."

**348**

As stated by Mudholka J. in the Supreme Court of India in S. K. Kar vs. Chief
Justice of Orissa(39).  -

" There may perhaps be a case where an order disobeyed could reasonably be
construed in two ways, and a Subordinate Court construed it in. one of those
two ways, but in a way different from that intended by the Supreme Court,
surely it cannot be said that. disobedience of that Order, in such a case by
a' Subordinate Court was Contempt of the Supreme Court."

In Sahakari's case (Supra) it was further held (p. 1818 para. 22):

" However as held in the Madras High Court in Motaur Majes and Co. vs. Dy.
Commissioner Tan Officer (40) we might emphasise that no Officer of
Government, however high or exalted he may be, can take upon himself the
responsibility .of judging the correctness or the. validity of the Order of-
the Court. If he, honestly and bone fide, in the discharge of his duties
feels, that it is either. erroneous or needs clarification; the only remedy
available to him is to approach the said Court by way of review and seek
modification OR approach a. High Court by filing an appeal. Instead of
following such a course it is not open to him to take upon himself the
responsibility of judging the Order and then to take.. action contrary to or
inconsistent with the same on the basis of his own judgment."

It is significant that out of the several circumstances in SAHAKARI's case
which . have influenced that decision,. one, which is not present in either of
the cases in hand; is that those Police Officers in that case had made
unqualified apologies to Court on realising the mistake they had made in
comprehending the Law. In this context it will be appropriate to bear in `mind
the words of Hidayatulla C.J. in the Supreme Court of India in _Debobrata vs.
The State (41)._ On the question of the absence of an apology.

**349**

'`However the man may have the courage of his convictions and may stake his
all in proving that he is not in, Contempt. and may take the risk. In the
present case the Appellant ran the gauntlet of such a risk and may be said to
have fairly succeeded."

In a case in which a declaratory decree had been obtained striking down a
dismissal of a Railway employee as unlawful but with no further directions,
pending appeal the Divisional Superintendent withheld payment, of his
salaries, thereafter. That was done on the advice of their Law Officers.
Narula J. added:

" Though I cannot congratulate him for the somewhat stubborn attitude adopted
by him in his return to the Rule issued in this case, I have not been able to
pursuade myself to hold the Respondent No. 2 guilty of Contempt of Court in
the peculiar circumstances of this case." _Ragunath Rai vs. Sahai(43)_

The Defendant, in a certain case, was-ordered to execute certain repairs to a
boiler. He did not do so. The District Court held him to be in Contempt. In a
subsequent case filed by the same Plaintiff for damages for non-compliance
with the earlier Judgment Bertram CJ held in appeal:

" That the District Court had no authority to punish for - Contempt under the
circumstances. (Not unless in the face of the Court.) Non-compliance with a
judgment of the court is not in ordinary circumstances a-contempt of Court.
"'. . . lsmail vs. lsmail(43)

I am in entire agreement with the dictum of Tuli J. in Prakash vs. Gerwal
(supra):

... but if the conduct of the particular Govt. `Officer whose duty it is to
give effect to the decree, shows that he wilfully and deliberately refrained
from giving effect to the decision of the Civil Court a case of Contempt may
arise. The present Petition was filed under Sec. 3 of the Contempt of Court
Act - 1952, which did not contain any definition of

**350**

the phrase 'Contempt of Court' or 'Criminal Contempt' or 'Civil Contempt with
the result that it was left to the learned Judge dealing with the matter to
come to the conclusion whether contempt had been committed or not in a
particular  case Contempt of Court it may be remembered is a summary process
and has to be used only from a sense of and under pressure of public interest.
These summary powers, if they are to be effective and are to uphold the
dignity of the Court, must not be used too rapidly and too frequently, without
compelling reasons, at. the instance of aggrieved litigants who, more often
than not, are inspired by a desire to use the machinery of these powers for
enforcing their Civil Rights. These powers have only to be used in serious.
cases where deliberate Contempt is clearly established on-the part of the
contemner. The great importance of upholding the dignity, power, prestige and
authority of the Court of Law and of implicit obedience to the Orders of
-Court can be minimised only at the risk of weakening the foundation of our
Constitutional set up and correspondingly endangering our very democratic
existence. The Court would, accordingly, be failing in its Constitutional
obligation to ignore disobedience of. its Orders or of those of its
subordinate Courts, from any quarter in this Republic, however high.. But, the
usefulness, of this power necessarily depends on the wisdom and restraint with
which it is exercised ... Contempt of Court, it is undeniable, .lies, broadly
speaking, in despising the authority of Justice or the Dignity of the Court."

Even-in Sri Lanka "Failure to honour an undertaking given to court" is a
Contempt of Court..

_De Alwis vs. Rajakaruna(44):_ In _Re Cader(45)_

So too 'Disobedience to an Injunction' . . . is punishable as for Contempt:

_Arumugan vs. Kadirgamanpillai   11-(46)_

In 1970 an Assize Judge made an Order for the return of a motor vehicle to the
claimant, but made it subject to certain conditions. Two months later, a
Proctor, the appellant, made an

**351**

application to that Court,  before the same Judge, for the unconditional
release of the car,' He was convicted for contempt. Fernando P. the President
of the Court of Appeal of Ceylon; (which at that time was the Apex Court)
held:

'' The application made to court to make an order. different from the Order it
had already made could not be-sad- to be in violation of that Order. The
person affected by that Order of 21/9/1970 could not be denied the opportunity
of requesting Court to vary that conditional Order. Much less could a Proctor
appearing for that person and presenting a motion to Court to the same effect
be guilty of Contempt."

_Velayuthan v. The Hon. A. CA. Alles(47)_

From an analysis of all these Judgments it appears that there is a difference
between those cases in which there has been been disobedience, to injunctions
and undertakings given to Court on the one hand, and those in which the
disobedience has been to a Decree or Judgment of a Court, on the other. While
in the former, the 'act itself, unless it has been accidental, casual or done
unintentionally, was held` to be culpable, in the latter instance, here must
be something more, namely, a deliberate disdain of the Court or a disregard
for or defiance of the Court and its Decree. In the case of "Publications" the
acts become culpable if they are 'Calculated' to bring the Court or the Judge
into disrepute or if it is 'Calculated' to divert the orderly course of
;justice or diminish the confidence of the Public in the Judiciary or the
Judicial Process.

In the cases now before us, the 1st Respondent has approached the Court
through his Attorney for a clarification, and for permission to re-commence
the Old Course, while at the same time and in compliance with the Decree,
straightaway, suspending the Old Course. On being pre-warned of a possible
infraction of the: Law, and of having to face. a charge of Contempt, he had,
at every stage, taken advice from the Hon. the Attorney General, before
finally re-starting the Old Course, and that too after the receipt of 1 R4.
Such conduct does not favour - the drawing of an inference of mala fides or
improper or

**352**

collateral motivation. They do not savour of Contempt. The 2nd Respondent,
happened to be acting that day for the Director General of Health. In these
circumstances and in the absence of cogent evidence of a conspiracy or of
connivance, it is most probable that on a reading of the letter 1134. he, the
2nd Respondent, bona fide believed that there was no illegality or misconduct
involved in complying with the order endorsed on it, to him, by the 1st
Respondent. That endorsement directed him to take steps to re-commence the
course. The 2nd Respondent was no doubt, not a party to that case No. 37/87
-Respondent stage, not even at the stage following the Judgment. From; the
evidence it appears that as Acting D.H.S. he merely passed on the directive he
had received from the Ministry. To my mind his conduct does not, in the
circumstances, reveal that degree of carelessness which will attract the
censure of the Court and a conviction for Contempt.

Learned President's, Counsel for the Petitioners contended that in any event..
parties cannot, even of consent, vary the terms `of a 'Judgment.-, No doubt
-that the parties cannot be heard to say, even of consent, that there had not
been a breach of a Fundamental Right, yet, as regards the other. findings and
of the directions given I am unable to accept, without reservation, Learned
Counsel's proposition. Notwithstanding the Judgment in a Civil case it is
possible for the parties to enter into a compromise after they have obtained a
Decree on the matters that they had submitted to court for its determination.
Indeed the Petitioners themselves, in-paragraph 11 of their Petition state
that the Supreme - Court had indicated that any problems between the parties
should be resolved by consent and mutual agreement. With great respect to the
learned Judges who. made the order on 16/6/88 (p8) I am unable to agree with
the statement that once a Court has passed a Decree that it cannot, at the
request of the parties and with their consent, record an agreement reached
between them subsequent to the decree It is possible that an arrangement so
made' and recorded becomes enforceable between the parties. Indeed, in civil
cases, when the Judgment Creditor seeks to issue writ, he is bound to inform
the Court of any compromise that has been reached between the parties, namely
between himself and the Judgment -Debtor, subsequent to the Judgment.

**353**

Accordingly the Rule issued on both Respondents, 1st and 2nd, are discharged.
In all the circumstances of the case I make no order far costs.

**FERNANDO, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading the judgments of my brothers Jameel, J.,
and Amerasinghe, J., and set out my reasons for agreeing with them that the
Rules issued on the` Respondents should be discharged,. without costs:

1. The Order dated 25.4.88 of this Court; firstly, set aside the selections made, and by necessary implication prohibited the continuation of the training course for the persons held to be disqualified, a and, secondly, mandatorily required that fresh selections be made, without any disqualification being imposed on account of trade union action, and by necessary implication required; 'that the persons so selected be' permitted to follow a training course.

2. Fresh selections were made in accordance with that order, and a training course having been commenced on 1.6.88, for the "new" trainees, there has been' full -compliance with the second limb of the Order, and no question of contempt arises in relation thereto.

3. Had the old course been continued, or had a new course been commenced, for the "disqualified" "persons, soon after 25.4.88, this would necessarily have-been in' deliberate and ""wilful" violation of the first limb of the Order, and thus a contempt. 

However, the old course was suspended, and those "disqualified" were
identified, with a view to exclusion from the training course. That Order did
not prohibit,`- for ever, the conducting of a -training course for the
"disqualified" persons: it would `have been quite proper, for instance, if
there were vacancies and after an appropriate selection process, to have
selected some or all of them for another' training course at a future date.
However, the resumption of the "old" course on 16.6.88, after an eight week
suspension, was not, on that basis, and would have been an attempted
circumvention of the Order, and thus a contempt, but for the intervening
events:

**354**

4. The motion dated 27.4.88, if, and insofar as, it sought the sanction of this Court for all the "disqualified" persons to continue to follow the "old" course, was an attempt to obtain a variation of the Order, as it could . not possibly have been suggested that the Order was per incuriam in that respect; this Court was clearly functus All parties, in effect, invited or at least acquiesced in the Court providing an opportunity. for them to reach agreement on any outstanding matter related to the manner of implementation of the Order.

5\. Orders giving redress in respect of the violation of fundamental rights
can be made in an action in an original Court (as in Gunaratne v. People's
Bank, .(1986) 1 Sri L.R. 338) (48) or in a Writ application (of Article
126(3)), or in an application under Article 126, and while parties cannot, by
consent or otherwise, vary the judgments or orders of this Court or. of any
other Court, it would generally be open to a party to renounce some or all of
the benefits to which he is entitled thereunder: A lawful adjustment or
compromise subsequent to judgment and decree would not amount. to a variation
thereof, but would nevertheless bind a party at least to the extent that his
right to execute the decree would be affected pro tanto. The persons aggrieved
by the discriminatory. acts complained of in S.C. 37/87 could have agreed, for
instance, that they had no objection to some or all of the "disqualified"
persons being selected, in addition to themselves. This would have been no
different to a plaintiff who obtains an injunction. restraining a defendant
from entering his land, later consenting to the defendant walking across part
of his land.

6\. While there is no doubt that an agreement was reached on 6.6.88, it
appears most- unlikely that the Petitioners would have agreed to a variation
of the Order of 25.4.88; if such a variation was notified to the Court (which
had already expressed the view that it was functus to vary its own order). it
is most likely that such variation would have been specifically recorded, and
not left for inference or implication. However, the terms of the motion dated
27.4.88, the correspondence between the 1st Respondent and the Deputy
Solicitor-General, and the legal advice given by the latter on 16.6.88
undoubtedly gave rise to a

**355**

misapprehension in the minds of the Respondents as to the Order of 25.4.88 and
what they were entitled to do; analysis-of the facts by my brother
Amerasinghe, J.; demonstrates that they acted bona fide, and not in defiance
or disregard of that Order.

7\. While there is "strict" liability for contempt in regard to scandalizing
the Court, and breaches of injunctions and undertakings, the alleged contempt
here does not fall into these categories. I entirely agree with my brother
Amerasinghe; J., that (a) the mere failure to comply with a declaratory order,
or a non-coercive order, does not, without more, amount to contempt, and that
the party affected by such non-compliance is entitled to come back to this
Court for appropriate orders; the power under Article 126(4) - to grant relief
and to give directions -'extends to giving such directions as may be necessary
for the due implementation of a judgment or order of the Court; contempt
proceedings should not be lightly resorted to, as a' mode of execution of
decrees and orders, but in accordance with the principles to which he has
referred; and (c) acting in accordance with legal advice confers no immunity,
but is merely one factor relevant to bona fides.

**

AMERASINGHE, J.

**

The Ministry of Health had proposed to hold a Post-basic training course for
nurses. It had been ordered by the First Respondent-the Secretary of the
Ministry of Health - that all the nurses who had defied an Essential Services
Order made under the Public Security Ordinance by going on strike would be
excluded from that course.

Miss K. K. Dayawathie and several other nurses who were by that decision
excluded from the course, in S.C. Application No. 37 of 1987, complained of
violations of the Fundamental Rights of equal protection of and equality
before the law and the right of non-discrimination on the ground of political
opinion guaranteed to them under Articles 12(1) and 12(2) of the Constitution.
The Respondents in that case were Dr. S. D.. M. Fernando, Secretary, Ministry
of Health (who is the First Respondent in this case) and 161 others.

**356**

After three days of hearing; the Supreme Court, comprising His Lordship the
Chief Justice and Justices Atukorale and Tambiah, on 25 April 1988 decided
that the -classification made by the Respondents in the selection of nurses
for the training course in question had "not been done bona fide". The Chief
Justice, (Atukorale and Tambiah JJ. agreeing) was of the opinion "that the
Petitioner's- assertion of not being equally treated and of being
discriminated against is entitled to succeed.-!' The Court accordingly made
order "directing that all selections made for the said training course - as,
for instance, set out in P10 and P1 1 - as Grade I-Nursing Officers (Hospital
Services), be and the same are hereby set, aside: that fresh selections be
made on the basis of the marks obtained by those who presented themselves
(including the Petitioners and the Added Petitioners) for the examination,
without any disqualification being imposed upon them on the ground of
participation in any trade union action between 18.3.86 and 17.4.86."

On 27 April 1988, two days after the Order of Court, the First Respondent in
that case (S.C. Application No. 37 of 1987), who is also the First Respondent
in this case, filed papers in Court moving that "this case be mentioned before
Your Lordships on 29th April 1988 (9.45 a.m.) for the purpose of obtaining a
clarification from Your Lordships whether it would 'be in order for the 1st
and 2nd Respondents to proceed with the course which has already commenced
whilst a new course is started for those whose names were deleted on account
of trade union action. Thus were commenced, what I shall, for convenience,
refer to as, the 'clarification proceedings before this Court.

The Court (Ranasinghe, C.J., Atukorale and Tambiah, JJ.) on 29 April 1988, 9
May 1988 and 6 June 1988 "listened to the submissions put forward by the
respective Counsel; and recorded the proceedings as they took place."
(Ranasinghe, C.J.). The Chief Justice explained that

" This Court assembled after the judgment in this Court was delivered, on an
application of the respondents, merely to enable the parties to arrive at any
settlement, which they would arrive inter se . . . . All this was done by this
Court,

**357**

even though this Court was functus, after the Judgment was delivered, merely
for the purpose of enabling the parties to arrive in the presence of Court a.
settlement which-would;' thereafter be given effect to by them."

The Chief Justice said that no order had been made, by Court during those
proceedings and added that

" As far as this Court is concerned, it, has no jurisdiction to make any order
that would bind the parties or to record any proceedings or a settlement that
would vest any party with any enforceable rights."

His Lordship the Chief Justice (Atukorale and Tambiah, JJ. agreeing) recorded
the proceedings of the 6th of June in the following terms:

" Mr. Mahanama, de Silva (Counsel for the Petitioners) informs the Court that
a new course has commenced on the 1 st of June 1988 and that all those
petitioners together with others who had complained that they have been
wrongfully left out of the earlier course have been allowed to participate in
this new course:

It is also agreed that both groups, i.e., the group already following the
course which is due to end in about three months time and the group which
commenced their course on the 1st of June 1988, will both sit one common
examination, i.e. those who finished the earlier course will have to await
till those who commenced their course on the 1st of June 1988 also complete
their course and thereafter both groups will sit together a common
examination."

There may well have also been, as there usually are from the Bench as well as
the Bar during the course of any proceeding, what Dharmadhikari, J. in _A. T.
K. Shakari Sanstha v. State of Maharashtra, (36)_ described as expressions of
""tentative loud thinking." There may have been such thinking on the question
of not merely the mode of implementing the decision of the Court, but also on
the

**358**

possibility of continuing the old training course for all the 163 nurses who
had been earlier selected for the course. I am persuaded that there might have
been some such loud thinking on this matter during the proceedings on the 6th
of June by three matters: Firstly, when the First Respondent wrote to Mr. M.
S. Aziz, Deputy Solicitor-General on 6th June inquiring

"(a) Whether we can continue the entire batch in training with immediate
effect.

(b) Whether we have to make any modifications in the batch to continue this
training", the Deputy Solicitor-General in his reply of 10 June stated as
follows: '

" On 6.6.1986" (Sic.) "I informed Court that there had been discussions with
the Ministry officials and the Petitioner's 'representatives and that it was
agreed to' have both courses proceed. The Petitioners" Counsel also agreed to
this and this was duly recorded. The' only stipulation recorded was that both
batches will it for one examination at the conclusion of the new course. I
also recall the Petitioners' Counsel stating that only those who were eligible
to be selected in the old batch would be permitted to- which l responded that
only persons eligible were selected and that in any case we should not have
this recorded as agreement had already been reached between the parties on the
lines recorded by Court. "

The emphasis is mine.

The second matter is this. On 10 June 1988 the Petitioner in S.C. Application
No. 37 of 1987, filed a petition seeking to include two matters in the record,
viz., that (1) "Counsel for the Petitioners submit that those who had not.
obtained the requisite marks should not be included,"; and (2) "that the
record be amended to include a provision that those who are not qualified for
selection would not be permitted to follow the course."

However, the record of the proceedings of the 6th of June was not amended.

**359**

Thirdly, the Deputy Solicitor-General seems to, have had the idea of the
continuation of. the course for all the 163 persons who had been, originally
selected lurking in the conscious or subconscious recesses of his mind. During
the proceedings of the Court on June 16th 1988, the Deputy Solicitor-General
is' reported in the record of the "clarification proceedings" to have said:

'' One has also to bear in mind the contents of the motion, which was filed
:soon after the judgment, which sought clarification from Your Lordship
whether 163-persons, who were following the 1st course continue to follow that
course, since 13 months have elapsed from the commencement of the course and
the course is to be concluded in another three months time.

I would respectfully submit, that I object to any steps to resile from this
agreement."

The motion recites the fact that there were 163 students who had already
followed the course for 13 months. But the Court was not asked in that motion
whether all the 1' 63 persons, eligible or not, who were following that
course, could continue to follow the course. The motion, was solely "for the
purpose of obtaining a clarification from Your Lords hips whether it would be
in order for the 1st and 2nd respondents to proceed with the course which has
already commenced whilst a new course is started for those whose names were
deleted on account of trade union action."

After the proceedings in Court on 6 June 1988 the Petitioners in S.C.
Application 87/7 (probably fearing that the agreement to have a continuing
course for those already selected might be construed to mean that all those
following the course, whether they were qualified in terms of the Order of
Court or not, might be permitted to continue to follow the old course) through
their instructing Attorney-at-law, Mr. S. M. Suhaid, wrote to the First
Respondent the Secretary, Ministry of Health, on 6 June 1988) as follows:

When the above case was mentioned today (6.6.1988) the Supreme Court was
informed that a fresh course has

**360**

commenced on 1.6.1988. It was also agreed between 'parties that those (who are
qualified and had the requisite marks) could continue to follow. the old
training course (that is' the course which commenced on. 1st April, 1987) but
that both groups would sit for a. single common finial examination.

You would appreciate that this concession only permits . you to accommodate
only persons qualified to follow the course and that persons **who have not
obtained the requisite marks should definitely be dropped from the course"**
(emphasis is his) "so as to fall in line with and give effect to the judgment
in the above case. In this connection

I have to invite your attention to the lists prepared by your Ministry and
furnished to the Public Services United Nurses Union which contains the names
of persons who are qualified to follow the course out of those who were
selected initially and the names of persons who would be dropped from the
course.

I trust that you would adhere strictly to the aforesaid arrangement as I have
been instructed to give `notice that any deviation on your part from the
aforesaid arrangement would compel my clients to apply to the Supreme Court to
have you dealt with for contempt.".

When he received Mr. Suhaid's letter of the 6th, of June, on the same day, the
First Respondent wrote to Mr. M. S. Aziz, the Deputy Solicitor-General who had
appeared for him in S.C. Application No. 37 of 1987, with copies to the
Attorney-General and the Director-General of Health Services, in the following
terms:

" I am herewith annexing a photocopy of a letter sent by Mr. S: M. Suhaid,
Attorney-at-Law and Notary. Public in regard to Supreme Court Application No.
S.C. 37/87. We have taken a batch of nurses for post-graduate training and the
course commenced on the 1st of June '1988. As you are aware, the cut off point
for entry into this latter course is higher tha    n the cut off point of the
previous students whose training was stopped on the Supreme Court ruling.

**361**

Mr. Suhaid's letter suggests that we should drop out from the course which has
run for 13 months, -those students who are below the cut off point of the new
batch:

It was our suggestion that the batch which was in training for 13 months be
allowed to continue, their training for the balance-5 months but sit for the
examination at the same time as the new, batch which commenced training on the
1st of June.

The last paragraph of Mr. Suhaid's letter speaks about matters- which `may
arise leading to contempt of the Supreme' Court decision.

Therefore, I shall be glad to be informed of the position in regard to the,
old batch:

(a) Whether we can continue the entire batch in training with immediate
effect.

(b) Whether we have to make any modifications in the batch to continue this
training."

Mr. M: S. Aziz, Deputy Solicitor-General, on. behalf of the Attorney-General,
replied on 10 June, 988 that the Court had been informed that after
discussions between the officials of-the Ministry of Health and the
Petitioners' representatives; it was agreed that both the old course and the
new course would proceed and he concludes that

" Since the Supreme Court has been kept informed of the steps we propose to
take now (with its permission) regarding the Old Course consequent to the
agreement reached, any action taken to proceed with the Old Course cannot, in
my view, be regarded as an act in contempt of court. It may nevertheless be
open for the Court on an application made by the other '"party to indicate"
that we should not proceed with the old course in view of the present-
situation. This would ultimately be a matter-for that Court and one cannot
state what its reaction will be."

It is clear from the letter of the First Respondent to Mr. Aziz that he was
not concerned with the question whether` the old

**362**

course and the new course could be conducted. What he, wanted guidance on`
were, two precisely worded, specific -matters relating, not to the mode of
training, but to the eligibility of those to be admitted to the training
facility, howsoever provided. With regard' to that matter the Deputy
Solicitor-General offered no advice. He merely stated in his letter of 10 June
that in the motion for clarification it had been recited that there were 163
students who were following a training course that had already proceeded for
thirteen months, and that he recalled that, although the Petitioners' Counsel
in the proceedings of the 6th of June had said that only those who were
eligible to be selected in the old batch would be permitted to follow the old
course, he had responded that only persons eligible were selected and that in
any case that should not have been recorded as agreement had already been
reached between. the parties on the lines recorded by Court.

What had been agreed between the parties and recorded by the Court-on 6 June,
1988 did not relate to eligibility. The Court had already decided that and it
was by no means attempting to vary its own order. It had no power to do so.
(See Ganeshanathan v. Vivienne Goonewardene and three others. (49) Moreover,
it was, as it said of itself, functus, and could not; therefore make any
order. It was in these 'clarification . proceedings' merely providing a forum
for the parties to work out an agreed method of implementing its Order.

Finding that the parties were at variance with each other and not wanting to
be drawn into controversy; on 16 June 1988 the Court terminated what I have
called the 'clarification proceedings' in respect of S.C. Application No.
37/87. The Chief Justice (with Atukorale and Tambiah, JJ. agreeing) said:

We now see that differences have arisen in regard to what took place before
this Court on the 6th of June 1988. As the parties have not been able to agree
as to what took place in Court, and as to why what was communicated to Court
on the 6th of June 1988 was so communicated, this Court does not propose to
continue any further in regard to this matter and these proceedings are now
terminated."

**363**

If I may say so with respect, the Court took the proper step in terminating
these proceedings at that stage when there was a dispute as to what was
supposed to have transpired. As Dharmadhikari, J. said in A. T. K. Sahakari
Sanstha, Nagour v. State of Maharashtra, (36).

" Judges cannot be drawn into controversy over 'such matters. It is not
consistent with the dignity of the Court and the decorum of the Bar that any
course should be permitted which may lead to controversy . Such matters are to
be determined only by what is stated in the record of the Court. That which is
not so recorded cannot be allowed to be relied upon giving scope to
controversy.

To permit the atmosphere of the Court to be vitiated by such controversy would
be detrimental to the very foundation of justice."

On the day on which the Court terminated the 'clarification proceedings", i.e.
16 June 1988, the First Respondent wrote to Mr. M. S. Aziz, the Deputy
Solicitor-General, as follows:

" I would be glad to be informed on the decisions made today in the Supreme
Court on this case how I should proceed.

Can I take back for training the entire Batch which Batch was suspended from
training earlier by the Supreme. Court. There is a lot of pressure from those
following the course that the entire batch should be taken for training."

On the same day, the Deputy Solicitor-General wrote to the First Respondent in
the following terms:

" The Supreme Court today made order terminating the proceedings in S.C.
Application 37/87. This means the Judgment of the Supreme Court and the
agreement recorded in the proceedings of 06.06.88 would determine the position
of the parties to this application. Thus, there is no objection to proceeding
with the First course 'which was suspended as a result of the Judgment of the
Supreme Court (which included nurses who were substituted in the place of
those whose names were deleted as a result of Trade Union Action.)"

**364**

On the same day the First Respondent made a minute as follows on the letter of
the Deputy Solicitor-General:

"D.G.,

Course to be commenced on Monday 20/6/88. Please issue necessary
instructions."

The Director-General, Health Services, to whom the minute was addressed, by
his letter dated 1 7 June 1988 instructed the Principal of the Post Basic
Nurses Training School in Colombo to "'take action to inform all students on
the course which was suspended on 25th April 1988 to report to the School and
to re-start the course on Monday 20th June 1988."

The old training course re-commenced on 20 June but was suspended by an Order
of Court in S.C. Application No. 109/88.

On 11 July, 1988 the Petitioner in this case (who was one of the Petitioners
in S.C. Application 37/87) complained to Court that the First Respondent (The
Secretary to the Ministry of Health), the Second Respondent (The Acting
Director-General of Health Services) and the Third Respondent (The Principal
of the Post Basic Nurses Training School) had by "re-opening and/or re-
commencing and/or continuation of the said Post Basic Training Course which
commenced on 01.04.87 were acting "in defiance" and that their action
constituted "a refusal to obey the order and judgment of" the Court and that
they had thereby "committed contempt of the authority of" the Court.

Upon reading the petition and Affidavit of the Petitioner, and after hearing
the submissions of Counsel for the Petitioner, the Court ordered that a Rule
be served on the First and. Second Respondents to show cause why they should
not be punished for having committed contempt of the Supreme Court in the
following manner:

"(1) By re-opening and re-commencing on 20th June, 1988 the Post Basic Course
for Training of Grade II Segment 'A' Nursing Officers (Hospital Services)
which had commenced on 01.04.1987 which had been set aside by

**365**

the Supreme Court , by its Judgment in Supreme Court Application Wring No.
S.C. 37/87 decided. on 25R4:1988 and Which had further directed that fresh
selections be made on the basis of the marks obtained by those who had
presented themselves for the examinations without any -disqualification being
imposed upon them on the ground of participation inn any trade union action
between 18.03.1986 and 17,04.1986, grid by continuing to conduct the said
Training Course from 20.06:1988 to 25.06.1988 and by holding 'classes and/or'
lectures in respect of the said Training Course, during the said period at
Mulleriyawa Hospital hand at Kalutara Hospital for those who had been selected
for the, said Training Course which, was set aside by the said Judgment and
thereby acting in defiance of the said order and judgment of the Supreme Court
and wilfully refusing Using to obey the same.

(2) By deliberately and wilfully neglecting and/or refraining from complying
with the judgment and Order by the Supreme Court in Application bearing No.
S.C. 37/87 and decided. on 25.04.1988 by wilfully neglecting and/or failing to
make fresh selections for. the Post Basic Course for raining of Grade II
Segment Nursing Officers as Grade I Nursing Officers (Hospital Services) and
Grade I Public Health Sisters as directed by the said. Judgment and Order . I
of the Supreme Court:''

It was not disputed that after the Judgment of the Court in Application No.
37/87 the Post Basic Training Course, which had commenced on 1 April 1987, was
suspended forthwith: This is stated to be the case in paragraph '8 of the
Petitioner's Petition. dated 11 July, 1988\. Nor was it in dispute that; in
accordance with the decision of the Court, fresh selections were made. In
paragraph 12 of the same Petition the Petitioner states that

'' On 30,4.88. aria on 05.05.88 the Ministry of Health had. prepared a list of
those who should.-be omitted from the said Post Basic Training Course and a
list of those who should be newly selected on; he basis of marks from and out
of those. who had been left out initially."

**366**

In paragraph 13 of the Petition, the states that "photocopies of the said
lists were handed over to Rev. Muthetuwa Ananda Thero. President of the United
Public Services Nurses Union, by Dr. Joe Fernando, Director of Health
Services", the Second Respondent in this case. Copies of these lists were
annexed to the Petition.

What was the purpose of preparing these new lists? The Petitioner in Paragraph
of 14 of her Petition explained that "the said lists were prepared by the,
Ministry of Health for the purpose of commencing a new Post Basic Training
Course on the basis of the marks obtained in order to give effect to and
comply with the judgment of Your Lordship's Court in the said case No. 37/87".

On the basis of the admissions made in the Petitioner's own Petition that the
Respondents had made fresh selections for the Post Basic Training Course in
order to give effect to and comply with the judgment of the Court, the second
charge in the Rule issued in these proceedings must fail.

The first of the two charges, in the Rule issued on the Respondents is that by
continuing to conduct the training course from 20.6. 1988 to 25. 06. 198 "for
those who had been Selected for the said training course and which was set
aside "by of Order of the Supreme Court", the Respondents were "acting in
defiance of the said Order and Judgment of the Supreme Court and wilfully
refusing to obey the same''.

The gravamen of the charge is not that the old training course had been re-
commenced, but that all those who had been originally directions of the Court,
had been allowed to continue to follow that course. It is this part of the
rule that bears most heavily on the Respondents.

There was clearly a failure on the of the Second Respondent to comply with the
order of the Court that only those who were eligible in terms of the marks
obtained were to be admitted to the training course, for the Second Respondent
in his letter dated 17 June 1988 to the Principal Post Basic

**367**

Training School ordered the Principal to "take immediate action to inform all
students on the course to report to your school and restart the course by
Monday,: 20th June 1988.".

The minute made by the 1st Respondent to the 2nd Respondent does not
specifically refer to the persons to be allowed to follow the course but, in a
cryptic manner, merely orders the re-commencement of the course. Ex facie,
therefore, it might have been argued that the First Respondent did not, in the
directions he gave, fail to comply with the Order of Court which said nothing
of the mode of training. Indeed, according. to the recorded, proceedings of
the 6th of June, the Court had expressed no objection to the continuation of
the old course. The Second Respondent took the minute to be an order that all
students who were following the old course should, be summoned to continue the
course. He probably misunderstood the opinion of the Deputy Solicitor-General
` who, somewhat ambiguously, said in. his letter of 16th June to the First
Respondent that that "there is no objection to proceeding with the first
course which was suspended as a result of Trade Union action." The course that
was suspended and with regard to which he was required to issue instructions
was, it seems, taken to mean the course, riot merely in the sense of form and
content, but in the wider sense of those following it as well. The course
lock, stock and barrel.

The First Respondent, however, did not in his Affidavit of 30 September; 1988,
filed in these proceedings, specifically deny the Petitioner' s complaint in
paragraph 25 of her Petition of 11 July 1988 that the Respondents, including
the First Respondent, were making arrangements to continue the` Post Basic
Training Course which commenced on 1: April, 1987 ""for all those who had been
selected for the said course: and without compliance of the said' Judgment of
Your Lordships Court."

Nor was it argued on his behalf that the First Respondent had no intention of
re-commencing the course for all those: who had followed the earlier course.
The First Respondent, quite properly in my view, did not seek to take shelter
behind technicalities but, instead, took his stand on the ground that in'
doing what he did, he did not act in contempt of this Court.

**368**

The question to be answered then is whether by recommencing the course for all
those who were participants in the old course, regardless of their eligibility
as determined by the" Court in its Order of 25 April 1988, the First
Respondent and the Second Respondent were guilty of contempt of court. Were
they, as they are charged, acting 'in of the "Order, and Judgment of the
Supreme Court and wilfully refusing to obey the same"?

The charge has, in my view, been correctly framed, for a mere failure or even
refusal to abide by the decision of a Court does not, without more, constitute
a contempt of Court. Whether there has been a contempt by reason of the
failure to comply with the decision of a Court depends on the circumstances of
the case, including the nature of its Order.

Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., on behalf of the Petitioner, urged that where the
Supreme Court, in the exercise of the jurisdiction conferred upon it by
Article 126 of the Constitution, hears and determines any question relating to
the infringement or imminent infringement by executive or administrative
action of any fundamental right or language right declared and recognised by
Chapter Ill; or Chapter IV of the Constitution, the Order of the Court ought
to be enforced through contempt proceedings in terms of the power conferred on
the Supreme Court by Article 105(3) of the Constitution.

Article 105(3) of the Constitution says that

" The Supreme Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka and the Court of Appeal of
the Republic of Sri Lanka shall each be a. superior, court of record and shall
have all. the powers of such court including the power to punish for contempt
of itself, whether committed in the court itself or elsewhere, with
imprisonment or fine or both as the court may deem fit...."

I am unable to accept without qualification the submission of the learned
President's Counsel appearing for the Petitioner.

In order to establish Contempt of-Court,. in the words of Lord Radcliffe in
Reginald Perera v. The King. (50)

**369**

"There must be involved some act done or writing published calculated bring a
Court or a Judge of the Court into contempt or to lower his authority or
something calculated to obstruct or interfere- with the due course of justice
or the lawful- process of the Courts. See Reg. v. Gray.

This does not necessarily happen where a person has failed to or refused to
obey an ordinary, non-coercive order of court.

Bertram, CJ. in _Ismail v. Ismail (43)_ said that "non-compliance with the
judgment of a Court is not, in ordinary circumstances, a Contempt of Court."

Where the Order of Court is declaratory, i.e., where it is a decision merely
expressing publicly, in formal and explicit terms, the rights and obligations
of the parties concerned, a failure to abide by such an order would not, in my
opinion without more, amount to a Contempt of Court. (See Borrie and Lowe's,
**Law of Contempt** , 1983, 2nd Edn. at p. 418). In Webster v. Southwark
London Borough Council, (52) following Idndley, L.J. in Seaward V. Peterson,
Forbes, J. said (53).

I readily accept the proposition that where a Court makes only a declaratory
order it ' is, not contempt for the party affected by the order to refuse to
abide by it.''

Indeed, even if the Order of the Court is more than merely declaratory, the
failure, or even refusal, to comply with it does not necessarily, itself
constitute a Contempt of Court. In Amarasekera v. Goonewardene, (54) a Police
Magistrate had directed the Respondent to abate a nuisance by removing a kiln
to the furthest distance possible from the house or break it down, The
Appellant

Stated aloud, " I will neither remove the kiln nor break it down" Ennis, J.
(at p.53) said

"Now, if the appellant said this in open court in an offensive or contemptuous
tone, he certainly deserved punishment and he rendered himself liable to
punishment. But the Magistrate called upon him to show cause why he should

**370**

not be punished for contempt not for the tone adopted by the appellant but for
refusing to obey the Order appealed -from imposing a fine of Rs. 100 for
Contempt of Court. Had the .complainant accepted the Order of Court and
undertaken to obey it, he would have :practically-sacrificed his right of
appeal. This he was not bound to do and by the mere refusal to obey the order
referred to, it can hardly be -said that he became liable to: be punished for
Contempt of Court."

By no means does this imply that the Orders of a Court can be disregarded. An
Order of a. Court, even one that is irregularly issued, must be obeyed by the
party affected until the Order be discharged. Per Macdonell; C.J. In the
Matter of a Rule on A.F. Molamure, (5) following Silva v. Appuhamy, (56)- Any
person wilfully. disobeying. such an order is liable to be. punished for
Contempt of Court. (Per Macdonell, C.J. in Molamure's case (supra) at pp. 50
fin. - 51). Moreover, there is it seems, a special duty cast on public
officers to comply with the, orders of court. Tuli, J.- in Parkash Chand v.
S.S. Grewal, (37) "Punjab and Haryana High Court, (Full Bench) at paragraph 5
of the judgment of the Court explained the expectations of the law in the
following way:

" If any party to the proceedings considers that any Court has committed any
error, in the understanding of the law or in its application, resort must be
had to such review or appeals as the law provides. When once an Order has been
passed which the Court has jurisdiction to pass, it is the duty of all persons
bound by it to obey the Order so long as it stands, and it would tend to the
subversion of orderly administration and civil Government if parties could
disobey orders with impunity. If' such is the position as regards private
parties, the duty is all the more imperative in the case of Governmental
authorities, otherwise there would be a conflict' between one branch of the
State polity, viz., the executive and another  branch the Judicial. If
disobedience could go. unchecked, it would result in Courts ceasing to have
any meaning and judicial power itself becoming a mockery. When the State
Government obeys a

**371**

law, or gives effect to an order of a Court passed against it, it is not doing
anything: which detracts from its dignity, but rather, invests the law and the
courts with the dignity which are their due, which enhances the prestige of
the executive Government itself, in a democratic set up.''

Attention might also be drawn to the observations of Nerula, J. in _Raghunath
v. P. Sahai, (42)_ paragraph 10, where he said as follows:

" Counsel then referred to the Judgment of the. Judicial . Committee in
_Eastern Trust Co. v. Mckenzie Mann & Co. Ltd., (57)._ In that case it was
held that it is the duty of the: Crown and of every branch of the Executive to
abide by and obey the law and that if there is any difficulty in ascertaining
it, the Courts are open, to the Crown to sue, and it is the duty of the
Executive in cases of doubt to ascertain the law,' in order to obey it, and
not to disregard it."

Although a failure or refusal to obey a merely declaratory order, will not by
itself, without more, expose a person to an action for. contempt, yet, where,
in the circumstances of a case: justice demands that such an order should be
enforced, the court has an inherent jurisdiction to enforce such orders. (See
per Forbes" J: in _Webster v. Southwark L._ _B. C., (52)._ In Webster's case
the Court' found  (see p. 224) that, although it had made a declaratory order
rather than issue an injunction or afford coercive relief because the
defendant was a responsible authority and it was "thought inconceivable that a
declaratory order would not result in the plaintiff obtaining his rights", yet
that authority-had in consequences of` the manner in which it had treated the
order of the Court, "forfeited all right to be regarded as a responsible
authority so far as the Courts are concerned-." In such exceptional
circumstances, Forbes, J. said (at p. 226) that a Court could not "just stand
by and confess that it was powerless" and decided that the writ of
sequestration in that case was ``properly sought and properly given:"

I cannot, however, go so far as to say that contempt proceedings should be-
ordinarily resorted to execute the orders

**372**

of a Court. Certainly, with regard to cases where: the law expressly provides
for the execution of decrees, separate proceedings, such as Contempt
proceedings, should not be resorted to give effect to an order of a Court.
This was clearly indicated by Bertram, C.J. in Ismail v. Ismail, (43).

Even if there is no process in law to execute a particular order, and there is
in my opinion no such process prescribed by law to give effect to the orders
of the Supreme Court made in the exercise of its jurisdiction conferred upon
it by Article 126 of the Constitution in its determination of questions
relating to the infringement or imminent. infringement by executive or
administrative action of. any fundamental right or language right declared and
recognized by, Chapter III or Chapter IV of the Constitution, it would, I
think, be improper to use Contempt proceedings as a lever for obtaining such
execution (see per Bal Raj Tuli, J. in delivering the Judgment of the Full
Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Parkash Chand v. S.S. Grewal and
Others. (P) See also _Raghunath Rai v. P. Sahai and another, (42)_ or :to 'do
duty for other measures. (See per Hidyatullah, C.J. delivering the Order of
the Court in _Debabrata Bandopoadhay and others v. The State of West Bengal
and another, (41)._

Perhaps it may be advisable in cases where the law does not provide for the
execution of an Order to ensure that the party affected gives an undertaking
to comply with the order, for then the failure to honour such an undertaking
would, l think, entitle the other party to legitimately use contempt
proceedings to enforce the order, even though the undertaking may not be
embodied in the Order. ( _Cf. C.J. F. De Alwis v. . C. Rajakaruna, (58)_
following _In Re P. K. Ensa, (59)._

What is the position where a party who has given no undertaking to Court
refuses to or otherwise fails to comply with a declaratory order of Court
made. in the exercise of the jurisdiction given in terms of Article 126 of the
Constitution? The party concerned ought, in my opinion, to go back to Court
and seek an injunction to enforce the order of the Court. (See per

**373**

Forbes, J. in _Webster v. Southwark London' Borough Council, (52 )._

Once such a coercive order is obtained, the; obligations and rights of, the
parties are placed on a different footing. There is then a most solemn and
authoritative; order of the Court where every diligence must be exercised to
observe the order of the Court and to obey it to the letter, strictly in terms
of the :order of the Court.. (See per Kindersley, V.C., in _Hardings v.
Tingey, (60)_ Spokes v. Banbury Board of Health, (1865) LR (42 at 48) and
_Howitt Transport v. Transport and General Workers' Union, (61)_ referred to
with approval in. Borne and Lowe's Law of Contempt, 1987, 2nd Edn. at p.394:
See also In _Re S.M.A. -Cader and another, (45)_ and _Perera v. Abdul Hamid
(62)._ In such circumstances there 'is, I believe, no need to show that the
person charged with contempt was intentionally contumacious or that he
intended to interfere with -the administration of justice.' (Borrie and Lowe's
**Law of` Contempt;** 1983 2nd Edn., p. 400; per Sachs, L. J., in _Knight v.
Clifton, (63_ ) and _Stancombe v. Trowbridge U.D.C. (64)_ cited with approval
by Lord Wilberforce in _Heaton "s Transport. (St. Helens)- Ltd. v. Transport
and General Workers" Union (65)._

Under Rule 31 of the Old English Rules of the Supreme Court, an, act of
disobedience would become an act of contempt only if it was "wilful" "Wilful"
was taken to mean that while, where the terms of an injunction were broken it
was not necessary to show that` the person was intentionally contumacious or
that he intended to interfere with the administration of justice, yet where
the failure or refusal to obey the order of Court was casual or accidental and
unintentional, it will "not be met by the full rigours of the law'". (Borrie
and Lowe's, Law of Contempt, (supra) at p. 400-401 following Lord Russell;
C.J. in Fairelough & Sans v. Manchester Ship Canal (N o. 2) of 1897 41 Sol Jo.
225) .: -

Although Rule 5(l:) (which is the corresponding. provision in the English
Rules of the Supreme Court of 1965 which came into effect on 1st October 1966)
omits; the word Wilful before 'disobeys", the liability for. the disobedience
of an injunction has

**374**

not become strict and absolute. The omission of the word wilful' may have made
it easier to establish a prima facie case of Contempt, but, disobedience which
attracts -commitment or sequestration continues in practice in the United
Kingdom to be required to be disobedience which-is not casual, accidental and
unintentional. See per Lord Wilberforce in _Heatons Transport (St. Helens)
Ltd. v. Transport and General Workers' Union, (65)._

In the matter before us the Order, of the Court was of a mixed nature: It was
partly declaratory in nature when it was formally . announced that the
petitioners had been discriminated against and, the selections made were set
aside. It is this part of the Order that has been disregarded and gave rise to
these proceedings. The Order was also partly, mandatory, in that in. terms it
gave directions and instructed the Respondents in S.C. Application No. 37 of
1987 to make fresh selections on. the basis of the marks obtained by those who
presented themselves. It was :partly prohibitive in that it ordered the
Respondents to refrain from imposing disqualification on the ground of
participation in any trade union activity between certain dates specified by
the Court.

The Respondents understood this perfectly well, and, for that reason, made new
lists of eligible persons in terms of the order of the Court. In re-commencing
the course for all those who had been selected earlier, regardless of, whether
they were qualified or not in terms of the order of Court, there is no doubt
that the Respondents disobeyed the order of this Court. Whether they did so
"'in defiance" of the order of the Court and whether they were ''wilfully"
refusing to obey the order of the Court and guilty of Contempt of Court is
another matter.

Justice Tuli in _Parkash Chand v S. S. Grewal and others, (37_ ) quotes with
approval the following instructive words of Chief Justice Dua of the Delhi
High Court, in _Gian Chand Bali v. L. F Singh, (67)_ on the nature of contempt
proceedings:

" Contempt of Court it may be remembered, is a summary - process and has Lo be
used only from a sense 0f duty and '-under pressure of public interest. These
summary powers; if they are to be effective. and are to uphold the dignity of

**375**

Court, must not be used too readily and too frequently, without compelling
reasons at the instance of aggrieved litigants who, more often than not, are
inspired by a desire to utilise the machinery of these powers for enforcing
their civil rights. These powers have to be used only in serious cases where
deliberate contempt is clearly established on the part of the contemner. The
great importance of upholding the dignity, power, prestige and authority of
the Courts of Law and justice in a democratic society founded , on the Rule of
Law and of implicit obedience to the orders of the Courts, can be minimised
only at the risk of weakening the foundations of our constitutional set-up and
correspondingly endangering our very democratic existence. This Court would,
accordingly, be failing in its constitutional obligation to ignore
disobedience of its orders or those of its subordinate Courts, from any
quarter in this Republic, however high. But the usefulness of this power
necessarily depends on the wisdom and restraint with which it is exercised
..... Contempt or Court, it is undeniable, lies broadly speaking, in
despising' of the authority, justice or dignity of the Court, and the person
whose conduct tends to bring the authority and administration -of law into
-disregard or, disrespect or interferes with or prejudices the parties or
witnesses, or tends to obstruct the Court in the discharge of its duties, is
normally understood to -be guilty of contempt: and it. is equally undeniable
that this Court would be' quick to take all lawful steps against the guilty
for vindicating the Court's authority."

After quoting those words from the decision of Chief Justice Dua, Justice Tuli
in Parkash Chand's case (supra) goes on to say at p. 688 as follows:

" From the above discussion it is abundantly clear that he essence of the
offence of contempt of court is . wilful disobedience to any judgment, decree,
direction, order or writ of a Court and not mere inaction to give effect to
it. The conduct of the alleged contemner must be wilful, showing deliberate
and conscious disregard of the Court's order or a

**376**

despising and disdainful attitude towards the verdicts of Courts. It has to be
remembered that contempt proceedings cannot be resorted to by a litigant with
a view to obtaining relief in accordance with the order or decree in his
favour but a serious note is to be taken of a disrespectful or disdainful
attitude of a person bound by the decree or. order with a view to uphold the
majesty, authority, and dignity of the Courts of Law:"

In _Badoordeen v. Dingiri Banda et. al., (68),_ Macdonell, C.J. expressed the
view, obiter, that Contempt is not criminal unless the act punished per se
constitutes a-crime.

Even if a contempt is not always a crime, it bears a criminal character and,
therefore; it must be satisfactorily proved.

Lord. Denning, _M. R. in Re Bramblewale Ltd., (22)_ said:

" A Contempt of Court is an offence. of a criminal character. A` man ay be
sent to prison for it. It must be satisfactorily proved. To use the time-
honoured phrase, it must be proved beyond reasonable doubt."'

In _Knight v. Clifton, (20). Lord Justice Russell, following Re Bramblewale
(22)_ said:

" Contempt of Court, even of the type that consists in breach of an injunction
or undertaking, is something that may carry penal consequences, even loss of
liberty, and the evidence required to establish it must be appropriately
cogent."

In _P. A. Thomas & Co. v. Mould, (69) O'Connor J, _said:

'" Where parties seek the power of the Court to commit people to prison and
deprive them of their liberty there has got to be quite clear certainty about
it."

**377**

This is also -the view of the Supreme. Court of India, Hidyatullah, C.J.,
speaking for the Court, in Debabrata _Bandopadhyay v. State of West Bengal
said (41):_

" A question whether there is contempt of Court or not is a serious one. The
Court is both the accuser as well as the Judge of the accusation. It behoves
the Court to act with as great circumspection as possible making all
allowances for errors of judgment and difficulties arising from inveterate
practices in courts and tribunals. It is only when a clear case of
contumacious conduct not explainable otherwise, arises that the contemner must
be punished .... Punishment under the law of contempt is called for when the
lapse is deliberate and is in disregard-of ones duty and in detiance of
authority. To take action in an unclear case is to make the law of contempt do
duty for other measures and is not to be encouraged."

This elucidation of the law was quoted-with approval by Barkaria:J. (who
delivered the judgment of the Court) in S, Abdul Karim v. M. K. Prakash and
Others, (34). In that case Sarkaria, J. said:

" The broad test to be applied in such a case is, whether the act complained
of was calculated to obstruct or had an intrinsic tendency to interfere with
.,the course of justice and the due administration of law. The standard of
proof required to establish` a charge of criminal contempt' is the same as in
any other criminal proceeding. .. Human Judgment is fallible and .... so long
as a .... officer in the discharge of his official duties acts in good faith
and without an y motive to defeat, obstruct or interfere with the due course
of justice, the Courts will not as a rule punish-him for a "criminal
contempt". Even if it could be urged that mens rea, as such, is not an'
indispensable ingredient of the offence of contempt;: the Courts are loath to
punish a contemner, if the act or omission complained of, was not wilful."

**378**

In _Ragunath_ _Rai_ v, P. _Sahai_ , (42) Nerula, J. said that:

Whether in a particular case contempt has been committed Pr not, has to -be.
decided in the light of the circumstances of each. case. While zealously
safeguarding the dignity of the Court, it is also to be borne in mind that it
is of equal importance that- contempt proceedings should not be abused and
that utmost care must betaken to avoid resort to such proceedings in such
cases where such action is not appropriate. Though disregard of a Court's
order may itself amount to contempt even in the absence of disobedience; it
would still be necessary, in my opinion, to prove in most cases, that even the
disregard was wilful and not **bona fide.'**

In continuing the old course for all those who were originally selected, the
acts of the Respondents may have been 'wilful' in the sense that they were not
casual, accidental or unintentional. However, in the light of the
circumstances of this case, I am not satisfied that the Respondents acted with
a conscious and deliberate disregard of the Order of Court. Their conduct was
not consistent with a disdainful attitude towards.' the, Order of the Court.
They displayed a contemptuous indifference or disregard. They did not unduly
neglect to pay attention to the Order of the Court or treat it as being of no
importance. In the circumstances, I am not satisfied that they were guilty of
the defiance with which they are accused. They acted incorrectly. However, in
my opinion they did so on account of' a misapprehension and not because they
were actuated by any improper motive or deliberate design to thwart, impede,
obstruct or interfere with the course of justice or. the lawful process of the
Court or to circumvent or defeat an Order of the Court or to bring the Court
into. contempt or lower its authority. ( _Cf. per Lord Radcliffe in Reginald
Perera v. The King, (50))_ and per- Sakaria, J. In _S. Abdul Karim v M. K.
Prakash, (34)._

The decision of the Court has been of paramount importance to the Respondents.
The manner in Which they conducted themselves shows that. As soon as the Court
had

**379**

given its decision, the course was stopped. Fresh selections were. then made
in-terms of the Order of Court. Being in some doubt as to whether the terms of
the Order of Court permitted them to continue the old course and the new
course side by side with a new one, clarification was sought from' Court byway
of motion. These are, in my view, certainly not the acts of a person who, with
disdain, thought that the Order of Court deserved scant attention.' They are
not the acts of a person who was defiant towards the Orders of the Court.

Having made fresh selections in accordance with the directions of -the ' Court
and having, in my view; properly concluded that two courses could be conducted
side by side one a continuation of the old course and the other a new one for
those who had been earlier improperly excluded, the new course was commenced
on 1st June 1988 - a fact which was communicated by Counsel for the
-Petitioners and recorded by Court.

The Respondents, however, directed that the old course be recommenced on 20th
June 1988 and -violated the Order of Court by permitting all those who had
been originally selected, whether #9; they were eligible or not in terms of
the Order of the -Court, to follow the old course. They did so, in my opinion,
on account of a . misapprehension of the advice they had sought and obtained
from the Deputy Solicitor-General on the 16th of June 1988. There had been, as
I have stated before; some tentative thinking aloud in Court during the
proceedings on the 6th June on the question of eligibility although what was
recorded, as might be expected, related only to the mode of conducting the
course and the method of examination. Yet,' as far as Counsel in the case were
concerned, as we have seen, there was uncertainty, so much so that a motion,
albeit unsuccessfully; was made to rectify the proceedings of the Court on the
6th of June:

When the First Respondent in his letter to the Deputy Solicitor-General on
16th June, 1988 asked for advice on "how I should proceed" and, specifically
asked "Can I take back for training the entire Batch which Batch was suspended
from training earlier by the-Supreme Court", the Deputy Solicitor-General: on
the same

**380**

day, on behalf of the Attorney-General, after stating that the effect of the
termination of the 'clarification proceedings' meant that

"the Judgment of the Supreme Court and the agreement recorded in the
proceedings of 06.06.88 would determine the position of the parties to this
application". went on to advise as follows:

hus there is no objection. 'to proceeding with the first course which was
suspended as a result of the Judgment of the Supreme Court (which included
nurses who were substituted in the place of those whose names were deleted as
a result of Trade Union action)".

The Order to re-commence, the course was made on the: letter of , the Deputy
Solicitor-General to the First Respondent. The Second Respondent interpreted
the Order to mean that, all those who had followed the earlier course were to
be recalled to complete their course. The Respondents -had no doubt
erroneously, but in good faith, supposed that that was what they were. at that
time entitled to do in terms of the legal advice sought and obtained from the
Attorney-General.

Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C. maintained that, whether in the case of a public
servant or a private person; the fact that a person has acted

on legal advice is not an answer to a charge of contempt based on disobedience
of an Order, of Court It is, he said, only a mitigatory circumstance.

Mr. K. N. Choksy, P.C., however, argued that, not only was legal advice a good
defence, but that in the case of a public servant who is required by the
Establishments Code to consult the Attorney-General on questions of law
relating to his work, the fact of acting in accordance with the advice of the
Attorney-. General confers immunity on such an officer. Later, however,
learned Counsel, finding himself in some distress, *quite properly, I think,
jettisoned the more burdensome part of his argument and proceeded to urge that
the selecting of legal advice was relevant' to the question of good faith.

**381**

Seeking and relying upon legal advice may no doubt; be relevant in mitigation
of Contempt, but it is not conclusive of the question whether there was
Contempt: (See per Megaw, P. in _Re Agreement of the Mileage Conference Group
of the Tyre Manufacturers' Conference Ltd. (70)_ _Gopal Bose v. State of
Bihar, (71)_. However, in the circumstances of a particular case, the fact
that a person bas acted on legal advice may support. the contention that the
party concerned had not wilfully disregarded the Order. of Court.: (See per
Tuli, J. in _Parkash Chand v. S.S Grewal,. (37)_ ). '`If the actor omission
was not wilful then it cannot be said that the officer acting in good faith on
the basis of legal advice, has deliberately or wilfully disobeyed the order of
the Court." Per Dharmadhikari, J:` in A. T. K.' _Sahakari Sanstha, Nagpur_ _v.
State of Maharastra, (36)._ See also per Narula, J. in _Raghunath Rai v. P.
Sahai, (42)._

I have said that in my view the Respondents did not act defiantly but acted
erroneously owing to a misapprehension of what they were entitled to do in
terms of the Order of the Court placed in the context of the 'clarification
proceedings" and the advice received from the Deputy Solicitor-General. As for
the future, I must add that the Order of Court in S.C. Application No. 37 of
1987 remains an Order which must be strictly. obeyed and I trust that there
will be an honest endeavour by all these concerned, including the:
Respondents, to honestly perform their obligations in terms of that Order. All
that I have decided in this case is that the Order ih S.C. Application No. 37
of 1987 has not been contumaciously disregarded. If it is strictly complied
with hereafter, adopting the words of Sterling, J. in _Perthington_ and
_Others v. Adlib Club Ltd. (18)_ I should like to add that, ".speaking
entirely for myself, ( would find it impossible to say that. it was not a
contumacious disregard."' And if there is wilful and contumacious disobedience
of the Order of the Court, the person who so disobeys the Order of Court will
be guilty of contempt and must  be .. punished. See -. L. _Arumugasamy v. L.
Kathirgampermpillai; (46) _in such a case, it may, not be of such avail, even
as  mitigating circumstance, that a person had

**382**

acted on the advice of lawyers. (Cf. per Diplock, J. in _Re The Agreement
Between the Newspaper Proprietors" Association Ltd. And the National
Federation of Retail Newsagents, Sellers and Stationers, (72)._ As a matter of
justice, I believe the Petitioner is entitled to such an assurance on my part.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner urged that the absence of an apology was an
indication of the contumacy of the Respondents. An explanation that offence
was not intended, with an expression of regret for any given or taken, may or
may not assist a person charged with Contempt of Court. It would depend upon
the circumstances of a particular ones. An unqualified apology may be an
indication of bona fides. (See A.T.K. _Sahakari Sanatha, Naggapi v. State of
Maharastra, 1977 Cri. L.J. 1809 at p. 1819)._ On the other hand an.
insufficient apology will be. of little use. (See In the matter of a Rule
issued under Section 4.7 of the Courts Ordinance on P. Ragunpathy per
Keuneman, S.P.J.) (73). The absence of an apology does not necessarily show
that the party was- stubbornly :perverse or rebellious and insubordinate or
that he was wilfully disobedient. In _Debrebrata Bandopadhamy and others v.
The State of West. Bengal and another, (41)_ no apology had been made.
Hidyatullah, C.J. said, at p. -9 93 paragraph 7, as follows:

The second point which the High Court unfortunately placed at the very.
forefront was failure to offer an apology and noted with great show of motion
that none was offered. Of course: an apology must be offered and that too
clearly and at the earliest opportunity. A person who offers a belated apology
runs the risk that it may not be accepted, for such an apology hardly: shown
the contrition which is the essence of the purging of a contempt. However, a
man may stake his all on proving that he is not in contempt and may take the
risk:".

As in that case, it maybe said in the matter before us, that the Respondents
"ran the gauntlet of such :risk and may be said to have fairly succeeded."
(Per Hidyatullah, C.J. at, p. 193).

**383**

For the reasons I have, stated I make order discharging the Rules-on the First
and Second Respondents.

I make no order as to costs.

_Rules discharged._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/22.html_  

