##  Ghouse v. Ghouse - SLR - 25, Vol 1 of 1988 [1987] LKSC 22; (1988) 1 Sri LR
25 (16 December 1987)

**

25

GHOUSE  
V.  
GROUSE

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA J , ATUKORALE, J., L. H. DE ALWIS, J..  
AND H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. No. 19/86. C.A. No. 621/75(F).  
D. C. MT LAVINIA No 26908/T  
NOVEMBER 9, 10 AND 11, 1987

_

Muslim Law-Muslim intestate succession-Adoption by a Muslim couple--adoption
of Children Ordinance No- 24 of 1941 s. 6(3)-Muslim Intestate Succession
Ordinance No. 10 of 1931-Special law and general law- Generalia specialibus
non derogant.

_

Is a child adopted under the provisions of the Adoption Ordinance (No. 24 of
1941) by a Muslim couple entitled to succeed to the intestate estate of his
adoptive parents?

**

Held-

**

(The Muslim law postulates consanguinity to qualify oneself for intestate
succession. The, Adoption of Children Ordinance being a general law does not
abrogate the special law set out in the Muslim Intestate Succession Ordinance
which prescribes that intestate succession to any deceased Muslim domiciled in
Sri Lanka or owning immovable property in Sri Lanka shall be governed by the
Muslim Law applicable to the sect to which the deceased Muslim belonged. The
maxim generalia specialibus non derogant applies and the claim of an adopted
child to succeed. to the estate of his adoptive Muslim parent fails as the
Muslim law does not recognise adoption, but only birth in` lawful wedlock for
intestate succession.

**26**

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1) _Muhammed Allhabad v. M. Ismail (1888) 10 All 289, 337.

_

(2) _Umar Khan v. Niaz-ud-Din Khan (1911) 39 l A 19, 25.

_

(3) _Fitzgerald v. Champneys 2 J & H 31, 54

_

(4) _The Vera Cruz 10 AC 59, 68.

_

(5) _The Queen v. Ramasamy (1964) 66 NLR 265 (PC).

_

(6) _Garnet v. Bradbury (1878) 3 App. Cases 944, 950.

_

(7) _Cohen v. Minister of interior (1942) TPD 151.

_

(8) _Pedley-Smith v Pedley-Smith (1953) 88 CLR 177.

_

(9) _Ahamet v. Sariffa Umma (1931) 33 NLR 9 (PC).

_

(10) _Sariff Umma v. Rahamathu Umma (1911) 14 NLR 464, 466.

_

(11) _Abdul Rahaman v Ussan Umma (1916) 19 NLR 175.

_

(12) _Noorul Muheetha v Sittie Leyandeen (1953) 54 NLR 270.

_

(13) _Sunniathangam v. Meera Mohideen ( 1958) 60 NLR 394 ,

_**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal reported at

_

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene Q. C. with A. A. M. Marleen, Miss. T. Keenawinna and
Harsha Amerasekera _ for petitioner-appellant

_

K. N. Choksy P .C. with K. Kanag-lswaran, Ifthika Hassim and Nigel Hatch _ for
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 16, 1987.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

The Appellant instituted testamentary proceedings seeking letters of
administration in respect of the intestate estate of Hafila Ghouse as an
intestate heir. The Respondent filed objections and claimed that he objection
that he was the sole heir to the estate of the deceased on the ground that the
deceased Hafila Ghouse and her pre-deceased husband Abdul Majeed Mohamed
Ghouse, being Muslims governed by the haws of Ceylon, made application in May
1950 for the adoption of the Respondent and the Court of Requests, Colombo,
had duly authorised the adoption in terms of the provisions of the Adoption of
Children Ordinance. No: 24 of 1941 and that hence he was for all purposes a
child of the deceased intestate, entitled to succeed to the estate of the
deceased .

After inquiry, the District Judge held that the Respondent was the -sole
intestate heir of the deceased by virtue of the said adoption order. On appeal
by the Appellant, a Divisional Bench of the Court of Appeal upheld by a
majority' the decision of the District Judge and dismissed the appeal. The
Appellant has preferred this appeal, from the said order of the Court of
Appeal. As an important question of law was involved in the appeal a Bench of
five Judges of this Court was constituted on the direction of the Chief
Justice to hear this appeal.

**27**

The question of law that arises for decision on the undisputed facts of the
case is 'Is a child adopted under the provisions of the Adoption Ordinance by
a Muslim Couple, entitled to succeed to the intestate estate of his adoptive
parents?'.

The Muslim Intestate Succession Ordinance No. 10. of 1931; (Cap. 62) Vol. III;
L. E. page 73) which Is an Ordinance to .define the law relating to Muslim
Intestate Succession and Donation provides:

"It is hereby declared that the law applicable to the intestacy of any
deceased Muslim who at the time of his death was domiciled in Ceylon or was
the owner. of any immovable property in Ceylon shall be the Muslim law
governing the sect to` which such deceased Muslim belonged."

It is not disputed by the parties that the several persons involved in these
proceedings. are Muslims, domiciled in Sri Lanka and belong to the Shafie
Sect. The assets of the estate sought to be administered, Include immovable
property situate in Ceylon. So the law applicable to the intestacy of the
deceased Muslim is according to the aforesaid Section the Muslim Law governing
the Safie Sect. But the Respondent relies on section 6(3) of the Adoption of
Children Ordinance No. 24 of 1941 as amended by No. 54 of 1943 (which is
operative from 1:2.1944) which provides "upon an adoption order being made the
a child s hall for all purposes whatsoever be deemed in law to be the child
born in lawful wedlock of the adopter" and submits that on account of the
adoption order made with reference to him, he should in law be regarded as 'a
child born in lawful wedlock' of the deceased and is entitled to succeed the
intestate estate of the deceased. The appellant's counter-submission is that
under the Muslim Lain, an adopted child cannot succeed the intestate parent,
that the Muslim Intestate Succession Ordinance of 1931 is a special law
applicable to the Muslims and that this special law of 1931 has not been
abrogated by the latter general law, viz: The Adoption of Children Ordinance
of 1941. He invokes the principle "generalia specialibus non derogant."

For the decision of the aforesaid question of law, it is not necessary to
embark on an. inquiry, into how much of the Muslim Law of succession has been
adopted into the legal jurisprudence of the country. Section 2 of the Muslim
Intestate Succession Ordinance relieves us of the task researching this
abstruse topic. It clearly and unequivocally provides that the Muslim Law
governing the Sect to which the deceased Muslim belonged shall apply to the
intestacy in question. This statutory provision imports the whole body of the
Muslim Law governing the Sect to

**28**

which the deceased belonged to decide the question of succession to the
intestacy in question irrespective of whether any part thereof has been
accepted earlier or not. The entire body of Muslim Law governing the Sect to
which the deceased Muslim belonged has become applicable from the date of the
Ordinance to the intestacy in question.

Mulla"s Principles of Mohammedan Law (17th Ed. at page 328) states
categorically that the Mohamedan Law does not recognise adoption.

Tyabji on Muslim Law (4th Ed.) states at page 208-209, para 228 -

"Paternity or maternity is not established in a Muslim who purports to adopt
another, nor is the latter considered in law. to be the child of the former.
Adoption is not known to Muslim Law."

Louis Neil in his book `The Mohammedan Law of Ceylon showing the Principles
and Rules of the Distribution of Inheritance" ('8731' states:

''When compared with the ether laws of inheritance obtaining in Ceylon, we
observe that the Mohammedan law calls parents, children and surviving spouse,
to inherit together... . Adoption is not recognised as conferring any right on
the children adopted."

Tyabji (supra) at page 800 et seq. in formatting the general principles and
scheme of the Muslim Law of inheritance and succession finds the basis o4
Muslim Law of succession in the Quran

"The Muslim Law of inheritance consists primarily of (1) the rules relating
thereto laid down in the Quran or by the Prophet in his teachings and 121 the
customs and usages prevailing amongst the Arab tribes near Mecca and Medina at
the time of the Prophet in so far as they have not been altered or abrogated
by the said rules and teachings. He continues ""the title to succession
previous to Islam, was that of comradeship in arms. It was on this basis that
women and children who were unable to bear arms were disqualified in regard to
inheritance. The law was not amended on this point for the first two or three
years during which the Prophet preached. Later this rule was abrogated by the
Quran and it was laid down that nothing could furnish so strong a claim to
inheritance as blood relation. This was indeed only a part of the general
scheme of the new religion to strengthen the family tie."

**29**

Dealing with the law of succession, the Quran states:

and they who believed and left their homes afterwards, and have striven along
with you, these are also of you, but these who are united by ties of blood are
nearer to each other by the books of God. Verily God has knowledge' of all
things - Quran VIII - 72-75. Nearer to the believers is the Prophet than they
are to their own selves, and his wives are (as) their mothers. In the Book of
God they who are related by blood, are nearer the one to the other than the
(other) believers and those who fled, but you should show kindness to your
kindred. This is written in the Book  XXXIII 6."

Tyabji 4th Ed. at 803.

Thus blood-relation title to succession came to replace comradeship in war.

Under all schools of Muslim Law the question who shall be heirs, and who, as
such, shall be entitled to take the estate is determined by determining who
are the nearest in accordance with the rules of proximity to the deceased.

Tyabji at 813.

In Wilson's Anglo-Muhamedan Law, 6th Ed. para. 209, at page 262, it instated
in the Chapter on Inheritance that

"The first step in the distribution is to assign certain specified fractions
of the whole heritable property, to the blood relations hereinafter mentioned,
should any such happen to exist, and also to the wife or wives, if any, or to
the husband, as the case may be, of the deceased. Such persons are called
sharers."

Sharer means a person who takes a definite fraction of the estate, under the
provisions contained in the Quoran. Sharers owe their rights to Islam.

Blood-relationship, except' in the case of husband or wife of the deceased is
basic to the right of succession to the intestate deceased. The Quoran
preferred consanguinity to any artificial modes` of ties not based on actual
parentage. The law, in its original and rigorous shape which was the aim of
Islam to see enforced, was that "parentage is only established in the real
father and mother of a child and only if the child is begotten by them in
lawful wedlock.' Tyabji at page 200. Though various presumptions later
modified this rigorous

**30**

rule, the principle of the viz. actual parentage continued in operation.
Maternity is established under Muslim law only in the women who gives birth to
a child is presumed in any man who acknowledges it with the intention of
admitting that it has been established. It can be disproved only by positive
proof that no marriage took place. Where the evidence establishes conclusively
that a person is not the legitimate son of another, then by acknowledgment or
otherwise that person cannot be given the status of a legitimate as a
acknowledging as child, prima facie means acknowledging as a legitimate child.
The offspring of adulterous cannot be legitimated by any acknowledgement.
Muhammed Allhabad v.M Ismail(1).

Paternity or maternity is not established, n a Muslim who purports to adopt
another, nor is the latter considered in law to be the child of the former:

The Privy Council in Umar Khan v. Niaz-ud-Din Khan (2)

Under the general Mohamedan law an adoption cannot be made; an adoption, if
made in fact by a Mohamedan, could carry with it no right of inheritance."

An adopted son has no right of inheritance since the principle of 'Muslim Law
based on the Quoran, is that one must be a consanguine relative of the
deceased to become entitled to inherit the property of the deceased; there
should be actual or natural parentage, not legal parentage over other people's
children in order to found a claim for inheritance under the Muslim Law.

A form of adoption was in vogue in Arabia previous to Islam. But this was
abrogated by the verses preferring consanguinity to any \- artificial modes of
creating- ties not; based on actual parentage.

''Allah has not made  
For any-man two hearts  
In his one body; nor has  
He made -your wives whom.  
Ye divorce by Zihar

**31**

Your mothers nor has He.  
Made your adopted sons  
Your sons, such is (only)  
Your (manner. of) speech  
By your mouths. But Allah  
Tells (you) the Truth, and He  
Shows the (right) way

Quoran XXXIII 4.

Adoption is inconsistent with the truth. "Truth cannot be altered by men's
'Adopting sons'." Natural parentage which is so fundamental to entitlement; in
the Muslim law of intestate succession cannot be established in the case of
Adopting and hence an adopted child under Muslim Law,' whatever be the Sect of
the deceased Muslim, is not qualified for want of consanguinity to succeed to
the intestacy of the deceased Muslim-no amount of deeming can make the blood
of his adoptive parent flow in his body.

The Adoption of Children Ordinance of 1941 (Cap. 61 ) came into operation on
1st February 1944. Section 2 of the Ordinance provides

"Any person desirous of being authorised to adopt a child may make application
to the court... and the court may..... make an order. (adoption. order)
authorising the person to, adopt the child."

"Upon an adoption` order being made; all rights; duties, obligations and
liabilities of the parent or parents.::. of the adopted child in relation to
the future custody, maintenance and education of the adopted child ... shall
be extinguished; and all- such rights, duties, obligations and liabilities
shall vest in and be exercisable by and be enforceable against the adopter. as
though the adopted child was a child born to the adopter in lawful wedlock,
and in. respect of the same matters and in` respect of the liability. of a
child to maintain its parents the adopted child shall stand to the adopter'
exclusively in the position of a child born to the adopter in lawful
wedlock.-"

Section 6(3)

"Upon an adoption order being made, the adopted child shall for ' all purposes
whatsoever be deemed in law to be the child born in lawful wedlock of the
adopter.

**32**

Provided, however; that unless the contrary intention clearly appears from any
instrument (. . . . .) such adopted child shall not by such adoption- . . .

(a) acquire any right, title or interest in any property

(i) devolving on any child of the adopter by virtue of any instrument executed
prior to the date of the adoption order;

(ii) burdened with a fideicommissum in favour of the descendants of the
adopter; or

(iii) devolving on the heirs ab intestato of any child born in lawful wedlock
of the adopter;

(b) become entitled to any succession (whether by will or ab intestato) jure
representation is the adopter. .

Section 16 of the Ordinance provides

"The provisions of this Part shall be in addition to and not in substitution
of the provisions of any written or other law relating to the adoption of
children by persons subject to the Thesawalamai or the Kandyan law; and
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in such other, law, an adoption order
may be made authorising any such person to adopt a child, and-where made,
shall have effect in accordance with the provisions of this Part."

It is to be noted that the institution of adoption was known both to
Thesawalamai and to the Kandyan law. Even though the the sections on adoption
in the Thesawalamai are now considered obsolete, the underlying .assumption of
that code is that adoption under the Thesawalamai was an existing institution.
Both systems recognised adoption as a device for instituting an heir who could
succeed to the adoptive-parents' property. Hence the rule of an adopted child
becoming an intestate heir, as prescribed by the Adoption of Children
Ordinance did not conflict with the principles of Thesawalamai or Kandyan Law
and did not operate to alter these laws.

The Adoption Ordinance enables "any person desirous of being authorised to,
adopt a child" to apply for an adoption, order - Hence a Muslim too is
competent to apply for an adoption order and can adopt children in terms of
the provisions of that Ordinance.  .

**33**

An Adoption Order establishes parentage in law as distinct from natural
parentage and vests in the adopting parents all the rights, duties,
obligations and liabilities of the parents of the child, as though the adopted
child is a child born to the adopting parents in lawful wedlock. Section 6
.(3) provides that upon-an adoption order being made the adopted child shall
for all purposes whatsoever be deemed in law to be the child born in lawful
wedlock of- the adopter. A literal application of this provision will enable a
child adopted by Muslim parents to succeed to the intestate estate of his
deceased parents in total derogation of the: Muslim Law of intestate
succession which does not recognise adoption for purposes of inheritance. Such
an eventuality is inconceivable in Muslim Law which postulates ties of
consanguinity to qualify oneself for intestate succession. Counsel for the
Respondent rightly conceded that according to the Quoranic Law, an adopted
child is not recognisable for the purpose of intestate succession. The issue
is whether the Adoption Ordinance has abrogated the prescription of Muslim Law
of intestate succession that an adopted child cannot inherit his adopting
parents' estate. Has section 6 (3) of the Adoption Ordinance of 1941 impliedly
repealed the principle of Muslim Law of intestate succession relating to the
inability of an adopted child to inherit the properties of his deceased
adopting parents?

Counsel for the appellant contended that there has been no express or implied
repeal of the relevant provisions of the Muslim Intestate Succession
Ordinance, a special law relating to Muslim inheritance by the general law
contained in section 6 (3) of the Adoption Ordinance.

Counsel for the Appellant invoked the principle 'generalia special bus non
derogant' in support of his submission and submitted that a general Act is to
be construed as not repealing a special Act. In Fitzgerald v. Champneys (3),
Wood V. C. said-

"In passing the special Act, the legislature had their attention directed to
the special case which the act was meant to meet, and. considered and provided
for all the circumstances of that special case; and having so done, they are
not to be considered by a general enactment passed subsequently, and making no
mention of -any such intention, to have intended to derogate: from that which
by their-own special Act, they had thus carefully supervised and regulated."

**34**

In The Vera Cruz (4) Lord Selbourne said "where there are general words in a
later Act capable of reasonable and sensible application without extending
them to subjects, specially dealt with by earlier legislation, you are not to
hold that earlier. And special legislation indirectly repealed, altered, or
derogated from merely by force of such general-words, without any indication
of a particular -intention

"If the legislature makes a special act dealing with a particular case and
later makes a general act, which by its terms -would. include the subject of
the special, act and is in conflict with the special act; nevertheless unless
it is clear that in making the general act the legislature has had the special
act in mind and has intended to abrogate it; the provisions of, the general
act do not override the special act", Bindra-interpretation of Statutes, 7th
Ed. 149.

An illustration of the principle is', provided by The Queen. v. Ramasamy (5).,
The Criminal Procedure Code No. 15 of 1898. by section 122 (3) prohibited the
use of oral, as well as written, statements given to the Police in an
investigation, whereas section 27 of the Evidence Ordinance No. 14 of 1895,
allowed evidence of information given by the accused in an investigation
which, related distinctly, to a fact discovered in consequence. The accused,
in an oral statement to the Police, had given information leading them to find
a gun and he, was accused of attempted murder. The Privy Council, being of
opinion that the correct way to solve the question, what effect section 122
(3) of the Criminal Procedure Code had upon section 27 of the Evidence
Ordinance which had been passed three years earlier was by applying the maxim
of interpretation 'generalia specialibus non derogant' held that section 27 of
the Evidence 'Ordinance, overrode section 122(3) of the Criminal Procedure
Code. Lord Radcliffe in the' course-of his judgment said:

"the evidence falling under section -27 can lawfully be. given at a trial,
even though it would otherwise be excluded as a statement made in the course
of investigation under section 122."

The principle 'generalia specialibus non derogant' sums up the 'presumption
against implied repeal. A subsequent general act does not affect a prior
special act by implication: A general provision should yield to a special-
provision. When a general act is subsequently passed  it is logical to presume
that the legislature has not repealed or modified

**35**

the former special act unless it appears that the special act again, received
consideration from Parliament. Lord Hatherley stated the rule thus:

"An. act directed towards a special objector special class of objects will not
be repealed by a subsequent general act embracing in its generality these
particular objects unless same reference be made, directly or by necessary
inference, to the preceding special act." Garnett v. Bradbury (6):

The Muslim Intestate Succession Ordinance is a special law dealing with the
rules relating to Muslim Intestate Succession as to who can or cannot inherit
the property of a deceased Muslim and in what proportion etc. As against this
special law,-section 6 of the Adoption Ordinance is a general` provision
defining the incidents and consequences of an 'adoption order.' There is
nothing in the Adoption Ordinance which indicates that the attention of the
legislature had been directed to the special Muslim law of intestate
succession and that the general provision of section 6(3) of the Adoption
Ordinance was intended to embrace the special cases covered by, the Muslim Law
Intestate Succession Ordinance. The Adoption Ordinance does not-manifest any
intention in explicit language to alter the special act viz: the Muslim
Intestate' Succession Ordinance or to abrogate any basic principle of Muslim
Law, Under the Muslim Law, an adopted child cannot succeed ;on intestacy. On
the other hand under the Adoption Ordinance an adopted child can succeed. To
this extent, the Adoption Ordinance derogates from-the Muslim Law of Intestate
Succession. In accordance with the maxim 'generalia specialibus non .
derogant' therefore, nothing in the Adoption Ordinance- can derogate -from the
Muslim Intestate Succession Ordinance and the former must - yield to the
latter whenever a` dispute involving a question of Muslim Intestate Succession
arises dispute whether an adopted child can succeed to the intestate estate of
a deceased Muslim parent clearly comes within the area of the law applicable
to the intestacy of a deceased Muslim. A fundamental rule of Muslim Law of
intestate succession is that 'consanguinity alone is the basis of a claim to
succeed-on intestacy and hence an adopted child who is unable to establish
paternity or maternity in the adopting parents cannot, under the Muslim Law
succeed on the intestacy of his adopting parents.

Hence on the principle of the aforesaid maxim; the-rule of Muslim law of
intestate succession which bars an adopted child inheriting property on
intestacy of his adopting-parents overrides section 6(3) of the Adoption
Ordinance and the Respondent's claim fails.

**36**

Counsel for the Respondent relied heavily on the South African case of Cohen
v. Minister of 'Interior (7) which interpreted section 8(1) of the South
African Adoption of Children Act of 1923 which reads-:

"an order of adoption shall, unless otherwise thereby provided, confer the
surname of the adopting parent on the adopted child and the` adopted child
shall :for all purposes whatsoever be deemed in law to be the child born in
lawful wedlock of the adopting parent."

Construing that section the court said

"such a child has all the rights. and all the liabilities appertaining to a
child born in lawful wedlock-As far as law possibly can make it so, the law
has in fact said that strange child you have adopted is in fact your own flesh
and blood." ,

In the above case, the court was called upon to construe the aforesaid section
8(1) of the South African Adoption Act, which corresponds to section 6(3) of
our Adoption Ordinance without reference to any other law. There was no other
law competing with section 8(1) and the court had not; to consider: the
application of the maxim 'generalia specialibus non derogant. In, our law, the
question is has the specific statutory provision declaring that Muslim Law
relating to intestacy with its- requirement of consanguine relationship to be
necessary to inherit been displaced by the general provision viz: section-
6(3) of our-Adoption: Ordinance; has the latter impliedly repealed the earlier
special provision?

The construction of section 6(3) of the Adoption Ordinance is not he issue; it
is-the impact of that section on the Muslim law of, intestate ; succession,
that is in question here. For the same reason, the judgment in the Australian
case of Pedley Smith v. Pedley Smith (8) is not, of persuasive value.

Counsel for the. Respondent referred to the case of Ahamet. v. Sariffa Umma
(9): where Privy Council -affirming the judgment; of, the Supreme Court held
that the Wills Ordinance No. 21 of 1844 applied to the will of a Muslim
testator and that a Muslim domiciled in Ceylon was competent to dispose of all
his property by will regardless of any limitation imposed ' by the Muslim Law:
Under the Muslim Law, a Muslim is precluded from snaking by Will dispositions
exceeding one third of his, net assets. The recognition of Muslim Law in these
matters was secured by, the special laws concerning. Mohamedans of 1806.

**37**

The question that arose was whether these-special laws have not been modified
by the Wills Ordinance of 1 844 so as to make the disposition of the entire
estate by the Muslim testator valid in law. Their Lordships examined the
language of the Wills. Ordinance and observed.

"The words of the enactment are of themselves sufficiently comprehensive to
include Muslims within their scope. When read in connection with the preamble,
which shows the purpose of the Ordinance is to secure uniformity with' respect
to testamentary disposition of property, it is not in their judgment possible
to limit or restrict the operation of the Ordinance so as to exclude the Wilts
of Muslim testators from its purview. The Ordinance then being applicable to
the will of a Muslim testator it is clear to their Lordships that it enables
the testator to dispose of the whole of the property and not merely one third
part of it. And such has been the declared 'judicial view in Ceylon since the
year 1911 when the 'decision of the Supreme Court in Shariffa Umma v.
Rahamathu Umma (10) was pronounced." In Shariffa Umma's case at `466 the Chief
Justice said that 'section 2 of the Wills Ordinance has uniformly .been
construed to enable Muhamedans in Ceylon to dispose of the whole of their
property by will and the Muhammedan population in Ceylon has freely taken
advantage of the privilege:"

The Privy Council said "in the face of a practice so well authenticated and so
long continued, any alteration in the law as so authentically laid down must
now come from the legislature and not from the courts." Since neither the
Privy Council nor the Supreme Court directed its mind to the presumption
against implied repeal or the maxim of 'generalia specialibus non derogant',
the case is authority only for what it actually decides and has no application
to the issue in this case.

In my" view since section 6 (3) of the Adoption Ordinance does not supersede
or abrogate the Muslim Law of intestate succession which does not recognise an
adopted child for purposes; of intestate - succession, the respondent's claim
to succeed to the intestate estate of his adopting parents being based solely
on the -aforesaid section 6(3) of the Adoption Ordinance cannot 'be sustained
and` therefore fails.

**38**

I allow the appeal and set aside the majority judgment of the Court of Appeal
and the judgment of the District Judge and declare that the Respondent is art
intestate heir of the deceased. In the special circumstances of the case, I
direct that parties, tear their -oven costs in all the courts.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** , - I agree

**

H. DE ALWIS, J**., - I agree

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.,- **I agree.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.

**

I have had the benefit of reading the judgment of the Chief Justice and I
agree with him in regard to one of the two, issues -'that arise for our and l
'' decision. I regret however that I am unable e to agree that this is a case
which calls for, the application of the principle "generalia specialibus non
derogant'' of statutory interpretation.

It is unnecessary to recapitulate the facts which are set out in his judgment.
In brief, the question ether, a Muslim child' legally is whether by a Muslim
couple under the provisions` of the ,Adoption of Children Ordinance .(Cap:,
All is entitled to succeed as a son to the intestate estate of the adopted
father.

It is agreed by all parties that both in terms of the Koran and the general
principles of Muslim law, adoption de jure is not recongnised by the Muslim
law. Accordingly, the question of the intestate succession by an adopted son
cannot arise as such in the Muslim law. However in the matter before us it was
also conceded by both counsel that there is nothing to prevent a Muslim in Sri
Lanka taking advantage of the provisions of the Adoption of Children Ordinance
and adopting a child.

An adoption can involve more than a legal relationship: It can engender
paternal feelings in the" adopter and evoke-. filial responses from the
adopted and help to create the institution of a real family. The Chief justice
in his judgment has accordingly , held that "a Muslim too is competent to
apply for an adoption order can adopt children in terms of the provisions of
the Ordinance".

**39**

Section: 6(3) of the Adoption of 'Children Ordinance states that ''upon an
adoption order being Made, the -adopted -child -shall for all purposes
whatsoever be deemed in law to be the child born in, lawful wedlock of the
adopter- Mr. Choksy brought to our notice `a decision of the South African
courts where the identical collocation of words, namely ''shall for all
purposes whatsoever be deemed in law to be the lawful wedlock of the adopter"
has been judicially interpreted. In fact, counsel for the respondent stated
that the provision in our law was borrowed from the corresponding South
African Act.

In Cohen v. Minister for, the Interior, (7), the court, in construing these
words said-

Such a child has all the rights and all the liabilities appertaining to a
child born in lawful wedlock subject to the exceptions which l have mentioned.
As far as the law possibly can make it so, the law has in fact said that child
`you have adopted is in fact your. own flesh and blood."

The Australian, Child Welfare Act 1939 had a somewhat similar provision.
Section 168 of that Act stated that an adopted child-

"Shall be deemed to be a child of the adopting parent, and the adopting parent
shall be a parent of the adopted child, as if such child had been born to such
adopting parent in lawful wedlock."

In Pedley-Smith v. Pedley-Smith, (8), the High Court of Australia interpreting
this provision said:

" That is law an adopted child must be considered the ‘issue' of the adopting
parent has been in New Zealand under a similar provision; in re a Deed of
Trust; Peddle v. Beattie; In re Stevenson; Public Trustee v. X.; (C.F. In re
Kingi; Thosmpson v. Kingi; where Myres C. j., as it seems, reserved and
question for future consideration).

Referring to the provisions of section 6(3) of our Ordinance, the Chief
Justice has therefore rightly said

**40**

"literal application of this provision will enable a child adopted by , Muslim
parents to succeed to the intestate estate-of his deceased parents in total
derogation of the Muslim law of intestate succession which does not recognise
adoption for purpose of inheritance."

As stated earlier, there is, no dispute here that a Muslim can take advantage
of the provisions f the Adoption of Children Ordinance and adopt a child. In-
fact, both counsel referred to a work by Professor Savitri Goonesekera on
Parent and Child, where she expresses the view that the Adoption of Children
Ordinance was intended to apply to all communities, including the Muslims. The
fact that the legislature must have given its mind to this aspect of the
matter is shown by the fact that it specifically mentions that the law would
be supplementary to the existing provisions relating to adoption in the
Kandyan law and Thesawalamai. The Muslim law did not recognise de jure
adoption and did not therefore need any special mention as in the case of the
other two systems of law. On the other hand we do not find: here the familiar
provisions for the exclusion of its application to Muslims if that were
intended as we find in numerous other enactments'. Vide section 3 (2) of the
Married Women's Property Ordinance' No. 1'8 of 1923; section 2 of the
Matrimonial Rights and Inheritance Ordinance; section. 627 of the Civil
Procedure Code;, section 2 (1) of, the Legitimacy Act, No. 3 of 1970.

Dr. Jayewardene, as stated earlier, conceded the application of the Adoption
of Children Ordinance to. Muslims but challenged only that part of the
Ordinance that would enable an adopted son to succeed to the intestate estate
of his adopted father: The Chief Justice has accordingly said that:

the construction of section 6(3) of the Adoption Ordinance is not the issue,
it is the impact of that section on the Muslim law of intestate succession
that is in question here."

And more specifically -

'The issue is whether the Adoption Ordinance has abrogated the ' prescription
of Muslim law of intestate succession that an adopted child cannot inherit his
adopting parents' estate. Has section 6 (3) of the Adoption Ordinance of 1941
impliedly repealed the principle of Muslim law of intestate succession
relating to the inability of an adopted child to inherit 'the properties of
his deceased adopting parents?'

**41**

This then is the only issue now to be decided and to make it even more precise
the-question, is which of the two competing enactments the Adoption of
Children Ordinance or the Muslim Intestate Succession Ordinance-should
prevail-in this matter.

The Chief Justice is, of the view that the Adoption of Children Ordinance is
in direct conflict with the provisions of the Muslim Intestate Succession'.
Ordinance 1931, which is to the effect that the law applicable to the
intestacy of a 'deceased Muslim is the Muslim law governing the sect to which
he belongs, which in this case is the Shaffie sect. The, Chief Justice has
invoked the well-known principle generalia specialibus non derogant' to
resolve this conflict.

Mr. Choksy has, on the other hand, submitted that it is possible for the two
enactments to be read harmoniously and that there is no warrant for the
application of the generalia specialibus principle. It is Mr. Choksy's
contention that once the adopted child is regarded ,in law as a son, then the
provisions of the Muslim Intestate Succession Ordinance ,can continue to
operate on that basis. I am, inclined to agree with Mr. Choksy, that this is
the correct method of approaching this matter.

If however the issue before us involved a .tenet of religion or some special
factor fundamental to the practice of Islam, then there is no question that we
would have without any hesitation given effect to it. But there are no such
religious or special reasons in this case. It was admitted by both counsel
that this was a purely secular matter. Further, the admission that a Muslim
can take advantage" of the Adoption of Children Ordinance and `adopt a child,
which is otherwise foreign to the concept of Muslim law, has to a great
measure undermined the basis of the appellant's case.

The appellant has relied solely on what he termed, the biological requirements
of consaguinity in intestate succession in Muslim law, as the reason for
excluding an adopted child. But this s not something special or, peculiar
only, to the Muslim law. In fact, consanguinity is in the first instance the
basis of succession in the other personal laws of succession in this country,
whether, it be the Roman-Dutch law, the Kandyan law, or the Thesawalamai. In
point of fact, in the Muslim law of intestate, succession; the sons, who 'are
agnates, take after the sharers while in the other systems of personal laws
the children are given precedence over others.

**42**

There is also nothing in the Muslim law to indicate that for a religious or
some special social reason the property-belonging to a Muslim family must be
confined to itself and must devolve only on the blood relations and cannot be
transferred or disposed of outside the family. Admittedly this property could
have been disposed of inter vivos by the adopting father to anybody, even to a
stranger. If the adopter had donated or transferred this property to his
adopted son during his lifetime by instrument of deed, that would have been a
perfectly valid transaction. Why then is there- this objection when the same
result is reached by way of an intestacy-? It seems to me that even the
majority judgment which has chosen to dispose of this matter on a principle of
statutory interpretation has not attached much weight to the argument based on
consanguinity.

I have carefully considered the dissenting judgment of Jameel, J. and find
that he has 'relied on no other ground but on the need of 'consanguinity for
purpose "of succession for his, decision. I do not think that it is necessary
to `say anything more on' this matter except to mention that Jameel J. has
`himself set out the- case of "Acknowledgment" as a legitimate mode of
intestate succession in 'the Muslim law. He stated:

"Acknowledgment is a method of filiation that is known to `and recognised by
Muslim Law. Indeed, it is the only other method, other than birth in lawful
-wedlock, known in Muslim law. But for this method to be operative three
conditions must co-exist, namely,

(a) the Acknowledger and the Acknowledged must be of such ages that they are
capable of being regarded as father and son

(b) the Acknowledged must be of unknown descent for if parentage is known no
Acknowledgment. is possible.

(c) the Acknowledged must, believe himself to be a child of the Acknowledger,
except when he cannot; consent due to infancy."

It would be observed that an admitted consanguinity in this context would be
regarded as a positive disqualification.

To place my decision in its proper context I would also like to mention very
briefly something of -the relevant, Muslim law background which is extensively
referred to in all three judgments of the Court of Appeal.

**43**

It is clear that the whole body of Muslim jurisprudence does not obtain here
and whatever: principles, that apply. In this country do not operate proprio-
vigore but derivatively by virtue of legislation or judicial decision of our
country. Abdul Rahiman v. Ussan Umma . (11) Noorul Muheetha v. Sittie
Leyaudeen, (12), Sinnathangam v. Meeramohaideen (13).

Custom has. also to some extent varied the "pure Muslim law. Some customs
foreign to pure Muslim law is followed by Muslims here and certain principles
of such, pure Muslim law have been abrogated by non-adoption.

justice Jameel has set out .the legal., position of Muslim law as follows:

"It cannot be gainsaid that the entire bulk of Muslim law does not obtain in
Sri Lanka. F or instance, the HUDUD laws (pertaining to sin or crime and
punishment) have never been introduced and are not part of the law of Sri
Lanka. Nor can it be denied that so much of the Muslim law as has in fact been
introduced, and so obtains here, has the full force of law. In the same
manner, so much of the local custom of the Muslims as have been recognised and
accorded legal sanction by the decisions of our courts, have become part of
the law Sri Lanka."

The authority for the application of Muslim law in Sri Lanka 'goes back to the
Proclamation of 1799 issued by Governor North. Prior to that under Dutch
occupation; the Dutch administration .had applied to the Muslim . residents e
of Ceylon the laws, and customs which were prevailing among them. But the
Charter of Justice of 1801 could be considered as the first enactment in this
regard. In 1806 the Code of Mohamedan law was enacted Intestate succession of
Muslims was governed ,by this Code although sections j -to 63 did not as such
set out the relevant principles of law but merely gave; examples This law.
prevailed until it was repealed by section 2 of the Muslim Intestate.
Succession Ordinance, . No., 10 of 1931, which is the one we are now
considering.

It is interesting to find that an issue similar to the, one confornting us,
has come up for decision earlier. Under. the Muslim, law a testator cannot
dispose of more than one third of his estate; and: this was the

**44**

prevailing law in this country by reason of the- application of the principles
of pure Muslim law in terms of the Code of Mohamedan law. But the Wills
Ordinance No. 2,1 of 1844 stated that-

"It shall be lawful for, every person competent to make a will` to devise,
bequeath, and dispose of by will all the; property.. .` :which at the time of
his death shall belong to him, or to which he shall be then entitled.........

Dispositions by Muslims of more than one third share of the estate by will
have thereafter been consistently upheld.

The Privy Council in Ahamat v. Sariffa Umma (9) dealing with this question
said.:

"The recognition of the Moslem law in these matters is secured to the Moslems
of Ceylon by the special laws concerning Maurs or Mohamedans of August 5,
1806, but such recognition is subject always to repeal, alteration or,
amendment by ordinance enacted - from time to time. The whole question,
therefore, is whether these special laws have not been modified. by the terms
of this Ordinance of 1844; and, if they have, whether they have been so far
modified as to make the testator's will a valid disposing instrument according
to its tenor."

"Now, approaching `the consideration of the Ordinance first, apart from
authority, their Lordships cannot `doubt that it applies to Mohamedan
testators as much as to all other `domiciled Cingalese. The words of the
enactment are of themselves sufficiently comprehensive to include Moslems
within their scope. When read in connection with the preamble, which shows
that the purpose of the 'Ordinance is to-secure uniformity with respect to
testamentary dispositions of property, it is not in thief judgement possible
to limit or restrict the operation of the Ordinance so as to exclude the wills
of Moslem testators from its purview. Their Lordships are strike by the fact
that where such imitation is intended to be placed on words of general import
with reference to just such 'subject as that with which this Ordinance to
dealing, it can clearly and easily be done A provision with such a result
will, for example, be found in the Ordinance No 15 of 1876, section 2.

**45**

The Ordinance then being applicable to the will of a Moslem testator, it is
clear to their Lordships that it enables the testator to dispose of the whole
of, this' property and not merely one-third part of it. And such has been the
declared judicial view in Ceylon since the year 1911, when the decision of
the, Supreme Court in Shariffa Umma v. Rahamathu Umma (10) was pronounced.

Their Lordships agree with that decision in the terms in which it was given,
but even if they had felt more doubt on the matter than they do, they would
have hesitated now to interfere with it after 20 years, especially as they
find the learned Chief Justice saying that the Ordinance has always been
construed- to enable Mohamedans in Ceylon to dispose of the whole of their
property by will and that the Mohamedan population in Ceylon had even then
freely taken advantage of the privilege. In the face of a practice so well
authenticated and so, long continued any alter at on in the law as so
authoritatively laid down must' now come from Legislation and not from the
Courts."

It would be seen from the above that the Privy Council in coming to its'
decision' l ad to resolve 'a conflict between "the special laws concerning
Maurs or Mohamedans of August 5, 1806'' as against the later enactment of the
Wills Ordinance. The legal issue before us, is identical. It may, also be
mentioned that one of the main reasons for the decision was the declared
intention in the Wills Ordinance to secure uniformity of-the law. In the
present case I would like once again in. this context to stress" the fact that
Professor Gunasekera's work by both counsel states clearly that the Adoption
of Children Ordinance was intended to apply to all :communities in the island.
Further, counsel for the appellant expressly conceded that' that Ordinance
does apply wall Muslims except on the limited question of intestate
succession. "The lave so authoritatively laid down." should be followed by us
since the issues and the reasoning are identical in both cases.

In these circumstances I would affirm the decision arrived at by both the
Court of Appeal and the trial court. The appeal should be dismissed with
costs. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1987/22.html_  

