##  Kumara v. The Mayor, Ratnapura Municipal Council and Others - SLR - 383,
Vol 1 of 2003 [2003] LKSC 22; (2003) 1 Sri LR 383 (12 May 2003)

383

KUMARA

**V.**

**THE MAYOR, RATNAPURA MUNICIPAL COUNCIL**

**AND OTHERS  **

** **

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

ISMAIL, J. AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC SLA NO. 254/2002

CA. APPLICATION NO. 1103/2000

27TH JANUARY, 2003



_Writs of certiorari and mandamus - Failure to perform duty is a precondition
for issue of writ._

_ _

The petitioner applied for certiorari and mandamus the 1st respondent Mayor of
the Ratnapura Municipal Council (the Mayor) fir an order to allocate shop No.
41 in a new shopping complex constructed by to Municipal Council. The court of
Appeal dismissed the application on the ground that the Mayor had given an
undertaking that the petitioner would be allocated a shop which undertaking
the Mayor was willing no honour.



**Held :**



There was no reason to interfere with the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



**APPLICATION** for leave to appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



384



_Dr. Jayatissa de Costa with Chandana Gunaratne for petitioner._

_ _

_K. Indatissa for 1st respondent._

_ _

_ _

# Cur. adv. vult

May 12, 2003.  


**FERNANDO, J.**

** **

The petitioner applied for certiorari and mandamus against the 1st respondent,
the Mayor of Ratnapura, in order to secure allocation to him of Shop No. 41 in
a new shopping complex constructed by the Municipal Council. He pleaded that
he had surrendered the premises formerly occupied by him, in order to enable
the new complex to be constructed, upon a promise that he would be allocated
shop No. 41.



The Court of Appeal dismissed his application on the ground that â€˜there had
been an undertaking given by the 1st respondent, despite the request by the
petitioner for Shop Nos. 41 and 42.........................That he would be
allocated a shop, which undertaking the 1st respondent is still willing to
honour in terms of P8."



The petitioner applied for special leave to appeal. After both Counsel sere
heard, they informed Court that they wished to explore a settlement on the
basis of paragraph 20 of the 1st respondents statement of objections \- which
referred to that undertaking. Accordingly, order was reserved but the parties
were given time till 21.02.2000 to file written terms of settlement.



No terms of settlement have been filed.



We see no reason to interfere with judgment of the Court of Appeal. Special
leave to appeal is refused without costs. ****

** **

**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.



**WEERASURIYA, J.** \- I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/22.html_  

