##  Muzamil and Others v. Rehabilitation of Property and Industries Authority
(Repia) and Others - SLR - 310, Vol 2 of 1985 [1985] LKSC 22; (1985) 2 Sri LR
310 (5 September 1985)

**

310

MUZAMIL AND OTHERS  
v.  
REHABILITATION OF PROPERTY AND INDUSTRIES  
AUTHORITY (REPIA) AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C. J., COLIN-THOME, J. AND RANASINGHE, J.  
S.C. No. 35/84 - C.A. APPLICATION No. 1368/83.  
JUNE 16, 24, 25 AND 26, 1985.

_

REPIA - Affected property - Demolition orders - Regulations 9 and 19 of the
Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected Property. Business and Industries) -
Regulations enacted under s. 5 of Public Security Ordinance.

_

Abdeen building co-owned by three co-owners (one of whom is the 2nd
respondent) stood at the intersection of Prince Street and 2nd Cross Street.
It is structurally one building consisting of a ground floor and upper floor
but the Municipal Council had for the purpose of assessment for rates treated
the ground floor as divided into eight portions and upper floor as divided
into seven portions and to each of these portions it assigned a separate
assessment number. The separately assessed portions were occupied by various
tenants. The petitioners for about 25 years had been tenants of the portion
bearing assessment No. 128, Prince Street on the ground floor where they
carried on the business of City Industrial Enterprises. Abdeen building was
badly damaged during the 1983 riots. The Rehabilitation of Property and
Industries Authority (REPIA) decided the building was affected property within
the meaning of Regulations 9 (1) and 19 of the Emergency (Rehabilitation of
Affected Property, Business and Industries) Regulations enacted by the
President under the Public Security Ordinance and vested in REPIA. It
accordingly decided to demolish the building for the purpose of development.

The petitioner having unsuccessfully sought relief in the Court of Appeal by
way of certiorari to quash the decision of REPIA appealed to the Supreme
Court.

**311**

The main question was whether the premises were affected property vested in
the State The 2nd respondent contended that the building including premises
No- 128 was in a dangerous state as a result of riot damage while the
petitioner maintained that premises No 128 were only slightly damaged. It was
clear however that if Abdeen Building was to be restored premises No. 128
would have to be demolished.

The jurisdiction of REPIA to rule on demolition rested on whether the entire
Abdeen Building with all its component parts had to be treated as one unit for
the purpose of it being stamped "affected property" or whether each component
part as separately assessed for rating constituted immovable property for the
application of the test of affected property.

**

Held :

**

(1) Although the building has been divided and assessed for the purposes of
rates leviable under the Municipal Councils Ordinance and each divided portion
bearing a separate assessment number may be treated as a separate immovable
property, physically the entire structure constitutes one building and a
single immovable property of which the building bearing assessment No. 128 is
an integral part, which has been damaged or destroyed by the riots and the
building cannot be repaired without affecting the petitioners' portion. For
the purposes of the relevant regulations Abdeen Building must be considered a
single entity and if any part of it is substantially damaged the whole
building is thereby affected and becomes affected property and under
Regulation 9 it vests absolutely in the State free from all encumbrances.

(2) The petitioners have accordingly lost their tenancy. Their present status
is that of licensees only

(3) Even if premises No. 128 are considered separate immovable property the
damage to it coupled with the damage to the rest of the building makes it
affected property.

Ranasinghe, J. dissenting

(4) If the owner was prepared to help REPIA to reconstruct the building it is
legal for REPIA to utilise such an arrangement. No divesting order is
necessary. The 2nd respondent could be authorised by REPIA to demolish the
building and erect a new one.

**

Cases referred to

** _

(1) Sinnamond v. British Airport Authority [1980] 2 All E. R. 368.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal reported at [ 1984] 2 Sri LR
197.

_

Eric Amarasinghe, P. C. with N. S. A. Gunatillake, S. S. Ratnayake and Miss.
D. Guniyangoda, for petitioners.

J. W Subasinghe, P. C. with Lakshman Perera, and Miss. E. M. S. Edirisinghe,
for 1st respondent.

K. N. Chosky, P. C. with M. Zuhair, Nihal Fernando, Miss l. R. Rajepakse and
Miss T Rodrigo, for 2nd respondent.

K. M. M. B. Kulatunga, P. C., Solicitor-General with K. C. Kamalasabayan,
S.S.C. for 3rd respondent.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

**312**

September 5, 1985. **  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

The building called "Abdeen Building" is situated at the Intersection of
Prince Street and 2nd Cross Street, Pettah, Colombo 11\. The building consists
of ground floor and upper floor. Though physically it is one building or
structure, the Municipal Council has, under section 233 (1) of the Municipal
Councils Ordinance for the purpose of assessment, divided this building and
assessed each divided portion separately in respect of rates leviable under
the said Ordinance. Numbers assigned to each separate portion for this purpose
are -

Ground Floor - No. 63, 2nd Cross Street ;

Nos. 126, 128, 130, 132, 134, 136 and 138, Prince Street.

Upper Floor - Nos. 126 1/1, 126 1/2, 126 1/3, 126 1/4, 125 1/5, 126 1/6 and
126 1/7, Prince Street.

There are three co-owners of the building, one of whom is the 2nd respondent-
respondent. Each of the portions separately assessed had been occupied by
various tenants under the co-owners of "Abdeen Building". The petitioners-
petitioners had for about twenty-five years been the tenants of the portion
bearing assessment No. 128 (on the ground floor) and been using it to carry on
the business of "City Industrial Enterprises."

According to the petitioners. during the communal disturbances which commenced
on 25.7.83, although parts of the "Abdeen Building" were badly damaged some
parts of the said building including the portion bearing No. 128, occupied by
the petitioners were not affected substantially save for some trivial and
negligible damage. According to them, their business and the premises of which
they were tenants were not affected. The petitioners have, after the
disturbances, continued to carry on business in the said premises after doing
some minor repairs.

According to the Chairman of the 1st respondent Authority, "Abdeen Building"
was one entity and was an item of immovable property damaged on or after
24.7.83 by the riot or civil commotion and thus became "affected property", as
defined by Regulation 19 of the Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected
Property, Business or Industries) Regulations. He states in his affidavit
that, by reason of the

**313**

riot the roof of the said building was completely burnt or destroyed ; divided
portions of the upper floor were so extensively damaged that they cannot now
be utilised, for any purpose whatsoever and that the previous tenants are not
in occupation thereof. In support of the extent of the damage to the upper
floor, he has attached photographs 1 R 1 A to 1 R 1 1. He further states that
the concrete slab separating the upper floor and ground floor is extensively
cracked, damaged and is out of alignment owing to the damage sustained by the
supporting walls of the ground floor. The slab thus constitutes a potential
danger to the occupants of the divided portion of the ground floor as it may
collapse notwithstanding temporary support ; that the walls of the divided
portion of the ground floor are extensively cracked. He has also annexed a
report 1 R3F (1) dated 4.10.83 sent to him by the Urban Development Authority.
The report relates to damaged buildings in Pettah, prepared by the U.D.A.
Engineer. According to the report, premises Nos. 126 to 138 had cracks on the
walls and the slab and the building is not safe.

The 2nd respondent in his affidavit states:

"Abdeen Building"" including No. 128 was extensively damaged and set fire
during the communal disturbances. The roof and the 1st floor of the building
were completely gutted and destroyed by the fire while the ground floor was
extensively damaged making physical occupation of the ground floor not
possible and extremely dangerous in as much as the concrete slab had cracked
at several points. Presently, there is no 1st floor and the condition of what
remains of the ground floor is such that the concrete slab and such portions
could suddenly collapse, gravely endangering both occupants and users of the
busy appurtenant roads.""

The building was examined by the 2nd respondent's Building Engineer on 20.9.83
and in his report (annexure 219 1) dated 22.9.83, the Engineer states that he
carried out a complete inspection of the upper floor, and that as regards the
ground floor, inspection was possible only in respect of two premises, as the
others were closed up and hence inaccessible. In regard to the damage he
states

"The brick work in the wails have been set in lime/sand mortar and portions of
the walls are completely destroyed at several places, especially at the upper
floor level. In those areas where the wall remains, cracks have appeared and
joints opened up, making them

**314**

unstable by themselves. The entire roof has been burnt and the remains consist
of a few pieces of partly burnt roof timber, hanging from the walls. The doors
and windows at the upper floor level are completely burnt and non-existent.
Reinforced concrete lintels over the doors and windows are completely burnt
and non-existent. The floor slab is badly cracked and distorted, arising out
of damages to the supporting structure. The walls of the two ground floor
premises inspected, showed damaged plaster work, cracks in the brick work, and
cracks in the soffit of the upper floor slab, with evidence of water leaking
through. Perhaps, similar conditions prevail in the other ground floor
premises as well. Based on the observations and the general condition of the
premises, I am of opinion that the remains of the buildings are structurally
unsound and is extremely unsuitable for occupation in any manner. Furthermore,
it is a threat to the safety of the people and the property around the
building, and hence fit for demolition as soon as possible.""

In his counter affidavits the 1st petitioner states, with reference to
paragraph 4 of the affidavit of the 1st respondent, Chairman :

"I deny that the said premises (namely premises 128) in which the petitioner
is carrying on business is an "affected property" within the intent and
meaning of the said Emergency Regulations."

By letter dated 10. 11.85 (annexure 'E') the Chairman of the 1st respondent
Authority wrote to the petitioners as follows

`Manager,  
M/s. City Industrial Enterprises, Prince Street,  
Colombo 12.  
Dear Sir,

**

"Abdeen Building" Prince Street  
Pettah, Colombo 11

**

The aforementioned premises that were damaged/destroyed during the July 1983
disturbances are to be developed, for which purpose these premises will be
demolished.

Yours faithfully,  
Sgd. RADM A. W. S. Perera, VSV.

Chairman/REPIA.

**315**

The petitioners have by application dated 15th November, 1983, moved the Court
of Appeal, for the Issue of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the decision or
determination of the 1st respondent that premises No. 128 is "affected
property"' and that it is to be demolished. The grounds urged in support of
the application are :

(a) that the decision conveyed by "E" that the premises No. 128 and/or the
petitioners business ""is affected" is one made ultra vires, outside the
regulations and/or one made without any power, authority or jurisdiction I -

(b) that the 1st respondent had not considered or decided the question of
whether the said premises No. 128, of which the petitioners are tenants or the
business "City Industrial Enterprises" carried on by them is an "affected
property or business" nor has any such declaration been made or conveyed by
the 1st respondent to the petitioners nor were the petitioners given a hearing
before the 1st respondent purported to decide that premises No. 128 was
'affected property"'.

The main burden of petitioners challenge of the authority of the 1st
respondent is that premises No. 128 is not "affected property"', within the
meaning of Regulation 9 (1) and therefore had not vested in the State and
hence the 1st respondent had no power or authority in or over the said
premises No. 128 and hence had no authority to demolish the said premises No.
128. The petitioners' application was argued for a number of days, before the
Court of Appeal and by its judgment dated 11th June 1984, the Court of Appeal
dismissed the application without costs. Petitioners have preferred this
appeal from the said decision.

The Emergency (Rehabilitation of Affected Property Business of Industries)
Regulations were enacted by the President under section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance, to meet the situation created by the communal riots. The
Regulations established a body called the "Rehabilitation of Affected
Property, Business or Industries Authority" (in the regulations referred to as
"REPIA"). It is a body corporate. The functions of REPIA are :

(a) the repair and restoration of affected properties.

(b) the rehabilitation of affected industries and businesses.

**316**

Regulation 9 provides -

"(1) Every affected property, industry or business shall, with effect from the
date these regulations come into force, vest absolutely in the State free from
all encumbrances.

(2) It any question arises as to whether any property, industry or business is
affected property, such question shall be decided by REPIA by a declaration in
writing and such declaration shall be final and conclusive and shall not be
called in question in any court in any proceeding whatsoever."

Regulation 14 -

"(1) Notwithstanding that any affected property, or industry or business has
vested in the State by reason of the operation of these regulations REPIA may
at any time by Order published in the Gazette divest such property, industry
or business.

(2): The following provisions shall apply to a divesting order made under
paragraph (1) ....

(a) the property, industry or business shall be deemed never to have vested in
the State by reason of the operation of these regulations and any, question
which may arise as to any right, title or interest in or over such property,
industry or business shall be determined accordingly.

(b) the divesting order shall have the effect of reviving any arrangement,
agreement or other notarially executed instrument in and over that property,
industry or business subsisting on the date on which such property, industry
or business vested in the State. ""

Regulation 19 - in these regulations -

"affected property" means any immovable property damaged or destroyed on or
after July 24, 1983, by riot or civil commotion and includes any immovable
property used for the purposes of an affected business or industry affected
business or industry' means any undertaking of a commercial or industrial
nature damaged or destroyed on or after July 24, 1983, and includes subject to
the provisions of these regulations, all rights, powers, privileges and
interests arising in or out of such undertaking."

**317**

The judgment of the Court of Appeal sets out the sequence of events leading to
the issue of the impugned letter "E" by REPIA, and I gratefully adopt the
narration :

"On 15.8.83 the 2nd respondent made an application to the 1 st respondent in
the prescribed form (2134(6)). He stated that the existing building which is
nearly 50 years old was gutted by tire during the recent riots, is beyond
repair and in a dangerous state of collapsing with the first heavy rainfall ;
that he proposes to re-construct a new 4 storeyed Building in place of the
present 2 storeyed one, in conformity with the U.D.A. New Master Plan ;'that
he would complete construction of the new building within six months with his
own funds ; that the tenants in the upper floor cannot be provided with shops
unless a new building is constructed ; that he agrees to provide new shops to
all tenants who are interested. He sought permission to demolish the remains
of the gutted building and to construct the new one. He stated that the
property could be divested after the existing tenants are given possession of
the respective shops in the ground and upper floor.

On 16.8.83, the 1 st petitioner wrote the letter ('B') to the Chairman of
REPIA. He stated that the business was not affected during the recent
disturbances and is not covered by the definition of 'affected business or
industry', and that the only damage was to the wooden doors at premises No.
128 and that some plaster was falling off the walls. He asked for a ruling in
regard to the condition of the business in so far as the Emergency Regulations
are concerned. He annexed a declaration (B 1) to the prescribed form. In
answer to the query - 'Do you propose to re-condition/repair/re-establish the
affected property, business or industry out of your own resources?' his answer
was 'Yes'."

The 2nd respondent says that he sent through his Attorney letters dated
18.8.83 to all tenants indicating his decision to construct a new four-
storeyed building after obtaining permission from REPIA and the U.D.A. and of
his willingness to rent out the new shops to his tenants. A letter sent to one
such tenant, one Senaratne, has been annexed (2132). According to him, all the
tenants have agreed to his suggestion except the petitioners. The petitioners,
however, have denied this.

**318**

The Chairman of REPIA wrote to the 1 st petitioner on 5.9.83 ("C") that in
terms of the Regulations, he declares that M/s. City Industrial Enterprise is
not an "affected business" for the purpose of the Regulations and to obtain
the prior approval of the Urban Development Authority and/or the local
authority before commencing any development activities or repairs.

On 13.9.83, the Chairman of REPIA, wrote to all tenants, including the
petitioners, to attend an inquiry on 21 .9.83 in regard to divesting of the
premises/business (1 R4A).

On 14.9.83, the Chairman of REPIA wrote to the 1 st petitioner (D) as follows

'"The above business has been divested on 5.9.83. If the owner is not
attending to the repairs you may plaster the inside walls at your expense.'"

On the same date (1 R3A of 14.9.83) the Chairman of REPIA wrote to the
Chairman, U.D.A., stating that as the U.D.A. had other plans for the land
covered by "Abdeen Building'", the premises have not been divested to the 2nd
respondent ; that he understands from the 2nd respondent that U.D.A. "s
original decision to use the land for other purposes has since been altered
and that it is possible for the owner to undertake re-building activities ; he
requested the U.D.A. to grant to the 2nd respondent permission to reconstruct
his property ; that it is intended to divest the property once agreements are
reached between the former owner/tenants.

On 15.9.83, the Chairman of REPIA wrote to the O.I.C., Pettah Police Station
(1 R2), informing him that the various premises in "Abdeen Building" are
"affected properties", that certain tenants, including tenants of premises No.
126 and 128 were given authority to resume business only, without any further
rights, to enable them to collect dues from previous customers , that the 2nd
respondent has made representations that five tenants, including M/s. City
Industrial Enterprise are in the process of doing repairs to some parts of the
premises for which they have received no. authority and requesting Police
action to prevent these tenants from exceeding the authority given to them
until REPIA takes action to divest the properties.

On 20.9.83, the 2nd respondent's Engineer inspected the property and on
22.9.83 gave his repot (2R1) referred to above.

**319**

The Chairman, REPIA, states that as only the tenant of premises No. 138 turned
up at the inquiry on 21.9.83, the inquiry was held on 26.9.83, on which date
the petitioners and some tenants were represented by Attorneys-at-Law and
matters relating to the demolition of "Abdeen Building", the construction of a
new building and letting of portions to previous tenants were discussed. The
note made by the Chairman at this inquiry has been annexed (1 R4B) to his
affidavit. According to this note, the petitioners have been represented by
lawyers. The note states that except for Senaratne, other tenants have not
indicated anything to the landlord , the lawyer for Abdul Kayoom & Co., stated
that premises No. 126 was not affected and no application was made for
divesting of business. The lawyer appearing for M/s. City Industrial
Enterprise and for some of the other tenants had stated that all ground floor
premises need very minor repairs; this was not allowed. The not concludes that
a decision will be taken after U.D.A. approval is forthcoming on the future of
the building.

On 27.9.83, U.D.A. replied to the letter of the Chairman of REPIA dated
14.9.83 (1 R3B). In the said letter 1R313, U.D.A. inquires whether REPIA will
permit the owner to reconstruct the buildings on the understanding that the
properties will remain vested in the State till such time an agreement between
the landlord and tenants is reached subsequently.

In continuation of the letter (1 R3A), the Chairman wrote to the U.D.A. (1 R3C
of 3.10.83) stating that the 2nd respondent and the other co-owners wish to
re-develop the property, and that REPIA has no objection to this ; that
demolition of the property will be permitted once the building plans are
approved by the U.D.A., that the property will continue to be vested in the
State until completion of construction and that the co-owners have agreed to
this.

The Chairman of REPIA was sent a letter by the U.D.A. dated 8.1 1 .83
forwarding a report dated 4.10.83 (1 R3F (1) ) relating to damaged buildings
in Pettah referred to above.

On 7.11.83, U.D.A. informed the 2nd respondent (1 R3D) that his building plans
conform to U.D.A. building and planning requirements and that the permit will
be issued on payment of a service charge of Rs. 360,000 in lieu of the three
parking spaces which he is not able to provide within the premises. A copy of
this letter was sent to REPIA.

**320**

The Chairman of REPIA on 10.1 1.83 wrote to the 2nd respondent (1 R3E)
authorising him to commence demolition operations, and requesting the latter
to grant 14 days for the tenants to vacate the premises, before commencing
demolition work.

On the same date (10.11. 83) the Chairman of REPIA wrote two letters dated
10.11. 1983, the letter 'C' to the Manager, M/s. Abdul Kayoom and Co., and the
letter 'E' to the Manager, M/s. City Industrial Enterprise, stating that
"Abdeen Building" that was "damaged/destroyed during the July 1983
disturbances are to be developed, for which purpose, these premises will be
demolished.""

The petitioners by their Attorney-at-Law's letter dated 11. 10.83 protested to
the 1 st respondent that "REPIA has no power, authority or jurisdiction to
demolish the premises, in which my clients are carrying on business or indeed
to do anything in respect of the entire building which will affect the
business carried on by my clients on the premises occupied by them as
tenants."

The jurisdiction of REPIA to order the demolition of "Abdeen Building"
referred to in his letter "E", 'turns on the question whether "Abdeen
Building" is an "affected property", within the meaning of Regulation 19\. It
is the position of the petitioners that, as far as they are concerned, the
relevant question is whether the premises No. 128, of which they are tenants
is an "affected property" or not. The petitioners stated that their premises
No. 128, is a defined and separate part of "Abdeen Building" and has an
identity of its own and is a distinct immovable property, which has neither
been damaged or destroyed by the riot.

It cannot be gainsaid on the facts of the case that "Abdeen Building"" was
damaged or destroyed by communal riots. It is quite manifest on the material
on record that - "Abdeen Building" has suffered substantial damages as a
result of the riots. There is evidence of the Chairman, 1 st respondent
supported by the Engineer's report of the U.D.A. and again there is a report
of the 2nd respondent's Building Engineer. The petitioners have not, as
against the reports of these Engineers, filed any Report of any competent
Engineer contradicting their conclusion that the "'Abdeen Building" should be
demolished as soon as possible. Certainly the petitioners do not specifically
deny that substantial damage has been caused to Abdeen Building" by riot. But
what the 1 st petitioner states is that the building like the curate's egg,

**321**

is good in parts and that the portion of the "Abdeen Building" represented by
premises No. 128 has not suffered any major damage. It may appear from the
facts disclosed that the petitioners' premises No. 128 considered in isolation
quite irrespective of what has happened to the rest of the building, are
intact and that business can be carried on therein without that part of the
building being demolished. But that state of affairs can exist only if the
rest of the building is allowed to continue in the damaged state : but, no
restructuring or restoration of the building can be effected with premises No.
128 being allowed to continue to be there, in the present state. The
petitioners in their Attorney-at-Law's letter "F" have relevantly apprehended
that anything done by REPIA in respect of the entire building will affect the
business carried on by them on the premises occupied by them as tenants
Further it is quite evident that the U.D.A. will not pass any plan to
reconstruct the "Abdeen Building" with premises No. 128 remaining intact. On
the facts, it cannot seriously be refuted that if "Abdeen Building" is to be
restored or rehabilitated it is necessary that premises No. 128 should be
demolished.

The Chairman of REPIA has quite unequivocally stated in his affidavit that
""Abdeen Building" cannot be demolished for the construction of a new
building, in such a manner, as to allow premises No. 128 to stand.

The jurisdiction of REPIA to rule on demolition rests on the answer to the
question whether the entire "Abdeen Building" with all its component parts
have to be treated as one unit for purposes of it being stamped "affected
property" or does each component part, as represented as premises for purposes
of rating, constitute "immovable property" for the application of the test of
"affected property". In my view the building might have been divided and
assessed in respect of rates leviable under the Municipal Councils Ordinance
and thereby in a legal sense each divided portion bearing a separate
assessment number may be treated as a separate immovable property, but
physically the entire structure, though divided into various parts for the
purpose of assessment, constitutes one building and a single immovable
property, and the portion of the building bearing assessment No. 128 is an
integral part of the building which has been damaged or destroyed by the riots
and the building cannot be repaired without affecting the petitioners'
portion. Any major repair or

**322**

reconstruction of the building is bound to affect all parts of the building ;
hence for the purpose of the relevant regulations, "Abdeen Building"" must be
considered as a single entity and if any part of the building is substantially
damaged the whole building is thereby affected and therefore becomes "affected
property," within the definition of ''affected property" In the Regulation. In
this perspective, premises No. 128 cannot be treated independently as
immovable property, not constituting "affected property".

On the facts of the case one cannot resist the conclusion that if the entire
building is the relevant unit of consideration in the construction of
"affected property" in the Regulations. "Abdeen Building" is affected property
within the pale of the Regulation, even though the part of the property
represented by No. 128, may appear to be intact and can be patched up without
any major repair. REPIA was established to repair and restore affected
properties. It cannot perform this function in respect of "Abdeen Building"
without demolishing premises No. 128. Once "Abdeen Building is identified as
"affected property" under Regulation 9 it vested absolutely in the State free
from all encumbrances. It is not disputed that if "Abdeen Building" is
"affected property" the petitioners" tenancy ceased to be operative by virtue
of Regulation 9. The petitioners have lost their tenancy. Their present status
is that of a licensee only. Their business may not be affected but the
premises in which they are carrying on business is part of the 1\. affected
property", subject to the authority of REPIA. On this view of the matter the
petitioners" objection that REPIA had no authority to decide on the fate of
premises No. 128 fails' Since in my view the entire "Abdeen Building" is
"affected property", it is not necessary to consider the validity of the
argument of counsel for the petitioners that if premises No. 128 is an
independent entity and is immovable property within the meaning of Regulation
19 REPIA exceeded its powers in ordering demolition of the premises. However,
I agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal that even on the application
of the criterion that premises No 128, is a separate immovable property in the
backdrop of the damage caused to premises No. 128 coupled with the damage to
the main building, premises No. 128 also constitute "affected property" The
Chairman of REPIA says that the concrete slab separating the upper floor and
ground floor is extensively cracked and damaged and is out of alignment and is
propped up by temporary support He states that the slab thus constitutes
potential damages (i.e. danger) to any occupants of the

**323**

divided portions of the ground floor as it may collapse notwithstanding
temporary support. According to him the walls of the divided portion of the
ground floor are also extensively cracked. As stated earlier the status of the
petitioners in relation to the premises No. 128, today, is that of licensees
only and not that of tenants and their interests in the property is only
contingent on a divestment order in terms of Regulation 14, when tenancy of
premises No. 128 would revive. But it should however be noted that under
Regulation 14, a divesting order can only be made of the entire "Abdeen
Building" in its damaged state and not of its undamaged parts. To that extent
only the petitioners can be interested in having the "Abdeen Building" kept in
the damaged state without premises No. 128 being demolished.

It is to be noted that the contention of the petitioner is that their premises
No. 128 is not "affected property". They do not question that, if the unit to
be considered is the entire building and not any part thereof then "Abdeen
Building" is "affected property". This contention posses the wrong question to
identify "affected property". A declaration by REPIA under Regulation 9 (2) is
not relevant to determine and in fact REPIA had no jurisdiction to determine
that a part of "affected property" is not "affected property". REPIA could
not, in law have decided that petitioners' premises No. 128 were not affected
property. Abdeen Building of which premises No. 128 were a part became stamped
in law as "affected property". The petitioners complain that they were not
heard on the question whether premises No. 128 is a "affected property",
within the meaning of the Regulation. In my view a hearing on that irrelevant
issue would have served no purpose in law. As was stated by Brandon, L.J., in
Sinnamond v. British Airport Authorty (1):

"No one can complain of not being given an opportunity to make representations
if such an opportunity would have availed him nothing.

On the question of demolition of the entire building referred to in letter
''E" I agree with the finding of the Court of Appeal that the demolition of
the building was considered at the inquiry held on 26.9.83 at which the
petitioners were represented by Attorney-at-Law.

The third ground of attack is that the decision contained in document 'E' was
not made bona fide. There is no substance in this ground. "Abdeen Building"
has been substantially damaged, cannot be rebuilt with parts of the said
building being allowed to remain intact

**324**

REPIA is charged with the function of repairing and restoring. Since Abdeen
Building" has been extensively damaged there is no question of effecting
piecemeal repairs. The debris has to be demolished and cleared and a new
building, satisfying the requirements of the U.D.A. has to be constructed.
Hence REPIA reached the decision that the remnants of the building including
premises No. 128, should be demolished, as preliminary to a new building being
erected. In my view, that is the only reasonable decision that could have been
reached by REPIA in the performance of its function of restoration of the
"affected property". Restoration of the affected property does not mean that
the substituted property should be of the same specifications as the old. The
requirements of U.D.A. would render such restoration impossible. In my view,
restoration will catch up a new building erected in terms of the building
plans approved by the U.D.A. In this context, it is significant that the REPIA
has power to clear and redevelop "affected property". The purpose of the power
has to be borne in mind in appreciating the decisions of REPIA.

The petitioners complain of the fact that REPIA was not going to construct any
new building with its moneys but has arranged with the 2nd respondent to
construct a four-storeyed building at his expense and according to his
approved plan. Petitioners state that this arrangement with the 2nd respondent
is beyond the powers of REPIA. They contend that if REPIA is unable to clear
and develop the property on its own with its own funds, it cannot permit the
2nd respondent to construct a new building on its behalf but will have to make
a divesting order in terms of Regulation 14 (1 ).This contention postulates
disregard by REPIA of its functions and of the social purposes for which it
has been established. A divesting order may benefit the petitioners at the
expense of the owners of the building, but REPIA will not, in the proper
exercise of its powers, be justified in making such an order if no request for
such order is made by the owners of the "affected property". A divesting order
will render sterile a valuable piece of land with vast potentialities in the
commercial area of Fort. REPIA should exercise its discretion to promote the
policy and object of the Regulation rather than thwart it. It has been vested
with the power to clear and develop damaged buildings and if the owner of the
building is ready and willing to help REPIA, the latter- should welcome the
gesture.

**325**

I cannot agree with the submission that REPIA cannot come to any arrangement
with the 2nd respondent regarding the construction of a new building in place
of the damaged "Abdeen Building". Regulation 5 vests the REPIA with power,
inter alia, to give or lease or hire, mortgage, pledge, sell or otherwise
dispose of any movable or immovable property and to clear and redevelop
"affected property" vested in the State for the purpose of discharging its
functions. In my view this power is wide enough to render legal the proposed
arrangement between the REPIA and 2nd respondent. Be that as it may the
immediate question is whether the decision to demolish as set out in document
"E" is justifiable in law. Demolition represents the first stage in
restoration. Development comes in subsequently.

For the reasons set out above I hold that the decision of REPIA ordering the
demolition is a valid decision in law. The demolition of the building cannot
be avoided in any scheme of restoration or redevelopment of the affected
property and how REPIA will find the necessary funds to perform this function
in respect of "Abdeen Building" is not a matter of concern to the petitioners.
The argument of the petitioners will frustrate the beneficent scheme of REPIA
and the U.D.A. for the development of the locale

I dismiss the appeal with costs and vacate the order of this court dated
18.7.84 prohibiting the 1 st respondent demolishing the premises No. 128,
Prince Street.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- I agree.

**

RANASINGHE, J.

**

In the forenoon of the 25th July, 1983 violence on a large and wide spread
scale broke out in the city of Colombo. Marauding gangs attacked innocent
people, damaged and destroyed properties set fire to buildings, both private
and public, as well as residential and business. Pettah was an area in which
considerable damage was caused to property by fire. Abdeen Building, situate
along Prince Street in the Pettah, and owned by the 2nd respondent, was a
building which was set on fire. Abdeen Building stood at the intersection of
Prince Street and 2nd Cross Street. It comprised a ground floor and an upper
floor, separated by a concrete slab which served as the roof of the ground
floor. Both floors were divided into separate

**326**

portions each of which had been assessed by the Colombo Municipality as a
separate unit and assigned a distinction number. The upper floor had seven
such units, numbered 126 1 /1 to 126 1/7 all of which faced Prince Street. The
ground floor had eight such units. One of these faced 2nd Cross Street and was
numbered 63. The other seven all of which faced Prince Street, were numbered
126, 128, 130, 132, 134, 136 and 138 respectively. The 1 st, 2nd and 3rd
petitioners-appellants were, on that date admittedly, in occupation, as
tenants, of the ground floor portion numbered 128, Prince Street in which they
carried on a business called "City Industrial Enterprise".

It is common ground that the roof and the entirety of the upper floor of this
building, consisting of the several portions, numbered as set out earlier on
that floor, were all completely destroyed by fire. It is also agreed that the
concrete slab separating the two floors, and several of the walls of the
ground floor were damaged. The parties are, however, at variance in regard to
the nature and the extent of the damage, caused to the portion numbered 128,
which was in the occupation of the 1 st to 3rd petitioners-appellants.

The Government, in order to meet the situation brought about by the
unfortunate incidents referred to earlier, brought into operation, on 6.8.83,
a set of Emergency Regulations known as the Emergency (Rehabilitation of
Affected Property, Business of Industries) Regulations No. 1 of 1983. These
Regulations have thereafter been renewed monthly, and are still in operation.

Regulation 2 of the said Regulations established a body called the
Rehabilitation of Property, Business and Industries Authority which was
referred to as REPIA", and which said body is the 1 st respondent in these
proceedings. REPIA is a body corporate with perpetual succession. Whilst
Regulation 4 sets out REPIA"s functions to be "

(a) the repair and restoration of affected properties I -

(b) the rehabilitation of affected industries and business ,

Regulation 5 spells out the powers, which REPIA may exercise for the purpose
of discharging its functions, to be, inter alia, "to clear and re-develop
affected property vested in the State under these regulations". Regulation 9
(1) provides that ""every affected property, industry business shall with
effect from the date these regulations come into force, vest absolutely in the
State free from

**327**

encumbrances" ; and paragraph (2) of Regulation 9 states that ""where any
question arises as to whether any property, industry or business is an
affected property, industry or business such question shall be decided by
REPIA by a declaration in writing and such declaration shall be final and
conclusive and shall not be called in question in any court in any proceedings
whatever"'. Regulation 12 prohibits the alienation of affected property ; and
Regulation 13 provides that only persons authorized in writing by REPIA could
enter, remain in or occupy any affected property. Divesting of affected
property by REPIA is provided for by Regulation 14:

The term "affected property" used in the said Regulations has been defined by
Regulation 19 to mean "any immovable property damaged or destroyed on or after
July 24, 1983, by riot or civil commotion and includes any immovable property
used for the purpose of an affected business or industry" ; and an "affected
business" has been defined to mean "any undertaking of a commercial.... nature
damaged or destroyed on or after July 24, 1983.........

The three petitioners-appellants, who had been carrying on their business in
the aforesaid portion numbered 128 for a considerable period of time prior to
the 24th July 83 and who have also continued to do so even after the said
date, addressed to the 1 st respondent the letter dated 16.8.83, a copy of
which has been marked "B" in these proceedings. In this letter the petitioners
stated.: that none of the shops on the ground floor has even been damaged to
an extent which would prevent any business being carried on. in it : that the
only damage caused to their premises No. 128 was that, whilst some wooden
doors were affected by the fire, some plaster fell off the walls : that the
damage so caused to their premises have since been repaired by them with the
permission of the Police, and they are continuing to carry on their business
in the said premises': that they are addressing this letter in order to
protect their interests as tenants of the said premises in view of the
attempts made by the landlord to utilize the situation, which has arisen, to
interfere with the rights which the petitioners are entitled to as tenants,
and to request the 1 st respondent to inspect the said building and give a
ruling in terms of the said emergency regulations in regard to their business.

The 1 st respondent by his letter dated 5.9.83 to the 1st Petitioner a copy of
which has been marked "C", declared, in terms of the aforesaid Emergency
Regulations, that the business in premises No. 128, Prince

**328**

treet, Pettah, "is not an affected business for the purposes of these
regulations". The 1st .petitioner was also informed that he should obtain the
prior approval of the Urban Development Authority and/or the Local Authority
before commencing any development activities or repairs.

Thereafter, on 14- 9.83, the 1 st respondent informed, by his letter, a copy
of which is the document "D", the 1 st petitioner : that the business in
premises No. 128, Prince Street, Colombo 1 1, "has been divested on 5.9.83" :
that, as it has been reported that the 1 st petitioner is already in
occupation of the premises and carrying on business, that he, the 1 st
petitioner, may plaster the inside walls at his expense if the owner does not
attend to the repairs.

The 1 st petitioner states that thereafter, at an interview held on 21 .9.83
at the office of the 1 st respondent, the petitioners were "'explained that
neither their business nor the premises occupied by them as tenants were
'affected property' or "affected business"". This interview according to the 1
st respondent, however, was actually held on 26.9.83, and at such interview a
number of matters relating to Abdeen Building, including the proposal of the
2nd respondent to demolish the entirety of Abdeen Building and the
construction of a new building and the letting out of portions of such new
building to the previous tenants, were discussed.

Thereafter, according to the petitioners, without any notice to them, the 1 st
respondent addressed to the petitioners the letter "E", dated 10.11.83, which
the petitioners maintain was handed over to them by the 2nd respondent
himself, on 10.11. 83, and in which the 1 st respondent states that Abdeen
Building, which was "damaged/destroyed during the July 1983 disturbances, are
to be developed for which purpose these premises will be demolished".

On receipt of the said letter "E", the petitioners forwarded to the 1 st
respondent the letter '"F" on the very next day, 1 1 . 1 1 .83 in which they
expressed astonishment, in view of the 1 st respondent's own earlier
communications "C" and "D" \- referred to above - to them, at the direction
issued to demolish the premises, No. 128, occupied by them, as well. They
charged the 1 st respondent with lack of bona fides, and of unfairly helping
the 2nd respondent to evict them, an act which the 2nd respondent could not
otherwise have been able to achieve legally. They also challenged the legality
of this course of action on the part of the 1 st respondent.

**329**

Thereupon, on 15.11.83, the petitioners instituted these proceedings before
the Court of Appeal praying for a writ of certiorari to quash the said
purported decision or determination of the 1 st respondent that premises No.
128, Prince Street, Colombo 1 1 is an 'affected property" and that it is to be
demolished", and also for an order directing the 1 st respondent to stay all
action or proceedings in regard to the demolition of the said premises.

The Court of Appeal by its judgment delivered on 11. 6.84, has held : that,
even if premises 128 (and 126) is considered a separate and distinct property,
it is damaged property and therefore an "affected property" within the meaning
of Regulation 19 ; that it cannot be held that the petitioners were not given
a hearing before the decision to demolish was made ; that there is no basis
for the petitioners" allegation that the said decision to demolish was not
made bona fide ; that the decision of the 1 st respondent to demolish is intra
vires Regulation 4 (a) ; that the petitioners have locus standi ; that the
tenants of the upper floor of Abdeen Building were necessary parties to these
proceedings. On the basis of such findings, the Court of Appeal dismissed the
petitioners" application.

The 1 st respondent's affidavit filed in the Court of Appeal discloses that on
15.9.83, the day after the 1 st respondent had sent the petitioners the
aforesaid letter "D"" confirming that the petitioners" premises No. 128 had
been divested on 5.9.83 and authorising the petitioners to carry out the
necessary repairs to the said premises, the 1 st respondent had sent out the
letter 1 R2 to the Officer-in-charge of the Police Station, Pettah, requesting
him to take necessary action to prevent, inter alia, the petitioners from
exceeding the authority - which the letter itself sets out as being only "to
resume business only without any further rights in view of the fact that they
would otherwise not even be able to collect dues from previous customers" \-
given to them until such time as action is taken by REPIA to divest the
properties. The letters 1 R3A dated 14.9.83, 1 R3B dated 27.9.83, 1 R3C dated
3.10.83, 1 R3D dated 7.11.83, 1 R3F dated 8.1 1 .83 constitute correspondence
between the 1 st respondent and the Urban Development Authority regarding the
grant of permission to demolish and re-develop the entirety of Abdeen
Building. The petitioners themselves do not appear to have been aware of the
said correspondence. 1 R3E, dated 10. 11.83, is a letter from the 1 st
respondent to the 2nd respondent authorizing the 2nd

**330**

respondent to commence the demolition of Abdeen Building. On the same day the
1 st respondent sent his letter "E", referred to earlier, to the petitioners
to which the petitioners promptly replied with their aforesaid letter "F"" on
the following day, 1 1 .1 1 .83.

The principal submission made to this Court by learned Counsel was in regard
to whether or not that portion of the Abdeen Building, which was occupied by
the petitioners as tenants of the 2nd respondent and numbered 128, Prince
Street, Colombo 1 1 , also became '"affected property" within the meaning of
the aforesaid Emergency Regulations. Learned President's Counsel for the
petitioners contended that it did not. Learned President's Counsel appearing
for the several respondents, on the other hand, all argued that it did.

That the term used in the said Emergency Regulations is "property" and not
"premises," ; that the term used in the Rent Restriction laws is "'premises"
which has been given a special meaning ; that, sec. 5 (2) of the Public
Security Ordinance (Chap 40), under the provisions of which the said Emergency
Regulations have been promulgated, draw a distinction between "property" and
premises, that, in regard to a building such as the said Abdeen Building,
which comprises several parts or portions, it is the Abdeen Building in its
entirety as one unit which would fall within the term "property" contemplated
by the said Regulations, and not each of such parts or portions separately ;
that, unless the said Abdeen Building itself, in its entirety, is so treated,
it will not be possible to demolish the entirety of the building, the greater
part of which has been damaged and destroyed, and construct in its place an
entirely new building in which the other occupants of the old building, whose
portions had also been so destroyed, could be accommodated ' that, if no such
new building is constructed, the other tenants so displaced would suffer for
want of accommodation, are arguments put forward in support of the contention
advanced on behalf of the respondents that the "affected property". in the
circumstances of this case, is the entirety of the building known as the
Abdeen Building.

Learned President's Counsel for the petitioners maintains that the portion
numbered 128 and occupied by the petitioners also constitutes immovable
property, and this portion not having been damaged or destroyed as
contemplated by Regulation 19 - in respect of either the area covered by the
said portion or the business carried

**331**

on within that portion - such portion was not "affected property" within the
meaning of the said Regulation 19, and did not, therefore, vest in REPIA.

Having regard to the background in which the said Emergency Regulations come
to be promulgated, the object of these Regulations, as is indicated by the
Citation itself, has been to repair, restore and rehabilitate not only
immovable property, which were damaged and destroyed on or after July 24 1983,
but also all undertakings of a commercial or industrial nature similarly
damaged or destroyed. For the purpose of giving effect to these objects such
properties and businesses and industries were sought to be vested immediately
in the State in order to prevent unscrupulous elements from exploiting the
situation and capitalising on the helpless position in which owners and
occupants found themselves as a result of the unfortunate incidents. Not only
was property, whether immovable, such as buildings, or movables, such as
businesses and industries, in need of the protection of the State, persons too
- whether they were owners of buildings, businesses or industries, or were
only occupants, such as tenants, of property - were in dire need of State
protection. The whole aim and object of such emergency legislation had been
the preservation of the status quo. The preservation of the position, of both
persons and property, as it existed on the 24th July 1983. The Regulations,
which by their very nature were to be of only a temporary nature and were
thought to be essential to meet an emergency situation, were to protect,
preserve and provide for the welfare and well-being of both persons and
property affected by such incidents. Such regulations could not have been
meant to make the position of any person, whether affected by such incidents
or not, any the worse or even less beneficial than what it was immediately
prior to the 24th July 1983.

According to the definition of the term "affected property" in Regulation 19
as set out above, such property should all be immovable. The very first
requirement is that such property should be immovable. The word "premises"" is
a term defined by the Rent Laws. It has been defined in the Rent Act of 1972
as : "any building or part of a building together with the land appertaining
thereto". This definition would, therefore, bring both premises No. 128, and
the Abdeen Building itself within the category of immovable property.

**332**

Premises No. 128 along with the other portions -  seven on the ground floor,
and seven on the upper floor - each of which has also been separately assessed
and separately occupied together constitute one composite building known as
the Abdeen Building. These fifteen portions, even though each of them would
fall within the category of premises for the purposes of the Rent laws,
nevertheless constitute, structurally, integral parts of one large building.

It has been contended that : in the case of a large composite building such as
the Abdeen Building, the entirety of the building should, for the purposes of
the said Regulations, be considered as one single unit, even though it
comprises several sections which have been treated separately for the purposes
of the Rent laws ; that, if substantial damage has been caused to the building
considered as one unit, then the entirety of the Abdeen Building, including
any parts which may not be damaged, should be considered "affected property"
for the purposes of the said Regulations. Such an approach would be fair and
acceptable in regard to a property which is not only in fact one independent
unit, but has also been treated and occupied as such. Should such an approach
be adopted, in such an inflexible form, always even in respect of a building
comprising several integral parts which, though structurally connected to, or
dependent on one another, yet, function as if each is independent of the other
? If, for instance, only are such constituent portion, or a business which was
being carried on in such constituent part, is damaged or destroyed, should
such constituent part \- on the basis of either the damage caused to such part
itself or to the business carried on therein - be not considered "affected
property"" merely because the parts not so damaged represent the larger
portion of the entirety of the building. Should the benefits accruing upon it
being considered "affected property" be denied to it on such ground.
Similarly, where the greater majority of such constituent parts are damaged or
destroyed, but effective repairs or restoration work cannot be safely and
satisfactorily carried out without interfering with those that remain
undamaged, then should such damaged parts also be deprived of the protection
and the benefits of the said Regulation ? It seems to me that no invariable
test could or should be adopted. It should be made to depend upon the
circumstances of each case. For instance, even if one constituent part,
undestroyed and undamaged, could be singled out from the other units, the
greater majority of which have been destroyed or damaged, yet, on a more
realistic and a more practical

**333**

overall view, it would be more just and equitable, for the sake of the greater
good of the greater number, to regard the entirety of the building as the unit
of immovable property for the purposes of the said Emergency Regulations. Such
an approach would tend to advance the aim and the object of the said
Regulations, more than a rather narrow and technical approach.

Although I am inclined to the view that, in the case of a building such as the
Abdeen Building, if there has been considerable damage caused to several of
the separate portions which together comprise such building, it is the
entirety of the building itself that should, for the purposes of the said
Regulations, be regarded as the unit of immovable property, yet, it becomes
unnecessary, in the circumstances of this case, to express a definite finding
in view of the opinion, as set out below, I take that the finding of the
-Court of Appeal, - that, even if the aforesaid premises No. 128 is considered
to be a separate and distinct property, it is nevertheless a damaged property
and therefore an affected property, - should be affirmed.

As set out earlier the 1st petitioner maintained that the only damage caused
to premises No. 128 was to some of its wooden doors and to the plaster on the
walls. The petitioners had so informed the 1st respondent as early as 16th
August 1983 in their letter "B", referred to earlier, and had requested the
1st respondent to inspect the building. There is no direct evidence of any
such inspection by the 1st respondent himself. Even so, the 1st respondent
had, as set out earlier, on 5.9.83 by his letter "C", declared the
petitioners' business, which was carried on in premises No. 128 as not being
an "affected business" and advised the petitioners that they should obtain the
prior approval of the authorities set out therein before commencing any
development activities or repairs. The 1st respondent did also, by the letter
"D", authorize the petitioners to carry out the repairs set out therein at
their own expense if the owner does not attend to such repairs. No limitations
have been imposed by this letter. According to 1114B, at the inquiry held by
the 1st respondent on 26.9.83, the repairs needed by the ground floor have
been described by the representatives of the petitioners as being "very
minor". Thereafter the 1st petitioner did once again in his letter '"F", sent
out. to the 1 st respondent the day after he received the 1st respondent's
letter "E", reiterate the nature and the extent of the damage caused to
premises No. 128\.

**334**

As against the petitioners' version of the damage sustained by their premises
No. 128, was the 1st respondent's description of the damage caused to the said
premises : that the concrete slab separating the upper floor and ground floor
is extensively cracked and damaged and is out of alignment owing to the damage
sustained by the supporting walls on the ground floor : that the said slab
constitutes a potential danger to the occupants of the ground floor as it may
collapse not withstanding temporary supports : that the walls of the divided
portions on the ground floor are also extensively cracked. As set out earlier
it is not clear whether this description is of something the 1 st respondent
had himself observed at an inspection of the scene or whether it is only
derivative knowledge, gathered for instance from the report 1 R3F1 dated 11
.10.83, which had been submitted to the Director-General of the Urban
Development Authority by an engineer of the said Authority after an inspection
on 4.10.83 and a copy of which had been received by the 1 st respondent from
the said Authority on 8.1 1.83.

It was contended that the Court of Appeal should not have taken into
consideration either the report 1 R3F1 tendered on behalf of the 1 st
respondent or the document 2R 1 submitted on behalf of the 2nd respondent, for
the reason that the petitioner has not been informed of the contents of these
documents and has not been given an opportunity of replying to them before the
impugned Order `E", referred to earlier, was made. 1 R3F 1 had been considered
by the 1 st respondent, according to his affidavit, on 8.11.83, only two days
before the said Order "E" was made. The petitioners had not been made aware of
its contents, until these proceedings began. 2R1 is a report made by the 2nd
respondent's engineer on 22.9.83 after an inspection on 20.9.83. 1 st
respondent has not stated that he had seen the sad report before he made the
Order "E". Nor have the petitioners been aware of it until the 2nd respondent
filed it in the Court of Appeal on 11. 1 .84 along with his affidavit dated
9.1.84. The petitioners it is submitted were not aware until the document
"Preached them on 10.1 1.83 in the circumstances set out by them that the 1 st
respondent had taken the view that their premises

**335**

No. 128 was also an "affected property", and that the moment they became aware
of the view so taken by the 1 st respondent they protested on 11 .1 1.83 to
the 1 st respondent by their letter "F", and that at least on that date, if
not earlier, the 1 st respondent should have known that a dispute had arisen
at least as to whether or not premises

No. 128 was "affected property" and that such question had to be decided by
him in terms of Regulation 9(2) before he could proceed to do anything further
under the said Regulations.

The declaration contemplated under Regulation 9(2) is not, in my opinion, a
condition precedent to the exercise by REPIA of the powers vested under the
said Regulations in REPIA even where a dispute has arisen as to whether a
particular property is "affected property" or not. In view of the provisions
of paragraph (1) of Regulation 9, the moment the said Regulations came into
operation on 7.8.83 any property, which at that time came within the
definition set out in Regulation 19, vested immediately in the State. Such
vesting was immediate and automatic. No further act or acts on the part of any
one, the 1 st respondent or any other official, was required to render such
property an "affected property". A declaration under 9(2) is not required -
even though the matter is in dispute - to impress the property with the
character of an affected property". Such a declaration merely declares, in
view of the existence of a dispute, the true character of the property which
the law has, by virtue of the said Regulations, already invested it with. Such
a. declaration cannot confer upon the property a character which it has not
acquired already. If at the time the said Regulations came into operation the
property concerned had been damaged or destroyed in the manner set out in
Regulation 19 then such property would have acquired to itself with immediate
effect the character of an "affected property", and REPIA would have been
promptly invested with the power to exercise all powers it could, under and by
virtue of the said Regulation, in and over the affected premises. What the
provisions of Regulation 9(1) do is merely to invest REPIA with the power to
make such a declaration. This does not constitute the vesting of a power
coupled with a duty to do that act. The authority of REPIA does not depend
even when there is a dispute, upon its making such a declaration. Where the
property has in fact been damaged or destroyed, as described in Regulation 19,
then REPIA's authority has, by operation of law, come into existence. Thus if
premises No. 128 had in fact been damaged or destroyed at any time on or after
24th July and before the 8th August 1983 - there is no allegation of any
damage being caused after 8.8.83 - then such premises would from and after
8.8.83 have been ""affected premises". whether or not a declaration under
Regulation 9(2) was made by the 1 st respondent. No such declaration was
needed for such premises to become and be termed "affected premises"", and to
confer power

**336**

upon the 1 st respondent in and over it. The only consequence of such a
declaration is that it gave to such a declaration the final and conclusive
effect set out therein. The absence of such a declaration would not render any
act done by the 1 st respondent in and over or in respect of premises No. 128
void if, in fact and in law, it was "affected property" within the meaning of
the said Regulation 19.

Although 1 R4B shows the representatives of the petitioners stating that the
ground floor needs "very minor repairs" and the 1st respondent not "allowing"
it and postponing the "decision"" until the "U.D.A. approval is forthcoming on
the future of the locality"", there is no reference made therein to the
question, referred to in Regulation 9 (2), having arisen. The letter "F", as
set out earlier, is dated 10.1 1.83. If, therefore, the question envisaged by
the said Regulation 9 (2) surfaced itself - as it certainly did - only upon
the said letter "F", then the 1 st respondent would not have had sufficient
time to decide such question ; for, the petitioners instituted these
proceedings before the Court of Appeal within a few days, on 15.1 1.83. In the
absence, therefore, of a declaration under Regulation 9(2), this question was
open to be considered by the Court of Appeal.

\- The only reports which were placed before the Court of Appeal were the
reports 1 R3F 1 and 2R 1. They were produced on behalf of the 1 st and 2nd
respondents respectively. There is in them material which, in my opinion,
justifies the finding of the Court of Appeal on this point.

The said impunged Order for demolition has been challenged by the petitioners
on several grounds : that they were not heard before it was made : that the
demolition of a building was beyond the powers of REPIA : that it has been
made upon considerations which should not have weighed with REPIA : that REPIA
has no power to authorise the 2nd respondent himself,' even though he is the
owner of the said building, to demolish the building and construct in its
place at his own expense a new building according to his own plan, even if
such plan has been approved by the Urban Development Authority.

The 1st respondent, by his letter 1 R4A, dated 13.9.83, summoned the
petitioners for an interview "in regard to the divesting of the above
premises/business". Premises so referred to was premises No. 128. This
interview was ultimately held on 26.9.83 ; and, according to 1 R4B, which is a
record of the proceedings of the said interview, the

**337**

representatives of the petitioners, and also of several other interested
parties, who had informed the 1 st respondent that "all ground floor premises
need very minor repairs" and who evidently asked for permission to carry out
such repairs, had not been allowed to do so and had been informed that :
"decision will be taken after U.D A. approval is forthcoming on the future of
the building". Although the 1 st respondent in his affidavit states that he
disclosed the contents of the 2nd respondent's affidavit 1 R4C, particularly
the provisions of paragraphs 13 and 14, to the lawyers and the parties, yet, 1
R4B does not bear out this averment. The impugned Order 1 R3E (or E) was made
by the 1 st respondent on 10.1 1 .83, after he received 1 R3F(1) from the
Urban Development Authority on 8.11.83, and 1 R3D, dated 7.11. 83, which is a
copy of a letter sent by the Urban Development Authority to the 2nd respondent
that the permit to build according to the 2nd respondent's plan would be
issued to the 2nd respondent upon the 2nd respondent making the payment
referred to in the said letter. The petitioners had not been made aware of
these communications, and had not been heard after the interview held on
29.6.83 and before the impugned order was made on 10.1 1.83. The moment any
property vests in the State under and by virtue of Regulation 9(1 ), such
property vests "absolutely in the State free from all encumbrances" the effect
of which, it was common ground at the hearing before this Court, was to wipe
out, inter alia, any subsisting contracts of tenancy. An order made under
Regulation 14(1) divesting any property, which has vested in the State under
these Regulations, would, in terms of paragraph 2(b) of the said Regulation
14, have the effect of reviving such contracts of tenancy as were earlier
wiped out by the operation of Regulation 9(1 ). As was set out earlier, the
interview, which had been summoned by the 1st respondent by his letter 1 RA
and held on 26.9.83 (1 R4B), was expressly an inquiry "in regard to the
divesting" of, inter alia, premises No. 128 The business, vvhich was being
carried on in premises No. 128 by the petitioners, had, it must be noted,
already been divested by the 1 st respondent on 14.9.83 by his letter
"D-referred to earlier. Where premises which are rented out, ceases to exist,
the contract of tenancy relating to such premises also comes to an end. It
appears to me that, even though the premises were vested in REPIA, yet, having
regard to the matters set out above, fairness demanded that the petitioners be
given an opportunity to be heard against the proposed order for demolition.

**338**

The functions of REPIA, as set out earlier, in respect of "affected
properties"" (Reg. 4(a)) are the repair and restoration of such properties.
For the purpose of discharging its functions REPIA had the power, inter alia,
"to clear and re-develop such affected premises" (Regulation 5(b)). The
petitioners contend that the demolition of a building does not fall within
these powers. Having regard to the provisions of Regulations 4(a) and 5(b),
however, I am inclined to agree with the view taken by the Court of Appeal on
this point.

Regulation 5 (c) empowers REPIA "to enter into and perform directly or through
Government departments . . . . . . . or any agent authorized in that behalf
all such contracts as it may consider necessary for the discharge of its
functions". Contracts which REPIA is given the power to enter into and perform
by this Regulation are only such contracts as REPIA "may consider necessary
for the discharge of its functions". These contracts are, therefore, clearly
REPIA"s own contracts. They may be entered into and performed either directly,
by REPIA itself, or through one of the agencies expressly referred to in
Regulation 5(c). Whatever be the mode - directly or through an agent - in
which such contracts are entered into and performed, they are and must be
REPIA"s own contracts. They cannot and must not be those of another - not even
of the owner of such premises. The power conferred on REPIA is concise and
clear. It must be exercised strictly in accordance with such powers. If, for
some reason or other, REPIA finds itself unable to do so, then the remedy is
also set out clearly in the Regulations. In such a situation the duty of REPIA
is clearly to make an order, in terms of (Regulation 14 (1)), divesting such
property. Thereupon the owner is free to do what he may legitimately do. REPIA
cannot and must not seek to extend the weight of its authority to enable
anyone, not even the owner of such premises, to do something which he would
not otherwise have been able to do under the ordinary law.

Contracts which REPIA may in terms of these Regulations perform can be carried
out by REPIA either directly by itself or through any one of the agencies set
out therein. One such agency is "an agent authorised" in that behalf. The
prime purpose for which REPIA can enter into such contracts, and REPIA's main
concern in entering into such contracts was only the discharge of its own
functions and no other. Once REPIA considered it necessary to perform such a
contract for the purpose of discharging its functions then such contract had
to

**339**

be done only in one of two ways : either directly by REPIA itself, or else
through a Government department, a public corporation or through an agent
authorised in that behalf. Any expenditure incurred by REPIA in the exercise
and discharge of its powers and functions is to come out of a Fund which REPIA
is empowered by Regulation 6(1) to have and maintain.

The agents through whom REPIA could perform its contracts are referred to in
the said Regulations. They are persons appointed by REPIA, in terms of
Regulation 15(1), subject to such conditions of service as REPIA may determine
in order to discharge its functions efficiently and are to be remunerated in
such manner and at rates to be determined by REPIA. These agents are protected
against any suit or prosecution for any act done or purported to be done by
them in good faith under the said Regulations or on the directions of REPIA.
It is only such a person as has been appointed as an agent in conformity with
the aforesaid Regulations whom REPIA could engage to perform, as authorised by
Regulation 5(c), a contract which REPIA has entered into (either by itself or
through such an authorised agent) for the discharge of REPIA's functions. On
the material placed before Court, the 2nd respondent cannot be termed as agent
`of REPIA as contemplated by the said Regulations.

As has been already set out, in the first week of September 1983 the 1 st
respondent divested the petitioners' business which was being carried on in
premises No. 128 and even authorised the repairs which were said to be
necessary. Then, about the middle of September, the 1 st respondent had been
considering the divesting of the premises itself. The decision to authorize
the demolition of the entire building, inclusive of premises No. 128 occupied
by the petitioners, has been taken by the 1 st respondent only on or about the
10th November 1983. The correspondence - 1 R3A dated 14.9.83, 1133B dated
27.9.83, 1 R3C dated 3.10.83, and 1 R3D dated 7.11.83 - between the 1 st
respondent and the Urban Development Authority seems to account for this
change in the position of the 1st respondent. A consideration of these
documents makes it clear that, although, at the beginning, the 1 st respondent
had contemplated a divesting of the property so that the owner, the 2nd
respondent, who had earlier, on 15.8.83, in his declaration 2R4(b) indicated
to the 1 st respondent the plans he had to develop the property in question,
could go ahead with such plans as he, the 2nd respondent, himself had, yet,
later on, the

**340**

1 st respondent decided against an immediate divesting, and let the property
continue to be vested in the State so that the 2nd respondent could be allowed
to demolish the entirety. of the building and construct in its place a new
building according to the 2nd respondent's plan, which had also by then been
found to be acceptable to the Urban Development Authority. In this course of
action, which had been decided on, the first step was to continue with the
vesting and permit the 1 st respondent to demolish the building. Such a
demolition could be possible only if the entirety of the building continued to
be vested in the State. If the property were divested, then the 2nd respondent
would have had to evict, at any rate, the petitioners, who were protected
tenants in occupation of premises No. 128. Such an eviction would have been
possible, in the event of opposition from the petitioners, only through a
decree of a competent court. The building sought to be so constructed was not
one to be constructed by the 2nd respondent for REPIA in pursuance of .a
contract REPIA had entered into with the 2nd respondent. The 2nd respondent
was not to be paid for such construction by REPIA from and out of REPIA's own
funds. Though the plan was approved by the Urban Development Authority, the
building to be constructed was the 2nd respondent's own, to be executed and
financed entirely by the 2nd respondent. The position then was this. The 2nd
response it had a plan to redevelop the entire property. This plan was
approved by the Urban Development Authority. The 2nd respondent was prepared
to commence building operations. He had the funds necessary to commence and
complete the construction. There was, however, a snag. The petitioners were in
occupation. This is where REPIA's assistance was needed. The part REPIA was to
play in, the proposed scheme was merely to pave the way for the 2nd respondent
to do acts which the 2nd respondent would not otherwise have been able to do
REPIA, could not and should not allow itself to be so made use of. If REPIA
found itself unable to clear and redevelop the property on its own with its
own funds, as required by the said Regulations, then all that REPIA had to do
and could have done, in accordance with the Regulations in terms of which
alone REPIA itself had come into existence, was to make an order, under the
provisions of Regulation 14(1), divesting the said property. Such a divesting
order would, in terms of paragraph (2) of the said Regulation 14, have revived
the tenancy agreement which the petitioner had with the 2nd respondent ,in
respect of premises No. 128 at the time the said Emergency Regulations came
into operation on 7.8.83.

On a consideration of the foregoing it seems to me that the submission made on
behalf of the petitioner, that REPIA has so conducted itself in order to
confer upon the 2nd respondent, at the expense of the petitioner, a benefit
which the 2nd respondent would not otherwise have been able to obtain and
which it was not within REPIA's power to bestow, is worthy of acceptance.

In this view of the matter I am of opinion that the aforesaid impugned order 1
R3E (or E), dated 10.1 1.1983, granting the. 2nd respondent authority to
demolish premises No. 128, Prince Street, Colombo 11 is ultra vires.

I, therefore, make order allowing the appeal of the petitioners. The judgment
of the Court of Appeal, dated 11. 6.84, is accordingly set aside. A Mandate in
the nature of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the aforesaid Order 183 E (or E),
dated 10.11. 83, made by the 1st respondent, is directed to be issued
forthwith.

The 1st and 2nd respondents are directed to pay, a sum of Rs. 787.50 each, to
the petitioners as costs of appeal.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/22.html_  

