##  Fonseka v. Wijetunge - SLR - 79, Vol 2 of 1984 [1984] LKSC 22; (1984) 2
Sri LR 79 (20 June 1984)

**  79**

** **

# FONSEKA

**v.**

**WIJETUNGE**



 SUPREME COURT.

SAMARAKOON, C.J., RANASINGHE, J. AND RODRIGO, J.

S.C. APPEAL No. 25/83.

S.C. SPECIAL LA/9/83.

C. A./L. A./7482 (S.C.).

C.A. (S.C) No. 811/75 (F).

D.C. COLOMBO No. 1969/ED.

JUNE 11,1984.



_Landlord and Tenant ‑ Arrears of rent ‑ Subletting ‑ Wanton destruction and
wilful damage ‑ Section 12A (1) (d) of the Rent Restriction Act as amended by
Act No. 12 of 1966._



The plaintiff sued his tenant the defendant for ejectment from shop premises
No. 327, Galle Road on three grounds : arrears of rent, subletting a portion
to one Albert Wijetunge and causing wanton destruction and wilful damage to
the premises. The District Judge found in favour of the plaintiff on all three
grounds but the Court of Appeal revised these findings and ordered plaintiff's
action to be dismissed.

##  80



In appeal by the plaintiff to the Supreme Court he was permitted to proceed
only on the grounds of subletting and causing wanton destruction and/or wilful
damage to the  premises.



The allegation of subletting to Albert who was defendant's brother was without
substance, but on the allegation of damage the Additional District Judge had
accepted the evidence of the architect Peiris and found that damage has been
caused to the floor of the shop, kitchen floor and southern wall of the shop
by acts of the defendant. The southern wall was damaged by nine angle‑iron
spikes driven into it to hold timber racks. As a result the wall had a crack
penetrating to the other side causing dislocation of the parapet gutter and
rain water to drain into the shop. The wall was thus rendered weak and liable
to collapse.



**Held ‑ **



The two grounds on which a landlord can eject his tenant under section 12A (1)
_(d)_ of the  Rent Restriction Act are 'wanton destruction' and 'wilful
damage'. The former means that there must be proof that the premises have
suffered total or partial destruction. In other words they must be totally or
partially destroyed. To be wanton, such destruction must be the result of
carelessness for or indifference to the consequences or an, unrestrained
disregard of them. "Wilful damage" on the other hand means damage caused
'intentionally" or 'deliberately".



There was no evidence that the respondent was guilty of wanton destruction. On
the other hand the damage to the southern wall caused by driving in nine
angle‑iron spikes was a deliberate act and the resulting weakening of the wall
making it liable to collapse is a direct consequence of the act of driving in
the spikes. The kitchen floor was cracked and pitted by the splitting of
firewood on it and the floor of the shop was damaged by the planting of posts
to support heavy rafters. Therefore the respondent is guilty of causing wilful
damage to the premises within the meaning of section 12A (1) _(d)_ of the Rent
Restriction Act.



The damage must be serious and not trivial and what exactly is serious damage
must be left to the discretion of the Judge. In the instant case the damage to
the southern wall taken with the damage to the kitchen floor and to the floor
of the shop must be regarded as serious and justifies ejectment.



**Cases referred to** :



(1)        _Arumugam v. Carolis_ (1964) 67 NLR 84, 85, 86  


(2)        Clarke v. Hoggins (1862) 11 C. B. (N. S) 551 – 52 ; 142 E.R. 912.



(3) _         Thangiah v. Yoonus _(19 72) 76 NLR 183.  


(4)        Pieris v. Pieris (1977) 79 (1) NLR 99.



**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_P. Wimalachanthiran_ with _A. P. Niles and C. S. Hettihewa_ for
plaintiff‑appellant.



_A. Mampitiya_ with _Ifthikar Hassim_ for defendant‑respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult  
 _

##  81



June 20, 1984.

**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**

** **

The Appellant instituted this action for the ejectment of the Respondent who
was his tenant of premises No. 327, Galle Road, Mount Lavinia. The action was
based on three grounds. They are :  
  
(1)        arrears of rent from October, 1969 to 30th April, 1970,  
  
(2)        that the Respondent had sublet a portion of his house to one Albert
Wijetunge, and  
  
(3)        that the Defendant and/or persons residing in the said premises had
caused wanton destruction and/or wilful damage to the premises.



The Additional District Judge held in favour of the Appellant on all three
allegations **** and decree was entered accordingly. The Respondent appealed
and the Court of Appeal reversed the findings of the Additional District
Judge, and allowed the appeal of the Respondent, and ordered decree to be
entered dismissing the Appellant's action. The Appellant has appealed on all
three grounds with special leave of this Court.



At the hearing of this appeal we informed Counsel for the Appellant that he
would be heard only on the allegation of subletting and the allegation that
the Respondent has caused wanton destruction and/or wilful damage. I do not
think there is any substance in the allegation that the premises had been
sublet to Albert the brother of the Respondent and I therefore reject that
ground of appeal.



In respect of the allegation of damage the Additional District Judge has
accepted the evidence of Architect Pieris and found as a fact that ‑



_(a)_         the floor of the shop had been cracked and holes dug to plant
timber posts to support heavy rafters carrying plantain bunches,



_(b)_         the kitchen floor cracked and pitted extensively by splitting
firewood on the floor, and



_(c)_         heavy angle‑iron spikes had been driven into the Southern wall
of the shop to hold timber racks. As a result the South‑West corners of the
wall had a crack penetrating to the outer side of the wall. This has caused
the dislocation of the parapet gutter and the rain water to drain into the
shop.

##  82



In his report (P3) architect Pieris stated that heavy hammering of nine
angle‑iron spikes into the wall had caused the crack and the draining of rain
water into it had caused it to develop thereby rendering the wall weak and
liable to collapse.



Section 12A (1) _(d)_ of the Rent Restriction Act (Cap. 274) amended by Act
No. 12 of 1966 permits a landlord to sue the tenant in ejectment where ‑



_" (d)_      wanton destruction or wilful damage to such premises has been
caused by the tenant thereof or any other son at his instigation, or any other
person residing in such premises."



Tambiah J. was inclined to follow the dictum of T. S. Fernando J. in _Arumugam
v. Carolis_ (1) __ where he sought to give a meaning to the word  "wanton" and
stated at pages 85 and 86 ‑



"The word _'wanton'_ in the expression _'wanton damage'_ in the context in
which it appears in the Rent Restriction Act should be given its ordinary
meaning. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the word _'wanton'_
(adjective) literally means 'Undisciplined'. One of the meanings of the word
_'wanton'_ (verb is 'to deal carelessly or wastefully (with property,
resources)'. I was referred by counsel to the meaning of the adverb
_'wantonly_ as ‘not having a reasonable cause' to be found in Stroud's
Judicial Dictionary. I find that the reference is taken from a judgment of
Willes J. in _Clarke v. Hoggins_ (2). That learned judge was there
interpreting a penal statute and he held that the mere fact of a man being
instructed to deliver papers at a house of a third person was no answer to a
complaint charging him with having 'wilfully and wantonly' disturbed the party
and his family by very violently knocking and ringing at the door at an
unreasonable hour in the night. I do not think the citation is of much
assistance in interpreting the adjective _wanton_ in the statute we are here
concerned with. In the  context in which we find it in the Rent Restriction
Act, I think the word means 'purposeless', and the expression 'wanton damage
means purposeless damage of the kind which irresponsible school boys and
soldiers of an invading army have been known to cause on certain occasions."

##  83



wijayatilake, J. approved and adopted this statement and the meaning given
**** to the words "wanton damage" when delivering his judgment in the case of
_Thangiah v. Yoonus_ (3) _._ 1 __ do not find either decision helpful in
deciding this matter. The phrase "wanton damage" does not appear in section
12A (1) _(d)_ of the Act and it is therefore not a ground upon which a
landlord can eject his tenant. The two grounds are ‑ " wanton destruction" and
"wilful damage". The former means that there must be proof that the premises
have suffered total or partial destruction. In other words they must be
totally or partially destroyed. To be wanton such destruction must be the
result of carelessness for or "indifference to the consequences (or) an
unrestrained disregard of them" (Stroud Vol. 5 Ed. 4 p. 2971). "Wilful damage"
on the other hand means damage caused "intentionally" or "deliberately".
Tambiah J., in following the dictum of Fernando J., was misled into the belief
that purposeful damage was not wanton damage. There is no evidence in this
case to hold that the Respondent has been guilty of wanton destruction. On the
other hand the damage to the wall caused by driving in nine angle‑iron spikes
was a deliberate act and the resulting weakening of the wall making it liable
to collapse is a direct consequence of the act of driving in the said spikes.
I am therefore of the view that the Respondent has been guilty of causing
wilful damage to the premises within the meaning of section 12A (1) _(d)_ of
the Rent Restriction Act (Cap. 274).



It is the duty of a tenant to take due care of the premises and to restore the
premises to the landlord at the end of the tenancy in the Same condition in
which it was delivered to him reasonable wear and tear excepted. (Wille's
Principles of South African Law 7th Edition p. 422). He must not inter alia
cause damage to the premises (Voet 19.2.29). But this damage must be of a
serious and not of a trival nature. (Voet 19.2.18). Vide also _Peiris v.
Peiris._ (4) What exactly is serious damage is a matter that "ought to be left
to the discretion of a prudent and cautious Judge". (Voet 19.2.18). The above
are principles of the Common Law applicable to the relationship of landlord
and tenant and I think they are apposite for the construction of the
provisions of section 12A (1) _(c)_ of the Rent Restriction Act (Cap. 274).
The damage caused to the Southern wall by driving angle‑iron spikes is so much
that it is in danger of collapse. This is

##  84



serious damage and it will entail considerable expense to the landlord to
restore it. This damage taken with the damage to he kitchen floor and the
floor of the shop would also, in my opinion, justify an order in ejectment. I
therefore allow the appeal and direct that a decree in ejectment and damages
as prayed for in the plaint be entered in favour of the Appellant. He will be
entitled to costs here and in the Court Appeal.



**RANASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RODRIGO, J**. ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/22.html_  

