##  Wigneswaren v. Thambipillai - SLR - 325, Vol 1 of 1983 [1983] LKSC 22;
(1983) 1 Sri LR 325 (27 October 1983)

**325**

WIENESWAREN

**v.**

**THAMBIPILLAI**

SUPREME COURT

WANASUNDERA, J, RAGWATTE, J.,

AND ABDUL CADER, J.

S.C.NO.47/82,

S.C.SPECIAL LEAVE TO APPEAL NO.69/82

APPLICATION NO. C.A.(L.A.)NO.60/81

D.C. MOUNT-LAVINIA, CASE NO. 667/RE.

October 10, 1983.

  
_Landlord and Tenent-Action for ejectment of Tenent-Reasonable requirement-
Section 22(2)(b) of the Rent Act._



# 326

  
No.7 of 1972 and Section 22 (2) (bb) of the Rent (Amendment) Act No. 55 of
1980 ‑ Whether an amendment of plaint can be permitted unless an action was
validly instituted-Sections 39,46(2),55 and 147 of the Civil Procedure Code.



The Petitioner, (a Tamil Lady), filed action seeking to eject the defendant
from the premises, on the ground of reasonable requirement under the Rent Act
No.7 of 1972\. During the trial, two further issues numbering 3 and 4 were
brought forward by the defendant.



viz:



(3) Whether the plaintiff is subject to "Thesavalamai"



(4) if so, could the plaintiff maintain this, case according to the manner in
which it is filed?



In the meantime, the Rent Act was amended by Act No. 55 of 1980 and the
petitioner sought to amend the plaint in terms of Section 22(2) (bb) of this
Act, and her application was allowed by the District Judge. The defendant
objected contending that the plaintiff being a Thesevalamai wife, could not
validly institute legal actions without joining her husband, and no amendment
can be permitted unless an action was validly instituted. The court of Appeal
decided that issues 3 and 4 be tried first to establish that the claim was
validly instituted by the plaintiff and thereafter make an order for the
amendment of the plaint.



# Held -



#### There is no reason to disagree with the decision made by the District
Judge as

# 327



(a) a decision on the issues of status viz : 3 and 4 will not decide the
entire case if the plaintiff succeeds; and



(b) This action being a tenancy case it is in the interest of justice to
decide the entire case together, so as to avoid inter­mediate appeals.  


# Cases referred to

  
(1) _Mango Nona vs. Manis Appu (1929) 31 N.L.R. 218  
  
_(2) _Fernando vs. Fernando (1923) 25 N.L.R. 197_



Appeal from an Order of the Court of Appeal



_K.N. Choksy, S.A.,_ with _K. Kanag ‑Iswaren_ with _Kumar Nadesan_ for the
appellant.  


_H. L. de Silva, S.A.,_ with _S.Mahenthiran_ for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

  
October 27, 1983.  


**ABDUL CADER ,J. ,**



The appellant, a Tamil lady, filed action seeking to eject the defendant from
the premises in suit on the ground of reasonable requirement in terms of
Section 22 (2) (b) of the Rent Act No.7 of 1972.



On the date of trial, the following issues were framed :‑



"(1) Are the premises relevant to this case required for reasonable occupation
as a residence for the plaintiff and members of her family?



(2) If so,

# 328  
  


# (a) Is the plaintiff entitled to ask for a decree of ejectment of the
defendant as prayed  for in the plaint?



(b) What is the amount of damages which the plaintiff can recover from the
defendant?"



The defendant did not frame any issues.



On 12th January, 1981, when the plaintiff" under cross‑examination, and in
consequence certain statements made by her, the defendant raised further
issues :‑



"(3) Whether the plaintiff is subject to 'Thesavalamai"?  


(4) If so, could the plaintiff maintain this case according to the manner in
which it is filed ?"



The trial was postponed further for 12th May, 1981.



In the meantime, the Rent Act was amen by Act No.55 of 1980 which introduced a
new ground of ejectment under Section 22 (2)(bb) an on 31st March, 1981, the
petitioner sought to amend the plaint in terms of this Section. The defendant
objected to this application, but the District by his Order of 12th May, 1981,
allowed the application.



The defendant appealed to the Court Appeal against the Order of the learned
District Judge contending that the plaintiff being Thesavalamai wife, could
not validly institute legal proceedings without joining her husband, no
amendment can be permitted unless an action validly instituted and, therefore
issues 3 and 4 regards the status of the plaintiff should decided before the
amendment can be allowed. relevant section (21(l) of the amending Act) reads

#  329

  
As follows:-



"Where any action or proceedings instituted in any Court for the ejectment of
a tenant from any premises under subsection (2)(b) of Section 22 of the
principal enactment, is or are pending on the day immediately preceding the
date of commencement of this Act, the landlord of such premises may, where he
seeks to rely on any new ground specified in subsection (2)(bb) of Section 22
of the prin­cipal enactment, make application to the Court to amend the plaint
and the court shall, notwithstanding the provisions of any other law, permit
the landlord to amend the plaint in such action or proceedings and make such
other orders as may be necessary, where the court is satisfied that the
landlord has deposited with the Commissioner of National Housing a sum
equivalent to five years' rent of such premises to be payable to the tenant
thereof, and proceed to hear and determine the action or proceedings on the
new ground adduced, and make order in accordance with .section 22 of the
principal enactment."



The Court of Appeal decided (a) that the word "instituted" in this Section
means "validly insti­tuted," and, therefore, the plaintiff should first
establish that the claim was validly instituted by her without joining her
husband and (2) if the Plaintiff is permitted to amend the plaint as re­quired
in this Section before she established (a) above, defendants will be precluded
from having the case tried on issues 3 and 4.



The Court of Appeal directed that issues 3 and 4 be tried first and thereafter
(presumably if the Plaintiff succeeds) make an order for the amendment of the
plaint.  


As regards the first, an action is instituted when a plaint is presented under
Section 39 of the  


#  330



C.P.C. The decisions in _Mango Nona vs Manis Appu_ (1) and _Fernando. vs.
Perera_ (2) support this view. Unless it is rejected by Court in terms of
Section 46(2) of C.P.C., summons will issue in terms of Section 55 C.P.C. on
the basis that the action has been properly instituted. Counsel for the
defendant cited decisions as regards minors which have to be distinguished as
the fact of minority was disclosed in the plaints unlike in the case where the
plaintiff did not admit that she was under coverture and, therefore, the Court
had no material to consider that the plaint was irregular. This action remains
validly instituted until the Court is satisfied on evidence that the plaintiff
is a woman governed by the law of Thesavalamai.



In reply to plaintiff's contention that Section 147 C.P.C. requires only
issues of law to be tried preliminarily and where the facts are in dispute, an
order to have two separate trials cannot be made, Counsel for the defendant
urged that the District Judge had a discretion to decide to hear certain
issues preliminarily if they will go to the root of the case. There is no
reason to disagree with the decision made by the District Judge as (a) a
decision on the issue of status, viz: 3 and 4 succeeds and (b) this action
being a tenancy case it is in the interests of justice to decide the entire
case together , so as to avoid intermediate appeals.



Under these circumstances, it is not necessary to interpret the meaning of
Section 147 C.P.C.



The second of the reasons given by the Court of Appeal is clearly wrong, so
much so that even Counsel for the defendant did not seek to support it. "The
action or proceedings on the new ground adduced with the Court is called upon
to hear and determine" necessarily presupposes the ordinary legal framework
consisting of both procedural and substantive law which provide for the
orderly  

# 331

  
determination of disputes between parties.



Counsel for the defendant having admitted that the permission to amend the
plaint will not preclude defendant's right to challenge the status of the
plaintiff, the present exercise of the defendant is nothing other than an
attempt to obtain further time in an action which has been already delayed
from 12.5.81 thereby defeating the provisions of Section 22(2)(c).



The appeal is allowed. The order of the learned District. judge is restored.
The amendment is accepted. After issues are framed consequent to the amendment
trial will proceed on all issues together. The defendant‑respondent will pay
the plaintiff‑appellant the costs of this Court and of the Court of Appeal.



In terms of Section 22(2)(c) this action should have been disposed of in its
entirety over an year ago. The Registrar is directed to forward the record to
the District Judge is directed to hear and conclude proceedings within 4
months of the receipt of the record.



**WANASUNDERA, J.**   I agree.



**RATWATTE, J.**            I agree.



_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/22.html_  

