##  Bandaranaike v. Times of Ceylon Ltd. - SLR - 178, Vol 1 of 1984 [1981]
LKSC 22; (1984) 1 Sri LR 178 (10 April 1981)

#  178



**BANDARANAIKE**

**v.**

**TIMES OF CEYLON LTD.**



SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND COLIN‑THOME', J.

S. C. No 56/82‑ C.A.L.A. No. 59/82 (S C.)‑C.A.L.A. No. 36/82 ‑ D.C. COLOMBO

No. 81692/M

FEBRUARY 1, 1984.



_Service of summons on Company ‑Section 471 of the Civil Procedure
Code‑Sections 91 and 357 of the Companies Ordinance._



The plaintiff‑appellant sued the respondent‑company (Times of Ceylon Ltd.) for
damages. Summons was issued on the defendant and was reported to have been
served by the fiscal at the registered address namely No 3, Bristol Street,
Colombo by handing it over to a person described as the Manager who really was
an officer of the Business Undertaking of the Times of Ceylon Ltd.



As the defendant did not appear, ex parte trial was held and judgment and
decree were entered. Subsequently an application for execution of writ was
made. At the time of the service of summons, at the time of the judgment after
ex parte hearing and at the date of the decree and application for issue of
writ of execution the registered address of the respondent‑Company was No. 3,
Bristol Street, Colombo.



On April 10, 1981, the respondent‑company prayed that the judgment and decree
be set aside and that permission be granted to it to appear and defend the
action. The grounds adduced were that the Business Undertaking of the
respondent‑company had been vested in the State by Order dated August 2, 1977,
and after 3rd August, 1977, the respondent‑company had ceased to carry on
business at No. 3, Bristol Street, Colombo. Although this was the registered
address, its address in fact was No 9, Castle Street, Colombo. Further by
resolution of 5th March, 1981, the respondent‑company went into voluntary
liquidation. The respondent‑company alleged that neither summons nor decree
had been served on it. The District Court upheld the objections and the
appellant appealed unsuccessfully to the Court of Appeal.



# Held –

** **

(1)        All that matters is that the summons reached the registered office
of the Company and was received by an officer working at the office even
though he may riot have been an employee of the respondent The law is only
concerned with the address registered in the Books of the Registrar of
Companies and not with the address in fact.



#  179



Per Samarakoon, C.J.‑



            "The law fixes the Company's habitat so that the process of law can reach it and the members of the public who have dealings with it can find it. The Respondent had represented to the public that its registered office was at No. 3, Bristol Street, and if any member of the public acted on the faith of it the Respondent cannot be heard to deny it ".



Hence summons and decree had been served as required by law.



(2)        Even though the respondent‑company had ceased to do any business
after the vesting order there was no evidence as to whether it had any movable
or immovable assets or as to whether the company was now an empty shell.
Further despite the voluntary liquidation of the respondent‑company its
corporate character continued.



# Cases referred to



(1)        _Mendis v. The Independent Publishing Co. Ltd._ 10 C. L. W 145.



(2)        _A/S Cathaneholm v. Nonequipment Trading Ltd._ (1978) 2 QB 314, 322
(C.A.) [1972] 2 All E.R. 538, 542 (C.A.).



**APPEAL** to the Supreme Court from the order of the Court of Appeal



_Nimal Senanayake, S.A.,_ with _Kithsiri P. Gunaratne, Saliya Mathew_ and
_Mohamed Ghazzale_ for plaintiff‑appellant.



_N. Sinnathamby_ with _K. S. Ratnavale_ for respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



March 8, 1984.

_ _

**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**



The appellant instituted this action on the 18th September, 1978, against the
respondent for recovery of damages in the total sum of Rs.750,000 upon two
causes of action. The appellant alleged that the respondent had published two
news items in the newspaper, "Sunday Times" of the 4th December, 1977\. The
address of the respondent set out in the caption to the plaint was No. 3,
Bristol Street. Summons was issued on the defendant and was reported to have
been served by the fiscal at that address. The returnable date was the 17th
November, 1978. The respondent did not appear on this date and the case was
fixed for ex parte trial on 10th January, 1979. _Ex parte_ evidence was led on
the 10th January, 1979, and judgment was delivered on 29th January, 1979.
Decree is stated to have been entered of record on the 17th



#  180



April, 1979. I presume that this was Decree Nisi. Application for execution of
writ was subsequently made. At the time of the issue of service of summons, at
the time of judgment after _ex parte_ hearing, and at the date of decree and
application for issue of Writ of Execution the registered address of the
respondent with the Registrar of Companies was and remained No. 3, Bristol
Street, Colombo.



The respondent filed objections on the 10th April, 1981, and prayed that the
judgment and decree entered of record be set aside and that the respondent be
permitted to enter an appearance, file answer and defend the action. The
reasons adduced are‑



1\.         That its Business Undertaking had vested in the State by Order
dated 2nd August, 1977, made under the Business Undertakings (Acquisition)
Act. No. 35 of 1972.



2\.         That on the 3rd August, 1977, the respondent ceased to carry on
business and ceased to have a business office at No. 3, Bristol Street, as
those premises were also vested in the State by the said vesting order.



3\.         That the summons and decree were not served on the respondent.



4\.         That by a resolution dated 5th March, 1981, the respondent went
into Voluntary Liquidation.



The address of the respondent set out in the caption to the objections is No.
9, Castle Street, Colombo 8. The District Judge held that summons had not been
served on the respondent and ordered that the decree be set aside. The Court
of Appeal upheld this Order but gave different reasons. The Appellant has
filed an appeal in this Court with the leave of the Court of Appeal which has
asked for a decision of this Court on three matters. I will deal with them in
their order.



The first question posed by the Court of Appeal is as follows: ‑



( _a_ )        Was the Court of Appeal wrong in law in holding that there has
been no valid service of summons in this case on the defendant‑respondent
Company as required by the provisions of section 471 of the Civil Procedure
Code read with sections 91 and 357 of the Companies Ordinance?"



#  181

** **

I fail to see the relevance of section 357 of the Companies Ordinance in this
case. That section deals with the service of documents on a Company and there
are no doubt many documents referred to in the Companies Ordinance that could
be served on the Company. Perhaps it could be utilised for the service of
summons issued by a Court of Law but I do not need to consider that aspect of
it because we are concerned here with a summons issued by a Court of Law and
its form and the manner of its service governed by the Civil Procedure Code in
terms of which it is issued. The cardinal rule of the Civil Procedure Code is
that there must be proof of personal service (Vide section 59). All summons,
as in the case of all processes of court, unless otherwise directed, shall be
issued to the fiscal accompanied by a precept in Form 17 of the Civil
Procedure Code (section 356 and section 364 of the Civil Procedure Code). The
fiscal's return to the precept must be in the manner required by the
provisions of section 371 of the Civil Procedure Code. The Civil Procedure
Code takes cognizance of the fact that in the case of juristic persons such
personal service is impractical. Therefore it made special provision in
section 471 as follows: ‑



"When the action is against a corporation, or against a board or other public
body, or a company authorised to sue and be sued in the name of an officer or
of a trustee, except in cases where a particular mode of service is directed
by law, the summons may be served‑



( _a_ )        by leaving it at the registered office (if any) of the
corporation, board, public body, or company: or



( _b_ )        by giving it to the secretary or other principal officer of the
corporation, board, public body, or company:



and the court may in such summons or by special order require the personal
appearance of such secretary or other principal officer of the corporation,
board, public body, or company who may be able to answer material questions
relating to the action."



No doubt section 357 (a) of the Companies Ordinance provides for "leaving" a
document at the registered office as does section 471 (a) of the Civil
Procedure Code but this is no reason for saying that section 357 can be
utilised for the service of summons of Court.



#  182



            The fiscal :repaired: to premises No. 3, Bristol Street, Colombo, and there served it on the "Manager on behalf of the Times of Ceylon Ltd." That this summons was so served and received is not denied. An entry in hand made on the original of the summons (which was subsequently returned to Court and now appears in the record) shows that it was received on 09.11.78 at 4.10 p.m. At the same time a minute has been made on it, directed to an officer referred to as "P & AM" as follows: ‑



"P& AM"



(1)        PI, ask Editor DM & ST. Mr. E. P. de Silva to see me with the pp in
question to discuss case with the A.G.



(2)        We have to show this to CA when he is in his office."



We were informed that the letters "DM" and "ST" stood for "Daily Mirror" and
"Sunday Times" respectively which were two newspapers, the letters "CA" stood
for "Competent Authority" who ran the business for the State and that the
letters "AG" stood for Attorney‑General. On the 10th January, 1979, the
General Manager wrote to the Registrar of the District Court of Colombo
stating that the summons in question had been delivered in error "at this
office" which we were told was a reference to the Times Building, No. 3,
Bristol Street. He also added that the defendant mentioned in the summons does
not maintain an office in those premises. It is quite clear that at the time
the Manager received the summons he did so in the _bona fide_ belief that it
was one receivable by him as Manager. It is equally clear that some months
later (perhaps after consultation with the Law Officers of the State) it
dawned on him that this summons was not meant for the Business Undertaking of
the State and was wrongly accepted by him. He therefore returned the summons
to Court and the receipt of his letter together with the original summons is
minuted in journal entry (4) under date 15.01.79 / 19.01.79.



The registered office of the respondent was No. 3, Bristol Street, Colombo,
and there is no evidence that it had any other registered office until it
registered the new address at No. 9, Castle Street, Borella. This registration
was done in compliance with a duty cast on it by the provisions of section
91(1) of the Companies



#  183

** **

Ordinance. Notice of any change had also to be given within 28 days. Failure
in either obligation constitutes an offence. A registered office gives the
Company a domicile and residence. Service of summons at this office is
equivalent to personal service on a person under section 59 of the Civil
Procedure Code. One of the objects of section 91 is to safeguard the interests
of the public. The law fixes the Company's habitat so that the process of law
can reach it and the members of the public who have dealings with it can find
it. The respondent has represented to the public that its registered office
was at No. 3, Bristol Street, and if any member of the public acted on the
faith of it the respondent cannot be heard to deny it. The appellant has done
what the law allowed her to do and she is entitled to the benefit of an act
lawfully done.



It is argued that delivery of the summons to the "Manager of the Business
Undertaking of the State" is not a valid delivery in law to the respondent as
he was not an employee of the respondent. The decision of Keuneman, J. in
_Mendis v. The Independent Publishing Co. Ltd._ (1) has been cited for the
proposition. The dispute in that case was whether one Fernando who accepted
the summons was a responsible officer. He was characterised as a cashier.
Keuneman, J. held that he was not a cashier but a very responsible officer of
the Company. This decision is not authority for the proposition that service
by leaving it at the registered office can only be done by giving it into the
hands of a responsible officer. In fact he added "very much less formality
would probably have achieved the purpose of the section". All that need be
proved is that the summons reached the registered office of the Company and
was there left with some human agency. It cannot just be left on some table or
thrown into the office. On the other hand the fiscal cannot be expected to
inquire into and decide on the status of the individual accepting the summons.
In this case there is no doubt that the summons reached the registered office
of the Company and was taken by a person who claimed to be the Manager. The
Fiscal was not made aware of the nice distinction between the "Times of Ceylon
Ltd" and the "Business Undertaking of the Times of Ceylon Ltd." If any
confusion arose it was the direct result of the default of the respondent. All
that matters is that the summons reached the registered office of the Company
and was received by an officer working at the office eve n though he may not
have been



#  184



an employee of the respondent. In normal circumstances that summons would have
been acted upon. The predicament that the respondent now finds itself is
entirely its own fault. "They did not enter the change of address on the
register as they should have done"‑ per Denning, M R. in _A/S Cathrineholm v.
Nonequipment Trading Ltd_ (2). The dispute in this Case hinged on the service
of writ by post. The plaintiff sent the writ by post on July 21, 1971, in a
prepaid envelope to the registered address of the defendant which was at
34‑35, Norfolk Street, London W.C.2. It was not delivered there. It was not
however returned by the postal authorities through the dead letter office. The
plaintiff rightly acted on the presumption that in the normal course of post
it would have been delivered on July 22, 1971, and obtained judgment in
default of appearance. It was subsequently established that the defendant had
vacated the premises on June 24, 1971, and on July 5, 1971, the building was
handed over to a contractor for demolition. The new office of the defendant
was at 23, Ridgmount Street, W.C.1, which address was not registered. When the
postman arrived with the letter on July 21 the building was a derelict, the
letter box had been removed and a pneumatic drill was working outside the
door. No delivery could be made but there was no evidence to show what the
postman did with the letter thereafter. In any event the Court held that the
letter must be deemed to have been delivered and the judgment obtained by the
plaintiff was regular. Roakill, J. summed up the position thus‑



"What happened in this case was entirely the fault of the defendants. They
changed their registered office from 34‑35, Norfolk Street to 23, Ridgmount
Street; they did not give notice as they should have done under section 107
(2) of the Companies Act, 1948. The plaintiffs did what the law entitled them
to do they posted the writ to the registered office in Norfolk Street. The
building was then apparently little more than an abandoned shell. There was
nothing else that the plaintiffs could do if they intended to serve the
defendants by post, and any misfortune of the defendants is through their own
fault."



For the reasons given above I would answer the first question in the
affirmative.



#  185

** **

The next question posed is as follows ‑



( _b_ )         Does the view expressed by the Court of Appeal that at the
relevant time 'merely the empty shell of the Company remained' constitute a
misdirection in regard to the effect of the provisions of the Business
Acquisition Act, No. 35 of 1971.



The Vesting Order (A2) has vested the business undertaking of "Times of Ceylon
Ltd." and its registered office No. 3, Bristol Street. In paragraph 3 of the
objections the respondent states that since then it had ceased to have any
business. There is no evidence to indicate whether or not it has any other
movable or immovable assets. Its corporate capacity continued and still exists
in spite of the voluntary liquidation (Vide section 219 of the Companies
Ordinance). In the absence of further evidence it is not possible to state
whether the vesting under the Business Acquisition Act left the Company an
empty shell.



The last question posed is as follows: ‑



(c)        Did the Court of Appeal misdirect itself in holding that the
District Court had been informed that No. 3 Bristol Street, Colombo 1, was no
longer the 'registered office' of the Company?



The letter dated 10th January, 1979 (marked A), does not state that No. 3,
Bristol Street is no longer the "registered office". It merely states that the
defendant "no longer maintains an office" in the premises. In any event this
is a statement of a third party and the Court was under no obligation to act
upon it. My answer to this question is in the affirmative.



The Court of Appeal has held that "though No. 3, Bristol Street, Fort was
nominally the registered office in the books of the Registrar of Companies, in
reality it was not". By this I understand the Court to mean that though in law
it was the registered office, in fact it was not the registered office. The
law is only concerned with what is registered in the Books of the Registrar of
Companies and the law must take its course. It was open to the respondent to
make reality conform to the law but it failed to do so. The only reason given
by the respondent in its petition is that summons was not served on it. There
is no other reason given.



#  186



            The appeal is allowed and the Orders of the Court of Appeal and the District Court are set aside. The appellant will be entitled to costs here and in the Court of Appeal.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME', J. **‑ I agree.



Appeal allowed.



_Orders of the Court of Appeal and District Court set aside._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/22.html_  

