##  Narangoda and Others v. Kodituwakku, Inspector General of Police and
Others - SLR - 247, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 22; (2002) 1 Sri LR 247 (11
February 2002)

**247**

**NARANGODA AND OTHERS  
v.  
KODITUWAKKU, INSPECTOR-GENERAL OF POLICE AND  
OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
GUNASEKERA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 397/2000  
WITH SC NOS. 398, 400, 703 AND 704 OF 2000  
15 AND 28 NOVEMBER, 2001  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Promotion of Assistant Superintendents of Police -
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  
_  
The petitioners Assistant Superintendents of Police who were unsuccessful
candidates at the selection for appointment to the rank of Superintendent
complained of discrimination vis-a-vis the successful candidates. They
challenged the authenticity of the interview mark sheet, the selection
criteria, the procedure followed in verifying service records and the
allocation of marks. They alleged that they were interviewed for three or four
minutes each and were asked questions some of which were not strictly relevant
to their police work.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) The state produced a computer printout and not the original mark sheet,
and there is considerable doubt as to whether that document correctly records
the marks given at the interview without subsequent adjustments.  
  
(2) The criteria applied did not include many important qualities needed for
the post such as leadership ability, management skills, initiative,
independence and the ability to resist improper influence. The allocation, of
marks for "service record" was gravely flawed.  
  
(3) The records relating to "pending disciplinary inquiries" and no pay leave,
etc., had not been properly assessed notwithstanding unauthenticated
alteration in some cases which led to one candidate who was not eligible being
selected for promotion and others being called for interview though

**248**

ineligible. There was also no satisfactory explanation as to the huge
discrepancies in the allocation of marks. There were no detailed interview
schedules for the use of the members of the select Board to enable them to
verify details in respect of each candidate in the time available for
interview.  
  
(4) Except as regards about one third of the promotees in respect of whom
there was no evidence of shortcoming or manipulation of marks by the Board,
the failure to produce the original mark sheet gives rise to the inference
that it would have disclosed alterations and additions indicative of
manipulation.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"45 officers were selected in advance for promotion, for good reasons or bad,
and at the interviews the allocation of marks was manipulated to give more for
the favoured few and less for the others, without disturbing their seniority
inter se."  
  
(5) _Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"It has been established beyond reasonable doubt that the interview and
selection process was a sham - worse than any I have come across. There had
been a grave denial of the petitioners' rights to a fair, equal and reasonable
selection process."  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Faisz Musthapha, PC with Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for the petitioners in SC 397,
398, 703 and 704 of 2000.  
  
_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC_ with _J. C. Weliamuna_ for the petitioners in SC 400 of
2000.  
  
_Palitha Fernando, Deputy Solicitor-General_ for the 1st to 12th and the 48th
respondents.  
  
_Manohara de Silva_ for the 25th respondent.  
  
_U. Abdul Najeem_ for the 44th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**249**

February 11, 2002  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
These five applications (SC Nos. 397, 398, 400, 703 and 704 of 2000) were
taken up for hearing together. Counsel agreed that the decision in SC 397/2000
would apply to the other four cases as well.  
  
 There are 17 petitioners in SC 397/2000, and 29 petitioners in the other four
cases. They are Assistant Superintendents of Police (ASP's), who complain that
their fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) had been infringed by the
failure to promote them to the rank of Superintendent. In SC 397/2000 they
have named as respondents 36 officers who were promoted, and all those
promotions are challenged in these five applications, except that of the 48th
respondent. Although in their petition the petitioners challenged his
appointment, alleging that he was not eligible and had neither applied nor
been interviewed, at the leave stage itself they stated that they were not
pursuing that challenge because he had been promoted in pursuance of a
distinct cabinet decision of 19. 04\. 2000. I express no opinion as to whether
that promotion was legal or proper in terms of the applicable scheme of
promotion. The 32nd respondent (can足didate No. 55) died before leave was
granted, without any attempt at substitution, and natural justice requires
that his promotion remain unaffected by this order.  
  
The officers who were invited to apply were ASP' s who had **five** years'
confirmed service as ASP' s, and an "unblemished record of service" for five
years prior to December, 1999. However, the modified scheme of recruitment and
promotion approved by the cabinet on 05. 08. 98 stipulated **eight** years,
service. The question whether some successful candidates were disqualified on
this score was not pursued at the hearing, and I express no opinion on that
matter.  
  
185 ASP' s were called for interview, and 179 were interviewed, on 13th, 15th,
17th and 19th March and 7th May, 2000. The Board

**250**

of interview (the Board) consisted of the 1st respondent (the Inspector-
General of Police), the 4th respondent (the Secretary, Ministry of Defence),
and the 50th, 51st and 52nd respondents (senior public officers). Upon the
Board's recommendation, communicated by the 4th respondent by his letter dated
12. 05. 2000 (not produced), the Public Service Commission (PSC) by letter
dated 16. 05\. 2000 granted approval for the promotion of 35 officers. The 5th
respondent is the Chairman, and the 6th, 8th, 10th and 11th respondents are
the members, of the PSC. The 1st respondent announced these promo足tions by a
circular dated 18. 05. 2000; (both the 17th and the 18th were public
holidays). The 4th respondent averred in his affidavit that  another eight
officers (not named) had not been recommended, although they had scored more
marks than the last of the 35 promotees, because of pending fundamental rights
applications, and disciplinary and criminal proceedings against them. The PSC
when granting approval stated that a further communication would follow in
regard to another ten officers (not named). In November and December, 2000,
six others were promoted. This judgment will apply to all ASP's promoted (or
recommended for promotion) in pursuance of the aforesaid interviews.  
  
After judgment was reserved, I called for the correspondence between the 1st
respondent, the 4th respondent and the PSC pertaining to the promotions, and
the PSC minutes. One of the documents produced was the 4th respondent's letter
dated 12\. 05. 2000 to the PSC, in which he recommended 45 officers, including
the eight who had scored more than the last promotee. That letter made no
reference to pending inquiries; his affidavit in this Court was therefore not
truthful. By letter dated 15. 05. 2000 the PSC asked whether there were
pending inquiries, and then only was it disclosed, by letter dated 15. 05.
2000 received by the PSC on 16. 05. 2000, that there were pending inquiries
against ten of the officers already recommended. It appears that without any
discussion at a meeting Chairman and three members of the PSC approved the 35
promotions by circulation of papers the same day.

**251**

The petitioners contended that the decisions of the Board and the PSC were
arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable and discriminatory.  
  
The shortcomings in the interview and selection process are more serious than
those disclosed in SC Applications Nos. 272-275/2001 (SCM 19. 11. 2001), which
involved the promotion of Chief Inspectors to the rank of ASP.  
  
The petitioners challenged the authenticity of the interview mark sheet, the
selection criteria adopted by the Board, the procedure followed in verifying
service records, and the allocation of marks. They averred that they were
interviewed for three to four minutes each and asked various questions, some
of which were strictly unrelated to their police work.  
  
**INTERVIEW MARK SHEETS  
  
**It was submitted on behalf of the members of the Board that they did not
maintain individual mark sheets, and that they made a joint assessment of each
candidate. If systematically and honestly done after meaningful discussion,
that procedure is not objectionable. However,  the document produced by the
4th respondent as being the interview mark sheet is a computer printout, and
not a mark sheet contempo足raneously maintained by them - although that was the
document which this Court called for. We were told that this was not
available. (By a strange coincidence, in SC Applications 272-275/2001, too,
the original mark sheet was not available).  
  
Only the last sheet (the eleventh) of that computer printout is signed. Though
all five members have signed, three of them have not dated it. The 1st
respondent had dated his signature as "12\. 05. 2000". The date under the 4th
respondent's signature is unclear. One possible explanation that might have
been suggested for the lack of a hand足written record is that the marks, as
soon as they had been agreed, were entered directly on the computer: but the
members of the Board

 **252**

made no such claim. Indeed, if that was the case, there is no reason why a
computer printout was not obtained on 07. 05. 2000, and signed at once; only a
few candidates were interviewed on 07. 05. 2000. Besides, the computer entries
include the ranking of the candidates, which would have been done only after
the conclusion of all the interviews. Here, too, the members of the Board
might have claimed - but did not - that this was done automatically, and
contemporaneously, by the computer program used. If that was what happened, it
would have been signed the same day.  
  
There is another matter. Against the name of candidate No. 68 (and his alone),
there are three asterisks (***). There was no explanation for this. However,
above the marks allocated to him, there is an unauthenticated entry: "Killed
in action. Posthumously promoted". The asterisks and that entry, quite
obviously, were not made at the time of interview, but later. When? is the
question.  
  
Among the documents produced after the hearing was the 1st respondent's
request dated 28. 04. 2000 to the 4th respondent for   a posthumous promotion
for candidate No. 68 who was killed in action on 07. 04. 2000. The 4th
respondent appears to have conveyed that request to the PSC only much later.
The PSC by letter dated 10. 08. 2001 granted that promotion. That officer had
scored enough marks to be ranked 27th, but his name was not among those
recommended for promotion by the Board, or promoted by the PSC in May, 2000\.
I find it difficult to believe that the members of the Board in May, 2000,
anticipated the PSC's August, 2001, decision.  
  
I think it probable that the computer printout was not a contem足poraneous
record, but one subsequently made from another  (probably handwritten)
document which has not been produced. There is neither a certificate nor
evidence that the computer printout is a correct copy of such original (or
that the members of the Board satisfied themselves on that score before
signing). There is consid足erable doubt as to whether that document correctly
records the marks given at the interview without subsequent adjustments.

**253**

 **CRITERIA AND PROCEDURE  
  
**In his first affidavit dated 07. 11. 2000, the 4th respondent explained the
criteria and procedure as follows:  
  
The Board of interview, with the concurrence of the Public Service Commission,
applied the following marking scheme:  


seniority  |

\- 30 marks  
---|---  
  
service record  |

\- 30 marks  
  
conceptual skills  |

\- 10 marks  
  
analytical skills  |

\- 10 marks  
  
human relations skills  |

\- 10 marks  
  
communication skills  |

\- 10 marks  
  
The candidates' seniority and service records were verified by perusing
personal files, records, reports and certificates submitted by the relevant
authorities and the candidates, in order to obtain, among no other details,
the total period of service in the said rank, special increments (10 marks),
commendations and rewards of Rs. 5,000 and above (10 marks) and good entries
(10 marks).  
  
The Board assessed their conceptual skills, analytical skills, human relations
skills, and communication skills by questioning candidates on real and
hypothetical situations in different languages and by paying special attention
to the manner and the confidence with which they faced the interview and
replied the numerous questions posed to them.  
  
Each candidate was awarded marks upon the overall agreement 1so of the members
of the Board.  
  
In a later affidavit dated 18. 04. 2001, filed in SC 398/2000 the 4th
respondent added:

 **254**

All members of the Interview Board were furnished with personal details of the
candidates in the form of computer printouts, an Inquiry File containing
disciplinary/criminal/court action pending against candidates, an assessment
of the service record of each candidate, and personal data submitted by
candidates in the prescribed form.  
  
Several questions arise in regard to the criteria and the procedure.  
  
While the criteria and the weightage given are unobjectionable, it is a
serious defect that the criteria did not include many important qualities
needed for the post - such as leadership ability management skills,
initiative, independence and the ability to resist improper influence.  
  
The decision of the Board to subdivide "service record" to include marks for
"rewards" and "good entries" was patently unreasonable. The petitioners
produced the Departmental Order relating to the Police Reward Fund, which
provided for the payment of rewards to officers of and below the rank of Chief
Inspector. It was not disputed that  ASP's are not entitled to rewards. It was
also conceded that there is no practice of making "good entries" in respect of
ASP's. That the Head of the Police Force was unaware of this, and failed to
enlighten his colleagues on the Board, raises serious doubts as to his
competence. Assuming, however, that all the members of the Board made a bona
fide mistake at the outset in making that subdivision, there is no explanation
for their failure to correct it when the interviews commenced - for it would
then have become apparent that marks could not be allocated under those two
heads. Indeed, the computer printouts containing the candidates' personal
details did not record rewards and good entries. Nevertheless, if the mark
sheet is to be believed, the Board purported to allocate marks under those two
heads as well. That is beyond dispute, because several candidates were given
high marks (between 16 and 21, out of 30) even though they had no special
increments or commendations.

**255**

Further, since an "unblemished record of service" for five years was a sine
qua non, the Board was obliged to make provision \- by deducting marks, or
otherwise \- for "blemishes". As pointed out later in this judgment, the Board
failed to do so.  
  
I hold that the subdivision of the "service record", and the allocation  of
marks for "service record", were gravely flawed.  
  
Turning to the procedure followed, although the 4th respondent asserted that
an assessment of the service record of each candidate was available to the
Board, when this Court called for the documents, the "assessments" tendered
did not include those in respect of candidates Nos. 1 to 36, and 137 to 185.
Ten of the original 35 promotees were among candidates Nos. 1 to 36. The
available assessments were a scanty recital of a few aspects of the service
details (which should anyway have been available in the computer printouts
referred to below), and were in no sense an evaluation of the merits or the
quality of service. Besides, those assessments were not signed or
authenticated in any way. I doubt their reliability. Thus, candidate No. 55
had not been recommended for promotion by his two immediate superiors, and had
pending disciplinary inquiries - facts which his "assessment" did not
disclose. Candidate No. 91 had been on no-pay leave, but this his "assessment"
did not reveal - although one of the matters which the 4th respondent had
directed the 1st respondent to provide in advance was "periods of no-pay
leave/no service period in the present rank".  
  
As for the computer printouts, it is doubtful whether the computer records
were regularly and systematically maintained. Thus, in regard to "disciplinary
inquiries", most records were negative, as indicated by "N". In the case of
many candidates, "N" had been altered in ink to "Y", without any
authentication. It may be that these alterations were correct and proper, but
the fact that they were made shortly after the printouts were obtained for the
interviews proves that the computer records had not been properly updated.
Further, in regard

**256**

to successful candidates Nos. 47 and 55, although the computer printout showed
"N", there was evidence that there were pending disciplinary inquiries against
them.  
  
There were inconsistencies between the "assessments" and the computer
printouts. Thus, successful candidate No. 91 had been on no-pay leave for one
year and seven months, and had that period been deducted it would have been
apparent that he did not have the required minimum of five years' confirmed
service as an ASP. Had that deduction been made, it would have been clear that
he was not eligible, even to be called for the interview. The computer
printout disclosed this period of no-pay leave; the "assessment" did not. The
petitioners pleaded that that candidate was ineligible. In reply, the 4th
respondent claimed that "this fact was not reported to the interview Board" \-
thereby confessing that the Board had failed to peruse the computer printouts.
Furthermore, counsel for that candidate pointed out that the candidate himself
had disclosed this fact in his application form. That confirms that even if
the "personal data submitted by candidates in the prescribed form" was
available to the Board (as the 4th respondent claims), that too was not
checked.  
  
I must mention that the other four members of the Board did not file
affidavits to answer or explain the allegations made by the petitioners. In SC
No. 398/2000, on 03. 11. 2000 the 1st respondent's instructing Attorneys
informed this Court that he was undergoing medical treatment in India and that
his affidavit would be filed on his return - but that was not done. The
explanation given by the 4th respondent is most unsatisfactory. It was humanly
impossible, in the time available, for the Board to have verified details from
all the numerous sources listed by the 4th respondent, namely:  
  
(a) personal files,  
  
(b) records, reports and certificates submitted by the relevant authorities
and the candidates,  
  
(c) personal data submitted by candidates in the prescribed forms,

**257**

(d) computer printouts,  
  
(e) inquiry file, and  
  
(f) assessments of service.  
  
What is more, it appears that what was available was only one set of all these
documents - which five members could not have referred at the same time.  
  
Any meaningful interview for such a large number of candidates should have
been preceded by the preparation of detailed interview schedules, listing out
all relevant details, for the use of every member of the Board. That was not
done.  
  
**ALLOCATION OF MARKS  
  
**The interview mark sheet shows that the first candidate scored 78 marks, and
the 45th candidate (not counting candidate No. 68) scored 50 marks. A large
number of candidates scored 49 marks, and were not recommended.  
  
" _Seniority_ ": The learned Deputy Solicitor-General submitted that marks for
seniority were allocated at the rate of three marks for each year of service
as ASP's. In that respect, the mark sheet reveals several discrepancies. Thus,
candidates Nos. 12, 129, 136, and 137 were allocated only 12 marks each: if
so, they had only four years' service, and were ineligible, and even if they
had been called for interview by mistake, the Board should not have wasted any
time in attempting to assess them.  
  
" _Service Record_ ': Among the top 45 candidates, there were over 20
candidates who had been allocated between 16 and 21 marks - although there was
no evidence that they had any special increments or commendations. There were
at least another 15 candidates, also without special increments or
commendations, who had been allocated between four and 13 marks: the latter
had an aggregate of 49 marks,

**258**

and thus missed selection by just one mark. I find it impossible to understand
how the Board differentiated between these two groups, and how the
differential was so substantial. Thus, successful candidate No. 44 (with eight
years' service) got 21 marks, while unsuccessful candidates Nos. 1 and 3 (with
over ten years' service) got only four and seven marks, respectively. There is
some doubt as to the former's eligibility as he had been on overseas leave
since July, 1995, but that apart since he was abroad for all but seven months
of the five-year period relevant to quality of service, it is surprising that
he earned the highest number of marks from among all the candidates for
"service record". Candidates Nos. 1 and 3 missed the cut-off mark by three
marks and one mark, respectively.  
  
There were others, such as candidates Nos. 7, 12 and 25, who did have special
increments or commendations, but were allocated only 9, 10 and 12 marks,
respectively. Each of them had an aggregate of , and missed selection by one
mark.  
  
There was no satisfactory explanation as to these huge discrep足ancies.  
  
When interviewing 179 candidates, a few mistakes are both unavoidable and
perhaps excusable. But, here the mistakes, if indeed they were no more than
mistakes, were legion. Five members of the Board, if they had each perused the
relevant documents, could not all have made the identical "mistakes" which I
have referred to above. The allocation of marks for "service record" appeared
to be no better than a "lucky dip".  
  
"Other Skills': I have now to turn to the other four criteria (col足lectively
referred to as "capacity"). The petitioners stressed the short足ness of the
interviews. The 4th respondent contented himself with a bare denial, saying
nothing about the length of each interview or the total time spent. The 25th
respondent stated that he had been in足terviewed for "almost 15 minutes". If
each interview lasted 15 minutes,

 **259**

the Board would have required 45 hours to interview the candidates. The Board
does not claim to have spent so much time on the interviews. Besides, even 15
minutes was inadequate for the Board to have done - properly - what it claims
to have done. Verifying the records of each candidate, asking him numerous
questions to judge his skills in four different areas, and discussing and
reaching agreement (for each candidate separately) as to the allocation of
marks for "service record" and four other criteria, would have required much
more than 15 minutes.  
  
There is another disturbing feature. By and large, the Candidates who came
among the top 45 had all been given 24 marks or more  (out of 40) for
"capacity", while the unsuccessful candidates got 15 or less. Candidates who
were given high marks for "service record" despite the lack of special
increments and commendations invariably received high marks for "capacity" as
well; and those who were given low marks for "service record" consistently
also received low marks for "capacity". That suggests a deliberate
manipulation of the marking system. Further, the ranking of the 45 candidates
who scored the highest marks, coincided with their seniority - that is to say,
not one of those officers scored more than any of his seniors or less than any
of his juniors. Many of the candidates were of equal seniority.  Thus, there
were about 20 officers with eight years' service, each entitled to 24 marks
for seniority. That none of these candidates scored more than his senior or
less than his junior is highly improbable.  
  
I have no hesitation in concluding that the allocation of marks was worse than
a "lucky dip", at which everyone has an equal chance, depending only on his
luck. This, however, was a deliberate manipu足lation, and not chance. 45
officers were selected in advance for promotion, for good reason or bad, and
at the interviews the allocation of marks was manipulated to give more for the
favoured few, and less for the others, without disturbing their seniority
inter se. The result  was that among the 60 most senior candidates, the 31
senior officers overlooked scored 47, 48 or 49 marks each. The only exception
was candidate No. 22 who scored 35 marks - but that was because he was wrongly
given only 12 marks (and not 24) for seniority.

 **260**

I must hasten to add that there is no evidence of shortcomings or manipulation
in regard to about one-third of the promotees.  
  
The failure to produce the original mark sheet(s) gives rise to the inference
that it would have disclosed alterations and additions indicative of
manipulation.  
  
**PENDING DISCIPLINARY INQUIRIES  
  
**The 4th respondent's position that candidates who had scored sufficient
marks to warrant promotion were not recommended for promotion if there were
pending disciplinary or legal proceedings against them is contradicted by his
letter dated 12. 05. 2000. The petitioners alleged that some officers were not
only recommended but even promoted despite such proceedings. Among the
examples cited were successful candidates Nos. 47 and 55.  
  
A rigid rule that public officers against whom disciplinary or legal
proceedings are pending must be denied appointments and promotions, may
sometimes cause injustice - as, for instance, if the proceedings are based on
frivolous allegations. At the same time, if an appointing authority were to
make an appointment or grant a promotion, despite such proceedings, a serious
injustice and anomaly would result if the officer was later found guilty.  
  
Such injustices and anomalies can be avoided in several ways. The appointing
authority may make an appointment or promotion subject to the result of the
proceedings, or may expressly reserve (if he lawfully could) the right to
revoke the appointment or promotion in the event of the charges being later
proved. Another reasonable alternative would be for the appointing authority
to make the appointment or promotion but to make it operative only upon the
favourable conclusion of such proceedings.  
  
The practice followed by the PSC in this case of permitting officers to apply
for promotions despite pending proceedings, and of withholding

**261**

promotions until such proceedings are concluded, is reasonable and proper.
However, in this case there is a further consideration, namely, that only
those with an "unblemished record" were eligible. Accordingly, not only were
pending proceedings of some relevance, though perhaps slight, but adverse
findings in concluded proceedings could not be ignored simply because no
punishment was imposed.  Any evaluation of the "service record" of a candidate
could not have ignored such "blemishes", at least for the reason that a
candidate against whom there was no adverse finding was entitled to some
preference as against another whose record was blemished by a finding of
guilt, even though not visited with "punishment" as defined in the
Establishments Code.  
  
It is in that context that the cases of candidates Nos. 47 and 55 have to be
considered. It was the 4th respondent, who had no personal knowledge of the
facts and circumstances, who ventured explanations. In regard to candidate No.
47 the petitioners' allegation was that he  had been severely warned by the
previous IGP on 03. 07. 98, and that an inquiry was pending in respect of the
misuse of an official vehicle. The 4th respondent said that a report had been
submitted to the 1st respondent, who "having carefully considered all
available material has decided not to initiate any further action". He did not
say when that decision had been taken - before the recommendation, before the
promotion, or after the promotion. In regard to candidate No. 55, the 4th
respondent stated that on 30. 03. 2000 the 1st respondent had communicated a
disciplinary order, a "warning", which, he said, was not a "punishment" under
the Establishments Code. The report, the disciplinary order, and other
relevant documents were not produced. The 1st respondent who would have had
personal knowledge of the circumstances did not try to explain.  
  
The 12th respondent, the Secretary to the PSC, tendered an affidavit pleading
unawareness of the petitioners' allegations, and that presumably extended to
the PSC as well.

 **262**

I hold that in this respect too the Board failed properly to assess the
"service record" of the candidates.  
  
**ORDER  
  
**At the conclusion of the oral argument on 28. 11. 2001, all counsel moved
for two weeks' time to explore the possibility of a settlement on the basis of
leaving the impugned promotions undisturbed and promoting the petitioners.
Having regard to the serious flaws in the interview and selection process, we
informed counsel that this Court could not approve such a settlement, and that
we would reserve the right of other unsuccessful candidates thereupon to
complain that such settlement was in violation of their rights. Thereafter, a
motion was filed by the State Attorney on 20. 12. 2001 asking for a further
two weeks' time "to settle this matter in view of the change of
administration". Finally, on 11. 01. 2002 we were informed that no settlement
had been reached.  
  
It has been established beyond reasonable doubt that the interview and
selection process was a sham - worse than any I have come across. There has
been a grave denial of the petitioners' rights to a fair, equal and reasonable
selection process.  
  
I hold that the petitioners' fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) have been
infringed by the 1st, 4th, 50th, 51st and 52nd respondents, and award each of
the 48 petitioners (in this and in the four other cases) a sum of Rs. 10,000
as compensation and costs, payable on or before 30. 04. 2002. The aggregate
sum of Rs. 460,000 will be  paid as follows: Rs. 100,000 personally by the 1st
and 4th respondents in equal shares, Rs. 60,000 personally by the 50th, 51st,
and 52nd respondents in equal shares, and the remaining Rs. 300,000 by the
State.  
  
All promotions made by the PSC in pursuance of the interviews held in March
and May, 2000, are quashed (other than the 32nd respondent's).

**263**

The Public Service Commission is directed to hold, or to cause to be held,
fresh interviews for promotion to the rank of Superintendent of Police for the
persons who duly applied and were interviewed in March and May, 2000; the
interview and selection process shall be completed and promotions made on or
before 31. 05. 2002\. The Board of interview will determine which candidates
are eligible to be called for interview. The Board of Interview shall not
include the 1st, 4th, 50th, 51st and 52nd respondents, and the PSC will
consider whether they should be debarred from sitting on interview panels.  
  
The Attorney-General is directed to consider whether the conduct of the 1st,
4th, 50th, 51st and 52nd respondents constitutes "corrup足tion" within the
meaning of section 70 of the Bribery Act as amended, or any other offence, and
if so to take appropriate consequential action;and to submit a report to this
Court not later than 30. 04. 2002.  
  
The Registrar is directed to return to the Attorney-General all personal files
and records pertaining to the candidates.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**  YAPA, J. - **I agree.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/22.html_  

