##  Basheer Segu Dawood v. Ferial Ashraff and Others - SLR - 26, Vol 1 of 2002
[2001] LKSC 22; (2002) 1 Sri LR 26 (28 September 2001)

**26**

**BASHEER SEGU DAWOOD  
v.  
FERIAL ASHRAFF AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
SC SPECIAL (E) NO. 2/2001  
17, 18 AND 19 SEPTEMBER, 2001  
  
_Constitutional Law - Expulsion of a 'member1 of recognized political party
who is a Member of Parliament - Articles 99 (13) (a) and 99A of the
Constitution \- Who may expel the 'member1 where the recognized political
party is a political alliance - Validity of the expulsion.  
_  
The petitioner was, at the material time, a member of the Sri Lanka Muslim
Congress (The SLMC) which party together with the Sri Lanka Progressive Front
formed "a new political alliance" called the National Unity Alliance (NUA) by
a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) dated 10th June, 1999. The NUA contested
Parliamentary elections in October, 2000.  
  
The petitioner's name appeared on the nomination paper of the NUA at the
aforesaid election for the Batticaloa District but he was presumably not
eligible to be declared elected on the basis of preferences received by him at
the poll. However, on a request dated 13th October, 2000, made by the 4th
respondent (the Secretary-General of the SLMC) made in terms of the MoU
between the SLMC and the NUA dated 13th August, 2000, the NUA nominated him as
its Nationalist List member under Article 99A of the Constitution and the 9th
respondent (the Commissioner of Elections) declared the petitioner as a Member
of Parliament under that Article.  
  
By her letter dated 3rd July, 2001, the 1st respondent (the Leader of the NUA)
informed the petitioner that he was expelled from the membership of the NUA
with immediate effect and that as the petitioner represented the NUA in
Parliament his explusion will be communicated to the 10th respondent
(Secretary-General of Parliament) and the 9th respondent (the Commissioner of
Elections).  
  
**Held:  
**  
The petitioner, not being a member of the NUA could not be expelled from it.
Therefore, the purported expulsion of the petitioner was invalid in terms of
Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution.

**27**

_Per_ Amerasinghe, J.  
  
"... as far as the petitioner is concerned he was and remains a member of the
political party, namely the SLMC, and that party alone, although he was a
candidate nominated by the NUA for election to Parliament in terms of Article
99A of the Constitution."  
  
**APPLICATION** in terms of Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution
challenging expulsion from the National Unity Alliance.  
  
_K. N. Choksy, PC_ with _D. S. Wijesinghe, PC, Ronald Perera, A. M. Faaiz_ and
_U. Abdul Najeem_ for petitioner.  
  
_Nihal Jayamanne, PC with Arnold Nanayakkara and Uditha Collure_ for 1st
respondent.  
  
_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ with _Sanjeewa Senasinghe, Mariam Mansoor and Shadiya
Zanoon_ for the 8th respondent.  
  
_Romesh de Silva, PC_ with _Harsha Amarasekera_ for 4th respondent.  
  
_Ikram Mohamed, PC_ with _Ian Fernando, Shyama Fernando, Thissath
Wijegunawardena, M. S. A. Wadood and Lai Munasinghe_ for 5th and 6th
respondents.  
  
_Parakrama Karunaratne_ with _Abdul Kalaam_ for 7th and 11th respondents.  
  
_Wijedasa Rajapakse, PC with Nizam Kariappar_ , and _Kuwera de Soyza_ for 2nd
and 8th respondents.  
  
_K. Sripavan, Deputy Solicitor-General_ with _Rajiv Gunathilake, State
Counsel_ for 9th and 10th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 28, 2001.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
By notification published in Government Gazette No. 1154/7 dated 17th October,
2000, the Commissioner of Elections, acting under Article 99 (A) of the
Constitution, declared certain persons as 'elected'

**28**

Members of Parliament. The petitioner was one of the persons so declared
'elected' as a Member of Parliament.  
  
By her letter dated the 3rd of July, 2001, (P19) the 1st respondent wrote to
the petitioner stating, inter alia, that he had acted in a manner that brought
disrespect and disrepute to the National Unity Alliance and its Leader. The
1st respondent further stated that "exercising the powers vested in me as the
Leader of the NUA with the objective of safeguarding the best interests of the
party, I hereby dismiss you from the Membership of the National Unity Alliance
and expel you from the said Party with immediate effect and as such you have
ceased to be a Member of the National Unity Alliance". The 1st respondent
concludes the letter dated the 3rd of July, 2001, with the following words:
"As you represent the National Unity Alliance in the Parliament, your
dismissal from the Membership of the NUA and your expulsion from the Party
will be communicated to the Secretary-General of Parliament and the
Commissioner of Elections."  
  
The petitioner, by his petition dated the 30th of July, 2001, prays  that this
Court, inter alia, (1) declare the purported expulsion of the petitioner from
the National Unity Alliance by P19 to be invalid and of no legal force or
effect; and (2) set aside the decision of the 1st respondent contained in P19;
and (3) declare that the petitioner continues to be and remains a Member of
Parliament.  
  
The application of the petitioner for the aforementioned reliefs is made under
and in terms of Article 99 (13) (a) states as follows:  
  
"where a Member of Parliament ceases, by resignation, expulsion or otherwise,
to be a member of recognized political party or independent group on whose
nomination paper (hereinafter referred to as the "relevant nomination paper")
his name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of Parliament, his
seat shall become vacant upon the expiration of a period of one month from the
date of his ceasing to be such member:

**29**

Provided that, in the case of the expulsion of a Member of Parliament his seat
shall not become vacant if prior to the expiration of the said period of one
month he applies to the Supreme Court by petition in writing, and the Supreme
Court upon such application determines that such expulsion was invalid. Such
petition shall be inquired into by three Judges of the Supreme Court who shall
make their determination within two months of the filing of such petition.
Where the Supreme Court determines that the expulsion was vaild the vacancy
shall occur from the date of such determination".  
  
The petitioner came to be a Member of Parliament in the following way:  
  
The Secretary-General of the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress (SLMC), on the 13th of
October, 2000, wrote to the Secretary-General of National Unity Alliance (NUA)
stating as follows: (P25B).  
  
"This is further to our discussion on the need to recommend a name to the
Commissioner of Elections for the National List of the National Unity
Alliance.  
  
Please take action to recommend the name of Mr. Basheer Segu Dawood, the
National Propaganda Secretary of the Party to the Commissioner of Elections to
be appointed as a MP on the National List of the NUA.  
  
This communication is sent to you in terms of the Memorandum of Understanding
signed between the SLMC and the NUA dated 31. 08. 2000."  
  
The Secretary-General of the NUA on the 13th of October, 2000, accordingly
wrote to the Commissioner of Elections (P25C).

**30**

  
  
  
  
  
The National Unity Alliance was, in the words of the Memorandum of
Understanding dated the 10th of June, 1999 (P4), "a new political alliance",
that brought together two recognized political parties for the purposes of
elections, namely, the Sri Lanka Muslim Congress and the Sri Lanka Progressive
Front. The National Unity Alliance itself became a recognized political party
for the purposes of elections within the meaning of section 7 of the
Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981.  
  
The Constitution of the National Unity Alliance states (P5a) that the members
of the National Unity Alliance are -

> (1) The Sri Lanka Muslim Congress, and  
>  
>  (2) The Sri Lanka Progressive Front.

However, the Constitution of the NUA provides that the politburo of the NUA
"by a unanimous decision may decide to admit any other political party into
the alliance".  
  
The structure known as the NUA had constituent parts consisting of political
parties, but it did not accommodate individuals as members.  
  
The petitioner contends that neither he, nor for that matter any other
individual, was a member of the NUA, for the NUA Constitution did not provide
for any members other than political parties. Individuals could not become
members of the NUA. The petitioner contends that inasmuch as he was not a
member of the NUA, the 1st respondent's purported expulsion of the petitioner
from the NUA was a nullity. The petitioner further contends that in any event
the purported expulsion was invalid in terms of the Constitution of the
National Unity Alliance (P5a).

**31**

Mr. Jayamanne, PC and Mr. Rajapakse, PC contended that, if as the petitioner
maintains, he was not a member of the NUA, then he is precluded from invoking
the jurisdiction of this Court under and in terms of Article 99 (13) (a) of
the Constitution, for a person invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under
that Article should have ceased by resignation, expulsion or otherwise to be a
member of a recognized political party ... on whose nomination paper. . . his
name appeared at the time of his becoming such Member of Parliament ..." The
submission of learned counsel, attractive though it appears at first sight, is
in my view flawed, for it rests on the erroneous assumption that a Member of
Parliament must be a member of a recognized political party.  
  
Where there is a purported expulsion of a Member of Parliament such Member is
entitled, under Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution, to invoke the
jurisdiction of this Court to determine whether such expulsion was valid. In
order to invoke the jurisdiction of this Court, a petitioner is not required
to establish that he was a member of a recognized political party on whose
nomination paper his name appeared at the time of becoming such Member of
Parliament. Members of Parliament who are 'elected' are candidates whose names
appear on the nomination papers of recognized political parties. There is no
requirement that such candidates shall also be members of such parties. The
petitioner, as we have seen was declared 'elected' under and in terms of
Article 99A of the Constitution. There is no requirement in that Article for a
nominee of a recognized political party, to fill a seat due to such political
party under an apportionment, to be a member of that political party. Neither
the provisions of the Constitution nor the provisions of the Parliamentary
Elections Act require a person to be a member of a political party to be
eligible to be nominated as a candidate for election to Parliament. Of course,
political parties and alliances of political parties may have members who can
be expelled. In fact, the new Constitution of the NUA does provide for
"Founder Members", namely, the SLMC and the SLPF and individuals. But, as far
as the petitioner is concerned he was and remains a member of one political
party, namely, the SLMC, and that party alone although he was a candidate
nominated by the NUA for election to Parliament in terms of Article 99A of the
Constitution.

**32**

As we have seen, the first respondent in her letter (P19) has stated that as
the petitioner represents the NUA in Parliament his "dismissal from membership
of the NUA" {sic) and his "expulsion from the Party" will be communicated to
the Secretary-General of Parliament and the Commissioner of Elections.  
  
Whatever the petitioner or anyone else may have thought about the matter, the
petitioner's seat in Parliament would have automatically fallen vacant upon
expiration of one month from the purported expulsion from the party and the
Secretary-General of Parliament would have informed the Commissioner of
Elections who would then have taken steps to fill the vacancy. (See Article 99
(13) (a) of the Constitution and section 64 (1) of the Parliamentary Elections
Act, No. 1 of 1981). However, the Constitution states that in the case of
expulsion of a Member of Parliament his seat would not become vacant if prior
to the expiration of one month from the expulsion he applies to the Supreme
Court and the Court upon such application determines that such expulsion was
invalid.  
  
The petitioner, not being a member of the NUA could not be expelled from it.
I, therefore, hold that the purported expulsion of the petitioner, Mr. Basheer
Segu Dawood, was invalid since it was null and void and of no force or avail
in law; the purported expulsion by the first respondent is of no value or
importance: It amounts to nothing and shall be treated as non-existent for the
purposes of Article 99 (13) (a) of the Constitution.  
  
The 1st respondent shall pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 25,000 as costs.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Expulsion of the petitioner from the party determined invalid.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/22.html_  

