##  Kamalawathie and Others v. The Provincial Public Service Commission, North
Western Province and Others - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 2001 [2000] LKSC 22; (2001) 1
Sri LR 1 (3 October 2000)

**1**

**KAMALAWATHIE AND OTHERS  
v.  
THE PROVINCIAL PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION,  
NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPLICATION 300/2000  
23RD AUGUST, 2000  
  
_Fundamental rights - Transfer of teachers by a Provincial Director of
Education - Breach of National Policy - Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
_The petitioners were teachers in the Sri Lanka Teachers' Service. The 4th
respondent (the Provincial Director of Education, North-Western Province) to
whom the power of transferring teachers had been delegated by the 1st
respondent (the Provincial Public Service Commission of the North-Western
Province) transferred the petitioners with effect from 02. 05. 2000. The
letters of transfer stated that in accordance with the National Teacher
Transfer Policy set out in circular No. 95/11 issued by the Ministry of
Education and Higher Education it had been decided to transfer teachers who
had less than three years service in difficult areas. No other reason was
given.  
  
The Circular 95/11 provided that subject to certain exceptions including
transfers necessitated by exigencies of service in very urgent and special
circumstances transfers should be on the recommendation of a duly established
Teacher Transfer Board. Even in the case of such urgency it was required that
the Teacher Transfer Board be summoned and informed within two weeks.
Provision was also made for an Appeal Board. Chapter III of the Establishments
Code was made applicable except as otherwise expressly provided in the
circular. None of the exceptions provided by the circular applied to the
petitioners; no Teacher Transfer Board or Appeal Board had been set up, and
accordingly the impugned transfers had been made and appeals had been dealt
with, without any reference to such boards.  
  
It was submitted on behalf of the respondents that the transfers were effected
as there was an excess of teachers in certain zones and a shortage of teachers
in other zones, hence transfers were on account of exigencies of service.

**2**

**Held :**  
  
1\. Even accepting that the 4th respondent did have power to make the impugned
transfers, an essential pre-requisite for the exercise of that power was the
recommendation of the Teacher Transfer Board. His failure to obtain those
recommendations vitiated the transfer orders, which were, therefore, in
violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 12(1).  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"While powers in respect of education have been devolved to Provincial
Councils, those powers must be exercised in conformity with national policy.
Once national policy has been duly formulated in respect of any subject, there
cannot be any conflicting provincial policy on that subject."  
  
2\. The transfer letters did not allege "exigencies of service". it is not
open to the respondents to allege one reason in the transfer letters and to
rely upon another when they come to court. Apart from anything else, that
would be stultifying the appeal procedure.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Upul Jayasuriya_ for petitioners.  
  
_Mahen Gopallawa_ , State Counsel for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 03, 2000.  
**  
FERNANDO, J.  
  
**The twenty Petitioners are teachers in the Sri Lanka Teachers' Service. Each
of them received a standard transfer letter - dated either 31. 03. 2000 or 01.
04\. 2000 - issued by the 4th Respondent (the Provincial Director of Education
of the North-Western Provincial Council) and captioned "Transfer of teachers
who have not completed service in difficult areas", transferring him/her with
effect from 02. 05. 2000. The letters stated that in accordance with the
national teacher transfer policy set out in Circular No. 95/11 issued by the
Ministry of Education and Higher Education, it had been decided to transfer
teachers who had less than three years' service in difficult areas. No other
reason was given.

**3**

Although the transfers were challenged for several different reasons, at the
hearing learned Counsel for the Petitioners confined his challenge to one
ground: that the transfers had been effected without recourse to a Teacher
Transfer Board, as required by Circular No. 95/11 and the Establishments Code,
and that consequently the Petitioners had been denied the protection thereof
in violation of Article 12(1).  
  
Circular No. 95/11 dated 31. 03. 95 stated, among other things, that in order
to make education more fruitful, the Government had decided that a teacher
transfer policy should be formulated so as to ensure the welfare of students
and teachers to the utmost; that in order to secure the professional security
and freedom of teachers, they should be able to serve without fear of unjust
transfers; and that the teacher transfer policy set out therein had been
approved by the Cabinet of Ministers on 18. 01. 95 as national policy, with
which every official (taking action in connection with teacher transfers) must
comply. The Circular specifically provided that apart from transfers in
connection with pending or proposed disciplinary action, in every other
instance transfers should be on the recommendation of a duly established
teacher transfer board. This was subject to two exceptions: a transfer upon
the request of a teacher for reasons of health, and a transfer necessitated by
the exigencies of service in very urgent and special circumstances. However,
even in the latter case, it was required that the teacher transfer board be
summoned and informed within two weeks. Provision was also made for an appeal
board. Chapter III of the Establishments Code was made applicable except as
otherwise expressly provided in the Circular.  
  
Chapter III of the Establishments Code makes detailed provision in regard to
transfers. It specifies the authorities having the power to transfer public
officers, and section 3:1 stipulates that "the authority ordering a transfer
will act on the advice of a Transfer Board, except in cases referred to in

**4**

section 3:2 when the transfers will be ordered entirely at the discretion of
the authority". Section 3:2 provides that a Transfer Board will not deal with
transfers not involving a change of station, transfers on disciplinary
grounds, transfers necessitated by the exigencies of service, and transfers in
a Department having less than 25 transferable officers. Section 4 requires
that, as far as possible, all transfers should take effect from the 1st of
January, and that at least two calendar months' notice of transfer should be
given.  
  
The 4th Respondent's position, as stated in his affidavit and as submitted by
State Counsel, was that the power to transfer teachers was vested in the 1st
Respondent, the Provincial Public Service Commission (under section 32(2A) of
the Provincial Councils Act, No. 42 of 1987, as amended by Act No. 28 of
1990); that that power had been delegated to the 4th Respondent (by the
Provincial Council's Circular No. 95/2 dated 16. 02. 95); that the impugned
transfers had been effected to redress an imbalance of teachers, there being
an excess of teachers in five zones in the Kurunegala District, and a shortage
of teachers in two zones in the Puttalam District (as revealed by surveys
carried out in 1998/99); that it was those teachers who were excess and had
not completed their mandatory period of service in difficult areas, who had
been selected for transfer; that such transfers had commenced in 1999; and
that fifteen Petitioners who had submitted appeals had been granted some
relief.  
  
Learned State Counsel conceded that no teacher transfer board or appeal board
had been set up, and that accordingly the impugned transfers had been made,
and the appeals had been dealt with, without any reference to such boards.  
  
Circular No. 95/11 sets out national policy on an important aspect of
education. A fair and impartial teacher transfer policy is essential to ensure
that teachers serve with dedication in the best interests of the children
entrusted to their care. A national policy regarding such transfers is most

**5**

desirable. While powers in respect of education have been devolved to
Provincial Councils, those powers must be exercised in conformity with
national policy. Once national policy has been duly formulated in respect of
any subject, there cannot be any conflicting provincial policy on that same
subject.  
  
We are concerned in this case not with the question who has the **power** to
transfer teachers, but rather with the proper **procedure** for the exercise
of that power. The Circular, read with the Establishments Code, made it very
clear that the teacher transfer board and the appeal board were essential
components of that procedure. That procedure constitutes a valuable safeguard
for the protection of the rights of teachers. Even accepting that the 4th
Respondent did have the power to make the impugned transfers, an essential
pre-requisite for the exercise of that power was the recommendations of the
teacher transfer board. His failure to obtain those recommendations vitiated
the transfer orders, which were therefore in violation of the Petitioners'
fundamental rights under Article 12(1). It is hardly necessary to add that the
failure to establish a transfer board did not enlarge the 4th Respondent's
discretion or make it unconditional.  
  
While that disposes of the issue in this case, I must refer to learned State
Counsel's submission that the transfers were on account of the exigencies of
service. First, Circular No. 95/11 does not dispense with the need to obtain
the recommendations of the teacher transfer board in every case of "exigencies
of service", but only where there is genuine urgency. Second, even in cases of
urgency the board must be promptly summoned and informed. In so far as the
present case is concerned, the alleged excesses and shortages were known in
1999, and should have been taken into consideration when deciding upon the
annual transfers for 2000. It was not reasonable to claim in March 2000 that
there was some urgency which prevented recourse to the teacher transfer board.
Finally, the transfer letters did not allege

**6**

"exigencies of service". It is not open to the Respondents to state one reason
in the transfer letters and to rely upon another when they come to Court.
Apart from anything else, that would stultify the appeal procedure.  
  
Having regard to the need to avoid disrupting the education of the children
involved, I do not quash the impugned transfer orders. Learned State Counsel
stated that on appeal some Petitioners had been given **mutually acceptable**
alternative stations, while others had been given deferments: all those orders
will stand. However, it is just and equitable that the Petitioners should be
fully compensated for the violation of their rights. I order the Provincial
Ministry of Education of the North-Western Provincial Council to pay each of
the Petitioners compensation and costs in a sum of Rs. 60,000, which shall be
paid in two installments: Rs. 20,000 on 01. 11. 2000, and Rs. 40,000 on 01.
02. 2001. If, however, in the annual transfers for the year 2001, any
Petitioner is retransferred (effective not later than 01. 01. 2001, and
operative for not less than one year) to the school in which he/ she was
serving prior to the impugned transfers, he will cease to be entitled to the
second installment of Rs. 40,000.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/22.html_  

