##  Dr. Preethi Weerasekera v. Dr. Reggie Perera, Director General of Health
Services and Others - SLR - 241, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 22; (1999) 2 Sri LR
241 (26 April 1999)

**241**

**DR. PREETHI WEERASEKERA  
v.  
DR. REGGIE PERERA, DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF HEALTH  
SERVICES AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE J.,  
GUNAWARDANA, J., AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 816/97 (FR)  
FEBRUARY 25, 1999

_Fundamental rights - Appointment of a specialist medical officer - Failure to
appoint the best candidate - Dispute regarding eligibility for appointment -
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._

By a circular dated 9.5.97 the Ministry of Health called for applications for
the post of Consultant Rheumatologist, Colombo South Hospital, Kalubowila The
closing date for applications was 10.6.97. Board certification as a specialist
by the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine (PGIM) was a condition of
eligibility for appointment. The petitioner applied for the post. There were
four other applicants. On 5.9.97 the Consultants' Transfer Board appointed the
7th respondent instead of the petitioner who had the highest points at the
selection. The petitioner was overlooked on the ground that as she had not
been Board certified as a specialist on 10.6.97, the dosing date for
applications, she was not eligible for appointment. However, the petitioner
had after obtaining the degree of MBBS in 1975 engaged herself in the field of
Rheumatology since 1980, completed her MD examination in 1993 and received one
year's foreign training in Rheumatology. On her return she was appointed
acting Consultant in Rheumatology and Rehabilitation at the General Hospital,
Anuradhapura.

Pending the selection of a candidate for the post in dispute, on 3.6.97 the
Director PGIM informed the Director-General of Health Services that the
petitioner had completed her training and that the Board of Studies would
consider her for Board certification as a specialist with effect from
13.12.95. On 30.6.97 the Director of Health Services was informed that on
27.6.97 the Board of studies had recommended to the Board of Management PGIM
that the petitioner be certified as a specialist with effect from 17.12.95 and
on 2.9.97 the Director of Health Services was informed that the Board of
Management had approved that the petitioner be certified as a specialist in
Rheumatology and Rehabilitation with effect from 17.12.95.

**242**

**Held :**

In view of the correspondence between the PGIM and the Director-General of
Health Services and the fact that the petitioner had been certified as a
specialist with effect from 17.12.95 the petitioner was Board certified on the
date of the meetings of the Transfer Board. She was also Board certified on
the closing date for applications, namely 10.6.97 although she lacked
documentary proof of such certification on that date. In the circumstance, the
Transfer Board misled itself in supposing that the petitioner was not eligible
for appointment, and infringed her rights under Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution.

**Case referred to :**

1. _ _ _SmithKline Beecham Biological S.A._ and _Another v. State Pharmaceuticals __Corporation of Sri Lanka and Others_ (1997) 3 Sri LR 20 at 49-53.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _Ms. Shiranthi Jayatilake_ for petitioner.

_S. Marsoof,_ DSG with _K Arulanandan_ for 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 6th and 7th
respondents.

_D. S. Wijesinghe_ PC with _J. C. Weliamune_ for 4th and 5th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 26,1999.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

By Circular Letter No. 4974 dated the 9th of May, 1987, the Ministry of
Health, Highways and Social Services invited applications from "Medical
Specialists with appropriate specialist qualifications" for the post of
Consultant Surgeon and the post of Consultant Rheumatologist, Colombo South
Hospital, Kalubowila. Applicants were required to .submit their applications
to reach the Ministry "not later than 10. 06.1997". The Circular Letter stated
that the appointments would be made "in accordance with the Health Service
Minute of 17th May, 1991''. The Minute, which was published in Gazette No.
662/11 of 17th May, 1991, inter cilia, provides as follows:

"5.6.4. Medical Officers in Grade II who have successfully completed the
appropriate post-graduate training programme, and possessing qualifications as
listed in Appendix I, and obtained Board Certification of the Post-Graduate
Institute of Medicine,

243

University of Colombo, are eligible for appointment as Specialist Medical
Officers." Appendix I does not list "Rheumatology" as a specialty and does not
specify a "Recognized Qualification". Evidently it was regarded as a "sub-
specialty", for the amendments to the Minute made by the Cabinet of Ministers
and published in Gazette No. 818/1 of 9th May, 1994, although not including
Rheumatology in the amended list of specialties, refers to it in prescribing
the "Requirements for Specialized Training in sub-specialities". The amending
Minute of 1994 provides, infer alia: "Following successful completion of the
MD Part 11, those intending to specialise **. . .** in **. . .** Rheumatology
and Rehabilitation **. . .** will be required to spend a period of two to four
years, of satisfactory training as follows: **. . .** A minimum period of 2
years post MD training in Rheumatology and Rehabilitation. This will include
one-year training in a Rhematology Unit in Sri Lanka with in-patient
facilities and one year in an approved institution abroad". "The amended
Minute goes on to deal with the subject of "Board Certification as a
Consultant" in the following terms: "A trainee will be certified as a
Consultant following the completion of a period of 2 to 4 years after the MD
Part 11 examination, depending upon whether the trainee intends to be a
general Physician or specialised in one of the branches of Medicine as has
been indicated above." The amending minute states: "6.1.3. The seniority for
specialist appointments would be Grade II seniority. In the case of
appointments in Teaching Hospitals, it will be on a point scheme. Four points
for Preliminary Grade (2 points per year), 24 points for Grade II (2 points
per year) and 2 points per year for each year of service in Grade I and 1
point for each year of service as a Consultant."

The petitioner applied for the post of "Consultant Rheumatologist" of the
Colombo South Hospital, Kalubowila. There were four other applicants for that
post. The Hospital was a "Teaching Hospital", and it was not in dispute, as
the respondents stated in their written and oral submissions, that, in terms
of the Minute in regard to Medical Personnel of the Health Services of 1991,
as amended in 1994, the appointment should have been made on the basis of the
Ministry's "points scheme". The selection of candidates was made by the
"Consultants' Transfer Board". According to the record of evaluation made by
the Transfer Board marked as document 3R1 and filed as part and parcel of the
affidavit of the third respondent, the "total points" obtained by the
applicants were as follows:

244

  | Dr. (Mrs.) L. P. Weerasekara |  . . | 35.5  
---|---|---|---  
  | Dr. L S. Wijayaratna |  . . | 34.5  
  | Dr. K. A. N. Gunatilaka |  . . | 30  
  | Dr. J. K. J. S. K. Jayanetti |  . . | 27.5  
  | Dr. (Mrs.) A. N. H. Herath |  . . | (No points mentioned)  
  
Although, on the face of it, Dr. Mrs. Weerasekera, the petitioner, should have
been appointed, Dr. L. S. Wijayaratna, the 7th respondent, was appointed
instead. The explanation for this is found in the following minute made on
document 3R1: "Dr. Mrs. L P. Weerasekera was not board certified on the date
fixed for computation of points for this appointment. Board of Study which met
on 27.08.97 has recommended board certification, subject to ratification by
the Board of Management. Therefore, she has not fulfilled the requirements for
eligibility to apply for the post". (The emphasis is the Board's)

Eligibility, indeed, lies at the heart of the matter before this Court. Did
the petitioner, in terms of the prescribed criteria, deserve to be recommended
for appointment? Was she a suitable, fit and proper person to be appointed? It
was not in dispute that today the petitioner is "a medical specialist with
appropriate specialist qualifications" as required by the Circular Letter.
Learned counsel for the respondents, however, contends that on the closing
date for applications for the post of Consultant Rheumatologist, namely, the
10th of June, 1997, the petitioner had not received "Board Certification" as a
Consultant and therefore at that date she was not a medical specialist with
the appropriate specialist qualifications. Learned counsel for the
respondents, cited _SmithKline Beecham Biologicals SA and Another v. State
Pharmaceuticals Corporation of Sri Lanka and Others_ ,(1) in support of his
submission that. eligibility should be determined by reference to the "closing
date".

In SmithKline applications for the supply of Rubella vaccine had been invited
by the State Pharmaceuticals Corporation. The Court held that the only
responsive offer was from the petitioner, for on the date and at the time
specified for the closing of the tender, the only registered product in terms
of the advertisement calling for applications was that of the petitioner.

Whereas, registration of the product, for the reasons explained in the
judgment, was of critical importance in SmithKline, and

245

was an expressly stipulated condition of a responsive bid, Board Certification
in the matter before this Court was not expressly specified as a condition
precedent to the appointment of a Consultant Rheumatologist. It may be
supposed that the requirement that the petitioner had to be 'a medical
specialist with appropriate specialist qualifications' carried with it the
corollary that the applicant was "Board Certified". However, in practice,
"Board Certification" was qualitatively of less significance than the
registration of the product required in SmithKline. For instance, there were
four applicants for three posts of Paediatricians at Anuradhapura, Avissawella
and Nawalapitiya. Dr. K. U. C. Perera was regarded by the Transfer Board as
"eligible" despite the fact that he had not received "Board Certification" and
was preferred to Dr. A. C. C. P. Amarasinghe who was "Board Certified".
(Document 3R11).

Moreover, the facts of the case before us places it on an entirely different
footing from SmithKline. The petitioner was not as it were an "unknown",
"untested" product as the rival vaccines were in SmithKline. The petitioner
passed her MBBS examination in 1975 and, among other things, served as
Registrar, Rheumatology, Colombo Teaching Hospital (1992-1994) and Senior
House Officer, Rheumatology (1980-1989). She completed her MD examination in
1993 and functioned as Senior Registrar in Rheumatology at the General
(Teaching) Hospital, Colombo, from 1994 to 1996. She spent a year as Registrar
Rheumatology at the Princess Alexandra Hospital, Harlow, UK in 199697. On her
return to Sri Lanka she was appointed Acting Consultant in Rheumatology and
Rehabilitation of the General Hospital, Anuradhapura.

In response to the Circular Letter dated 9th May, 1997, the petitioner had
applied for the post of Consultant Rheumatologist, Colombo South Hospital,
Kalubowila. The Director of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine,
University of Colombo, on the 3rd of June, 1997, wrote to the Director-General
of Health Services informing him that the petitioner had "completed all facets
of training for Board Certification in Rheumatology and Rehabilitation". The
letter went on to state as follows: "Her eligibility for Board Certification
as a specialist with, effect from 17th December, 1995, will be taken up for
consideration at the meeting of the Board of Study in Medicine to be held on
29th June, 1997 and ratification by the Board of Management in July, 1997".

246

The matter of 'Board Certification' would have been taken up on the 30th of
May, 1997, but for the fact that on account of Trade Union action by the non-
academic staff of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine, the meeting was
postponed. This was pointed out to the Deputy Director-General of Health by
the petitioner who requested that in the circumstances she should not be
penalized for failing to submit the letter of Board Certification. The
petitioner made a similar, submission to the Government Medical Officers'
Association (GMOA) which requested her to send her explanation on the question
of Certification to the Director-General of Health Services "so that it could
be discussed at the next Consultants' Transfer Board".

On the 30th of June, 1997, the Acting Director of the Post-Graduate Institute
of Medicine wrote to the Director-General of Health Services, as follows:
"This is to inform you that subject to ratification by the Board of
Management, the Board of Study in Medicine at its last meeting held on 27th
June, 1997, recommended that Dr. (Mrs.) L P. Weerasekara be Board Certifiable
as a Specialist in Rheumatology and Rehabilitation with effect from
17.12.1995. She could now be released from the training programme with
immediate effect. The above facts may be considered when she applies for a
specialist post in the Department of Health".

On the 2nd of September, 1997, the Director of the Post-Graduate Institute of
Medicine informed the Director-General of Health Services that "the Board of
Management having considered the recommendation of the Board of Study in
Medicine has approved that Dr. (Mrs.) L. P. Weerasekera **. . .** be certified
as a specialist in Rheumatology and Rehabilitation with effect from 17th
December, 1995".

When the Consultants' Transfer Board met on the 5th of September, 1997, it had
before it, or should have had, the petitioner's explanation for not submitting
a document evidencing Board Certification. It also had, or should have had,
the letters of the Director of the Post-Graduate Institute of Colombo dated
the 9th of May, 1997 and the letter of the Acting Director of the Post-
Graduate Institute of Medicine indicating that the petitioner had completed
all facets of training and that certification was due to take place, and that
when it did take place, it would be retrospective. The Transfer Board also

247

had or ought to have had, the letter from the Director of the Post-Graduate
Institute of Medicine dated the 2nd of September,1997, stating that the
petitioner had been Board Certified "with effect from 17th December, 1995". At
the date of the meeting of the Transfer Board, therefore, the petitioner was
Board Certified. She was also Board Certified on the closing date for
applications, namely the 10th of June, 1997\. What she lacked on the 10th of
June was documentary proof of Board Certification. In the circumstances, the
Consultants' Transfer Board misled itself in supposing that the petitioner was
not eligible for appointment and failed to afford her equal treatment in terms
of the Minute on Health (as amended) and read with the Circular Letter of the
9th of May, 1997. Consequently, her rights under Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution were violated.

I declare that the 1st-3rd respondents have violated the fundamental rights of
the petitioner guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution and that the
selection of the Consultants' Transfer Board of the 7th respondent to the post
of Consultant Rheumatologist, Colombo South Hospital, Kalubowila, was null and
void.

The State shall pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 25,000 as costs.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/22.html_  

