##  George Payne & Co., [Ceylon] Ltd. v. International Exports [Pvt.] Ltd. -
SLR - 250, Vol 1 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 22; (1998) 1 Sri LR 250 (3 March 1998)

**250**

**GEORGE PAYNE & CO., (CEYLON) LTD.  
v.  
INTERNATIONAL EXPORTS (PVT) LTD.**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
PERERA, J. AND  
SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 35/97  
H.C. (CIVIL) NO. 9/96 (3)  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 4666/SPL  
JULY 3RD, 4TH, OCTOBER 22ND, 24TH, 1997.  
  
_Intellectual property - Infringement of trade marks - Unfair competition -
Code of Intellectual Property Act, No. 52 of 1979 - Sections 117, 142 and 179
of the Code - Continuation of wrongs after decree - "Merger in judgment" of
subsequent acts.  
_  
In consequence of the defendant exporting tea in circumstances which
constituted an infringement of the plaintiffs trade marks, the plaintiff
obtained a permanent injunction against the defendant in 1993, in the District
Court, Colombo. In 1996 the plaintiff found that the defendant was shipping
tea in continued violation of the plaintiffs rights; whereupon, the plaintiff
filed the present action pleading two causes of action (1) infringement of
trade marks in breach of rights under section 117 of the Code of Intellectual
Property Act, No. 52 of 1979 (2) unfair competition based on section 142 of
the Code.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The subsequent acts of infringement and unfair competition did not have an
independent existence. They were "merged" in the decree in the previous action
and did not in law give rise to fresh causes of action. The acts which the
plaintiff contended to constitute "fresh causes of action" fell directly
within the prohibition contained in the permanent injunction in the previous
action.

**251**

**Cases referred to:  
**  
(1) _Paris v. Florence_ (1987) 1 Sri LR 141, 147.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court, Colombo.  
  
_K. Kanag-lsvaran, PC with A. A. M. Illiyas, M. A Sumanthiran and Ms. Dilmoni
Wijeyawardena_ for the plaintiff-appellant.  
  
_S. L Gunasekera with Kushan de Alwis_ for the defendant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

 March 03, 1998.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.  
**  
The plaintiff and the defendant are engaged in the export of tea and are both
competitors in the tea trade. The plaintiff is the registered owner of 3 trade
marks and device which consist of the words, "AL-WAZAH TEA" (Swan brand)
together with the device of the Swan and also the word "CHAI AL-WAZAH" in
Arabic. True copies of the certificates of registration issued in terms of
section 174 of the Code of Intellectual Property Act (Code) depicting the
three trade marks are annexed to the plaint marked X1, X2 and X3.  
  
In June, 1996, the plaintiff became aware that the defendant was shipping tea
in infringement of the plaintiffs trade marks to the same destination as the
plaintiff. The export of tea was also an act of unfair competition within the
meaning of section 142 of the Code as the cartons were similar to those of the
plaintiff and were calculated to deceive the public. In its plaint the
plaintiff sought, inter alia, "an interim injunction restraining the defendant
by itself and by its servants and agents and/or otherwise howsoever from using
or continuing to use in any manner whatsoever or howsoever the get-up shown in
the specimen cartons annexed to the plaint marked X14 (a) and X14 (b) or any
colourable imitation of the plaintiffs specimen cartons annexed to the plaint
marked X15 (a) and X15 (b) and/or the trade marks X1, X2, and X3 in respect of
the defendant's product, namely, tea, or any other similar goods until the
final determination of this action". The learned Judge of the High Court
refused the application for an interim injunction. Hence the present appeal by
the plaintiff against this order.

**252**

Admittedly, the plaintiff had instituted a previous action against the same
defendant in February, 1993, in the District Court of Colombo (case No.
3671/Spl) and had obtained a permanent injunction. The decree in that case
dated 17th February, 1993 (X12) is in the following terms:  
  
"It is ordered and decreed of consent that the defendant is restrained by
itself and/or by its servants and/or agents and/or otherwise howsoever, from
using or continuing to use in any manner whatsoever the get-up shown in the
specimen carton annexed to the plaint marked X8 or any colourable imitation of
the plaintiff's specimen cartons marked X5 (a), X5 (b), and X5 (c) and/or
trade marks X1, X2 and X3 and in respect of the defendant's product, namely,
tea or any other similar goods." (emphasis added).  
  
It is correct, as submitted by Mr. Kanag-lsvaran for the plaintiff-appellant
that two causes of action have been pleaded in the present action. The 1st
cause of action is based on section 117 of the Code. It is averred in
paragraph 13 (b) of the plaint "that the use by the defendant of the said mark
'Alsaqr tea' and the aforesaid device depicted in X14 (a) and X14 (b) without
the consent of the plaintiff is an infringement of the rights of the plaintiff
granted under section 117 of the Code in respect of the registered trade marks
of the plaintiff depicted in X1 to X3 . . ." By reason of the infringement of
the registered trade marks, the plaintiff claims a statutory right to an
injunction in terms of section 179 of the Code. (Paragraph 13 (c) of the
plaint). The 2nd cause of action is based on section 142 of the Code. Section
142 (1) enacts that "any act of competition contrary to honest practices in
industrial or commercial matters shall constitute an act of unfair
competition". The second cause of action is pleaded in paragraphs 17, 18 and
19 of the plaint. The plaintiff seeks an interim injunction to restrain the
defendant from using or continuing to use "the get-up shown in the specimens
annexed hereto marked X14 (a) and X14 (b) or any colourable imitation of the
plaintiffs specimen cartons marked X15 (a) and X15 (b) in respect of the
defendant's product, namely, tea . . .". (Paragraph 18 of the plaint).  
  
Mr. Kanag-lsvaran for the plaintiff-appellant strenuously contended before us
that in refusing the interim injunction, the learned Judge of the High Court
totally failed to appreciate the crucial fact that the 1st and 2nd causes of
action were not founded on the consent decree

**253**

in the previous action 3671/Spl (X12), but on fresh acts of infringement and
fresh acts of unfair competition, "being continuing infringements and acts of
unfair competition giving rise to new causes of action'. (to use counsel's own
words).  
  
It is true that the "acts of infringement" and the "acts of unfair
competition" complained of in the present action occurred about 3 1/2 years
subsequent to the previous action. However, it is very relevant to note that
the plaintiff does not dispute the fact that the cartons X14 (a) and X14 (b)
are more or less a reproduction of the carton X8 which was the subject matter
of the previous action. In the written submissions dated 15.8.96 the plaintiff
states: "The get-up inclusive of the colour scheme and all other essential
material which appear on the present impugned cartons, X14 (a) and X14 (b) are
identical to that of the previous carton X8 and also identical to the
plaintiffs cartons X5 (a), X5 (b), X15 (a) and X15 (b) in violation of the
plaintiffs three registered trade marks X1 to X3". (Para.2.6 of the written
submissions). The plaintiff goes on to state: "The use by the defendant of the
present cartons X14 (a) and X14 (b) is without an iota of doubt, a
reproduction of its earlier carton X8 except with the replacement of a peacock
with that of a bird's head and the replaceÂ­ment of the name "AITAOOS TEA" with
that of "ALSAQR TEA". The get-up/colour scheme/trade dress is identical"
(paragraph 4.2 of the written submissions). Besides, in its letters addressed
to the defendant through its registered attorneys-at-law just before the
institution of the present action it has stated, inter alia: "you have now
violated the permanent injunction which is a decree of court and thus your
company, its directors, officers and servants are guilty of contempt of court
thereby making all your Directors and officers liable for such contempt". X13
(a) (Emphasis added). The letter X13 (c) is in similar terms: "We reiterate
that your client has violated the permanent injunction".  
  
On a consideration of the matters set out above, it seems to me that the "acts
of infringement" and the "acts of unfair competition" complained of in the
present action, though in point of time subsequent to the decree (X12) entered
in the previous action, do not in law give rise to fresh causes of action as
contended for by Mr. Kanag-lsvaran. The reason is that the subsequent "acts"
are merged in the permanent injunction (X12) granted in favour of the
plaintiff in the previous action. In my view the resulting position is one of
"merger in judgment". The

**254**

subsequent "acts of infringements" and of "unfair competition" do not have an
independent existence; they are "merged" in the decree X12 and do not in law
give rise to fresh causes of action. This principle is based on the maxim
"Interest reipublicae ut sit finis litium. (See also the judgment of S. B.
Goonewardena, J. in Paris v. Florence?". As pointed out earlier, the previous
decree (X12) restrains the defendant from using or continuing to use in any
manner whatsoever "the get-up shown in the carton P8 or any colourable
imitation of the plaintiff's specimen cartons X5 (a), X5 (b) and X5 (c) and
the trade marks X1, X2 and X3". The "acts" which the plaintiff contends
constitute "fresh causes of action" fall directly within the prohibition
contained in the permanent injunction X12.  
  
Moreover, the ultimate relief which the plaintiff seeks in the present action
is a permanent injunction in order to protect the legal rights claimed in the
plaint. The plaintiff already has this protection by virtue of the permanent
injunction granted in the previous action, as rightly submitted by Mr. S. L.
Gunasekera for the defendant-respondent. A court does not act in vain and so
the application for an interim injunction cannot succeed.  
  
For the reasons I have endeavoured to set out above, the appeal fails and is
dismissed, but, in all the circumstances, without costs.  
  
**PERERA, J. - I agree.  
**  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. - I agree.  
**  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/22.html_  

