##  Cyril Fernando v. Ratnasiri Wickramanayake and Others - SLR - 166, Vol 1
of 1998 [1997] LKSC 22; (1998) 1 Sri LR 166 (17 December 1997)

**166**

**CYRIL FERNANDO  
v.  
RATNASIRI WICKRAMANAYAKE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WADUGODAPIT1YA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. (F.R.) APPLICATION NO. 324/96  
NOVEMBER 3RD, 11TH, 1997, DECEMBER 12TH, 1997.  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Transfer of ownership of government vehicles to Senior
Public Officers at retirement - Public Administration Circular No. 24/93 -
Eligibility of an employee of a Public Corporation - Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution.  
_  
**Held:  
**  
Part III of the Public Administration Circular 24/93 provides for the
transfer, to a Senior Public Officer, on the eve of his retirement, of the
ownership of the vehicle which had been assigned to him for his official use.
It relates to government vehicles and not to the transfer of ownership of
vehicles belonging to corporations, statutory boards, local authorities, etc.;
and the officer entitled to such transfer must be a public officer viz. a
person holding paid office under the Republic as opposed to a corporation
employee.

**167**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Varuna Basnayake, PC with Ms. Marina Fernando_ for the petitioner.  
  
_K. Sripavan DSG_ for the Attorney-General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

 December 17, 1997.  
  
**  DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
The petitioner was employed by the 3rd respondent corporation, which is a
statutory body established in terms of the State Agricultural Corporations
Act, No. 11 of 1972. He was appointed as a senior executive officer in 1976,
the deputy general manager in 1985, the deputy director produce / warehousing
in 1990, and the deputy director (estates) in 1994. He counted 19 1/2 years'
of service with the 3rd respondent corporation up to his retirement in August
1995. The petitioner complains that his fundamental right guaranteed under
Article 12 (1) was violated by all or anyone of the 1st to 4th respondents, by
their refusal, on the eve of his retirement, to transfer the ownership of the
vehicle assigned to him for- his official use. The bone of contention between
him on the one hand and the respondents on the other, is the application and
interpretation of part three of the Public Administration Circular 24/93 (the
Circular), dealing with transfer of the ownership of vehicles.  
  
The petitioner contended that he was a "senior public officer" within the
meaning of part three of the Circular and therefore was entitled, at his
retirement, as of right, to obtain the transfer of ownership of the vehicle
which was assigned to him. It was further contended on his behalf that the
meaning of the term "senior public officer" is found in paragraph (ix) under
category II in the annexure I of the Circular; and that reads "officers who
are of and above the level of a deputy head of a department/institution in
government departments/ institutions, government corporations, statutory
bodies, local authorities and government-owned companies, who have a minimum
of five years, continuous service in a permanent post and confirmed in the
such permanent post". The respondents do not agree with that interpretation
and that has warranted a closer examination of the Circular by us.

**168**

The circular is titled "Importation of vehicles and issue of used vehicles
from Procurement and Advisory Service Unit (PASU) on concessionary terms and
transfer of ownership of government vehicles to officers". The preface to the
Circular states that the Circular consists of three parts; the first two deal
with (to state briefly) Importation and Purchase from PASU, respectively; and
the deals with (to state verbatim) "Transfer of Ownership of Government
Vehicles". In part one dealing with importation, under the subtitle
"Eligibility", in the group marked (a), it is stated "All persons covered
under categories I, II & III in Annexure I are eligible to make use of this
concession". The term "all persons" is used there because in these categories
there are persons other than "officers", like Members of Parliament, certain
Private Secretaries, certain members of the Teaching Staff of UniÂ­versities,
etc. It is the description of officers under (ix), in the category II of
Annexure I, that the petitioner states must be resorted to in construing the
meaning of the term "Senior Public Officer" in part three of the Circular. In
part two, which deals with purchase of used vehicles from the PASU too, there
is a subtitle called "Eligibility" as in part one and it is stated that "all
persons covered under categories contained in Annexure VI are eligible to make
use of the concession . . ."  
  
In part three of the circular dealing exclusively with the transfer of
ownership, under the subtitle "Terms and Conditions" item (a) reads: "This has
to be considered as once in a lifetime concession to **Senior Public
Officers** , who have not availed of the facility under part I". Under the
subtitle "Eligibility" it is stated "Officers with continuous, uninterrupted
service up to the date of retirement or on extension after reaching the age of
55 are eligible to apply". It is noteworthy that unlike the specifications
given under the subtitle "Eligibility" in parts I and II, the specifications
under that subtitle in part III do not refer to any category of persons or
officers with reference to any annexure. The reason for this difference is
quite obvious; the category of officers to whom it applies is described in the
body of that part itself under the subtitle "Terms and Conditions".  
  
As the title to the Circular and its preface indicate, part three of the
Circular relates to transfer of ownership of **Government vehicles.** This
part of the Circular is therefore not applicable to the transfer of ownership
of vehicles belonging to corporations, statutory boards, local authorities,
etc. An officer who is entitled on the eve of his retirement, to obtain a
transfer of ownership of a **government** vehicle,

**169**

which had been assigned to him and which he had been using, must necessarily
be a **government** servant and not, for instance, a corporation employee. I
find no justification to refer to categories of officers eligible under part
one to discover the meaning of the term "senior public officer" in part three.
By common usage, the term public officer denotes a **government** servant or
an officer who holds paid office under the Republic as opposed to a
corporation employee. The Chambers 20th Century Dictionary makes no reference
to a "public officer"; but, a "public servant" is defined as a person employed
by the **government**. By implication, a "public officer" should mean an
officer employed by the **government** The Establishments Code states that an
"Officer" means a "Public Officer"; who is in turn defined as a person who
holds any paid office under the Republic and specifically excludes from within
its meaning, amongst some others, "an employee of a Public Corporation, a
Statutory Board or an Institution vested in the Government". The Sinhala
version of the Circular puts the matter beyond any doubt where the term **
"senior public officers" **is referred to as ** "jeshta rajaye niladhareen".  
**  
For the above reasons, I hold that the petitioner was ineligible, on the eve
of his retirement, to have obtained the transfer of ownership of the vehicle
belonging to the 3rd respondent Corporation. I find no violation of his
fundamental right by 1st to 4th respondents. The application is dismissed
without costs.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNAWARDANA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/22.html_  

