##  R.I.K. De Silva v. The University Grants Commission and Others - SLR -
261, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 23; (2003) 1 Sri LR 261 (21 November 2002)

**261**

**R.I.K. DE SILVA** ****

**v.** ****

# THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION

**AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA, C.J.,

EDUSSURIYA, J., AND

YAPA, J.

SC (FR) APPLICATION No. 642/2002

9 SEPTEMBER, 2002.

_ _

_Fundamental Rights - Request of student selected to Arts Faculty for a mutual
transfer to the Law Faculty of the University - Discriminatory and unlawful
rejection of the request - Non compliance with the rules for filling vacancies
-Article 12(1) of the Constitution._



The petitioner was a Colombo District candidate at the G.C.E. (A Level)
Examination. She obtained two "A" s and two "B" s at that examination with a
"Z" score of 1.6517 but failed to secure admission to the Law Faculty but
gained admission to the Arts Faculty of the University of Colombo. However,
she applied for a mutual transfer to the Law Faculty with a candidate who had
been admitted to the Law Faculty who was agreeable to join the Arts Faculty.
This application was recommended by the Deans of the Faculties of Law and
Arts. However, the appropriate authority, the 1st respondent University Grants
Commission ('The UGC") rejected the petitioner's application.



Event though the UGC rejected the petitioner's application it permitted a
student who had been admitted to the Arts Faculty who had a lower "Z" score
than the petitioner to be admitted to the Law Faculty on the ground that the
student had excelled in the sport "kabadi" which allegedly permitted her to be
so admitted to the Law Faculty according to the conditions for admission. The
UGC also permitted the student who had agreed to a transfer from the Law
Faculty to the Arts Faculty to join the Arts Faculty without much ado.

At the time the petitioner's application to join the Law Faculty was rejected,
there were several vacancies in the Law Faculty due to the fact that out of
the total number of students who had been admitted to that Faculty some had
failed to register.

**262**

**Held :**

1.                     The rejection of the petitioner's application for a transfer to the Law Faculty was discriminatory and constitutes an infringement of her rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution, particularly for the rea­son that the request of the student who applied for a transfer from the Law Faculty to the Arts Faculty was allowed.  


2.                     The ground on which a student with a lower "Z' score than the peti­tioner was admitted to the Law Faculty, namely, that that the student excelled in "Kabadi" did not provide a sufficient guideline for such admission. The guideline was vague and left an absolute discretion in the hands of the UGC. In any event admission of students on special consideration should be permitted if at all at the commencement of the admission process.  


3.                     The denial of the petitioner's application for a transfer to the Law Faculty where there were vacancies was contrary to the conditions applicable to the filling of vacancies.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_D.S. Wijesinghe,_ P.C. with _Dhammika Dharmadasa_ for petitioner

_R.K. W. Goonesekera_ with _S. Hewamanna_ for the 1st and 2nd respondents

_U. Egalahewa,_ State Counsel for 3rd and 4th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 30, 2003 **  
SARATH N. SILVA, C.J.**

The Petitioner has been granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged
infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. She sat for the G.C.E. (A
Level) examination in the year 2001 and obtained grades of two A's and two B's
with an "Z" score 1.6517. She sought admission to the Faculty of Law, but
being a candidate from the Colombo District failed to secure admission,
failling short



263

by a few marks. Instead, she gained admission to the Faculty of Arts in the
University of Colombo.

 The Petitioner subsequently learnt that there were vacancies in the Faculty
of Law and that a student in that Faculty wanted to join the Faculty of Arts.
On the basis of that information she wrote letter dated 17.10.2002 (the
original of which has been produced marked 3R2) to the 4th Respondent being
the Dean, Faculty of Arts. The letter refers to the matters stated above with
regard to vacancies and concludes with the following sentences.



"In the circumstances I am willing to exchange place with this student. I am
very keen on getting a degree in law as it is my chosen career. Therefore I
kindly request you to consider my case sympathetically and release me to do
the law degree."



From the endorsement appearing on the letter and the affi­davit filed in
Court, it is clear that this request was supported by the Dean, Faculty of Law
and the Dean, Faculty of Arts being the 3rd and 4th Respondents. The Dean,
Faculty of Law has stated in his affidavit as follows:



"I sent the letter (being the request of the Petitioner) with an endorsement
to the following effect, that I learnt that names of 14 students had been sent
for registration but only 9 have so far registered, that time was running out
with regard to the students' attendance requirement, and that we have
permit­ted mutual transfer in the past, if I remember correct. I also
requested the Additional Secretary (Admissions of the University Grants
Commission - the 1st Respondent) whether he could consider the Petitioner's
appeal favourably at his earliest."



After the Petitioner's request supported by the Deans of the respective
Faculties was sent to the University Grants Commission (UGC), letter dated
22.10.2002 (produced marked X9 and 3R5) was sent by the Commission to the
Dean, Faculty of Law stating that another student already registered with the
Faculty of Arts should be admitted to the Faculty of Law. This student is also
one that sat for the same G.C.E. (A Level) examination as the Petitioner from
the Colombo District, but secured a 'Z' score lower than the Petitioner. The
Petitioner's 'Z' score was 1.6517, as noted above

264



and the student whose admission was ordered by the UGC by X9 had an 'Z' score
of only 1.6109. The admission was ordered by the UGC not on the basis of the
performance at the G.C.E. (A Level) examination and the respective marks that
had been secured, but on the basis that the latter student had done well in
the sport of "Kabadi". The Dean, Faculty of Law has referred this matter in
his affidavit as follows:



"I was compelled to admit a student from the Faculty of Arts on the basis that
the said student had excelled in the sport "Kabadi". It is also observed that
the 'Z' score of this student is 1.6109 which is lower than that of the
Petitioner. I annex herewith a copy of the letter marked 3R5."



The request of the Petitioner was refused by the UGC by let­ter dated
5.11.2002 (X13). It appears that the student who was reg­istered in the
Faculty of Law and who sought a transfer to the Faculty of Arts had that
request granted without much ado. According to the affidavit of the Dean,
Faculty of Arts that student's request was considered at the 176th Faculty
Board meeting and the student was allowed to register in the Faculty of Arts
in October 2002.



It is in this context that the Petitioner has alleged an infringe­ment of her
fundamental right to equality guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution,
on the part of the Respondents. The Petitioner relies mainly on two grounds to
establish her allegation of unequal treatment -

1.                           that a student similarly circumstanced having sat for the same examination from the same District and reg­istered in the same Faculty of Arts has been permitted to register in the Faculty of Law although she had a lower 'Z' score.

2.                           that a student registered in the Faculty of Law has been permitted to transfer to the Faculty of Arts although she has been denied an opportunity of her request being considered on the basis of any applicable criteria.



The UGC has strenuously resisted the grant of any relief to the Petitioner
although the Dean, Faculty of Law has stated in his

265

affidavit that there is yet a vacancy in that Faculty. In the circum­stances
it is necessary to examine the matter of admission further.



The intake to the Faculty of Law of the University of Colombo has been fixed
at 200 students for the year 2002/2003. By docu­ment X11 the UGC decided on
the allocation of places in respect of the total intake of 200 students. 79
places were allocated on the all island merit quota and 121 on the district
quota, making a total of 200. On that basis the cut off point in the 'Z' score
for each District was notified by XII. It is clear that the UGC did not make
any reser­vation for special admissions, including for students who have
excelled in fields other that studies, as provided in Part Two of the Handbook
issued by the UGC in respect of admissions (R1). By letter dated 18.09.2002
the Deputy Registrar Examinations of the University of Colombo, informed the
UGC that there are 15 vacan­cies in the Faculty of Law resulting from selected
students failing to seek registration. This letter produced as X4 bears the
endorse­ment _" very urgent' _and requests that immediate action be taken to
fill these vacancies. The sense of urgency on the part of the University
authorities is understandable, since the academic pro­gramme in the Faculty of
Law was due to commence on 07.10.2002. In response, the UGC sent the letter
dated 10.10.2002 giving the names of 14 students to fill the vacancies. The
explana­tion of the UGC is that one place from the vacancies was reserved for
a special admission.



The UGC claims that the action taken to fill the vacancies is strictly in
accordance with the provisions in the Handbook (R1). In view of the firm stand
taken by the UGC in this regard, it is neces­sary to examine the claim
carefully in the light of the relevant pro­visions of the Handbook. Part II of
the Handbook which deals with special admissions in paragraph 18(b) states as
follows:



"(b) Students who have excelled in fields other than studies: 0.5% of the
places in each course of study has been reserved for candidates who have
achievements at national or international levels in such fields as sports,
cultural activi­ties (e.g. dancing, painting, music and literature), scouting
and cadetting, social work and other extra curricular activities in and after
1998, but have failed to gain admission under the normal intake because of the
short fall of a few marks."

266

It has to be observed at the outset that the criteria set out in this
provision is vague and it purports to reserve a power to the UGC to make
selections at its sole discretion. The provision does not contain adequate
guidelines to ensure that the power reserved by the UGC to itself would not be
exercised arbitrarily. The UGC has selected a candidate who is from the same
District as the Petitioner but who has got a lower 'Z' score on the basis of
her per­formance in the sport of 'Kabadi". The level of her performance in the
sport is not disclosed. Whilst the UGC may be under the impression that skill
in the sport of "Kabadi" is a useful attribute to the study of law, it has to
be noted that such a course of action is inconsistent with the equal
protection of the law guaranteed to every person by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution. If any reservation for a special admission is to be made, that
should be done on the basis of rational criteria, related to the overall
objective of selecting the most competent student with the highest aptitude
for the par­ticular course of study. In that respect the provision relied on
by the UGC falls far short of the required standard. It's application, seen
from the facts of this case, makes it worse and demonstrates the danger in
reserving to an authority discretionary power without adequate guidelines as
to its exercise. I do not want to go into this matter further since the
student selected from her performance in "Kabadi" is not a party to this
application. From the Petitioner's per­spective, she has been plainly denied
the equal protection of the law guaranteed to her by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution. Her appli­cation for a transfer to the Faculty of Law which had
been support­ed by the Deans of the respective Faculties evoked a negative
response from the UGC. Whereas the UGC has permitted a sim­ilar transfer,
which has not been supported by the Deans of the respective Faculties,
according to the material available, in respect of a student with a lower "Z"
score on a ground that cannot be sup­ported.



When one delves into the matter further, it is seen that a place for special
admission should, if at all, be "reserved" at the commencement of the
admission process. In this instance, the UGC did not make a reservation for
any special admission, but allocated all 200 places on the district and the
all island merit quo­tas as seen in the document XII. The UGC has purported to
order

267



the registration of a student as a special admission in the process of filling
of vacancies that resulted from non-registration of select­ed students.
Filling of vacancies is dealt with in paragraph 12 of Part I of the Handbook
whereas reservation for special admissions is provided for in paragraph 18 in
Part II of the Handbook. Since the UGC has strenuously contended that the
filling of vacancies was ordered strictly in accordance with the relevant
provisions, I would reproduce the entirely of paragraph 12 Vacancies may arise
as a result of non-registration of stu­dents selected under the normal intake.
These are filled on the fol­lowing basis:

(a)          Vacancies due to non-registration of students under the merit
quota will be filled on an all island merit basis.

(b)          Vacancies due to non-registration of students selected under the
district quota will be filled on a district merit  
basis. Vacancies in a particular district will be filled with students from
the same district.

(c)          When an additional number of students have been selected over and
above the quota due to clustering of students at the same mark point, such
additional number will be deducted from the number of vacancies and only  
the balance will be filled.  


(d)          Vacancies in any course of study will not be filled after the
commencement of the academic programme of the uni­versity concerned.

(e)          In terms of 9.4 above candidates once registered in a course of
study on the basis of the results of the GCE (A/L) Examination held in 2001
should accept the course of study to which he/she would be elevated according
to the higher preference indicated by him/her in the applica­tion for
admission, when filling vacancies.



On a plain reading it is seen that no place can be reserved for a special
admission in the process of filling of vacancies. I am compelled to note that
the UGC has conveniently skipped from paragraph 12 in Part I to paragraph
18(b) in Part II of the Handbook to order the registration of the student with
a lower "Z" score than

268



the Petitioner on the basis of her performance in sport. Thus the reservation
of one place for a special admission in the process of filling vacancies is
clearly illegal.

To proceed further on the matter of filling of vacancies, as noted above, the
Deputy Registrar Examinations of the University of Colombo informed the UGC of
15 vacancies in the Faculty of Law by letter dated 18.09.2002 (X4) which was
marked "very urgent". The urgency lay in the fact that the academic programme
of the Faculty of Law was due to commence on 07.10.2002. Paragraph 12(d) of
the Handbook, reproduced above states clear­ly that vacancies will not be
filled after the commencement of the academic programme of the University. The
UGC violated its own rule by sending the 14 names by letter dated 10.10.2002,
after the academic programme commenced on 07.10.2002. When 5 stu­dents of the
14 failed to register, the UGC sent another list on 5.11.2002 (X7) and yet
another list on 21.11.2002 (X8). This is in addition to the special admission
on the performance in sport ordered by letter dated 22.10.2002 (X9). All these
lists have been sent in contravention of the provisions of paragraph 12(d)
referred above. Therefore the strenuous claim of the UGC that it has acted
strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Handbook in filling of
vacancies, ends up in smoke when subjected to a close scrutiny.

A more alarming fact that emerges from the foregoing account of the process of
admission is that 15 students out of the 200 (7.5%) originally selected
dropped out at the stage of registra­tion itself. There are further drop outs
as the academic programme goes on. This demonstrates the inherent weakness of
a selection process based solely on statistics churned out by computers. There
is a live question whether such a process by itself will produce stu­dents
with the required aptitude and the real capacity to engage in undergraduates
studies in a given field. This question addresses a matter of policy,
formulation which is outside the purview of the jurisdiction of this Court.



Reverting specially to the facts of this case, the action of the UGC is best
epitomized by the following paragraph in the affidavit filed by the Dean,
Faculty of Law.



13\. "I further state that if the action of the 1st and 2nd Respondents (the
UGC and its Chairman) are transparent,

269

complaints of this nature could have been minimized. I am of the view that the
University Grants Commission should publish openly every year its admission
policy, cri­teria adopted to select candidates, each candidate's marks and
ranking, each one's choice of courses/disci­plines, their choice of university
and the selection made by the University Grants Commission. Transparency will
not only make candidates to trust the institution and the decision making
process but also cause the institution to be responsible and accountable."



The answer of the UGC is that the University of Colombo should be the proper
party in the case and not the Deans of the respective faculties. I find it
difficult to comprehend this objection. The Dean is the administrative head of
the Faculty. The request of the Petitioner for a transfer to the Faculty of
Law was addressed to the Dean, Faculty of Arts, who submitted it to the Dean,
Faculty of Law who in turn recommended it to the UGC. By X13 addressed to the
Dean, Faculty of Law the UGC refused that request. The spe­cial admission on
the basis of performance in sport, regarding which much has been said above,
was notified by the UGC to the Dean, Faculty of Law. When there is an alleged
infringement of a fundamental right this Court has to examine the process of
the impugned executive or administrative action. In that respect the proper
parties involved in the impugned administrative process are before Court and I
accordingly overrule the ground of objection.



For the reasons stated above, I hold that there has been an infringement of
the fundamental right of the Petitioner guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution resulting from action on the part of the University Grants
Commission. I allow to the Petitioner the relief prayed for in prayers (B) and
(C) of the prayer to the petition.



The 1st Respondent will pay a sum of Rs. 15,000/- as costs to the Petitioner.

**EDUSSURIYA, J.** - I agree.

**YAPA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/23.html_  

