##  Kodituwakkuge Nihal v. Police Sergeant Kotalawala and Others - SLR - 217,
Vol 1 of 2000 [1994] LKSC 23; (2000) 1 Sri LR 217 (6 October 1994)

**217**

**KODITUWAKKUGE NIHAL  
 v.  
POLICE SERGEANT KOTALAWALA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 126/94  
13th SEPTEMBER, 1994  
  
_Fundamental rights - Torture whilst in police custody - Article 11 of the
Constitution - Illegal order by the Magistrate directing the Superintendent of
Prisons to take the petitioner to prison custody - Article 13(2) of the
Constitution - Section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.  
_  
The 1st to the 10th respondents were police officers attached to the Police
Guard Room, Boralesgamuwa which comes under the Maharagama Police Station. On
04\. 03. 1994, the petitioner was arrested by the 1st and 2nd respondents for
a traffic offence and taken to the Police Guard Room, Boralesgamuwa after
using much force on him. Whilst in police custody, the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th
respondents assaulted him. He was assaulted with a rubber hose whilst the 3rd
respondent, a Sub-Inspector of Police, struck him on his right ear. On the 3rd
day after the arrest, the petitioner was admitted to the Kalubowila Hospital
under police custody where he remained until 11. 03. 1994 when he was taken
over by Prison Officers on the Order of the Magistrate, Gangodawila and
admitted to the Prison Hospital. According to the discharge ticket of the
Kalubowila Hospital, the petitioner had sustained contusions, fractures and
perforations of both ear drums.  
  
The Order for the transfer from police custody to prison custody was made by
the Magistrate on the application of the officer-in -charge, Maharagama Police
Station whilst the petitioner was at the Kalubowila Hospital. That order which
is dated 06. 03. 1994 (a Sunday) states "Suspect ... Nihal present. Remand
until 16\. 03. 94"  
  
**Held:**  
  
The 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents violated the petitioner's
fundamental right protected by Article 11.

**218**

Per Dheeratne, J.  
  
"We are unable to find any provision of law granting sanction for a Magistrate
to make such a remand order which is capable of so insidiously eroding the
liberty of the subject (see Article 13(2) of the Constitution and Section 37
of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979"  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_A. H. H. Perera with Gamini Perera_ for petitioner.  
  
_K. Kumarasiri with Chandima Withanarachchi_ for 1st-8th and 10th respondents.  
  
_D. Weerasuriya, SSC_ for 11th and 12th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 06, 1994  
**DHEERARATNE, J.  
**  
The petitioner was granted leave to proceed for the alleged violation of
Article 11 of the Constitution by the 1st to 10th respondents who were police
officers attached to Borelesgamuwa police guard room on 04. 03. 1994. The
medical evidence which will be referred to in detail later discloses the
presence of several injuries on the petitioner received at or about the time
he was in police custody.  
  
The petitioner states that at about 8.30 a.m. he travelled on the pillion of a
motor cycle ridden by one Ranjith and about 200 meters before reaching the
Borelesgamuwa police guard room, he alighted from the pillion because he wore
no protective helmet. Ranjith proceeded but was stopped by the 1st respondent
a short distance before approaching the guard room. When the petitioner walked
up to the spot where the 1st respondent was, he was detained by 1st respondent
who asked for his name and his national identity card. The petitioner told the
1st respondent that he had not committed any traffic offence and refused to
give his name or the identity card. Ranjith was issued a spot fine ticket by
the 1st respondent having taken into custody his driving licence. Ranjith was

**219**

asked to leave. Thereafter the 1st respondent got on to his motor cycle and
proceeded towards the police guard room while the petitioner went in the
direction of the bus stand which was in the vicinity. When the petitioner was
near the bus stand, the 1st respondent came there along with the 2nd
respondent on foot. They held the petitioner by his belt at the waist and
endeavoured to frog-march him to the police guard room. The petitioner told
the 1st and 2nd respondents that he would accompany them voluntarily but the
two respondents next caught him by his wrists and continued to twist them
causing severe pain to the petitioner. When they approached the guard room,
several police officers in mufti came out and assaulted him. There was an
"ongoing scuffle in which the petitioner was flaying his hands to escape the
blows", states the petitioner. At the guard room 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th and 8th
respondents assaulted him. The 3rd respondent, the OIC of the guard room,
directed a search of the petitioner's person. The petitioner states at that
stage some police officers wanted to implicate him in a narcotic offence and
they introduced some packet into his wallet. Petitioner pleaded with the 3rd
respondent to refrain from doing so and requested that he be examined
medically to verify whether he was addicted to drugs or not. The 3rd
respondent who was annoyed at what the petitioner stated closed the
petitioners left ear and rained a series of blows on his right ear. Petitioner
was taken to the barrack room and assaulted by the 5th respondent and some
constables with a rubber hose and two wooden slats. The 4th respondent placed
the petitioner against a wall and assaulted him. The right wrist of petitioner
was handcuffed to a bed and he was made to lie face upwards under the bed.
Sometime in the afternoon, the petitioner was produced before a medical
officer at the Kalubowila hospital from police custody. The medical officer
wanted the petitioner to be warded, but the police took him back to the guard
room He was readmitted to the hospital on the following day and remained there
till the 11th of March when he was taken to the prison hospital by some prison
guards.

**220**

The respondent police officers 1 to 10 gave a different version as to how
petitioner came by his injuries. The 1st and 2nd respondents stated that they
were on traffic duty on the 4th morning when they detected a motor cyclist
coming from the direction of Colombo carrying a pillion rider who wore no
protective helmet. The 1st respondent signalled the rider to stop. Thereafter
the 1 s' respondent asked the pillion rider who is now identified as the
petitioner for his name and identity card. The petitioner turned aggressive
and refused to divulge the information; the 1st respondent then asked
petitioner to accompany him to the police station but he refused. At that
stage the 2nd respondent held the petitioner by his wrist and 'advised him' to
come to the police station. The petitioner then struck the 2nd respondent on
his face and the 2nd respondent fell down. When the 2nd respondent got up, he
saw the 1st respondent struggling with the petitioner on the ground and there
was an exchange of blows between them. In order to extricate the 1st
respondent, the 2nd respondent struck the petitioner on his arms and legs
several times with his baton. The 2nd respondent's right eye was swollen as a
result of the blow inflicted by the petitioner. There was no assault on the
petitioner thereafter and nothing happened inside the guard room or the
barrack room which could have caused injuries on petitioner. The 3rd
respondent stated that on the same day the petitioner was produced before a
medical officer at Kalubowila hospital, but as the petitioner declined to be
warded, he was brought back to the police station. On the 5th morning on a
request made over the telephone by the medical officer who examined the
petitioner the previous day that he be permitted to prepare a report after
examining petitioner, petitioner was taken back to the hospital where he was
warded. The 7th respondent was kept at the hospital to guard the petitioner.
The 3rd respondent further stated that as the Borelesgamuwa guard room came
under the Maharagama police station, on 06. 03. 94 the OIC Maharagama had
reported the facts about the incident to the Magistrate, Gangodawila.

**221**

The discharge ticket issued by the Kalubowila hospital dated 11. 03. 94 shows
that the petitioner had an un displaced fracture of the lower end of the ulnar
and perforations of both ear drums. The medico-legal report of the JMO Colombo
issued to this court after examination of the petitioner on 31. 03. 94 (apart
from the 'tenderness' found at two places) disclosed the presence of the
following injuries.  
  
(1) 3"x2" contusion of the right groin.  
  
(2) 2"x2" contusion of the left groin.  
  
(3) contusion over medical aspect of the right collar bone - 2" with an
underlying acromio clavicular joint subluxation (displacement).  
  
(4) Fracture of the distal end of left ulnar bone (forearm) with minimal
displacement.  
  
(5) Fracture of the styloid process of the left ulnar bone.  
  
At whatever point the petitioner alighted from the pillion of the motor cycle,
on his own showing, he was detected by the 1st respondent of having committed
an offence under the Motor Traffic Act. The Motor Traffic (Amendment) Act No.
40 of 1984 amended section 158 of the principal enactment to read as follows:  
  
158(3) Where the driver of a motor cycle carries on his motor cycle any person
who does not wear a protective helmet of a type approved by the Minister under
subsection (2), both such driver and such person shall be guilty of an offence
under this Act.  
  
It is likely that the petitioner's obstinate refusal, which he admits, to
disclose his name and identity would have aroused the ire of 1st respondent.
It is also possible that petitioner did give a blow to the 2nd respondent
while resisting arrest and that 2nd respondent received a contusion near his
right eye as a result.

**222**

In any event it is difficult to relate the perforation of petitioner's ear
drums to the acts allegedly done by the 1st and 2nd respondents in bringing
the petitioner under control while resisting arrest. I hold that the
petitioner received those injuries after he was brought to the police guard
room in consequence of 3rd respondent raining blows on his right ear as
narrated by petitioner. Regarding the rest of the injuries, the learned
counsel for petitioner rightly submitted that the force and intensity of
inflicting the injuries could be measured by the fact that they were still
present when the petitioner was examined by the JMO twenty seven days after he
was subjected to assault. Particularly the injuries on the right collar bone
and left forearm appear to have been received by petitioner more in
consequence of violent assaults inflicted as deposed by him rather than as a
result of using reasonable force as stated by the police officer respondents.
However I am mindful of the fact that the entire episode was brought about by
petitioner's own folly.  
  
I hold that the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th respondents have violated the
petitioner's fundamental right protected under Article 11\. The case against
6th, 7th, 8th and 10th respondents was not pressed by learned counsel for
petitioner and I make no order against them. I order the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th
and 5th respondents to pay a sum of Rs. 2000/= each as compensation and a sum
of Rs. 500/= each as costs to the petitioner. Petitioner will be thus entitled
to a sum of Rs. 10,000/= as compensation and Rs. 2500/= as costs from the 1st
to 5th respondents.  
  
Before parting with this judgement I would like to deal with one aspect of
this case which deeply troubled this court. The petitioner averred that when
he was warded at the Kalubowila hospital (Colombo South General Hospital)
between 05. 03\. 94 - 11. 03. 94 he noticed that the police officer who was
guarding him got replaced by a prison guard; he was never produced before a
Magistrate during that period. From the Kalubowila hospital the petitioner was
taken by prison

**223**

guards to the remand prison and then to the prison hospital. The petitioner,
was produced before the Gangodawila Magistrate on 16. 03\. 94 under prison
custody. Explaining the change of custody of the petitioner from police to
prison personnel, the 3rd respondent stated that the Borelesgamuwa police post
comes under the Maharagama police station and that "on 06. 03. 94 the OIC
Maharagama police station reported the facts to Court on a 'B' report in case
No. 86778 of Magistarate's Court Gangodawila." A bare copy of this 'B' report
was produced wherein no other entries appeared. In these circumstances we
called for this record from the Magistrate's Court Gangodawila for our
perusal.  
  
According to that record, the last paragraph of the "B' report (as
translated), reads as follows:  
  
_Reporting these facts to court I beg that an order be made to the
Superintendent of the Welikade prison to take into remand custody the
abovenamed suspect who is now being treated at the accident ward of the
Colombo South hospital under police custody and to produce him before the
Magistrate Gangodawila on 16. 03. 94._

signed) OIC Maharagama"

The 1st journal entry on this 'B' report (as translated) reads:  
  
"1994.03.06 suspect  
  
(1) Wagegoda Kodituwakkuge Nihal - present Remand until 16. 03. 94.  
  
I order that the suspect be immediately taken to the custody of prison
officers.

(signature)"

In the warrant of detention signed by the Magistrate dated 06. 03. 94 the
following entry (as translated) appears at the top margin on page 1 above the
printed letters.

**224**

**Superintendent of Prisons Welikada.**  
  
Take charge immediately suspect who is now being treated at the accident ward
of the Colombo South General hospital and produce him on the due date before
court.

_(signed) Magistrate Gangodawila_

06\. 03. 94 was a Sunday. Although the journal entry of 06.03.1994 indicates
that the petitioner was present, it would appear from the last paragraph of
the 'B' report that the petitioner was not being physically produced before
the Magistrate. Moreover the last part of the Magistrate's order of remand
made on 06. 03. 94 and his entry made on the top margin of the warrant of
detention, make it clear that when he made that remand order the petitioner
was **not present** before him physically, otherwise they carry no meaning and
are unnecessary. We are unable to find any provision of law granting sanction
for a Magistrate to make such a remand order which is capable of so
insidiously eroding the liberty of the subject. (See Article 13(2) of the
Constitution and section 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of
1979). The seriousness of this matter compels us to direct the Registrar of
this Court to bring it to the notice of the Chairman of the Judicial Service
Commission for such action he deems appropriate.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/23.html_  

