##  Jayakody v. Lilian Perera - SLR - 74, Vol 2 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 23; (1993)
2 Sri LR 74 (21 June 1993)

74

JAYAKODY **  
v.  
LILIAN PERERA **

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. 57/92  
C.A. NO. 574/83 F

D.C. MOUNT LAVINIA CASE NO. 635/RE  
MARCH 29, JUNE 01 AND 09, 1993.

_     Landlord and Tenant - Rent Act - Ejectment for arrears of rent -
Tenant's claim for repairs set off against rent \- Payment to court - Sections
13 (1) and 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act - Section 409 of the Civil Procedure
Code \- Section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance. _

Plaintiff sued the defendant for ejectment from the premises in dispute on the
ground of arrears of rent. The defendant claimed that he was not in arrears in
that firstly he had effected repairs to the house on an order of the Rent
Board under Section 13 (1) of the Rent Act and secondly, in any event, the
defendant had deposited a sum of Rs. 1500 to the credit of the case on the
summons returnable date and hence the action could not be proceeded with in
view of Section 22 (3) (c) of the Act.

**Held** :

(1) The existence of a valid order under Section 13 (1) of the Act is the
foundation of the right to set off against rent in respect of the premises,
the expenditure actually incurred for repairs.

(2) On the day of the action there was no valid order for repairs, the order
relied upon having been set aside by the Board of Review and the Supreme
Court. The cost of repairs effected before the order of the Rent Board was set
aside, were effected by the defendant at his peril.

(3) The defendant should produce the order of the Rent Board of which oral
evidence cannot be led in view of Section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance.

(4) The tender of money under Section 22 (3) (c) of the Act should be to the
landlord. The deposit of money to the credit of the case does not constitute a
valid tender to the landlord within the meaning of that section.

75

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Razik v. Esufally 58 NLR 469._  
_  
2\. Medonza v. De Silva [1985] 1 Sri L.R. 44._

**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_A. K. Premadasa, P.C. with L. V. P. Wettasinghe for Defendant Appellant._

  
_N. R. M. Daluwatte, P.C. with S. Sinnetamby and E K. Shanmugalingam for
Plaintiff-Respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 21, 1993\.  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

The plaintiff instituted this action on 18th September, 1978, in the District
Court for the ejectment of the defendant from the premises in suit, inter
alia, on the ground of rent being in arrear for three months or more after it
has become due as provided for in section 22 (1) (a) of the Rent Act No. 7 of
1972. It was the case for the plaintiff that no rent was paid from 1st May,
1976. The plaintiff so stated in her evidence and this was not challenged.

The defendant resisted the claim of the plaintiff for ejectment on a two-fold
basis. Firstly, he pleaded in his answer that on 18th May, 1976, the Rent
Board of Dehiwala-Mt. Lavinia made order in case No. 352/73 authorizing him to
effect repairs in a sum of Rs. 1500 in the event of the plaintiff failing to
effect the repairs ; that he did effect repairs which cost Rs. 1500 and that
thereafter he did not pay rent, as he lawfully might, until the said sum of
Rs. 1500 'was liquidated'. Secondly, he pleaded that he deposited to the
credit of the present case a sum of Rs. 1500 on 17th November, 1978, which was
the summons returnable date and thus relied on the provisions of section 22
(3) (c) of the Rent Act as a defence.

After trial, the District Judge entered judgment for the plaintiff; the
defendant unsuccessfully appealed to the Court of Appeal. He has now preferred
an appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal to this court.

76

The first submission of Mr. Premadasa for the defendant-appellant was that a
tenant is in arrear of rent within the meaning of section 22 (1) (a) only when
rent is due. In other words, it was Counsel's contention that the landlord can
succeed only upon proof of the tenant's default in the payment of rent; there
can be no such default in view of the order of the Rent Board dated 18.05.76
in his favour.

I shall deal first with the defence based on the order of the Rent Board. By
relying on the order of the Rent Board the defendant is in truth claiming the
benefit of section 13 of the Rent Act. The material provisions of section 13
read as follows

"13 (1) Where the board is satisfied, on application made by the tenant of any
premises, or on an inspection of such premises carried out by it or under its
authority, that the landlord -

(a) has without reasonable cause discontinued or withheld any amenities
previously provided for the benefit of the tenant ; or

(b) has failed to carry out any repairs or redecoration necessary in the
opinion of the Board to maintain the premises in proper condition,

the Board may make order directing the landlord to provide such amenities or
to carry out such repairs or redecoration as may be specified in the order ;
and it shall be the duty of the, landlord to comply with the provisions of
such order before such date as may be specified in that behalf in the order,
or within such extended period as may be allowed by the Board on application
made by the landlord.

(2) Where the Board is satisfied that any delay in the provision of the
amenities alleged to have been discontinued or withheld in an application made
under sub-section (1) or that any delay in the carrying out of the repairs or
redecoration which the landlord is alleged in any such application to have
failed to carry out, will cause injury to the occupants of the premises or
hazard to their health or permanent damage to the premises, or seriously
inconvenience the occupants, the Board shall, before making the

77

 final order on such application, make an interim order directing the landlord
to provide such amenities or to carry out such repairs or redecoration without
delay, notwithstanding that there may be pending in any court, at the time of
such application, any other action or proceedings relating to such premises.

(3) The Board shall in any order under sub-section (1) or subsection (2)
directing the landlord to effect any repairs or redecoration authorize the
tenant, in the event of the landlord failing to comply with the order, to
carry out such repairs or redecoration and to incur for the purpose,
expenditure not exceeding such amount as may be specified in that behalf in
the order; and where any repairs or redecoration are carried out by the tenant
in pursuance of the authority so conferred, the tenant shall be entitled to
set off against the rent payable in respect of the premises the expenditure
actually incurred by him for the purpose, or the amount specified in that
behalf in the order, whichever is less."

On a reading of the above provisions of law, it is clear that the foundation
of the right to set off against the rent payable in respect of the premises
that expenditure actually incurred for repairs is the existence of a valid
order of the Rent Board made in terms of section 13 of the Rent Act. But in
the present case it is not disputed that the order of the Rent Board was set
aside by the order of the Board of Review ; an appeal against the order of the
Rent Board has to be filed "before the expiry of a period of 21 days after the
date of the receipt of a copy of the order" (s. 40 (4) of the Rent Act). It is
also common ground that an application for a writ of certiorari was made to
the Supreme Court on 28th June, 1978; which set aside both the order of the
Rent Board and the order of the Board of Review and directed that a fresh
inquiry be held. The resulting position was that as on the date of action
there was no valid order of the Rent Board. Mr. Premadasa, however, contended
that the fact that the order of the Rent Board was quashed is not material for
the reason that the defendant had already spent Rs. 1500 for repairs on the
strength of the order of the Rent Board. It seems to me that it is not an
answer to contend that prior to 28th June, 1978, the tenant had already spent
Rs. 1500 as cost of repairs, for if in fact he has done so prior to the final
determination of the validity of the order of the Rent Board, he has acted at
his peril. What is more, there is no evidence as to the date on which the
repairs were carried out

78

by the defendant. Moreover, the order of the Rent Board was not produced,
despite the provisions of section 39 (13) of the Rent Act which enacts that "
Every order made by the Board .............. shall be reduced to writing and
signed by the Chairman ". No oral evidence of the order could have been led in
view of section 91 of the Evidence Ordinance. I accordingly hold that there
was no basis upon which the defendant could have relied on the purported order
of the Rent Board.

Mr. Premadasa's next contention was that in as much as the defendant has
deposited a sum of Rs. 1500 to the credit of the instant case on the summons
returnable date, he was entitled to rely on section 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act
as a bar to the action for ejectment being proceeded with. The material part
of section 22 (3) (c) reads thus

"The landlord of any premises referred to in sub-section (1).................
shall not be entitled to proceed with any action or proceedings for the
ejectment of the tenant of such premises on the ground that the rent of such
premises has been in arrear for three months or more ......................
after it has become due,

(a) ......................................

(b) .......................................

(c) if the tenant has, on or before the date fixed in such summons that is
served on him, as the date on which he shall appear in court in respect of
such action or proceedings, tendered to the landlord all arrears of rent."

The District Judge reached the finding that there was no proof that the
defendant had deposited the sum of Rs. 1500 as arrears of rent to the credit
of the case. This finding is clearly contrary to the evidence. The defendant
in the course of his evidence produced the relevant receipt as V3. This was
not challenged. The Journal Entry No. 11 shows that the Manager of the Bank
had sent a letter to Court confirming the deposit of the money. Thus the
finding of the District Judge cannot be sustained.

The true question that arises for decision is whether the deposit of the
arrears of rent to the credit of the instant case is a " tender " of such
arrears to the " landlord " within the meaning of

79

section 22 (3) (c). _In Rasak v. Esufally_ (1), Basnayake C.J. had occasion to
consider the meaning of tender of rent in the context of section 13 of the
Rent Restriction Act. Said the learned Judge, " Mere willingness to pay the
rent does not discharge the obligation to pay the rent.....................
Tender does not mean mere expression of readiness to pay. To constitute tender
the readiness to pay must be accompanied by production of the money that is
offered in satisfaction of the debt. (Harris on Law of Tender, p.
11)........... The rent must be actually paid ".

Mr. Daluwatte for the plaintiff-respondent placed strong reliance on the
judgment of the Court of Appeal in Medonza v. de Silva (2), where the
provisions of section 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act directly arose for
consideration. Tambiah J. (as he then was) having cited the case of Rasik vs.
Esufally (supra) and a passage from Law of Contract by Cheshire and Fifoot,
4th Edn., P. 445 concluded :- " So, it seems to me to constitute a valid
tender of all arrears to the landlord under section 22 (3) (c), there must be
actual production of the money.......... The tender of the money....... must
be made to the landlord ". This, in my view, is the correct interpretation to
be placed on the words " tendered to the landlord all arrears of rent " in
section 22 (3) (c). It is to be noted that the same phrase occurs in section
22 (3) (b) which contemplates a situation prior to the institution of action.
In such a situation the tender of the money must of necessity be to the
landlord, which is a term defined in section 48 of the Rent Act. There is no
compelling reason for giving the same expression occurring in section 22 (3)
(c) a different meaning.

Mr. Premadasa, on the other hand, submitted that the interpretation placed on
section 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act in Medonza v. de Silva (supra) was
incorrect as the Court of Appeal has failed to consider section 409 of the
Civil Procedure Code. Section 409 of the Civil Procedure Code reads thus: "
The defendant in any action brought to recover a debt or damage may, at any
stage of the action, deposit in court such sum of money as he considers a
satisfaction in full of the plaintiff's claim ". In my view the provisions
contained in section 409 of the Civil Procedure Code which speaks of an action
" to recover a debt or damage " have no application to the provisions in
section 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act. As rightly submitted by Mr. Daluwatte,
where a tenant is in arrears of rent for three months or more within the
meaning of section 22 (3) (a) of the Rent Act, two distinct legal

80

consequences flow. Firstly, the tenant loses the protection of the Rent Act
and the bar against proceedings for ejectment by the landlord is removed.
Secondly, the landlord has a claim against the tenant for arrears of rent. It
is to be noted that section 409 of the Civil Procedure Code speaks of a " debt
" and of " satisfaction in full of the plaintiff's claim ". The deposit of
money in court in full of the plaintiff's claim ". The deposit of money in
court in terms of section 409 of the Civil Procedure Code has relevance to the
money claim, namely the arrears of rent. However, section 409 of the Civil
Procedure Code has no bearing whatever on the claim for ejectment. The
defendant who was in arrears of rent within the meaning of section 22 (1) (a)
and has thus lost the protection of the Rent Act, cannot regain the protection
which he has lost except by complying with the statutory requirements set out
in section 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act.

I accordingly hold that the deposit of money to the credit of the case, does
not constitute a tender of arrears of rent to the landlord within the meaning
of section 22 (3) (c) of the Rent Act.

In the result, the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs. Since the
immediate ejectment of the defendant from the premises in suit may cause grave
hardship, I direct writ of ejectment not to issue till 31st December, 1993.

**KULATUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/23.html_  

