##  Premadasa Rodrigo v. Ceylon Petroleum Corporation - SLR - 382, Vol 2 of
1991 [1991] LKSC 23; (1991) 2 Sri LR 382 (10 September 1991)

**382**



**PREMADASA RODRIGO,**

**v.**

**CEYLON PETROLEUM CORPORATION.**



SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., FERNANDO, J., AND AMERASINGHE, J.

S. C. APPEAL NO. 29/88.

S. C. SPECIAL LA NO. 50/88.

C. A. NO. 305/83

LT. NO. 1/ADD/2643/80.



SEPTEMBER 10th, 1991.



Industrial Law ‑ Termination of employment ‑ Tests of misconduct and
disobedience justifying dismissal ‑ Compensation.



In the sale of used household and other equipment to the employer the
appellant who was the Assistant Manager(Stores) purchased a large amount of
the goods on sale defying some of the instructions and procedure set out in
circulars issued by the management and circumventing others by false entries.



**Held:**



1\.         Loss of confidence must be based on established grounds of
mis­conduct which the law regards as sufficient. An employer's response to the
misconduct in question must be reasonable. It must not be flagrantly unjust.
In applying these principles a tribunal or court is not seeking to impose its
own views on what an employer ought to have done.



**Per Amerasinghe, J:**



"There is a band of reasonableness within which, in the circumstances,
employers in that very type of business may well have acted differently.
Within that band, there can be no single correct or incorrect decision."



2.         The test is not that a dismissal would be unfair only if no reasona­ble employer would have dismissed the employee.



**383**



            3\.         The concerns of a tribunal or court in considering an allegation unfair dismissal should be 



(a)        Were the alleged grounds of misconduct sufficiently established
evidence? What was the **quality** and **nature** of the misconduct?

(b)        Are there proved reasons, or legitimate inferences from the evide
available with regard to how and why the business of the employer was, or
might be reasonably expected to be adversely affected dire or indirectly by
the act or omission in question?



(c)        Was the misconduct taken by itself, sufficient?



(d)        Are there, established by evidence, aggravating circumstances
exonerating or extenuating facts that change the quality and nay of the act or
omission?



In the light of the answers to these questions, is it reasonable to c clude
that the employee's misconduct was repudiatory in nature?

** **

**4.          Per Amerasinghe J:**



"Ever since Adam ate the forbidden fruit, disobedience has been viewed askance
as something to be regarded as contemptible, something deserving punishment.
The law relating to industrial relations reflects these values. It permits
punishment, for inexcusable, wilful neglect or refusal to submit to or comply
with or the transgression or violation of a command order or direction of an
employer, or that of' a person lawfully and properly acting for and on behalf
of an employer".



5\.         Not every act of disobedience would merit dismissal. The act must
be qualitatively appropriate for the purpose. For instance, unless the person
issuing the relevant order had the authority to do so, there can be no dis-
obedience of the employer's order. Moreover, the order must be clear, positive
and unambiguous; it must have been communicated to the employee and within his
knowledge. It must not be impossible, unreasonable or unlawful to obey the
order.



6\.         It was his inordinate and overpowering greed, rather than zeal or
any sense of duty that motivated the appellant to act in defiance of the
orders of the employer. There were no extenuating factors.



7\.         Where his misbehaviour encourages subordinates to act in
dereliction of their duties, a supervisory employee is guilty of misconduct,
the recurrence of which the management is entitled to prevent by strong action



**384**



The appellant not merely failed to exercise his supervisory functions, he
actively assisted his subordinate in the violation of superior orders, to be
able to carry out his own improper designs and his culpability is therefore
that much more serious.



8\.         If the de _minimis_ principle is applicable a warning or
admonition

might be appropriate. Here the goods were deliberately sold at a concessionary
price. They were hard to get and valuable. The scramble for the items
demonstrates this. The appellant could not be said to have taken the trouble
he took and risk so much for trifles. He cannot take refuge in the _de minimis
_ principal



9\.         In failing in his duty as a supervisor, and in failing to maintain
his authority as a supervisor, the appellant acted in breach of implied, but
essential conditions of his employment. No business organization could ever be
successful unless employers could depend on supervisors to do what is expected
of them. The successful running of a business is committed to its supervisors.





10\.       Apart from his obligations in general as a supervisor and senior
hand, the appellant was entrusted with the custody and safety of the
employer's property. As Assistant Stores Manager, he was in a special position
of confidence with regard to the goods entrusted to him. As the person in
charge of the implementation of the scheme of sale, he was in a sensitive or
strategic position. It was a high risk to keep the appellant in such a
position after he had misused or abused his position and once suspicion had
started.



11\.       Although in certain circumstances, compensation may be payable
where reinstatement is not feasible, if the employee's conduct had induced the
termination, he cannot in justice and equity have a just claim for
compensation.



**Cases referred to :**



1. _          Laws v. London Chronicle_ [1959] 2 ALL ER 285\. 



2.         _Michael v. Johnson Pumps_ AIR 1975 SC 661. 



3.         _The Lever Brothers Dispute_ ID 66 11549 of 19.10.1985.



4.         _Lanka Estate Workers Union v. Superintendent of Vellai Oya Estate_ , _Hatton_ ID 8, CGG 11095 of 22.03.1937.  


5.         _Democratic Workers Congress v. Superintendent of Kahagalla Estate_ , _Haputale_ ID 11, CGG 11068 of 15.12.1957.  


6.         _Trust Houses Forte Leisure Ltd. v. Aquilar_ [1976] I‑RLR 251. 

  
7.         _British Leyland (UK) Ltd. v. Swift_ [1981] 1‑RLR 91. 



8.         _Vickers Ltd. v. Smith_ [1977] I- RLR 11.



**385    **



9.         _Hind Construction & engineering Co., Ltd. v. Their Workmen 1965 2 SCR 85, 88._



10\.       _All Ceylon Oil Companies Workers' Union v. Standard Vacuum Co._ ID
237 CGG 12034 of 08.01.1960.



11\.       _Ceylon Transport Board v. Samastha Lanka Motor Sewaka Samithiy_ __
(1962) 65 NLR 566.



12\.       _Ceylon Workers' Congress v. Janatha Estates Development Board
[1987]_ 2 Sri LR 73, 77.



13.       _Adam v. Maison de Luxe Ltd._ 1924 35 Comm. LR 143, 151‑152.



14\.       _Youngash v. Sasketchewan Engine Co._ 1911 4 Sask, LR 63 16 WLR
268.



15\.       _Power v. Rengsami_ (1891) 9 S.C.C 149, 152.



16\.       _Winthrop v. Madasamy_ , (1913) 16 NLR 467.



17\.       _Handyside v. Wirappu & Others_ (1858) 3 Lorensz 114.



18.       _Hattingh v. Sutterheim Div. Council_ 1910 SALR E.D.L.D. 342.



19\.       _United Elec. Rad. and Mach. Workers v. Canada Wire and Cable Co._
__ 1950 Can. Lab. Arb. Cas. 492, 493.  


20.       _Mckellar v. Macfarlane_ (1852) 15D. 246, 248, 2 Stuart 123 25 Jur. 156.



21\.       _Cawnpore Sugar Works Ltd. v. Rashtriya Chini Mill Mazdoor Sangh_
__  ( _Uttar Pradesh Gazette, of_ 05.03.1960 Pt 1 ‑ B (ii),P.             508,
512 (Lab. ct.)



22\.       _Rv. Milne_ 1950 4SALR 604, 607.



23\.       _Murray v. Velaiden_ (1899) Tambyah 32.



24\.       _Mysore Premier Metal Factory v. Workmen_ , (Fort St. George
Gazette,  29.05.1963 Pt. 11, Section 1(supp.)p.2 Mad. Lab. ct.)



25\.       _United Packinghouse Workers v. Robin Hood Flour Mills Ltd._ (1961)
12 Can. Lab. Arb. Cas. 69.



26\.       _Sarangpur Cotton Manufacturing Co. v. Idu Ismail_ , (1955) Bombay
Ind. Ct. Ref. 262.  


27\.       _United Auto Air & Agric. Imp. Co. v. Massey‑Harris Co._ 1949 1
Cam. Lab. Arb. Cas. 311, 316.  


28.       _Champdany Jute Mills v. Ali_ (Jan. 1952 Lab. App. Cas. 583)



29\.       _Moradabed Water Supply Co. v. Abdul H. Khan_ 1951 2 Lab. L. J. 296



30\.       _Ford Motor Co. v. Dhomdu S. Mayekar_ 1953 Bomb. Ind. et. Refs.
418.



31\.       _National Rayon Corp. v. Gajaman D. Bankeer_ 1954 Bomb. Ind. Ct.
Rep. 161.



32\.       _Khulma N. Employees Union v. Khulna Newsprint Mills Ltd_. (1963)
Pakistan Lab. L. Cas. 874, 875.



33\.       _Baidya V. Das v. Angus Co._ (Calcutta Gazette Feb. 9 1961 Pt. 1 P.
445, 446.



34\.       _United Elec. Rad & Mach, Workers v. Canadian Gen. Elec. Co._ 1949
1Can. Lab. Arb. Cas. 320



35\.       _H. G. Jayasekera v. Ceylon Transport Board_ ID/LT/8/69, CGG 14359
of 26.03.1965.



**386**

###  

36\.       _Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. v. Industrial & General Workmens Union_
1982 1 Sriskantha's Law Reports 7.



37\.       _The International Union, United Automobile, Aircraft and
Agricultural_ _Implement Workers of America (UAWC 10) Local 199,
in Re Mckinnon Industries Ltd._(1951) 2 Can. Lab. Arb. Cas. 644.



38.       _Berec (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Walpola & Others SC 96/75 SC Minutes of_ 14.08.1978.



39\.       _Ceylon Oil & Petroleum Workers Union v. Ceylon Petroleum
Corporation_ (1978 ‑ 79) 2 SLR 72, 78.



40\.       _Saverimuttu v. Board of Directors, CWE_ , CGG 15000 of 03.03.1972.



41\.       _Glaxo Allenbury's (Ceylon) Ltd, v. Fernando_ SC 250/71, SC Minutes
of 22.10.1974.



42\.       _Jayasuriya v. SLPC, SC_ Minute of 30.05.1991.



43\.       _Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman_ (1977)
79 (1) NLR 421.



44\.       _Piliyandala Palgasowita Multi Purpose Co ‑op Soc. v. Liyanage_
(1971) 74 NLR 138.



45\.       _Wataraka Multi Purpose Co ‑op Soc. Ltd. v. Wickramachandra_ (1968)
70 NLR 239.



46\.       _The Group Superintendent Dalma Group v. Ceylon Estate Staffs
Union_

(1971) 73 NLR 574.



47\.       _Rumblan v. Ceylon Press Workers Union_ (1973) 75 NLR 575.



48\.       _Karthigesu v. Sri Lanka Sugar Corporation 111 Sriskantha_ LR 42.



49\.       _Somawathie v. Baksons Textile Industries Ltd_ , (1973) 79 (1) NLR
202.



50\.       _Binny Ltd. v. Their Workmen_ , AIR 1973 SC 1403, 1404.



**Appeal** from a Judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _S. M. Senaratne_ for appellant.



_S. B. L. de Silva_ for respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



December 16, 1991.

**  **

**AMERASINGHE, J:**



            This an appeal from the decision of the Court of Appeal affirming the Order of a Labour Tribunal that the termination of the appellant's employment was justified. The question for determination is whether, in the circumstances of the case, the termination was warranted.



**387   **

**  **

The circumstances of the case are as follows: After the vacation of homes
occupied by expatriate staff upon the com­pletion of their assignments with
the Ceylon Petroleum Corpo­ration, the Corporation, hereinafter referred to as
the employer'. announced by a Circular dated 27 June 1978 (P1), that it
proposed to sell to its employees the household equip­ment used by the former
expatriate staff. Employees were requested to make their applications for the
items in a pres­cribed manner. If there was competition for items, the good
were to be allocated by lottery. Goods not purchased within two weeks, the
Circular said, would be sold to others.



The Manager, (Stores and Supplies) informed the Chair­man by a memorandum (P2)
that 2506 applications were received in response to the advertisement, and
because the demand greatly exceeded the available items, he said he would with
the help of a computer, try to ascertain particulars of the items applied for,
it was stated in the memorandum that the Tender Board had decided that (a)
items of cutlery were to be limited to six per person; (b) where applicants
were married the husband and wife would, nevertheless, be each entitled to his
or her quota as an individual employee; (c) where the same item was repeated
by an applicant in several applications, the item should be struck out; (d)
the deadline for application; should be extended to August 4; and (e) the
Chairman should decide on the applications of temporary employees.



On 6th September, 1978, the Manager (Stores and Supplies) by letter, informed
the Assistant Manager (Stores), the appel lant, that some of the items would
be required for the future use of other "foreign personnel due to arrive in
the Island shortly in connection with Corporation activities". The kind: and
the number of items required were specified. The appellant was directed to
"set aside's these items from the best available and to "segregate" them in a
"separate location" from the others.



### 388

  

On 11th October 1978 the Manager (Stores and Supplies) issued a Circular to
all the Heads of Departments (P5) announcing that, further to the Circular of
27 June 1978 (P1), there would be a lottery conducted with the assistance of a
computer, for the household items applied for by employees on 17th October
1978, in the employees' recreation hall. The Chairman, Working Director and
Director in‑charge of per­sonnel, it was said, were expected to be present.
The Circular (P5) also stated that (1) three items from the list originally
advertised, viz., items 40, 41 and 47 were withdrawn from the sale; and (2)
that, while the results of the lottery, it was hoped, would be announced on or
before 20th October 1978, the goods should be paid for and removed between
23rd October and 10th November 1978; and (3) that goods not disposed of on or
before the closing date, would be sold to those employees mentioned in an
additional reserve list.



On 24th October 1978 the Manager (Stores and Supplies) by a Circular to all
Heads of Departments (P7): (1) sent the results of the lottery; and (2)
directed that the winners should, between 27th October and 10th November 1978,
pay the amounts due for the purchase of the items they were entitled to, after
establishing their personal identities in the manner specified.



On 2 December 1978 the appellant, who was in charge of the disposal of the
items on sale, wrote to the Manager (Stores and Supplies) as follows (P8 ):



"SALE OF HOUSEHOLD AND OTHER EQUIP­MENT TO EMPLOYEES.



After the lottery and sale of goods to the respective employees which ended on
the 17th of November 1978, the following goods are left with us. A list of
such items is attached hereto. Though there were some employees who applied to
take their goods after the 17th of November 1978, we rejected the offers. as
it was decided, that some persons had been selected at that lottery qual‑



**389**



ifying them to purchase the goods which might be left unsold. However, we have
to face difficulties in selling these leftover items as some times the number
of items are more or less than the number of specified qualified persons.



If the lottery system is adopted to solve this problem, it would take
approximately one month, and this would seriously hamper our day‑to‑day
official functions."



The Manager (Stores and Supplies) on 12th December 1978 responded that. since
it had been earlier resolved that if the first winner did not exercise his
right of purchase, the second and third "etc" (sic) in line should be called
upon to purchase the items, the Tender Board had decided that the second and
third should be called upon " to pay and remove the leftover goods". The
Manager added that "If the 2nd and 3rd parties also failed to pay and remove
the goods, the Tender Board decided that we should throw open to any officer
of the Corporation the opportunity to purchase such leftover items on a
first‑come first‑served basis"



The Appellant was asked to "take action accordingly"



Although he had not become entitled to do so in terms of the luck of the draw
at the lottery, the appellant, according to the Stores Invoice Order of 20
December, 1978 (P14), purchased for himself 12 saucepans, 12 table spoons, 12
forks, an LP Gas Cooker and 2 foam rubber mattresses.

On 22nd December, 1978, the appellant issued a Circular to all Heads of
Departments (P9) stating as follows:‑



"SALE OF USED HOUSEHOLD AND OTHE EQUIPMENT TO THE EMPLOYEES.



This letter is further to my Circular dated 24.10.1978 and the letters dated
26.10.1978 and 09.11.1978 issued by the Assistant Manager (Stores).



**390**



After the lottery, a list of workers was prepared, hav­ing regard to the
number of items to be sold. Other names were also picked at the same lottery
to deal with the eventuality of some goods being left unpurchased by the
winners. The names of workers, selected for the sale of unsold goods, are
stated against the particular items they are eligible to purchase in a list.



These workers should, between 26th December 1978 and 5th January 1979, pay the
amounts due for the pur­chase of the items to which they are entitled,
establishing their personnel identities in the manner specified. Goods are to
be sold in the condition in which they are found.



Please inform your respective departments of this let­ter and advise those
whose names appear on the list to pay and collect the goods before the
deadline mentioned above.

_ _

_Assistant Manager (Stores)"_



No reference was made by the appellant to the way in which the goods not
purchased by the winners at the lottery were to be sold.



In terms of invoice 192284, dated 24 January 1979, (P14), the appellant
purchased a breadknife, ten tea spoons and a bread‑board. The sale of these
items had been approved on 4th January, 1979, which in terms of the Circular
issued by the appellant (P9) was the day immediately preceding the last date
for purchase by those qualified to purchase in terms of the lot­tery.



Complaints were made to the management by employees about the appellant
helping himself to the items referred to above (a) none of which he was
qualified by lottery to pur­chase; (b) some of which no one could have
purchased in such _quantities_ and (c) others which could not have been
purchased by anyone at all, because they had been withdrawn from the sale. A
domestic inquiry was held into the appellant's conduct;



**391**



and his services were terminated with effect from 25th May, 1979. His appeal
to the Labour Tribunal was without success, save and except to the extent that
the Tribunal on 6th April, 1983 ordered the payment of a gratuity of Rs.
12,792/50 for the services rendered by the appellant. In the Court of Appeal,
on 11th March, 1988, Mr. Justice Palakidnar affirmed the decision of the
President of the Labour Tribunal.



On 21st July, 1988 this Court (Atukorale, Actg. C.J., G.P.S. de Silva, J. (as
he then was) and Jameel, J.), observing that the "only point urged by the
learned Counsel for the peti­tioner" was "whether in the circumstances of this
case the punishment meted out to the petitioner is warranted", granted
"special leave to appeal to this Court from the judgment of the Court of
Appeal dated 11th March, 1988."



The matter was argued before us on 10th September, 1991. At the request of the
Court, learned Counsel filed additional written submissions: The appellant did
so on 16th September and the respondent on 7th October 1991.



Mr. Goonesekere, learned Counsel for the appellant, sub­mitted that, although
an employer ought to have the right to decide on what punishment is
appropriate in the event of mis­conduct, it is not every mistake or act of
disobedience that would make dismissal a just and equitable way of dealing
with the matter. Where the employer has acted _mala fide_ , or where the
punishment is disproportionate to the offence, a Labour Tribunal should, he
said, intervene to give relief. A Tribunal, learned counsel for the appellant
submitted during his address, should regard a dismissal as unfair if _no
reasonable employer would have dismissed him_. No reasonable employer, learned
counsel submitted, would have dismissed the appellant. How­ever, in his
written submissions later on 26th September, 1991. Mr. Goonesekere submitted
that a tribunal or court should be guided by the test, _Would a reasonable
employer have decided that the employee's conduct was sufficiently serious to
warrant the penalty of dismissal?_ Mr. Goonesekere cited S. R. de Silva,



### 392



_Legal Framework of Industrial Relations_ , 592‑595; Malhotra, _Dismissal,
Discharge, Termination of Service and Punishment,_ 7 Ed., 274‑275 and Steven
D. Anderman, _The Law of Unfair Dismissal_ , 1985, pp. 149 ‑ 172, in support
of his submissions. Mr. Goonesekera drew our attention to the fact that
Ander­man (op.cit.) quoted Lord Evershed, MR in _Laws v. London Chronicle_ (1)
as stating that "an act of" disobedience can jus­tify dismissal only if it is
of a nature which goes to show in effect that the servant is repudiating the
contract or one of its essential conditions." Mr. Goonesekere submitted that
the appellant's conduct "cannot even remotely be considered gross misconduct"
and that, therefore, the termination could not be justified.



It was never suggested at any time that the employer in this case acted _mala
fide_. Therefore, that matter does not need to engage our attention.



Whether the termination of the appellant's services was jus­tifiable or not,
whether it was, as Mr. Goonesekere claims "disproportionate", depends on what
he did or omitted to do and whether what he did or omitted to do, as a matter
of law, and not as a mere whim or fancy of the employer, warranted dismissal.
(Cf. _Michael v. Johnson Pumps_ (2) at p. 666 para. 22, per Krishna Iyer, J.).
I agree with learned counsel for the appellant that an employer cannot claim
to have a right to dismiss an employee merely because he says he has lost
confi­dence in an employee. As Justice Krishna Iyer pointed out, with great
respect, albeit somewhat quaintly, In _Michael v..Johnson Pumps_ , (supra) at
p.666 para. 19, loss of confidence is "no new armour for the management :
otherwise security of tenure, ensured by the new industrial jurisprudence and
authenticated by a catena of cases of the Supreme Court, can be subverted by
this neo‑formula."



Loss of confidence must be based on established grounds of misconduct which
the law regards as sufficient. An employ­er's response to the misconduct in
question must be reasona­ble. It must not be flagrantly unjust. (Cf. _The
Lever Brothers_  



### 393



_Dispute_ (3), see also ID/LT/4/30 CGG 13441 of December 21, 1962). It must be
emphasized, however, that, in applying these principles, a tribunal or court
is not seeking to impose its own views on what an employer ought to have done.
In general, tribunals and courts must recognize the fact that the employer is
in the best position to judge what punishment is appropriate for his
employee's misconduct. (E.g. see _Lanka Estate Workers Union v. Superintendent
of Vellai Oya Estate, Hatton_ ) (4) _Democratic Workers Congress v.
Superintendent of Kahagalla Estate, Haputale_ (5) see also ID 66 CGG 11549 of
October 10, 1958). The question for a tribunal or court is not what such
tribunal or court would have done if it had been the employer. [See _Trust
Houses Forte Leisure Ltd. v. Aquilar_ , (6)].



Nor is a tribunal or court concerned with what a reasona­ble employer might
have done. There is a band of reasonable­ness within which, in the
circumstances, employers in that very type of business may well have acted
differently. Within that band, there can be no single, correct or incorrect
decision. One reasonable employer might have retained his services. Another,
equally reasonable, employer might have dismissed him.



I am unable to accept the other test suggested by learned counsel for the
appellant, namely, that a dismissal is unfair only if _no_ reasonable employer
would have dismissed the employee. I know that this seems to have been the
standard suggested in _British Leyland (UK) Ltd. v. Swift_ (7) Cf. also
_Vickers Ltd. v. Smith_ (8) Perhaps it was the same criterion the Indian
Supreme Court had in mind in _Hind Construction & Engineering Co. Ltd. v.
Their Workmen_, (9), at p.88 when Justice Hidayatullah, (Gajendragadar, C.J.,
and Wanchoo, J. agreeing), said: "In respect of punishment it has been ruled
that the award of punishment for misconduct under the Standing Orders, if any,
is a matter for the management to decide, and



### 394



if there is any justification for the punishment imposed, the tribunal should
not interfere. The tribunal is not required to consider the propriety or
adequacy of the punishment or whether it is excessive or too severe. But where
the punishment is shockingly disproportionate, regard being made to the
par­ticular conduct and the past record, or is such, as no reasona­ble
employer would ever impose in like circumstances, the tribunal may treat the
imposition of such punishment as itself showing victimization or unfair labour
practice."



The decisions in _British Leyland_ (supra) and _Hind Construc­tion &
Engineering Co., _in my view, impose unacceptable fet­ters on Labour Tribunals
in making their decisions in terms of the Industrial Disputes Act, including
decisions under section 33 (6) of that Act. The application of the no
reasonable employer test would drive tribunals, and eventually employers, to
seek th,e lowest standards of conduct. Concerned as we are with the pursuit of
excellence, better performance and greater productivity in our places of work,
I have no hesitation in rejecting the "no reasonable employer" standard
proposed by Mr. Goonesekera. Employers should not be compelled to scrounge in
the lowest depths of the relevant standards of per­formance and behaviour to
justify their actions.



A reading of the decisions leads me to the view that the concerns of a
tribunal or court in considering an allegation of unfair dismissal are these:
Were the alleged grounds of mis­conduct sufficiently established by evidence?
What was the _quality_ and _nature_ of the misconduct? Are there _proved
rea­sons_ , or _legitimate inferences_ from the evidence available, with
regard to how and why the business of the employer was, or might be reasonably
expected to be adversely affected, directly or indirectly, by the act or
omission in question? (Cf. _All Cey­lon Oil Companies Workers' Union v.
Standard Vacuum Co.,_ (10). Was the misconduct, taken by itself, sufficient?
Are there, established by evidence, aggravating circumstances or exoner‑



### 395



ating or extenuating facts that change the quality and nature of the act or
omission? in the light of the answers to these questions, is it reasonable to
conclude that the employee's misconduct was repudiatory in nature?



What did the appellant do or omit to do in this case?



The appellant was disobedient. Not once, but over and over again. Although on
6th September, 1978 he had been directed by the Manager (Stores and Supplies)
to set apart and, subsequently on 11th October, 1978 the Manager (Stores and
Supplies), in Circular (P5) announced that those items (40, 41 and 47) had
been withdrawn from the scheme of sale to the employees, the appellant,
nevertheless, made personal pur­chases of two of those items, namely teaspoons
(item 40) and stainless steel spoons (item 41).



The appellant was also disobedient, when he purchased items of household
equipment for himself, because in terms of the scheme set out in the
employer's several Circulars, includ­ing one issued by the appellant himself
for and on behalf of the employer (P9), he was not qualified at all to make
such purchases.



The appellant was disobedient once again when he pur­chased 12 table spoons,
12 forks and ten tea spoons, since the _maximum_ number of such items of
cutlery as were permitted to be sold was limited to six per person.



The appellant was disobedient again when he failed to inform employees in his
Circular (P9) of the manner in which goods remaining after 5th January, 1979
would be sold. He incorporated in his Circular only some of the instructions
he had been ordered to communicate.

           

What is the nature and quality of an act of disobedience? Ever since Adam ate
the forbidden fruit, disobedience has been viewed askance as something to be
regarded as contempt­ible, something deserving punishment. The law relating to

**396**

  

industrial relations reflects these values. It permits punishment, for
inexcusable, wilful neglect or refusal to submit to or comply with or the
transgression or violation of a command, order or direction of an employer, or
that of a person lawfully and properly acting for and on behalf of an
employer. (Cf. _Ceylon Transport Board v. Samastha Lanka Motor Sewaka
Samithiya_ (11) _Ceylon Workers' Congress v. Janatha Estates Development
Board_ (12) at p.77 per Atukorale, J. See also the Australian case of _Adam v.
Maison de Luxe Ltd_ (13) at pp. 151‑152 per Isaacs ACJ; and the Canadian case
of _Youngash v. Sasketchewan Engine Co._ (14).



Alfred Avins, _Emplovees' Misconduct_ , 1968 Ed., pp. 125-­126 explains why
obedience to orders is essential to a business, why it is an essential
condition of every contract of employ­ment and why disobedience must be
regarded as misconduct, in the following way:



"Disobedience to lawful commands is a most noxious offence, and the most
dangerous in nature, for it goes at once to the utter annihilation of all
authority.



The authority and desires of superiors, be they employ­ers or supervisors, are
expressed through orders. With­out a willingness by an employee to accept the
authority of superiors, no business organization of any kind, or indeed any
other kind of organization, could function. Every employee would do just what
he chose, and no central plan could be put in operation or successfully
carried out. The objects and aims of the employer would never be accomplished,
the very purpose of the contract of employment."



I agree with Mr. Goonesekcre's submission that not every act of disobedience
merits dismissal. The act must be qualita­tively appropriate for the purpose.
For instance, unless the person issuing the relevant order had the authority
to do so, there can be no disobedience of the _employer's_ order. This is an



**397**

 old, well‑established principle in our law, going back a hundred years at
least. (E.g. see _Power v. Rengsami_ , (15) see also _Winthrop v. Madasamy_
(16) Moreover, the order must be clear and positive and unambiguous; it must
have been com­municated to the employee and within his knowledge; Other­wise,
how could he be disobedient? Moreover, it must not be impossible, unreasonable
or unlawful to obey the order.



No questions were raised in the case before us of lack of authority, or
clarity, or misinterpretation or impossibility or illegality and similar
extenuating or exonerating circumstances. Had these questions been raised, I
would have considered them in deciding whether these circumstances made the
appel­lant's conduct qualitatively less serious than disobedience. of orders
might usually be.



However, it was in evidence that the appellant did think that the scheme, from
the point of view of implementation, was somewhat problematical. It was not a
case where the order was so unreasonable as to make the disobedience
excu­sable. (Cf. _Handyside v. Wirappu & Others_ (17) a case of a prosecution
for the disobedience of an employer's orders under Ordinance 5 of 1845). This
is not a case where performance was impossible or dangerous or illegal. The
implementation of the scheme ordered by the employer was, in the appellant's
view, disruptive of his other work, inconvenient, perhaps, and something of a
nuisance. But no more than that. He expressed his views in his letter to the
Manager (Stores and Supplies) on 2nd December 1978 (P7). Due consideration, no
doubt, was given to the disruptive effects alleged; but the appellant was
informed in the clearest of terms, by the Manager (Stores and Supplies) on
12th December 1978, that his views were not acceptable, and he was told what
he should do. Whatever his private views were, and however desirable his
personal motives might have been, the appellant should have complied with the
order of the Manager (Stores and Supplies) dated 12th December



**398**





1978 given, as it was said, in consultation with the Tender Board. Avins (op.
cit. p. 289), referring to numerous authori­ties in support of his views, says
this:



"While excessive zeal or other good motives may lessen the punishment to be
imposed on an employee who dis­obeys orders, unless the superior is mistaken
as to the facts in which they are to operate, good motives do not constitute a
defence. A subordinate has no right to sub­stitute his own opinion for that of
a superior, and any disobedience in so doing will be considered wilful and not
merely due to forgetfulness or carelessness. An employee cannot refuse to obey
an order because he believes the work called for is unnecessary or the order
is unwise... Disobedience of a positive order to do some­thing in one way is
not excused because the employee believes he has a better method of
accomplishing the same result. Likewise, it is no excuse for disobeying orders
that obedience might endanger the employer's property, when this has been
explained to the employer and he has said that he would take the risk."



According to the evidence, it seems to me that it was his inordinate and
overpowering greed, rather than zeal or any sense of duty that motivated the
appellant in this case to act in defiance of the orders of the employer. There
were no exte­nuating factors.



How did the appellant disobey the orders of his employer? He did so by
committing several additional acts of misconduct which aggravated his
disobedience.



For one thing, he falsified entries in the relevant documen­tation to enable
him to purchase the twelve saucepans. There is abundant authority for the
proposition that an employee who makes false records, a _fortiori_ to benefit
himself, is guilty of serious misconduct., warranting dismissal. (E.g. see
Avins, op. cit. at p. 483 et seq. p. 489 et seq., p. 511 et seq.). Indeed,



**399**



generally, any abuse of authority to gain a personal advantage would, _prima
facie_ amount to misconduct. Thus in the South African case of _Hattingh v.
Sutterheim Div. Council_ , (18) it was held that a supervisor who, without
authority, altered the hours of work of the gang under him, so that he could
get to a dance on time, was guilty of misconduct, although they worked the
same number of hours as usual.



A superior officer is expected to set a good example to his subordinates. His
misconduct serves to demoralize his entire department. (See _United Elec. Rad.
and Mach. Workers v. Canada Wire and Cable Co.,_ (19). The appellant violated
the employer's orders in circumstances of great aggravation, since he made a
subordinate officer accessory to open anti deter­mined breach of such orders.
He thereby destroyed respect for himself and his authority as Acting Assistant
Stores Manager and lowered himself in the eyes of other employees by showing
himself to be so completely the slave of his cupidity. (Cf _Mckellar v.
Macfarlane_ ) (20). In the words of a decision in an old Sheriff's Court case
in Scotland, "this was a fault of the highest kind."



Where his misbehaviour encourages subordinates to act in dereliction of their
duties, a supervisory employee is guilty of misconduct, the recurrence of
which the management is entitled to prevent by strong action. In _Cawnpore
Sugar Works Ltd. v. Rashtriya Chini Mill Mazdoor Sangh_ , (14) at the end of
the last shift before a two day holiday, there was some work yet to be
completed. The Chief Engineer told the shift engineer to remain until the work
was completed, but the latter refused on the ground that he had arranged to go
home by the 2.30 a.m. train, leaving a half hour after the end of the shift,
and that he had sent his family to the railway station to wait for him. He
also protested that he had not received prior notification of this work.
Ultimately, he did not stay, and, for



### 400



this act of disobedience, he was dismissed. The Uttar Pradesh Labour Court
upheld the dismissal. After finding that there was an emergency, it said:



"The shift engineer, being next to the chief engineer, .... was... second in
command. When such a person was to behave in the manner Sri Daya Ram did, it
gave encour­agement to other subordinates and this is why .... the ..... chief
engineer was put in trouble and had to ask Sri Daya Ram and others to make
haste and bring the workmen who were leaving the shift and were going out of
the gate. It one visualises the situation which pre­vailed at the moment, he
would no doubt think that it was like one second‑in‑command letting down the
com­mander and the whole army was running away helter­skelter. I am afraid
when such a chaotic condition is led by the action of a responsible employee,
no management would like to tolerate it... [and must] take strong action so as
to put an end to recurrence of it... Further.... there was no harm if Sri Daya
Ram had stayed for a few hours and could have gone by the second train which
was leaving at 7 a.m. The distance to Gorakhpur which he was to cover was a
little over 40 miles. To the family which he alleged to have sent to the
station in advance he could have sent a message through a peon or any other
workman of his department to await for the next train. By taking employment
and the responsibility of shift engineer, he subordinated his personal
interests to that of the concern. He should have kept before him the motto
Service before Self'. When Daya Ram could put up an excuse for not
overstaying in his own shift, it was not proper for him to suggest before this
Court that the chief engineer could have sent for shift engineers of the
previous shifts, one of which was over sixteen hours back and the other eight
hours back."



**401**



A supervisor is ultimately responsible for the operations within the section
or unit under his charge. It is his duty to devise ways and means by which the
overall plans and objects of his employer are carried out. (See _R. v. Milne_
(22). It is the duty of a person in a supervisory position to see that the
plans and directions of the employer are executed. ( _Murray v. Velaiden_ (23)
_Mysore Premier Metal Factory v. Workmen_ (24). A superior officer is obliged
to ensure that subordinates comply with the legitimate orders of the employer.
He must prevent a dereliction of duty by subordinates. Where he culpa­bly
fails to do these things, he is guilty of misconduct.



In permitting his subordinate, Jayasekera, to violate the instructions given
by the employer, the appellant was guilty of misconduct in that he failed to
exercise his supervisory duties.



In this case, the appellant not merely failed to exercise his supervisory
functions. he actively assisted his subordinate in the violation of superior
orders, to be able to carry out his own improper designs and his culpablity is
therefore that much more serious. ( _United Packinghouse Workers v. Robin Hood
Flour Mills Ltd.._ (25) _Sarangpur Cotton Manufacturing Co. v. Arb idu Ismail_
(26))Jayasekera, his subordinate, "auth­orized" the appellant's irregular
purchase on 20th December; and the appellant returned the favour by approving
Jayaseke­ra's unauthorised purchases on 27th December, 1978. (Vide p.16).



The authority to deviate from the scheme could have been 'given only by the
employer. In authorizing Jayasekere's pur­chase, the appellant, therefore, was
guilty of a further act of misconduct, namely usurping functions he did not
possess. (See _United Auto Air & Agric. Imp. Co. v. Massey‑Harris Co._ (27)



Counsel for the appellant argued that the penalty of dis­missal was unfair,
having regard to the value of the property involved. I agree that where the de
_minimis_ principle might be applicable in the circumstances of a case, a
warning or admo­nition might be more appropriate than dismissal. However,



**402**



dismissal is justified where the nature of the misconduct is serious.
Quantitative considerations must be taken into account but only in relation to
the nature and quality of the act in question. For instance where an employee
is guilty of theft the value of the thing stolen is not necessarily conclusive
of the matter, although dismissal would be usually considered reasonable.
[E.g. see _Champdany Jute Mills v. Ali_ (28) _Mora­dabed Water Supply Co. v.
Abdul H. Khan_ (29) _Ford Motor Co. v. Dhomdu S. Mayekar_ (30) _National Rayon
Corp v. Gaj­aman D. Bankeer_ (31) _Khulma N. Employees Union v. Khulna
Newsprint Mills Ltd._ (32) _Baidya V. Das v. Angus Co.,_ (33).



In _United Elec. Rad & Mach. W. v. Canadian Gen. Elec. Co._ (34) an employee
who was ordered to sell to other employees items at the canteen at the price
he got them for, was dismissed for charging one cent extra per item. The
amount involved did not render the misconduct trivial.



The case of _H.G. Jayasekera v. Ceylon Transport Board_ (35) also supports the
view that the amount is not conclusive. The amount involved was Rs. 1/40, but
the employer who attempted to defraud the employer of this amount earned just
dismissal.



In _Ceylon Cold Stores Ltd. v. Industrial & General Work­men's Union_ (36) the
Court of Appeal reversed the order of the Labour Tribunal and held that the
dismissal of an employee who was "caught with a few sundry items of small
value at the gate of the" employer's premises was justified because the
employee had been working in a "responsible position". He had disobeyed an
order prohibiting employees from bringing things from outside into the
premises without notice to the security officers.



**403**



In the case before me, the price fixed was no indication of the value of the
articles. The goods were deliberately sold at a concessionary price. Moreover,
they were hard to get and they were therefore valuable. The scramble for the
items amply demonstrates this. The appellant himself complained that due to
the large numbers flocking to his stores in search of the goods, his other
work was disrupted. Did the Chairman and important officials waste their time
in attending a lottery of items of little use or value? Were the elaborate
steps taken to sell the items consistent with the sale of discarded trash? Did
the appellant abuse his position of trust and manipulate the records and, not
only fail to exercise his supervisory duties but, also support disobedience on
the part of his subordinate, Jayasekera, thereby demeaning himself and
undermining his authority, in order to acquire goods that were of little
value? Did he take all the trouble he did, and risk so much, for tri­fles? He
can scarcely take refuge in the de _minimis_ principle.



What did the disobedience on the appellant's part (and that of his subordinate
he helped to defy the employer's orders) relate to? They concerned a scheme
devised by the employer to promote good employer‑employee relations. It is the
law that any wilful and inexcusable disruption by an employee of a
relationship, which an employer has a legitimate interest in preserving, is
misconduct. (See Avins op. cit. 604 et seq.). This may relate to suppliers,
customers or others, such as govern­ment officials, with whom the employer has
dealings. Perhaps, the most precious of all connections an employer has, the
most important to the success of his business, is that he has with his
employees. It is the very basis of production. Obviously, any­thing done to
create disaffection amongst employees, would be a serious matter. Equally,
anything done to frustrate or thwart or jeopardise a scheme of an employer to
strengthen his valued connections, would be serious misconduct. In the case
before us, not only had the employer generously offered to give its employees
much‑sought after goods at a concessionary price, it had also taken the most
elaborate steps to ensure that



**404**



employees would be satisfied by the equitable treatment meted out to them. The
appellant's conduct put the scheme of the employer in jeopardy and drew
understandable protests from the employees. His misconduct in this regard was
properly, in my opinion, regarded as serious enough to warrant his dismis­sal.



The case of the _International Union, United Automobile, Aircraft and
Agricultural Implement Workers of America (UAWCIO) Local 199 in re Mckinnon
Industries Limited_ , (37) is instructive. At a time when new cars were
scarce, and a per­son without priority had to wait for many months after
plac­ing his order before he secured delivery, Mckinnon Industries of Ontario
made an arrangement under which its employees could secure certain priorities
when purchasing new General Motor Cars. From 1948 until July 2nd 1950, 273
employees purchased cars under this scheme. However, a few employees, in
disregard of their obligations, sold the cars to others. In order to
discourage future abuses, the company required its employees to sign an
agreement under which they promised not to sell the vehicles obtained under
the scheme for twelve months. It was agreed that failure to live up to the
terms of the agreement would incur discharge or other diciplinary action which
the Company may deem advisable under the cir­cumstances.



An employee named Joseph Kormany purchased a car under the scheme on July
14th, 1950. Kormany sold the car a few months later. His position was that,
since he had paid for the car, he had the right to sell it when it pleased
him. In any event, he was soon returning to Budapest and had no further use
for another car. Kormany was dismissed. He protested and demanded
reinstatement on the ground that he had been unfairly treated. His Trade Union
took up this matter. The dispute was referred to an arbitrator ‑ Professor
J.C. Cameron. Kormany, it seems, had not read the agreement and, in any event,
did not realize that he was liable to be dismissed,



**405**



if he sold the car he had purchased within twelve months. The arbitrator held
that if the employer had not read the agree­ment, he had nobody to blame but
himself. He refused to remove or modify the penalty on the assumption that
Kor­many did not intend to do wrong. To do so, he said, "would be to encourage
other employees who were disposed to breach the agreement to do so in the hope
that they too would be dealt with leniently. This practice, if indulged in,
would cer­tainly mean cancellation of the priority plan." The arbitrator
concluded that, "while the punishment imposed upon Kor­many is severe, the
circumstances of the case certainly do not warrant me in setting aside the
penalty".



Reference might also be made to _Berec (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Walpola & Others_ (38)
In that case, six employees defrauded a medical scheme set up for the benefit
of employees by the employer. Collin Thorne, J (Malcolm Perera, J agreeing)
held that the six employees had been justifiably dismissed for "defrauding
their fellow workers who had a stake in the scheme'."



In deciding the nature of and evaluating the quality of an act of misconduct,
regard must be had to the position of the employee. I have already dealt with
the duties and responsibil­ities of the appellant as a supervisor and his
several failures as a supervisor. It is hardly necessary to add that, in
failing in his duty as a supervisor, and in failing to maintain his authority
as a supervisor, he acted in breach of implied, but essential, conditions of
his employment as a supervisor. No business organization could ever be
successful unless employers could depend on supervisors to do what is expected
of them. The successful running of a business is committed to its
supervi­sors. The appellant failed in more ways than one to discharge his
duties as a supervisor.



There are other aspects to the question relating to the spe­cific position of
the appellant in the organization and the act of misconduct in question, apart
from his obligations in



**406**



general as a supervisor and senior hand. The appellant was entrusted with the
custody and safety of the employer's prop­erty. As Assistant Stores Manager,
he was in a special position of confidence with regard to the goods entrusted
to him. As the person in‑charge of the implementation of the scheme of sale,
he was, what Justice Krishna lyer in _Michael v. Johnson Pumps Ltd.,_ (2)
called a person in a "sensitive or strategic" position. It was, as Krishna
lyer, J said in that case (at p,666), a "high risk" to keep the appellant in
such a position after he had misused or abused his position and once suspicion
had started. (See also _Ceylon Oil & Petroleum Workers Union v. Ceylon
Petroleum Corporation_ (39) per Tambiah, J.). In _Save­rimuttu v. Board of
Directors_ , _CWE_ (40), a senior accoun­tant's dismissal was upheld for
acting contrary to orders pro­hibiting the authorization of the encashment of
personal cheques. Where loss of confidence is based on proven miscon­duct
which warrants dismissal, an employer should not be compelled to employ the
workman, (Cf. _Glaxo Allenbury's (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Fernando_ (41).



Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that if rein­statement was not
possible, then the court should award the appellant compensation on the basis
of the principles set out in _Jayasuriya v. SLPC._ (42) .



Although, in certain circumstances, compensation may be payable where
reinstatement is not feasible, yet, as Sharva­nanda, J. (as he then was)
observed in _Caledonian (Ceylon) Tea and Rubber Estates Ltd. v. Hillman_ (43)
"If the employee's conduct had induced the termination, he cannot in justice
and equity have a just claim to compensation for loss of career as he has only
himself to blame for the predicament in which he finds himself." (See also
_Piliyandala Polgasowita Muti Purpose Co ‑op Soc. v. Liyanage_ (44) _Wataraka
Multi Purpose Co ‑op. Soc. Ltd. v. Wickramachandra_ (45). The



### 407



_Group Superintendant Dalma Group v. Ceylon Estate Staffs Union_ (46) _Rumblan
v. Ceylon Press Workers ‑Union_ (47) _Kar­thigesu v. Sri Lanka Sugar Corp_
(48) also _Somawathie v. Bak­sons Textile Industries Ltd._ (49).



The appellant is, in my view, solely to blame for the pre­dicament in which he
finds himself. He had acted in a manner on account of which the employer could
possibly have no con­fidence in him for the future and, therefore, I do not
think he has any claim to be compensated. (Cf. per Grover, J. in _Binny Ltd.
v. Their Workmen_ , (50)).



For the reasons stated, I hold that the dismissal of the appellant was
justified. The decision of the Court of Appeal is affirmed. The appeal is
dismissed. Each party will bear his own costs.



**Bandaranayake, J.    _**      I agree.



**Fernando, J.    __   **I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/23.html_  

