##  Mudiyanse v. Christie Silva, Government Agent, Hambantota - SLR - 52, Vol
2 of 1985 [1985] LKSC 23; (1985) 2 Sri LR 52 (16 May 1985)

**

52

MUDIYANSE  
v.  
CHRISTIE SILVA, GOVERNMENT AGENT, HAMBANTOTA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
RANASINGHE, J., ATUKORALE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWJS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 37/84.  
C.A. APPLICATION No. 275/81.  
MAY 16, 1985.

_

Writ of Certiorari - Suspension of liquor licence - Section 28A (1) of the
Excise ordinance as amended by Excise (Amendment) Law No. 24 of 1977 - Proper
party to be sued.

_

The appellant had been the holder of an excise licence for the sale of foreign
liquor at his cinema, renewed annually from 1976. When he sought renewal of
the licence for 1981 the appellant was informed that there was a directive
from the Ministry (of Finance) to suspend the licence and therefore his
licence fee could not be accepted. The appellant then made representations to
the Minister of Finance but the Excise Commissioner instructed the Government
Agent (respondent) to cancel the licence with immediate effect as the Minister
of Finance had so directed and to report the same to the Ministry of Finance.
The appellant alleging arbitrariness, capriciousness and mala fides on the
part of the respondent in that he had been influenced by extraneous and
irrelevant considerations, and violation of natural justice sought to quash
the respondent's decision by certiorari. The Court of Appeal however held that
the application could not be maintained without joining the Minister of
Finance.

Held Section 28A (1) of the Excise Ordinance as amended by Excise (Amendment)
Law No. 24 of 1977 clearly empowers the Minister of Finance to direct the
authority granting a licence to, inter alia, cancel a licence and such
authority is obliged to give effect to such a direction. The respondent's
refusal to renew the licence for the year 1981 was not one made by him on his
own volition in the exercise or purported exercise of the powers vested in him
but one made in pursuance of the direction given by the Minister of Finance.
Hence this application for a writ of certiorari should have been made against
the Minister and not against the respondent.

**

APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P. C. with D. S. Wijesinghe for the appellant.

Douglas Premaratne, D.S.G. with L. M. Wijesundera, S.C. and Mrs. S.
Samararatne

State Attorney for respondent.

_

_Cur. adv. vult_.

**53**

April 2, 1985. **  
ATUKORALE, J.

**

The appellant filed this application in the Court of Appeal seeking an order
in the nature of a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the respondent,
the Government Agent of Hambantota, refusing to grant him a renewal of the
excise licence for the sale of foreign liquor at the premises called Saliya
Cinema, Ambalantota. He also asked for a writ of mandamus directing the
respondent' to grant a renewal of the said licence. The renewal sought for by
the appellant was for the year 1981.

The facts established' that the appellant was the proprietor of the Cinema ,
that from 1976 he had been the holder of the said licence, P1 being the
licence for the year ending 31.12.1980 ; that` on 29.12.1980 when the
appellant went to the office of the respondent to ascertain the licence fee
for the year 1981, he was informed by the officer in charge of the licence
branch that there was a directive from the 'Ministry' to suspend the licence
and that a decision would be reached after a discussion with the respondent -
vide P4 ; that on the following day (30.12.1980) the appellant again went to
the office of the respondent and made a written request that the licence fee
be accepted, to which the respondent replied by P5, of the same date stating
that on the advice of the District Minister of Hambantota the issue of the
licence to the respondent had been suspended and that the fee could not be
accepted. The appellant then by P6 of 06.01.1981 made representations to the
Minister of Finance and requested him to give instructions for the issue of
the licence. On the same date the Excise Commissioner by P7 wrote to the
respondent (with a copy to the appellant) directing the respondent to cancel
the licence with immediate effect and to report the same to the Secretary of
the Ministry of Finance. P7 refers to the direction made by the Minister of
Finance to cancel the appellant's licence with immediate effect and contained
in letter R3 of 01.01.1981 by which the Secretary, Ministry of Finance,
communicated the Minister's direction to the Excise Commissioner. The
appellant in his application averred that the decision of the respondent not
to accept the :licence fee for the year 1981 and not to renew the licence was
null and void for the . reasons, inter alia, that the respondent acted mala
fide in that he was influenced by extraneous and irrelevant considerations ,
that the respondent acted arbitrarily and capriciously in 'suspending'-and
later

**54**

'canceling' the licence and that the respondent acted in violation of the
principles of natural justice in not giving the appellant an opportunity of
being heard prior to taking a decision. The appellant thus sought to quash the
respondent's decision not to renew the licence.'

The respondent in his affidavit of objections whilst admitting that the Excise
Commissioner by P7 directed him to forthwith cancel the appellant's licence`
stated that the decision not to renew was made consequent to and upon a
direction issued by the Minister of Finance in terms of the provisions of the
Excise Ordinance (Chap. 52, L.E.). In support of this position he produced as
R3 the copy received by him of the letter dated 1.1.1981 sent by the
Secretary, Ministry of Finance, to the Excise Commissioner embodying the
Minister's direction. The respondent also produced as R1 a letter dated
29.12.1980 sent by him to, the Assistant Excise Commissioner by which he
informed the Assistant Commissioner that the District Minister of Hambantota
had advised him that the Minister of Finance had ordered that the issue of the
licence for 1981 be suspended and that accordingly he has suspended the same
until he-receives further orders from the 'Assistant Commissioner.

The Court of Appeal reached the finding that the decision of the respondent
not to renew the licence for the year 1981 was referable solely to the
directive in P7 given by the Minister of Finance through the Excise
Commissioner to the respondent to cancel the licence. On this basis the court
held that the appellant could not maintain this application -without joining
the Minister of Finance as a party respondent.:; This is the main ground upon
which the Court of Appeal dismissed the application. The short point that
arises for our consideration is-whether the court was right in rejecting the
application on this ground.

The Excise (Amendment) Law, No. 14 of 1977, introduced a new section as s. 28A
to the Excise Ordinance (Chap. 52). Subsection (1) of this. section reads as
follows:

'' (1) Notwithstanding anything in this Ordinance, if, upon representation
made or otherwise, the Minister considers it :necessary to do so, he may,
without assigning any reason therefor, direct the authority granting a
licence, to grant a licence, or to renew or cancel a licence, and such
authority shall give effect to such direction.'

**55**

This subsection clearly empowers the Minister of Finance to direct the
authority granting a licence (in this case the respondent) to, inter alias
cancel a licence and such authority is obliged to give effect to such a
direction. On a careful perusal of documents P4; P7, R1 and R3 it seems to me
that the respondent's refusal to renew the licence for the year 1981 was not
one made by him on his own volition in the exercise or purported exercise of
the powers vested in him by s. 27 (1) or s. 28 (1) of the Excise Ordinance but
was in pursuance of the direction given by the Minister of Finance embodied in
R3 and communicated to the respondent by P7 of 6.1.1981. The fact that the
appellant himself, was aware that it was so is borne out by his own statement
to the Police, P4 of 29.12.1980, in which he states that he was informed by
the officer-in-charge of issuing licences that there was an order of the
'Ministry' to suspend the renewal of the licence. The application for a writ
of certiorari should therefore, in my view, have been made not against the
respondent who was merely giving effect to the Minister's direction to cancel
the licence but against the Minister himself who gave the direction under s.
28A (1). For these reasons the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and
the appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs. 420.

**

RANASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/23.html_  

