##  Wimalasiri Perera and Others v. Lakmali Enterprises Diesel and Petrol
Motor Engineers and Others - SLR - 62, Vol 1 of 2003 [2001] LKSC 23; (2003) 1
Sri LR 62 (8 March 2001)

**62**

**WIMALASIRI PERERA AND OTHERS** ****

**v.** ****

**LAKMALI ENTERPRISES DIESEL AND PETROL** ****

**MOTOR ENGINEERS AND OTHERS** ****

 SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J., GUNASEKERA, J., AND

WIGNESWARAN, J.

SC APPEAL No. 58/2000

PHC/WP (COLOMBO) No. HCA/LT 1692/98

LT Nos. 1/312-314/96

8TH MARCH, 2001





_Industrial Dispute -Appeal by employer- Failure to deposit security -
Section_ _31 D (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act - Whether the deposit of
security is_ _mandatory._



The employer - respondents appealed to the High Court against relief which had
been granted to the workmen - appellants by the Labour Tribunal, but failed to
deposit security in terms of section 31 D(4) of the Industrial Disputes Act.

**63**

**Held :**

The deposit of security was mandatory; and the High Court erred in holding
that the unexplained failure to deposit security did not justify the rejection
of the appeal.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.

**Case referred to :**



1\. Sri Lanka General Workers' Union v. Samaranayake (1996)2 Sri LR 268
distinguished

_Sunil F.A. Cooray_ with _Lai Perera_ and _Dilip Obeysekera_ for appellants.

#  

# Cur. adv. vult

March 08, 2001

**FERNANDO, J.**



In this case the Labour Tribunal had awarded the three Applicants-Respondents-
Appellants Rs. 63,000/-, Rs. 30,000/-, and Rs. 48,000/-, as compensation. The
Employees-Appellants-Respondents appealed to the High Court on 8/4/99 but
failed to deposit security in terms of section 31 D (4). On appeal the
objec足tion was taken on behalf of the Applicants that the appeal could not be
proceeded with since security had not been deposited. The Employers did not
deposit security even then, nor did they tender any evidence as to the reason
for that default. The learned High Court Judge held that the failure to
deposit security does not war足rant the rejection of an appeal.



In _Sri Lanka General Workers' Union_ v. _Samaranayake(1)_ where security was
deposited seven days late, it was held that the time limit was not mandatory,
and that the High Court had a dis足cretion to entertain the appeal after
considering the nature of the default, the circumstances in which it occurred,
and the prejudice to the other party. That does not mean, however, that the
deposit of security was not mandatory.



The High Court erred in holding that the unexplained failure to deposit
security did not justify the rejection of the appeal.

 64

I allow the appeal, set aside the order of the High Court, and restore the
order of the Labour Tribunal. The applicants will be enti足tled to the sums
awarded by the Labour Tribunal together with a further sum equivalent to 25%
thereof (in lieu of interest), and costs in a sum of Rs. 5000/- (Rs. Five
Thousand) each.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** - I agree

**WIGNESWARAN, J.** - I agree

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/23.html_  

