##  Singer (Sri Lanka) Ltd. v. Rasheed and Another - SLR - 258, Vol 1 of 1984
[1983] LKSC 23; (1984) 1 Sri LR 258 (13 December 1983)

#  258



**SINGER (SRI LANKA) LTD.**

**v.**

**RASHEED AND ANOTHER**



SUPREME COURT.

WIMALARATNE, J., COLIN‑THOME, J. AND ABDUL CADER, J.

S. C APPEAL No.21/83 ‑ C.A. APPLICATION No. 540/80 ‑ L T. 17/7057  
DECEMBER 13, 1983



Writs of Certiorari and Mandamus‑Effect of delay ‑ Res Judicata.



The respondent had been employed by the appellant as the managing salesman in
their shop at Werawatte. After a domestic inquiry at which he was found guilty
of being involved in the misappropriation or breach of trust of some sewing
machine needles, his services were terminated. He filed two applications
before the Labour Tribunal complaining of unlawful termination of his services
One before the Tribunal at Narahenpita (on 6.5.77) which was dismissed owing
to his absence; the other before the Vauxhall Street Tribunal where the
employer‑appellant raised the plea of res judicata relying on the order of
dismissal made by the Narahenpita Tribunal. The latter application was
transferred to the Narahenpita Tribunal which re‑numbered the application and
proceeded to hear it The plea of res judicata was raised again by the
appellant This was upheld by the Tribunal and the application was dismissed by
its order of 28.11.79. The respondent did not appeal from either of the orders
dismissing the application. Instead, he invoked the writ jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal and sought a writ of certiorari to quash the order made by the
Labour Tribunal on 28.11.79 and a writ of Mandamus to compel the Tribunal to
proceed with the inquiry into the re‑numbered application on the ground that
the proceedings in the first application had been heard exparte and without
notice to him and that its dismissal did not operate as res judicata.



# Held‑



There was ample opportunity for the respondent to have lodged an appeal from
the first order of dismissal of the Labour Tribunal as he had notice of the
order a few days after it was made and even of the proceedings before that.
Instead of doing so he had, six months later, invoked the extraordinary
jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. Although a six month delay is not by
itself a ground for refusing relief, the circumstances of this, case did not
warrant excusing the delay.



**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_R. D. C de Silva_ for appellant.



_Siva Rajaratnam_ with _S. C. Crosette Thambiah_ and _K. Thevarajah_ for 1st
respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

#  

#  259

** **

January 12, 1984.

**WIMALARATNE, J.**



This is an appeal from a judgment of the Court of Appeal allowing an
application for a Writ of Certiorari quashing an order of the Labour Tribunal
which had dismissed an application by the workman (1st respondent) praying for
reinstatement and back wages. The workman who had been employed as managing
salesman in the employer's shop at Wellawatte alleged that his services were
unlawfully terminated by letter dated 15.3.77. He filed two applications in
respect of the same termination, one before the Labour Tribunal at Narahenpita
on 6.5.77 and the other before the Tribunal at Vauxhall Street on 9.5.77. He
says he filed two applications because he was riot certain as to which
tribunal was possessed of jurisdiction in respect of the termination.



The first application was numbered LT 17/5838/77, and notices were issued on
10.5.77 requiring answer to be filed on 20.6.77. The applicant was absent on
20.6.77 and the Tribunal appears to have appointed 3.8.77 as the date on which
he was required to purge his default. He was absent on that date as well. The
Tribunal has therefore dismissed his application by order dated 18.8.77.



The second application at Vauxhall Street was numbered LT2/9614/77. The
employer filed answer on 2.6.77 in which he referred to the fact that LT
17/5838/77 was pending. The employer pleaded that the applicant and some
others had been involved in the misappropriation or breach of trust of 83,000
sewing machine needles valued at Rs.124,500 and as the applicant's explanation
was unsatisfactory a domestic inquiry was held at which he was found guilty;
hence his services were lawfully terminated. When this second application was
taken up for inquiry on 2.12.77 the employer raised the plea of res judicata,
as by then the first application in respect of the same termination had been
dismissed by the Tribunal at Narahenpita. The Tribunal then made order on
2.12.77 that the second application be transferred from Vauxhall Street to
Narahenpita.



The Tribunal at Narahenpita re‑numbered this application as LT 17/7057. The
plea of res Judicata was again taken on 28.11.79. That Tribunal heard
arguments of Counsel for both parties on that date, and by its order of that
date (apparently dictated) upheld the plea and dismissed the application



#  260



            The applicant did not appeal from either of the orders dismissing this application. Instead he invoked the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal by his application dated 21.5.80 and sought a Writ of Certiorari to quash the order made on 28.11.79 and a Writ of Mandamus to compel the Tribunal (2nd respondent) to proceed with the inquiry in LT 17/7057 on the ground that the proceedings in the first application were held ex parte and without notice to him, and that the 2nd respondent erred in holding that that order operated as res judicata. He pointed to the fact that notice in the first application had been addressed to "22 Wekanda Road, Colombo 6" whereas his correct address is "22 Vivekananda Road, Colombo 6".



The Court of Appeal has taken the view that the Tribunal had failed, to
address its mind to the main issue in the case, which was as to whether the
applicant had in fact received the notice requiring his attendance before the
first Tribunal on 20.6.77 and/or 3.8.77. The Tribunal, in the opinion of the
Court of Appeal had erred in holding that the first application had been
"looked into and disposed of" and thus upholding the plea of res judicata.



Before us learned Counsel for the appellant contended that‑



( _a_ )        the order of 28.11.79 was an appealable order from which the
1st respondent had not appealed;



( _b_ )        that there has been a long delay of over five months after that
order was delivered before the Writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal was
invoked; and



( _c_ )        that the 1st respondent had suppressed material facts in that
he had not intimated to the Court of Appeal that he had received a copy of the
order of dismissal of the first application within a few days of that order.



The Court of Appeal has taken the view that as the 1st respondent could not
obtain certified copies of the relevant documents till about January 1980, his
failure to lodge an appeal was excusable. Of the documents relevant to an
appeal, the pleadings in the two applications, and the order in the first
application were already in the possession of the 1st respondent and were
marked P1 to P4 when his case was argued on 29.11.79. The only other relevant
document was P5 the order of that date. That order was a brief order made in
the presence of Counsel. There was, therefore ample opportunity for the 1st
respondent to have lodged an appeal.



#  261

** **

Instead, six months later he invoked the extraordinary jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal. The Court of Appeal has taken the view that a delay for a
period of six months by _itself_ is not a ground for refusing relief. I am in
entire agreement; but the circumstances of this case did not warrant the
extension of that latitude to the 1st respondent. In the first place, he ought
to have been aware that the employer had received notice of the first
application because the employer in its answer filed in the second application
on 2.6.77 had disclosed the fact that the first application was pending. That
averment should have alerted the 1st respondent, especially in view of the
serious allegation of misappropriation levelled against him. Between 2.6.77
and 3.8.77 he had two months in which to make inquiries regarding the stage of
proceedings in the first application. Had he made any sort of inquiry he would
have found out the relevant dates. As the Tribunal has, in its order in the
first application correctly held, if the employee wanted relief from that
Tribunal, the employee should have been vigilant.



The 1st respondent produced at the arguments before the Tribunal, on 28.11.79
a letter dated 26.8.77 by the first Tribunal to him which was marked A4. He
did not, however file it of record either in the Tribunal or in the Court of
Appeal. The appellant makes a point of this suppression, because according to
that letter the 1st respondent had received intimation of the order of 18.8.77
made in the first application within a few days after it was made. If that be
so he had ample opportunity to either appeal from that order or to seek to
have that order set aside on the ground that he had no notice. The order in
the first application refers to the fact that the notice which had been sent
to the 1st respondent by registered post had not been returned. The Tribunal
has presumed correctly that the 1st respondent had notice of the date 20.6.77.



I am therefore of the view that the Court of Appeal ought not to have
exercised its jurisdiction to quash by way of Certiorari the order of the
Labour Tribunal dated 28.11.79. I would accordingly set aside the judgment of
the Court of Appeal, and restore the order of the Labour Tribunal dismissing
this application. The appellant will be entitled to costs of this appeal
payable by the 1st respondent.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.** ‑  I agree.

#  262



**ABDUL CADER, J.**



The 1st respondent filed two applications in respect of termination of his
employment, one before the Labour Tribunal at Narahenpita on 6.5.77 and the
other before the Labour Tribunal at Vauxhall Street o 9.5.77. The first one
was given the number L.T./17/5838/77 and the other L.T./2/9614/77.
L.T./17/5838/77 was dismissed o 18.8.77 as the 1st respondent was absent after
notice. The 1st respondent has stated that he did not receive notice.
Wimalaratne, J. has referred to "A4" but it has not been produced in the Court
of Appeal or in this Court. I shall assume, therefore, that there is no proof
before this Court that the 1st respondent had notice of the inquiry into that
application.



When the second application was taken up, it was dismissed on the ground that
the dismissal of the first application operated as re judicata. That was an
appealable order and I agree with Wimalaratne J. that the reasons urged by the
1st respondent for his failure to lodge an appeal within the prescribed time
are not sufficient to grant the petitioner extraordinary relief by way of writ
filed long after the appealable period.



There is yet a further circumstance that militates against the 1st respondent.
When the second application was taken up for inquiry on 2.12.77, the employer
raised the plea of res judicata. The first application had been dismissed on
18.8.77 ‑ 4 months earlier. Even assuming that the 1st respondent had no
notice of that dismissal, he would have been then aware on 2.12.77 that the
first application ha been dismissed. It was then open to him to move to purge
his default in the first application so as to vacate the order of dismissal.
When the second application came up for inquiry on 28.11.79. 2 years later,
his failure to take steps in the earlier application permitted the appellant
to raise the plea of res judicata, which the Tribunal validly upheld
Therefore, it was the negligence on the part of the petitioner in failing to
re‑open proceedings in the first application that led to the dismissal of the
second application by way of res judicata.



Under the circumstances, I agree with the order made by Wimalaratne, J.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/23.html_  

