##  Sirinaga v. Jayasinghe - SLR - 538, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 23; (1982) 2
Sri LR 538 (8 July 1982)

# 538

  **SIRINAGA**

**v.**

**JAYASINGHE**

SUPREME COURT

WIMALARATNE, J., RATWATTE, J., AND SOZA, J.

S. C. 1/82

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 223/81

JUNE 15, 1982



    Constitution ‑ Article 114 ‑ Scheduled public officer ‑ Necessity for appointment by Judicial Service Commission.



The petitioner‑appellant was an officer in Class I of the General Clerical
Service employed as a Clerk in the District Court of Colombo. He was
transferred by an order of the Director of Combined Services to the
Metereology Department with effect from 1.1.81 because he was found to be
unsuitable for employment in the Courts.



The petitioner‑appellant made application to the Court of Appeal to quash the
order by Writ of Certiorari on the grounds that he was a scheduled public
officer by reason of the fact that he was employed in the District Court
before the Constitution of 1978 came into force and therefore only the
Judicial Service Commission could transfer him and that too only to another
Court.



'Scheduled public officer' is defined in Article 114(b). This definition
included a class of officers which was specified in the Fifth Schedule,
Generally Clerks and Typists etc. working in the Courts were specified in the
Fifth Schedule. All appointments, transfers, dismissals etc. of scheduled
public officers were effected by the Judicial Service Commission.



# Held ‑



(1)        That in the absence of an appointment by the Judicial Service
Commission the petitioner‑appellant could not become a scheduled public
officer.



(2)        That the Director of Combined Services had the power to transfer
the  petitioner‑ appellant to a post in the Combined Services.



**Cases referred to:**



(1) _Kodeeswaran v. Attorney ‑ General (1969) 72 N.L.R. 337_



(2) _Reilly v. The King (1934) A.C. 176, 180_



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_V.S.A. Pullenayagam_ with _Faiz Mustapha, Mangalan Kanapathipillai and
Deepali Wijesundera_ for petitioner‑appellant



_Sarath Silva, D.S.G_. with _Kalinga Wijewardena_ , S.C. for
respondent‑respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



**539**

** **

July 8, 1982.



**WIMALARATNE, J.**



Immediately before the commencement of the Constitution of the Democratic
Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (7.9.78) the petitioner‑appellant, Palitha
Sirinaga, was an officer in Class I of the General Clerical Service (G.C.S.)
employed as a clerk in the District Court of Colombo. He was so employed until
he was transferred to the Department of Metereology by order of the Director
of Combined Services, the respondent, with effect from 1.1.81. The transfer
had been ordered at the request of the Judicial Service Commission (J.S.C.)
which had found the petitioner unsuitable for employment in the Courts.



The appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public
officers, other than those public officers appointed by the President of the
Republic of Sri Lanka, is vested by Article 55(1) of the Constitution in the
Cabinet of Ministers. The Cabinet is empowered by Article 55(3) to delegate
such powers, except in the case of Heads of Departments, to the Public Service
Commission (P.S.C.); and the P.S.C. is in turn empowered by Article 58(1) to
delegate such powers in respect of any category of public officers to a public
officer. The Director of Combined Services is the public officer to whom the
P.S.C. has delegated such powers over non‑staff officers of the General
Clerical Ser. ice. Public Administration Circular

No.130 dated 18.10.78 issued on the orders of the Cabinet is the relevant
document of delegation.



The Constitution of 1978 also created a category of public officers to be
known as "scheduled public officers", and by Article 114(1) vested the,
appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of this category in
the J.S.C. Article 114(6) defines "scheduled public officer" to mean "the
Registrar of the Supreme Court, The Registrar of the Court of Appeal, the
Registrar of any Court of First Instance, or any public officer employed in
the Registry of the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal, or any Court of First
Instance, included in a category in the Fifth Schedule, or in such other
categories as may be specified by Order made by the Minister in charge of the
subject of Justice, and approved by Parliament, and published in the Gazette".
The Fifth Schedule includes Clerks, Fiscals, Interpreters, Stenographers,
Typists and Binders. Family Counsellors have subsequently been added. There
could be no doubt that the framers of the Constitution intended creating a
closed service of those administrative and other



**540**



officers employed in the Courts who are required to carry out judicial orders.



The petitioner challenged the respondent's power to transfer him, and sought
to have the transfer quashed by way of certiorari in the Court of Appeal. He
challenged the order on the ground that by reason of being "employed" in the
District Court of Colombo immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution he was a , "scheduled public officer"; that the power to transfer
him is vested in the J.S.C.; and that' the J.S.C. is empowered to transfer him
only to a post which could be held by a scheduled public officer, that is, to
a post in any of the Courts included in the definition clause in Article
114(6).



The respondent made and filed an affidavit in which he took up the position
that as the petitioner had not been appointed by the J.S.C., the petitioner
was not a scheduled public officer; and that he, as the authority empowered to
transfer non‑staff officers in the G. C. S. lawfully transferred, the
petitioner to a post in the public service.



Although the Supreme Court is vested with the sole and exclusive jurisdiction
to hear and determine any question relating to the interpretation of the
Constitution, the Court of Appeal did not refer to the Supreme Court the
questions which arose for determination. Instead the Court of Appeal
determined that by reason of being "employed" in the District Court the
petitioner was a "scheduled public officer," and that 'appointments' by the
J.S.C. ate necessary only in the case of officers appointed after 7.9.78. But
the Court of Appeal dismissed the petition for the reason that there is
nothing in Articles,114 which prevents the J.S.C. from releasing him to the
combined services from which he had been appointed to the, District, Court.



We are concerned in this appeal with only that category of public officers
employed in the Registries of the Courts of Justice immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution. What is the criterion to determine whether
they are "scheduled public officers"? Whilst learned Counsel for the
petitioner stressed the aspect of the fact of being employed in the Courts on
the crucial date as the criterion, the learned Deputy Solicitor General argued
that appointment by the J.S.C. is the only method by which the transformation
of a public officer to a "scheduled public officer" can take place. The D.S.G.
has thus invited us to overrule the first finding of the Court of Appeal,
namely that the petitioner was "scheduled public officer" on the date he was
transferred.



**  541**



When a public officer 'simpliciter' (if I may use that term) is transferred
into a "scheduled public officer" there certainly is a change in his status.
The authority vested with the power to transfer him, with the power to promote
him, with the power to take disciplinary action against him, and with the
power to dismiss him, changes. With that change of status may also take place
a change in the terms and conditions of his service. Such alteration in his
status and in his terms and conditions of service can take place, in my view,
only with his consent; it cannot be foisted on him without his consent.
Therefore the accident of being "employed" in any of the Courts on the date of
the promulgation of the Constitution can never be a sound criterion for
determining his status.



Continuity of service for public officers on the same terms and conditions or
an option to retire on pension and gratuity when those terms and conditions
Were changed has been a significant feature in all our Constitutions since
Ceylon attained Dominion Status. Under the Donoughmore Constitution the
Secretary of State for the Colonies exercised a supreme authority over the
public services of Ceylon. The right to dismiss at pleasure was implied and
recognised, and the pay and condition s of service were regulated by or under
delegated authority from him. The Soulbury Constitution changed the masters.
The Ceylon (Constitution) Order‑in‑Council, 1946 (Cap.379) established a
Public Service Commission and vested in it the power of appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers. Along with that change
it provided by Article 63(2) that certain categories of officers who held
appointments subject to the approval of the Secretary of State would have the
option to retire on pension. When the Soulbury Constitution was replaced by
the first Republican Constitution in 1972, whilst stipulating in section
107(1) that every state officer shall hold office during the pleasure of the
President, it also provided in Chapter XV for the. continuation in service of
Judges, Public officers and others _under the same terms and conditions._ When
the present Constitution was promulgated, continuity of service was provided
for in a Chapter dealing with Transitional Provisions; Article 164(b)
stipulates that every person who before the commencement of the Constitution
was in the service of the Republic, or any local authority or public
corporation shall continue in such service _under the same terms and
conditions._



Here, then, is a Constitutional guarantee of continuity in the public service
under the same terms and conditions as before the commencement of the
Constitution. "Under the same terms and



# 542



conditions" especially when these words occur in a written Constitution must
necessarily have a clear meaning. What then are these terms and conditions?
They cannot be any other than the terms and conditions of their contract of
service with the State. If there had been any doubt as regards the existence
of a relationship which possessed the legal characteristics of a contract
between the then Crown and the persons appointed by the Government of Ceylon
to serve in the civil administration, such doubts were cleared by the decision
of the Privy Council in _Kodeeswaran Vs. Attorney General_ (1). Under the
Order‑in‑Council, 1946, public " servants held office (as indeed they do now)
at pleasure. But, as stated by 'Lord Atkin in _Reilly vs. The Kink_ (2), "a
power to determine a contract at will is not inconsistent with the existence
of a contract until so determined". This dictum was cited with approval by
Lord Diplock in _Kodeeswaran_ (at p 341). The position is not different under
the Republican Constitution.



These terms and conditions attached to their contract of employment would be
contained in documents such as the letters of appointment, the Establishment
Code, Public Administration Circulars etc. issued or published by the
authority empowered by the Constitution to issue or publish them. They would
necessarily encompass such. terms and conditions as relate to emoluments,
allowances, increments, efficiency bars, leave, interdictions, dismissals or
other forms of punishment, procedure at disciplinary inquiries, prospects of
promotion and a host of other matters. The guarantee of continuity is a
guarantee that the same, terms and conditions would apply. Implicit in this
guarantee is that if there is to be a change in these terms and conditions,
public officers would be given an option of either accepting the new terms or
continuing under the same, old terms. I am therefore of the view that before a
public officer's designation is altered to that of a scheduled public officer
within the meaning of Article 114(6) his consent to the new terms and
conditions is necessary. If he consents, then he has to receive a letter of
appointment from the Judicial Service Commission.



In the background of this assurance of continuity the adoption of a criterion
based upon the fact of being employed in the Courts immediately before the
commencement. of the Constitution leads to absurd results. Let me give an
illustration. By virtue of Article 169(2) the former Supreme Court ceased to
exist; so did the Registry of the former Supreme Court. What then, would be
the position of those public officers employed in the Registry of the former
Supreme



**543**



Court? In order to conform to the assurance of continuity as public officers
they had, no doubt to be employed in one of the Courts, either established or
recognised by the new Constitution. They had no alternative but to be so
employed, lest they forfeited all their rights in the public service. But they
were employed not on the terms and conditions applicable to scheduled public
officers, because such terms and conditions were not in existence at the
commencement of the Constitution. This illustration fortifies my conclusion
that by appointment alone can a public officer change his status to that of a
scheduled public officer.



My view is also supported by the absence of a "deeming provision". Deeming
provisions are usually included to put beyond doubt a construction that might
otherwise be uncertain. Whereas there are in the Constitution deeming
provisions, such as that all persons who immediately before the commencement
of the Constitution were Members. of the National State Assembly shall be
deemed to have been elected as Members of Parliament [Article 161(a)]; and
that all Attorneys‑at‑Law admitted and enrolled under the provisions of the
Administration of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973 shall be deemed to have been
admitted and enrolled as Attorneys‑at‑Law of the Supreme Court created and
established by the Constitution, [Article 169(11)]. There is no such deeming
provision in relation to public officers employed in the Registries of the
Courts immediately prior to the commencement of the Constitution, to the
effect that they shall be deemed to be scheduled public officers within the
meaning of Article 114(6). The reason appears to me to be that the framers of
the Constitution, having given all public officers the assurance of continuity
under the same. terms and conditions, could not have included a deeming
provision, which would necessarily have curtailed their freedom of Contract,
and would be contrary to such assurance.



I would therefore uphold the contention of the Deputy Solicitor General that
in the absence of an appointment by the Judicial Service Commission the
petitioner‑appellant was not a "scheduled public officer", and that the
respondent in his capacity as Director of Combined Services had the power to
transfer him to a post in the Combined Services.



This finding would suffice to dispose of this appeal. The further question as
to whether a scheduled public officer could be released by the J.S.C. and
thereafter transferred by the Director of Combined Services would, to a large
extent, depend upon the terms and



# 544

conditions laid down for "scheduled public officers". As those terms and
conditions have not been brought to our notice it is not possible to provide
an answer to that question.



This appeal is accordingly dismissed with costs.



**RATWATTE, J. -** I agree.



**SOZA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/23.html_  

