##  Ittepana v. Hemawathie - SLR - 476, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 23; (1981) 1
Sri LR 476 (7 December 1981)

**476**

**ITTEPANA  
v.  
 HEMAWATHIE**

**SUPREME COURT  
ISMAIL J., WEERARATNE, J., AND SHARVANANDA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 74/80  
S.C. SPECIAL L.A. 90/80  
C.A. Application No. 1791/79  
D.C. Gampaha No. 19464/D  
October 8 and 23, 1981  
**  
_Matrimonial action -Divorce-Failure to serve summons - Vacating of decree
nisi and decree absolute - jurisdiction - Inherent powers ex debito justitiae
- S. 839 CAC  
_  
The plaintiff sued his wife for a divorce on the ground of malicious
desertion. Summons was reported served on the defendant and a proxy was filed
on her behalf. At the trial the defendant was represented by her lawyer but
she was absent.. Decree nisi was entered and later decree absolute. Later when
the defendant wife appeared in Court in connection with her maintenance case
the plaintiff produced the decree absolute of divorce. The defendant wife
claimed she had not been served with summons and denied having filed proxy and
filed papers in the District Court to have the divorce decree annulled on the
ground of non-service of summons. The District Judge inquired into this and
held with the defendant wife and vacated the decree. The only defence put up
by the plaintiff was that the District Judge had no jurisdiction to vacate the
decree entered by him.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The principles of natural justice are the basis of our laws of procedure. The
requirement that the defendant should have notice of the action either by
personal service or substituted service of summons is a condition precedent to
the assumption of jurisdiction against the defendant.  
  
'Jurisdiction' may be defined to be the power of a court to hear and determine
a cause, to adjudicate or exercise any judicial power in relation to it. When
the jurisdiction of a Court is challenged the Court is competent to determine
the question of jurisdiction. An inquiry whether the Court has jurisdiction in
a particular case is not an exercise of jurisdiction over the case itself. It
is really an investigation as to whether the conditions of cognizance are
satisfied. Therefore, a Court is always clothed with jurisdiction to see
whether it has jurisdiction to try the cause submitted to it.  
  
Failure to serve summons is a failure which goes to the root of the
jurisdiction of the Court to hear and determine the action against  the
defendant. It is only by service of summons on the defendant that the Court
gets jurisdiction over the defendant. If a defendant is not served with
summons or otherwise notified of the proceedings against him, the judgment
entered against him in those circumstances is a nullity. The proceedings being
void, the person affected by them can apply to have them set aside ex debito
justitiae in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the court which is
saved by S. 839 of the Civil Procedure Code. Hence the District Judge acted
within his jurisdiction in inquiring into the question of non-service of
summons.

**477**

**Cases referred to:  
**  
_(1) Ramasamy Pulle v. De Silva (1909) 12 NLR 298  
  
(2) Silva v. Silva (1910) 13 NLR 87  
  
(3) Van Twest v. Gunewardene (1930) 34 NLR 220  
  
(4) Paulusz v. Perera (1933) 34 NLR 438  
  
(5) Craig v. Kanssen (1943) 1 A 11 ER 108, 113  
  
(6) Kofi Forie v. Seifah (1958) AC 59  
  
(7) Macfoy v. United Africa Co. Ltd. (1961) 3 All ER 1169  
  
(8) Sirinivasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero (19601 63 NLR 31, 33  
  
(9) Hewage v. Bandaranayake (1967) 70 NLR 119  
  
(10) Perera v. Commissioner of National Housing (1974) 77 NLR 361  
  
(11) Albert v. Veeriahpillai S. C. App. 73/80 -S.C. Minutes of 23.9.81  
  
(12) Thambirajah v. Sinnamma (1935) 36 NLR 442  
  
(13) James v. Dochinona (1942) 43 NLR 527  
  
(14) Marian v. Burah (1948) 51 NLR 34, 41  
  
(15) Anisminic v. Foreign Compensation Commission (1969) 1 All ER 208  
  
(16) Rodger v. Comptoir D' Excompte de Paris (1871) 3 PC 465  
  
(17) Mcpherson v. Mcpherson (1936) AC 177  
_  
**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_Walter Jayawardene Q.C. with C. Ganesh and Miss K. Chelliah_ for the
plaintiff-petitioner-appellant.  
  
_D. R. P. Gunatilleke with K. S. Tilakaratne_ for the defendant-respondent-
respondent.

_**Cur. adv. vult.**_

December 7,1981  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
The plaintiff-appellant instituted on 7.10.77 this action for divorce a
vinculo matrimonii against the defendant-respondent on the ground of malicious
desertion and for the custody of the only child Indranie. In accordance with
the provisions of the Administration of Justice (Amendment) Law, No. 25 of
1975, which was in operation at that time, summons was issued on 11. 10.77.
The record contains the following journal entries.  
  
"(1) 21.10.77  
Return to service of summons received.  
  
(2) 15.11.77  
Memorandum of appearance for defence tendered.  
  
(3) 20.12.77  
Mr. W. E. C. Perera, Attorney-at-Law, files his appointment and also answer of
the Defendant.

**478**

(4) 10.10.78  
Attorney-at-Law for Defendant moves for trial as answer has already been
filed.  
Call case on 20.01.78 to fix date of trial.  
  
(5) 24.01.78  
Case not called on 20.01.78.  
Called today to fix date of trial  
Mr. K.S. Subasinghe, A/L for Plaintiff.  
Mr. W.E.C. Perera, A/L for Defendant.  
Trial 28.02.78."  
  
The case was taken up for trial on 28.2.78. According to the record, Mr.
Dharmawardena, Attorney-at-Law, instructed by Mr. K. S. Subasinghe, Attorney-
at Law, appeared for the Plaintiff, and Mr. Karunaratne, Attorney-at-Law,
instructed by Mr. Perera, Attorney-at-Law, appeared for the defendant. The
Plaintiff was present, but the defendant was absent. It is recorded that "the
Plaintiff as well as the Defendant in this case are seeking a divorce. There
is no contest in this case". The plaintiff gave evidence and stated that the
defendant deserted him on 10th February 1964 and thereafter had not come back
in spite of his attempts to bring her back and that she was guilty of
malicious desertion. There was. no cross-examination of the plaintiff. Mr.
Karunaratne, Attorney-at-Law who appeared for the defendant, then stated that
the defence was not calling any evidence. At the conclusion of the trial, the
District Judge granted the prayer of the plaintiff and ordered decree nisi to
be entered annulling the marriage. On 16th June 1978, decree absolute was
entered. l n October 1978, the plaintiff contracted a second marriage and a
child was born to him by that marriage in July 1979.  
  
On 9th April 1979, the defendant filed petition and affidavit stating that no
summons was served on her, that she did not file the proxy or memorandum of
appearance alleged to have been given by her to Mr. W. E. C. Perera and that
she had given no instructions to him to file answer or to appear for her. She
prayed that all proceedings be set aside and that the decree nisi and decree
absolute be vacated and that she be allowed to defend the action.  
  
The matter was taken up for inquiry on 9th April 1979. The defendant stated
that she had not received summons in that case and became aware of this action
only when she appeared in the Magistrate's Court on 9th March 1979 in her
maintenance case. As Mr. W. 'E. C. Perera was not an Attorney-at-Law
practising in the District Court of Gampaha and who had given his registered
address

**479**

 as "No. 247, Hultsdorf Street, Colombo 12", the District Judge, having
ascertained that Mr. Karunaratne, Attorney-at-Law, who normally practised in
that' Court had not appeared in that case, issued notice on Mr. W. E. C.
Perera and the plaintiff to appear in Court on 2.5.79. The notice sent. by
Court to Mr. Perera was returned undelivered with the endorsement that "there
was no such person at the address given", but the notice was served on the
plaintiff to appear in Court on 2nd May 1979\. The plaintiff appeared in
Court, on that date and was represented by Mr. M. A. Dharmawardena, and the
defendant was represented by Mr. R. M. P. Dharmawardena. The defendant
testified that she had filed an action for maintenance against the plaintiff.
As he had defaulted for eight months in the payment of maintenance, she had
appeared in Court on 9.3.79 to claim the arrears. On that date, the plaintiff
had appeared in Court and stated that he had obtained a divorce and produced
the decree absolute. She re-affirmed that she hadn't received any summons. She
denied having signed any proxy or other documents or that she gave any
instructions to any Attorney-at-Law to file answer. Counsel who appeared for
the plaintiff said that he was neither cross-examining. nor calling any
evidence as it was his position that the Court had no jurisdiction to vacate
the judgment entered by it on 28.2.78.  
  
The District Judge delivered his order on 8.5.79 accepting the unchallenged
evidence of the defendant that no summons had been served on her. He declared
void and of no effect all steps taken against the defendant. He set aside the
decree nisi and decree absolute and granted the defendant an opportunity to
file answer.  
  
The plaintiff thereafter by his revision application dated 25th September 1979
moved the Court of Appeal to have the order of the District Judge set aside on
the ground that the District Judge had no jurisdiction to vacate his own order
even if it was established that summons had not been served on the defendant
respondent. By its order dated 28.7.80, the Court of Appeal dismissed the
application with costs. The plaintiff has preferred this appeal from that
order.  
  
Principles of natural justice are the basis of our laws of procedure. The
requirement that the defendant should have notice of the action either by
personal service or substituted service of summons is a condition precedent to
the assumption of jurisdiction against the defendant.  
  
At the hearing before us, Counsel for plaintiff-appellant accepted that a
decree entered against a defendant who has had no

**480**

notice of the action because of non-service of summons on him is a nullity.
But he argued that the District Court which entered the decree had no
jurisdiction to vacate its own order or judgment. He submitted that in that
event relief should be sought from the Court of Appeal by way of revision or
restitution integrum. He urged that it is competent only for the superior
Court to vacate such judgment and decree of the District Court, even though it
is, in law, a nullity. He contended that on entering a decree, the District
Judge becomes functus and had no further jurisdiction to go into the question
whether summons had been served or not. He, however, qualified his proposition
by the concession that though the Judge cannot enter into a judicial inquiry
to determine whether summons was served or not, he could, without taking any
independent evidence, peruse the record to check whether summons had been
served or not, and if the record disclosed that there had been no service of
summons, he could declare the decree a nullity. His submission was that the
jurisdiction of the District Court was confined to ascertainment of a fact
that did not involve a finding by judicial inquiry in a contentious matter. He
said that if there was a contentious matter between the parties, such as
whether summons had been served or not and the court is called upon to address
its judicial mind to that question, the Court cannot embark on a judicial
inquiry but is bound by the decree already entered. In support of his
submission, he relied on the case of Ramasamy Pulle v. de Silva (1); Silva v.
Silva(2) Van Twest v: ? Gunewardene(3) and Paulusz v. Perera 141. He wound up
by saying that once an order or decree is entered, the Court becomes functus
officio and cannot set aside or alter the order or decree except in the
limited circumstances specified in section 189 of the Civil Procedure Code;
The rationale of his contention was that the District Court had no inherent
power to set aside a judgment which it had delivered) without jurisdiction. He
was referred to the following observation of Lord Green M. R. in Craig v.
Kanssen 151.  
  
"Those cases appear to me to establish that a person who is affected by an
order, if it can properly be described as a nullity, is entitled ex debito
justitiae to have it set aside. As far as procedure is concerned, it seems to
me that the Court in its inherent jurisdiction can set aside its own order and
it is not necessary to appeal from it:"  
  
 Which has been approved by the Privy Council.- vide Kofi Forfie v. Seifah(6)
Macfoy v. United Africa Co. Ltd. 171. His reply was that this observation is
correct as far as English law is concerned, but does not represent the legal
position in Sri Lanka. According

**481**

to him, the inherent powers of our original Courts are deficient to grant
relief in such an instance. It is to be noted that this salutary principle
enunciated by Lord Greene has often been invoked and acted upon by our Courts.
- vide Sirinivasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero (8 ); Hewage v. Bandaranayake (9)
Perera v. Commissioner of National Housing (10) Albert v. Veeriahpillai (11)  
  
In Ramasamy Pulle v. de Silva (1), no question of nullity was involved. The
Court had made order annulling adjudication under section 140 of the
Insolvency Ordinance after only one meeting of creditors, whereas there should
have been two meetings before such an order was made. When the District Court
became aware of this irregularity, it set aside its earlier order. On appeal,
the Supreme Court held that the District Court had, in the circumstances, no
jurisdiction to set aside or review its earlier order which had been made
irregularly in the exercise of its jurisdiction.  
  
In Silva v. Silva (2 ), on a dispute between the appellant and the respondent
as to who was entitled to 1/16th share of the land sought to be partitioned,
the District Judge held that the appellant was entitled to that share.
Preliminary decree for partition was drawn up in accordance with the judgment.
There was no appeal against the decree. Subsequently, another District Judge
made order amending the preliminary decree by taking away the 1/16th share
from the appellant and adding it to the respondent's share. The Supreme Court
held that the District Judge had no power to modify or amend the preliminary
decree even if he was of the opinion that the former decision was mistaken in
fact or law. Here again there was no question of the original preliminary
decree being a nullity, in the sense that the District Court had no
jurisdiction to enter the decree.  
  
In Van Twest v. Gunewardene(3) judgment was entered of consent in pursuance of
the warrant of attorney to confess judgment. Later it was contended that the
decree was wrongly entered as the warrant of attorney was bad. It was held
that the District Court had no jurisdiction to set aside its own decree. Here
again there was no question of the consent order being a nullity. Summons had
been duly served upon the Proctor as provided in the warrant of attorney and
the Proctor had wrongly consented to judgment.  
  
In Paulusz v. Perera 141, the District Judge had dismissed the partition
action on the grounds: (a) that the deeds produced before him were copies and
not the originals, and (b) that some of the documents that had been tendered
in evidence had not been filed. After the order of dismissal had been made, it
was brought to the notice of the Court that the documents had been tendered

**482**

to the clerk in charge of the record who had omitted to send them with the
record. After a consideration of the documents, the District Judge was of the
opinion that he would not have made the earlier order if the documents had
been before him; he set aside his earlier order dismissing the partition
action and entered decree on the basis of those documents. The Supreme Court
held that the District Judge had, in the circumstances, no jurisdiction to
vary his own decree, and that having dismissed the partition action, he could
not subsequently set aside his own order. Here again, there was no question of
absence of jurisdiction to make the original order in question. It was a ease
of the District Judge improperly dismissing the plaintiff's action. The
Supreme Court alone was entitled to vacate such order in the exercise of its
appellate or revisionary jurisdiction.  
  
In contradistinction to the above cases, the case of Thambirajah v.
Sinnamma(12) brings out the distinction. I n this case, after final partition
decree had been entered, the 1st defendant applied to have the decree set
aside on the ground that she had not been served with summons. The lower Court
held that it had no jurisdiction to set aside the interlocutory and the final
decrees entered in the case. On appeal, Maartensz J. following "the trend of
authority" held that the lower Court had jurisdiction to set aside a decree on
the application of a party to the suit who had not been served with summons.
He sent the case back to the Commissioner of Requests to determine whether the
1st defendant had been served with summons and to vacate the interlocutory and
final decrees if he found that summons had not been served on the 1st
defendant.  
  
In the case of James v. Dochinona(l3) an ex-parte judgment had been entered
against the defendant in the Court of Requests. Three days after judgment
being so entered, the defendant moved the Court to have the judgment vacated
on the ground that he was not served with summons. The Supreme Court held that
the Court had acted without jurisdiction in entering judgment against the
defendant when he had not been served with summons. The judgment of the
Supreme Court proceeded on the basis that the Court of Requests had
jurisdiction to inquire into the question whether summons had been served or
not, and that if it came to a finding that there was no service, it had the
power to vacate the earlier exparte judgment.  
  
In Perera v. Commissioner of National Housing (10) an exparte judgment for
ejectment of the defendant had been entered against the defendant in the Court
of Requests and the defendant

**483**

was summarily ejected under writ of possession issued by the Court. The
defendant thereafter filed petition and affidavit and moved that the judgment
and decree entered ex-party against her be vacated as there was no service of
summons on her. After inquiry, the Commissioner of Requests found the Fiscal
's officer who gave evidence to be unworthy of credit and held that no summons
had been served nor any substituted service effected on the defendant; he made
order vacating the default judgment. However, the .Commissioner made no
consequential order to see that the defendant was restored to possession of
the premises. It was held by the Supreme Court that "the inherent powers of
the Court are wide enough to have enabled the Court to order the plaintiff to
vacate the premises and restore possession to the defendant". In the course of
his judgment, Tennekoon C. J. stated that "where there was neither personal
service nor substituted ser vice of summons on the defendant ..............
.the Court was without competence to proceed with the action. A judgment
entered under such circumstances is void and can be challenged both in the
very Court and in the proceedings in which it was had and also collaterally
and it also follows that where such attack is made, on a judgment, if the lack
of jurisdiction or competence of the Court is not apparent in the record,
extrinsic evidence would be admissible to show that, in fact, the Court did
not, at the time it gave judgment, have jurisdiction to do so - even to the
extent of contradicting the record."  
  
'Jurisdiction' may be defined to the power of a Court to hear and determine a
cause, to adjudicate or exercise any judicial power. in relation to it. When
the jurisdiction of a Court is challenged, the Court is competent to determine
the question of jurisdiction. An inquiry whether the Court has jurisdiction in
a particular case is not an exercise of jurisdiction over the case itself. It
is really an investigation as to whether the conditions of cognizance are
satisfied. Therefore, a Court is always clothed with jurisdiction to see
whether it has jurisdiction to try the cause submitted to it.  
  
"Jurisdiction naturally divides itself into three heads. In order to the
validity of a judgment, the Court must have jurisdiction of the persons, of
the subject matter and of the particular question which it assumes to decide.
It cannot act upon persons who are not legally before it; upon one who is not
a party to the suit ..... upon a defendant who has never been notified of the
proceedings. If the Court has no jurisdiction, it is of no consequence that
the proceedings had been formally conducted, for they are coram non judice. A
judgment entered by such Court is void and a mere nullity." (Black on
Judgments \- P.261)

**484**

Failure to serve summons is a failure which goes to the root of the
jurisdiction of the Court to hear and determine the action against the
defendant. It is only by service of summons on the defendant that the Court
gets jurisdiction over the defendant. If a defendant is not served with
summons or is otherwise notified of the proceedings against him, judgment
entered against him in those circumstances is a nullity. And when the Court is
made aware of this defect in its jurisdiction, the question of rescinding or
otherwise altering the judgment by the Court does not arise since the judgment
concerned is a nullity. Where there is no act, there can be no question of the
power to revoke or rescind. One cannot after that which does not exist. The
exercise of power to declare such proceedings or judgment a nullity is in fact
an original exercise of the power of the Court and not an exercise of the
power of revocation or alteration. The proceedings being void, the person
affected by them can apply to have them set aside ex debito justitiae in the
exercise of the inherent jurisdiction of the Court. Nagalingam J. in Marian v.
Burah (1 4) stated the legal position thus:  
"it was however urged that the District Court had no inherent power to vacate
its own decree or order in the same proceedings and that the only jurisdiction
it possesses in regard to such matters is what is conferred upon it by the
Civil Procedure Code and no other. But this is a principle that is applicable
only where the Court is called upon to set aside its decree. It does not
extend to cases where it is sought to prove that the decree was obtained by
fraud, collusion and therefore a nullity - a right expressly granted by
section 44 of the Evidence Ordinance." (Section 44 adds in competency of
Court' as another ground rendering the decree a nullity)  
  
In Anisminic v. Foreign Compensation Commission (15), the House of Lords held
that an ouster clause did not operate on decisions outside the permitted
jurisdiction because they are a nullity, and that the Courts, when they decree
that a decision is nullity, are not disregarding the preclusive clause. The
principle of the decision is that the ouster clause would not prevent a
determination of the tribunal being set aside by Court if it was outside the
tribunal's jurisdiction. Nullity is the consequence of all kinds of
jurisdictional errors, e.g. breach of natural justice. As Lord Reid observed
at p. 213:  
  
"There are many cases where although the tribunal had jurisdiction to enter on
the inquiry, it has done or failed to do something in the course of the
inquiry which is of such a nature

**485**

that its decision is a nullity. It may have given its decision in bad faith;
it may have made a decision which it had no power to make; it would have
failed in the course of the inquiry to comply with the requirements of natural
justice."  
  
Every Court, in the absence of express provision in the Civil Procedure Code
for that purpose, possesses, as inherent in its very constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to undo a wrong in the course of the administration of
justice.  
  
Section 839 of the Code preserves the inherent power of the Court "to make
such orders as may be necessary for the ends of justice or to prevent abuse of
the process of the Court". This section embodies a legislative recognition of
the inherent power of the Court to make such orders as may be necessary for
the ends of justice. The inherent power is exercised ex debito justitiae to do
that real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone Courts
exist.  
  
A grave injustice would-be caused to the defendant-respondent if .she has been
divorced without any knowledge of the proceedings against her. Her status and
right of maintenance have been affected. The Court possesses inherent power to
rectify such injustice on the principle actus neminem gravabit (an act of the
Court shall prejudice no person). This principle has been stated by Lord
Cairns in Rodge v. Comptoir D'Escompte de Paris (16) to be:  
  
"One of the first and highest duties of all Courts is to take care that the
act of the Court does no injury to any of the suitors, and when the expression
'the act of the Court' is used, it does not mean merely the act of the primary
Court, or of any intermediate Court of Appeal, but the act of the Court as a
whole; from the lowest Court which entertains jurisdiction over the matter up
to the highest Court which finally disposes of the case. It is a duty of the
aggregate of those tribunals, if I may use the expression to take care that no
act of the Court in the course of the whole of the proceedings does an injury
to the suitors in the Court."  
  
Thus, when a complaint is made to Court that injustice has been caused by the
default of the Court in not serving summons, it is the duty of the Court to
institute a judicial inquiry into the complaint and ascertain whether summons
had been served or not, even going outside the record and admitting extrinsic
evidence. and if it finds that summons had not been served, it should declare
its ex-parte order null and void and vacate it. The contention of

**486**

Counsel for the appellant fetters or impedes the Court from performing this
paramount duty.  
  
Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant referred us to Mcpherson v. Mcpherson(17)
where the fact of re-marriage was treated as a decisive factor against ex
parte proceedings being set aside. The facts in that case were. the wife had
due notice but made no answer and a decree nisi was pronounced, which was
later made absolute, some time after the period of appeal had expired, the
husband re-married the wife then commenced an action against her former
husband to set aside the decrees on the ground that he had committed perjury.
she later alleged that the trial of the divorce action was a nullity, not
being a trial in open Court. It was with the latter point only that the Privy
Council was concerned. The Privy Council held that the decrees were voidable,
but not void. Apart from the alleged exclusion of the public, the proceedings
were regular, and the wife, if so minded, could have filed answer and
contested the petition. Where there was a defect in procedure which had not
caused a failure of natural justice, the resulting order is only voidable. The
Court held on the facts of that case that "the order absolute cannot be
touched after the time for appeal therefrom has passed and a new status has
been acquired, or, as in this case, after the respondent having re-married is
entitled to the protection afforded by section 57 of the Matrimonial Causes
Act, 1857. It follows in Their Lordships' judgment that the appeal fails. the
order absolute, although originally voidable, having become unassailable by
the time the appellant's claim was made". It was too late, and by herself re-
marrying, the wife had adopted the decree. If a party waives or acquiesces in
the irregularity, he cannot afterwards complain of it. In my view, the `same
conclusion would not have been reached by the Judicial Committee if the facts
had been that the proceedings had never been brought to the notice of the
wife, as in the case we are considering.  
  
It is to be noted that it was never the position of the plaintiff that even
though the defendant had not been served with summons, she had become
otherwise aware of the proceedings against her and had acquiesced in or waived
the irregularity or failure, in which event there would not have been any
failure of natural justice.  
  
Mr. Jayawardene addresses us also on the facts and stated that the Court below
has -not paid sufficient consideration to the statutory presumption created by
section 404 of the Administration of Justice (Amendment) Law, No. 25 of 1975.

**487**

Section 400(1) of that Law provides that "summons shall ordinarily be served
by' registered post" and section 404 provides that "when a summons is served
by registered post, the advice of delivery issued under the Inland Post Rules
and the endorsement of service, if any, shall be sufficient evidence of the
service of summons and of the date of such service, and shall be admissible in
evidence, and the statements contained therein shall be deemed to be correct,
unless and until the contrary is proved".  
  
The copy of the summons alleged to have been served on the defendant gives the
address as "575/12, Baseline Road, Colombo". The advice of delivery exhibits a
signature "W. Hemawathie", alleged to be the signature of the addressee. The
defendant Hemawathie has stated on oath that she did not receive the summons.
She was not cross-examined on her denial and no effort has been made to prove
that the signature appearing on .the advice of delivery is that of the
defendant, and no evidence has been led to show that the address referred to
in the aforesaid copy of the summons was the correct address of the defendant
at the time. The advice of delivery further does not carry the name of the
road nor the number of the premises. In the circumstances, the presumption
under section 404 cannot be drawn. In any event, the defendant by her sworn
testimony has deposed that she had not been served with summons. She has not
been contradicted.  
  
For the reasons stated above, the appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.  
  
**ISMAIL, J.**                        I agree.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J**.            I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/23.html_  

