##  Lilanthi De Silva v. Attorney General and Others - SLR - 155, Vol 3 of
2000 [2000] LKSC 23; (2000) 3 Sri LR 155 (25 September 2000)

**155**

**LILANTHI DE SILVA  
V.  
 ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
SC (FR) NO. 428/2000  
25TH SEPTEMBER, 2000  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Public Security Ordinance - Emergency (Restriction on
Consumption of Electricity) Regulations - Discrimination \- Article 12(1) of
the Constitution.  
_  
Regulation 6 of the Emergency (Restriction on Consumption of Electricity)
Regulations No. 1/2000 published on 31.05.2000 required every consumer of
electricity to reduce his monthly consumption of electricity by twenty
percentum of his average monthly consumption based on the consumption for the
months of March, April and May, 2000 in default of which he was made liable to
a surcharge amounting to twenty five percentum of the amount of his monthly
electricity bill.  
  
**Held :  
**  
Regulation 6 was made applicable equally to all namely (a) public spirited
consumers who had reduced consumption of electricity during the relevant
period (b) . consumers who being indifferent or anti-social increased their
consumption (c) consumers who used electricity sparingly for essential
purposes; (d) others more affluent who used electricity more lavishly for non-
essential purposes as well. The regulation treated unequal equally; it is an
unreasonable exercise of the power conferred by the Public Security Ordinance,
ultra vires and violative of the petitioner's right under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Manohara de Silva with David Weeraratne, Athula Perera, Nalinda Indatissa and
Ms. Kishali Pinto Jayawardena_ for petitioner.  
  
_Palitha Fernando, DSG_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**156**

September 25, 2000.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
In this application the Petitioner complains that Regulation 6 of the
Emergency (Restriction on Use of Consumption of Electricity) Regulations No.
1/2000 published in Government Gazette Extraordinary No. 1134/21 of 31.05.2000
was ultra wires of the Public Security Ordinance and infringed her fundamental
right under Article 12(1).  
  
Regulation 6 provides:  
  
"6(a) Every person who consumes electricity shall reduce his monthly
electricity consumption by twenty percentum of his average monthly
consumption.  
  
(b) Every person who fails to comply with this regulation shall be liable to a
surcharge amounting to twenty five percentum of the amount of his monthly
electricity bill.  
  
For the purpose of this regulation, "average monthly consumption" of a person
shall be the average of his electricity consumption for the months of March,
April and May 2000.  
  
Admittedly, it was known in January 2000 that the amount of water stored in
the reservoirs was relatively law, and that a power crisis was anticipated by
the 2nd Respondent, the Ceylon Electricity Board, by the end of May. In that
context, a mandatory reduction in electricity consumption and/or a surcharge
on excessive consumption were legitimate measures "for the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the life of the community". However, the
question that arises in this case is whether the basis of such reduction
and/or surcharge was so arbitrary and unfair to the extent that it infringed
Article 12(1).  
  
The complaint in respect of the mandatory reduction, imposed as from June 2000
and based on average March-May

**157**

consumption, is that Regulation 6(a) failed to take account of the fact that
as at June all consumers could not be treated as being similarly
circumstanced.  
  
From one point of view, consumers fell into three categories. Thus, in
response to the crisis which was anticipated in January 2000, some public-
spirited consumers would have voluntarily reduced their consumption in March-
May; others would have been indifferent; and some anti-social consumers might
even have increased their consumption. Whether consumers had reduced or
increased consumption would have been readily ascertainable from the records
of the 2nd Respondent. Hence to compel a uniform 20% reduction, by reference
to average March-May consumption, would have imposed a greater burden on
public-spirited and conservation minded consumers than on others (and not vice
versa).  
  
From another point of view, consumers fell into two categories: a large number
who - by necessity or choice - used electricity sparingly, for essential
purposes only, and therefore consumed little; and others - more affluent - who
used electricity more lavishly, for non-essential purposes as well. The
mandatory reduction and surcharge operated unequally on these two categories:
the former would have to curtail use for essentials, while the latter would
only have to cut down on "luxuries". The failure to recognize, at least to
some extent, the special needs of the former was unfair and arbitrary.,'  
  
As for the surcharge, the consumer who made an honest effort to curtail
consumption, and the one who did not, were made equally liable to a surcharge
of 25% on total consumption (and not just on the excess). Thus one consumer
who reduced monthly consumption from 800 units to 650, a second who maintained
his consumption at 650 units, and a third who increased his consumption from
500 units to 650, would all be liable to the identical surcharge of 25% (on
monthly consumption of 650 units). Regulation 6(b) thus treated unequals
equally.

**158**

Learned Deputy Solicitor-General who appears for the Respondents could suggest
no basis whatever to justify Regulation 6. His only submission was that it was
enacted to achieve the lawful and desirable objective of conserving
electricity. However legitimate and- proper the objective, the means selected
were in violation of Article 12(1) and were not a reasonable exercise of the
power conferred by the Public Security Ordinance.  
  
We therefore hold that Regulation 6 is ultra vires and in violation of the
Petitioner's fundamental right under Article 12(1), and we award her a sum of
Rs. 3000/- as costs payable by the 2nd Respondent.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/23.html_  

