##  Gnanamuttu v. Military Officer Ananda and Others - SLR - 213, Vol 2 of
1999 [1999] LKSC 23; (1999) 2 Sri LR 213 (5 May 1999)

**213**

**GNANAMUTTU  
v.  
MILITARY OFFICER ANANDA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA,  
CJ., WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 152/98  
MARCH 15, 1999

_Fundamental rights - Investigation of terrorist activity - Arrest on the
ground of failure to possess a 'Police Registration Form' \- Articles 12 (1)
and 13 (1) of the Constitution._

The petitioner a Civil Engineer by profession was a passenger in a bus
proceeding to Borella. The bus was stopped at an Army check-point at Stanley
Wijesundera Mawatha around 8.15 am on 13.02.98. When the identity of the
passengers was checked the petitioner produced his National Identity Card,
Driving Licence and a Student Identity Card issued to him by the Bandaranaike
Centre for International Studies. Notwithstanding, such proof of identity the
petitioner was detained by the 1st respondent for not possessing a "Police
Registration Form", while the rest of the passengers were released. Around
9.30 am 'two men in civils'' arrived in a police jeep and took the petitioner
to the Cinnamon Gardens Police Station where he was kept in a room. The
petitioner was finger-printed and produced before the Magistrate's Court,
Hulftsdorp, around 4 pm on a "B" Report which stated that he was suspected of
"terrorist activities". On 20.2.98, he was discharged by the Magistrate.

**Held :**

The documents produced by the petitioner were more than sufficient to
ascertain his identity. There was no basis for the 1st respondent to have
detained the petitioner, and no basis for the 2nd respondent to have produced
him before the Magistrate's Court on a "B' Report. The petitioner's rights
under Articles 12 (1) and 13 (1) of the Constitution were infringed by such
action.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Dr. Jayantha de Almeida Gunaratne_ with _Elmore Perera, Kishali Pinto
Jayawardene_ and _Kamal Nissanka_ for petitioner.

_Harsha Fernando_ SC for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**214**

May 5, 1999.  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

The petitioner is 42 years and a Civil Engineer by profession. He has been
resident in and around Colombo for the last 29 years and since 1987 he has
been residing at No. 66, St. Mary's Road, Mount Lavinia. According to the
petitioner, on 13.02.1998, he left his residence around 7.00 am to proceed to
his work place at Rajagiriya. After attending to a money transaction at the
Automatic Teller Machine, Standard Chartered Bank at Bambalapitiya (P4) he had
boarded a No.154 bus from the Bullers Road bus halt intending "to transfer to
a Rajagiriya bound bus from Borella Junction". While the bus was proceeding to
Borella, it was stopped at an Army checkpoint at Stanley Wijesundera Mawatha
around 8.15 am and "the passengers were asked to disembark". The petitioner
had produced his identity card, his driving licence and a student identity
card issued to him by the Bandaranaike Centre for International Studies (P5).
The 1st respondent after checking these documents had asked the petitioner to
produce his "Police Registration Form". He had told the 1st respondent that
"there was no legal requirement to possess such a form" (P6). The 1st
respondent had then addressed the petitioner rudely and had queried as to
whether the form in question is so heavy that it cannot be carried on his
person. Thereafter, the petitioner was detained while the rest of the
passengers were released. The petitioner was kept standing on the road near
the Army check-point in full view of the public and "suffering considerable
humiliation in the process". A police jeep arrived around 9.30 am with "two
men in civils" and the petitioner was taken to the Police Station, Cinnamon
Gardens. At the Police Station, the petitioner was interrogated by the 3rd
respondent. After a while his identification documents together with his diary
and his money were taken from him and he was put inside a cell. Around 12.30
pm the petitioner was taken to the Police Station, Bambalapitiya, in order to
be photographed. He was kept in a room at the Police Station and after about
two and a half hours he was informed that the required photographs cannot be
taken as the police photographer had not turned up. At this point the
petitioner was informed that as there was a transport problem he would have to
walk upto the Galle Road. He was waiting there with a policeman "in civils",
when the petitioner noticed a colleague of his and a member of the Institute
of Engineers walking along the Galle Road. The petitioner had apprised him of
the situation and he had given him a telephone card with which

215

the petitioner had informed a fellow-worker in his office that he has been
arrested. After making the telephone call he had discovered that the policeman
who was with him was not there and he had found out that he had gone to the
Police Station, Cinnamon Gardens. The petitioner had no money with him as all
his belongings were taken by the Police. As there was no other option, the
petitioner had proceeded on foot to the Police Station, Cinnamon Gardens. He
reached the Police Station around 4.00 pm Thereafter, the petitioner was told
that he had to be finger-printed and following which, all his belongings,
except the National Identity Card was returned to him. He was then taken to
the Magistrate's Court, Hulftsdorp, where an Attorney-at-law had said that he
would appear for the petitioner and had demanded Ps. 1,500 for the said
purpose. To the surprise of the petitioner he had found his National Identity
Card, which was handed over to the Police that morning, in the possession of
the said Attorney-at-law. The petitioner had refused this offer saying that he
did not have any money with him. Then the Attorney-at-law had become hostile.
The Magistrate had directed that the petitioner could sign a personal bond and
reappear in Court on 20.02.1998 (P7). He was discharged by the Magistrate when
he appeared on 20.02.1998 (P7).

The petitioner submitted that there was no basis for the 1st respondent to
arrest him and for the 3rd respondent acting under the authority of the 2nd
respondent to detain him. He was never informed of the charges against him.
The petitioner alleges that his arrest was arbitrary, unreasonable, unlawful
and illegal and was in violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed under
Articles 12 (1), 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

This Court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged violation of
Articles 12 (1) and 13 (1) of the Constitution.  
  
The 2nd respondent had averred that on 13.02.1998, around 9.15 am the 1st
respondent, who was on duty at the road block at Stanley Wijesundera Mawatha
had handed over the petitioner to one PC Jayasinghe, who was on duty, on
suspicion that the petitioner may be connected to or involved in terrorist
activities. On the instructions given by the 2nd respondent, the officer on
duty has telephoned the National Information Bureau and the Security Co-
ordination Unit and given the particulars of the petitioner in order to
ascertain whether there were any reports, evidence or other facts suggesting
and/or

215

linking the petitioner to any terrorist related activities. The 2nd respondent
averred that around 9.45 am with the consent of the petitioner, a detailed
statement was recorded. According to him, the petitioner was produced before
the Magistrate on a B report bearing No. B 6591/1, in the Magistrate's Court
in Hulftsdorp at 10.45 am on 13.02.1998.

The 1st respondent had made a statement at the Police Station, Cinnamon
Gardens, on 13.02.1998 at 9.15 am (2131). He had stated that the officers on
duty at the check-point on Stanley Wijesundera Mawatha, had taken the
petitioner into custody as he did not have a "Police Registration Form".

The 2nd respondent in paragraph 9 of his affidavit has averred that:

" **. . .** at the point of accepting the petitioner into custody from the 1st
respondent, PC Jayasinghe has recorded that the petitioner has been arrested
by the 1st respondent for not possessing, a police report and that the 1st
respondent has handed over the petitioner to police custody to (sic) further
inquiry."

It is thus common ground that the petitioner was arrested as he did not
possess the "Police Registration Form". Learned State Counsel rightly conceded
that an arrest cannot be made on the basis that the petitioner did not possess
a "Police Registration Form". His position was that the police should have
released him immediately. However, the police had acted differently. B Report
No. B 6591/1 (2137) stated that the petitioner was produced before the
Magistrate as he was suspected of "terrorist activities". The 2nd respondent
had further stated in the said B Report that he was conducting inquiries to
find out whether the petitioner is involved in such activities. He, therefore,
moved that the petitioner be remanded until 20.02.1998.

It is conceded that the petitioner was arrested by the 1st respondent at a
security check-point on Stanley Wijesundera Mawatha. At that time the
petitioner was on his way to his place of work. The petitioner, along with the
rest of the passengers in the bus, had produced his Identity Card, as proof of
his identity at the check-point. The petitioner had also produced his Driving
Licence and a Student Identity Card issued by the Bandaranaike Centre for
International Studies (P5).

217

If the purpose at the security check-point was to ascertain the identity of
the person travelling in that bus, these documents in my view, were more than
sufficient.

Learned State Counsel for the 2nd to 4th respondents, submitted that the
Magistrate should have noticed the lapse on the part of the 2nd respondent and
should have released the petitioner forthwith without making an order for the
petitioner to sign a personal bond and to appear in Courts on 20.02.1998. I
find it difficult to agree with this submission. The Magistrate made his Order
on the basis of the B Report submitted by the 2nd respondent. As mentioned
earlier, the B Report stated that the petitioner was produced before the
Magistrate as he was suspected of terrorist activities. The Magistrate had to
act according to the documents produced before him. In such a situation I do
not think the Magistrate had acted unfairly or unreasonably.

According to the submissions made by the petitioner, he was produced before
the Magistrate only around 4.00 pm. The 2nd respondent, however, averred that
the petitioner was produced before the Magistrate around 10.45 am (paragraph 6
(e) of the 2nd respondent's affidavit). The IB extracts show that the
petitioner was taken to Court at 10.45 am on 13.02.1998 (2R6). That officer,
however, had returned to the Police Station only at 7.02 pm (2R6 A). On the
material placed before us, the version given by the petitioner is more
acceptable.

On a consideration of the totality of the material placed before us, I hold
that the 2nd respondent has violated the petitioner's fundamental rights
guaranteed under Articles 12 (1) and 13 (1) of the Constitution. There was no
basis for the 1st respondent to have detained the petitioner. The 2nd
respondent, as the officer-in-charge of the Police Station, should have
released the petitioner immediately. There was no basis at all for the 2nd
respondent to have caused the petitioner to be produced before the
Magistrate's Court on a B Report.

I, accordingly, hold that the petitioner is entitled to a sum of Rs. 50,000 as
compensation and costs, out of which Rs. 42,500 must be paid by the State and
Rs. 7,500 personally by the 2nd respondent. These amounts must be paid within
three (3) months from today.

218

The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Inspector-General of Police.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/23.html_  

