##  Dhanapala v. Dissanayake, Provincial Director of Education and Others -
SLR - 400, Vol 1 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 23; (1997) 1 Sri LR 400 (4 April 1997)

**400**

**DHANAPALA**

**v.**

**DISSANAYAKE, PROVINCIAL DIRECTOR**

## **OF EDUCATION AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

DR. AMERASINGHE, J.,

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 145/95.

FEBRUARY 7 AND MARCH 24, 1997.



_Fundamental Rights ‑ Article 12(1) of the Constitution ‑ Legitimate
expectation ‑Provincial Council public service ‑ National Public Service ‑
Powers of Public Service Commission ‑ Position of persons in the National
Service not seconded but serving in Provincial Council public service to
assist or to support._



There are two kinds of officers who are subject to the power of transfer and
disciplinary control of a Provincial Council.



(1) Those who belong to a National Service but serving a Provincial Council on
secondment; and



(2) Those who belong to the provincial public service.



A distinction is made between whose who belong to a National Service but serve
a Provincial Council on secondment on the one hand and those who are members
of the provincial public service. The former have a right of appeal to the
Public Service Commission in respect of all matters connected with their
employment, for, although for the time being they are subject to the powers of
transfer and disciplinary control of the Provincial Council they serve, they
are nevertheless members of a National Service coming therefore within the
Public Service Commission. Those who belong to the provincial public service
too have a right of appeal to the Public Service Commission but only against
an order of dismissal.



There is a third group of officers like the class of officers to whom the
petitioner belongs, who have not been seconded nor serve as members of the
provincial public service. This third group belong to the National Service but
their services have been made available to Provincial Councils to support or
assist them but not upon the basis of secondment.



Persons in the third group would remain subject to the powers of transfer and
disciplinary control of the Public Service Commission. Hence the transfer of
the

401



petitioner by the Secretary of the Education Service Board of the Public
Service Commission to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education from the
post of Deputy Director of Education in charge of the Dimbulagala Division
held on appointment by the North Central Provincial Director of Education and
Secretary, Ministry of Education, Health etc. of the North Central Provincial
Council, was valid and in no way frustrates his legitimate expectations.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C._ with _Nigel_ _Hatch_ for petitioner.



_Kolitha Dharmawardene, D. S. G._ for respondents.

_Cur. Adv. vult._



  
April 04, 1997\.  


**DR**. **AMERASINGHE, J.**  


In 1967, the petitioner was appointed a Grade III Sinhala Teacher at the
Aluthwewa Vidyalaya by the Chief Education Officer, Polonnaruwa. In 1981 he
was promoted to the rank of Grade IV Principal. In 1982 he was promoted to the
rank of Grade V Principal and appointed Education Officer Polonnaruwa. In 1985
he was appointed a Class III Officer of the Sri Lanka Education Administrative
Service. In 1988 he was appointed Principal of Welikanda Maha Vidyalaya. All
the appointments and promotions since 1981 were made by the Education Service
Board of the Public Service Commission.



The petitioner served as Education Officer of the North Central Provincial
Council from July to September 1989 and in the Dimbulagala Division Education
Office from 1 September 1989 to March 1993. In 1992, while he was at
Dimbulagala, he was promoted to Class II of the Sri Lanka Education
Administrative Service by the Education Service Board of the Public Service
Commission. In 1993, he was appointed from time to time to serve as Deputy
Director of Education of the Lankapura Pradeshiya Education Office, the
Elahera Pradeshiya Education Office, the Dimbulagala Pradeshiya Division
Office, and at Mannampitiya. In 1994 he was appointed Deputy Director of
Education in charge of the Dimbulagala Division. The appointments and
transfers between 1989 and 1993 were made by

402



the Pradeshiya Education Director. The 1993 and 1994 appointments and
transfers were made by the North Central Provincial Director of Education and
the Secretary, Ministry of Education, Health etc of the North Central
Provincial Council. By a letter dated 31 March 1995, the Secretary of the
Education Service Board of the Public Service Commission transferred the
petitioner to the Ministry of Education and Higher Education. The Fourth
respondent was appointed by the Education Service Board of the Public Service
Commission to fill the vacancy created by the transfer of the petitioner. The
petitioner in his letter dated 18 April 1995 addressed to the Secretary,
Education Service Board of the Public Service Commission appealed against the
transfer, but received no response.

The petitioner alleged that his fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12(1)
of the Constitution have been violated by his transfer to the Ministry of
Education and Higher Education. The petitioner does not deny that he was and
is a member of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service, but he maintains that he
was "released from or about 1988 to the service of the [North Central]
Provincial Council in terms of the applicable State Administrative Circular
[s]," namely Public Administration Circulars No. 10/89 and No. 10/89 (1). He
states that in terms of Public Administration Circular No. 25/91 dated 03 July
1991, officials released to a Provincial Council would serve that Council for
a period of four years; at the end of that period, the officer was entitled at
his request to have his service with the Council extended. Until such a
request was made, he could not be transferred without the approval of the Head
of the relevant Department of the Provincial Council. He had neither requested
a transfer, nor had the transfer been made with the approval of the Head of
his Department. On the other hand, the Additional Secretary (Education), on
the directions of the Minister of Education of the Provincial Council, had
objected to the transfer of the petitioner. The petitioner maintains that the
Secretary of the Education Service Board had no power to transfer the
petitioner and frustrate his legitimate expectation of serving the North
Central Provincial Council.



While it is not in dispute that the petitioner did serve the North Central
Provincial Council and was appointed to various posts by that

  
403



Council, there was no evidence placed before us to show that he had been
released to serve the Provincial Council on secondment. All that he has been
able to do is to say that "to the best of his knowledge and belief in October
1993 he signified for the first time his consent to be released to the Central
Provincial Council (sic.) on a letter dated 19/10/1993 sent to the Deputy
Director of Education Dimbulagala Education Office of the North Central
Province on which the Deputy Director of Education Dimbulagala who was the
head of the Department that the petitioner had served in had approved the said
extension of the petitioner's service," and to submit a copy of the letter
dated 19 October 1993. That document (P9) is a letter from the Dimbulagala
Pradeshiya Education Office requesting the petitioner in terms of Circular
Nos. 10/89 and 10/89 (1) to signify his agreement to serve that institution.
That document is of little or no value, for it does not evidence the fact that
the petitioner had been seconded for service in the North Central Provincial
Council. Indeed, the petitioner, although he submitted the letter, states in
paragraph 17 of his petition that the basis of the letter was flawed by
"inadvertence or mistake".



If the petitioner had not been released on secondment in terms of the
prescribed manner to serve in the Provincial Council of the North Central
Province, then he would have been subject to the authority of the Education
Service Board of the Public Service Commission and could legitimately have
been transferred by that Board. If he had been released, he might perhaps have
come under the authority of the Provincial Council until 23 April 1993. After
that date, however, he would, it seems, have been subject to the control of
the Education Service Board even if he had been released on secondment, for
Public Administration Circular No. 56/89 (1) issued on 23 April 1993 states
that to be the case. At the date of the letter intimating his transfer, namely
31 March 1995, the petitioner was subject to the authority of the Education
Service Board of the Public Service Commission in terms of Circular No. 56/89
(1).



However, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that if Circular No.
56/89 (1) did permit the Education Service Board "to transfer any officer in
the all‑island services during their period of release to the Provincial
Public service unilaterally, then ... this



404



circular is contrary to the Constitution which by the 13th Amendment
Provincial Council List has vested the transfer and disciplinary control of
such officers in the Provincial Council. This circular can only be made
operative if such transfers are made on the recommendation or approval of the
Provincial Public Service or the relevant Provincial Ministry. Further, the
question arises whether the consent of the officer should not be obtained if
he is to be transferred out of the Province since his consent is obtained in
respect of his transfer or appointment to the Provincial Public Service."



The petitioner was neither transferred nor appointed to the provincial Public
Service, and therefore the question of obtaining his consent before he was
transferred does not arise. He did serve the North Central Provincial Council
under some arrangement or  on the basis of some tacit understanding, with
regard to which the Court was not provided with any information. More
importantly, there was no evidence placed before us to show that the
petitioner was seconded in the manner prescribed by the relevant circulars to
serve the Provincial Council, let alone being transferred to the provincial
public service. The petitioner continued to be a member of the Sri Lanka
Education Service and while he was serving in the Provincial Council was
promoted to Class II of that Service by the Education Board of the Public
Service Commission.



Education and Educational Services are indeed placed on List 1 (the provincial
Council List) by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution; but there is no
unqualified devolution. List 1 states that the subject of education is
devolved "to the extent set out in Appendix III". Appendix III.3 states as
follows: "The transfer and disciplinary control of all educational personnel,
i.e. Teachers, Principals and Education Officers. Officers belonging to a
National Service but serving the Provincial authority on secondment will have
the right of appeal to the Public Service Commission. Officers belonging to
the provincial public service will have a right of appeal to the Public
Service Commission against dismissal."



The first sight, the phrase "all educational personnel" would suggest that
each and every person, without exception, engaged in  


405



providing educational services, whether as a teacher, principal or education
officer, would in terms of Appendix III.3 be subject to the powers of transfer
and disciplinary control of the relevant Provincial Council.



However, the legal meaning of Appendix III.3 is that there are two kinds of
officers who are subject to the power of transfer and disciplinary control of
a Provincial Council: (1) those who belong to a National Service but serving a
Provincial Council on secondment; and (2) those who belong to the provincial
public service. A distinction is made between those who belong to a National
Service and serve a Provincial body on secondment on the one hand, and those
who are members of the provincial public service. The former have a right of
appeal to the Public Service Commission in respect of all matters connected
with their employment, for, although for the time being they are subject to
the powers of transfer and disciplinary control of the Provincial Council they
serve, they are nevertheless members of a National Service coming therefore
within the Public Service Commission. Those who belong to the provincial
public service too have a right of appeal to the Public Service Commission,
but only against an order of dismissal.



The petitioner does not belong to either class of officers referred to in
Appendix III.3; he has not been seconded nor is he a member of the provincial
public service. He belongs, in my view, to a third group ‑ those who belong to
a National Service, but whose services have been made available to Provincial
Councils to support or assist them but not upon the basis of secondment.
Persons in the third group would remain subject to the powers of transfer and
disciplinary control of the Public Service Commission.



In the circumstances, I am of the view that the transfer of the petitioner was
valid and in no way frustrates his legitimate expectations. The Secretary of
the Education Service Board of the Public Service Commission has adduced
evidence to establish that other officers having the status of the petitioner
have also been transferred and that there has been no invidious
discrimination.



406



For the reasons set out above, I declare that the petitioner's fundamental
rights under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution have not been violated and
make order dismissing the petition; but, having regard to the important and
debatable questions he has raised for consideration, without costs.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/23.html_  

