##  Maithripala Senanayake, Governor of the North Central Province and Another
v. Gamage Don Mahindasoma and Others - SLR - 333, Vol 2 of 1998 [1996] LKSC
23; (1998) 2 Sri LR 333 (4 January 1996)

**333**

**MAITHRIPALA SENANAYAKE, GOVERNOR OF**

**THE NORTH-CENTRAL PROVINCE AND ANOTHER  
v.  
GAMAGE DON MAHINDASOMA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEALS NOS. 41 & 42/96  
SEPTEMBER 23RD AND 24TH, 1996

_Certiorari - Interpretation of the Constitution - Powers of the Governor to
dissolve a Provincial Council - Pre-conditions for. dissolution \- Whether
discretionary or mandatory - Powers of the President to give directions -
Article 4 (b), 154 B, 154 C & 154 .F of the Constitution._

The Governor; each of the North-Central and Sabaragamuwa Provincial Councils,
upon receiving complaints regarding the administration of the Council, wrote
to the Chief Minister of the Provincial Council seeking advice on the
dissolution of the Provincial Council. The Chief Minister advised against the
dissolution. When the Chief Minister so advised, the Board of Ministers in
each Council, in the opinion of the Governor, commanded the support of the
majority of the Provincial Council. According to the Proclamation that was
Gazetted thereafter, on receiving the Chief Minister's advice each Governor
sought the order and direction of the President of the Republic under Article
154 B read with Article 154 F of the Constitution; and acting upon the order
and direction of the President under the said Articles, dissolved the
Provincial Council. Consequently, the Commissioner of Elections, acting under
section 10 of the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988 gave notice
of election to the two Councils and called for nominations on 18.1.96. On
applications made by the Chief Minister the Court of Appeal issued Writs of
Certiorari quashing the orders of dissolution made by the Governors and the
notifications published by the Commissioner of Elections on the ground that
they were null and void and illegal. The court granted leave to appeal to the
Supreme Court on the following questions:

(a). Whether Article 154 B (8) (c) contemplates a discretionary power by the
Governor and if so whether such power is required to be exercised on the
direction of the President.

(b). Whether Article 154 B (8) (d) contemplates the exercise of the Governor's
power solely as a delegate.

(c). Whether the proviso appearing immediately after Article 154 B (9) applies
to Article 154 B (8) (d).

**334**

**Held:**

1\. In exercising his power to dissolve a Provincial Council under Article 154
B (8) (c), the Governor is required by Article 154 B (8) (d) to act in
accordance with the advice of the Chief Minister, so long as the Board of
Ministers commands, in the opinion of the Governor, the support of the
majority of the Council. This is a safeguard imposed by Parliament to promote
the purpose of the Thirteenth Amendment namely, devolution, for the benefit of
voters and elected representatives at Provincial level. The proviso to Article
154 B (9)_ which enables the Governor where he disagrees with the advice of
the Board of Ministers to refer the case to the President for orders is
included to apply to the words immediately preceding it in Article 154 B (9)
which deals with pardon, respite or remission. It does not apply to any other
paragraph or sub-paragraph of Article 154 B, including Article 154 B (c) and
(d).

2\. Article 154 B (8) confers on the Governor a discretionary power to
dissolve a Provincial Council, but that power is coupled with a duty imposed
by Article 154 B (8) (d), to exercise it in accordance with the advice of the
Chief Minister. That duty is mandatory. Hence, the Governor cannot exercise
the power in his discretion, on the directions of the President. The fact that
the Governor believed that he was required to act in his discretion did not
make it so; nor did his decision become final within the meaning of Article
154 F (2).

3\. The power of dissolution of a Provincial Council is conferred by
Parliament on the Governor by Article 154 B (8) (c). Parliament has not given
that power to the President and made it delegable to the Governor. The
Governor is required by Article 154 B (8) (d) to act in accordance with the
advice of the Chief Minister. Article 154 B (2) which provides that the
Governor shall be appointed by the President and shall hold office, in
accordance with Article 4 (b), during the pleasure of the President does not
alter this position since the general provisions of Article 4 (b) would not
override the specific provisions of Article 154 B (8) (c). Consequently,
Article 154 B (8) (c) does not contemplate the exercise of the Governor's
power solely as a delegate.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Rai Karishna Bose v. Binod Kanungo AIR 1954 SC 202.  
  
2\. Piper v. Harvey (1958) 1 QB 439.  
  
3\. In Re the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and the Provincial
Councils Bill (1987) 2 Sri LR 312.  
  
4\. Hanlon v. The Law Society (1980) 2 All ER 199, 221.  
  
5\. Houston v. Bums (1918) AC 337, 348._

335

_6\. Jones v. Wrotham Park Settled Estates (1979) 1 All ER 286, 289.  
  
7\. l. R. C. v. Hinchy (1960) AC 748.  
  
8\. l. R. C. v. Ayrshire Employers, Mutual Insurance Association Ltd. (1946) 1
All ER 637.  
  
9\. Bribery Commissioner v. Ranasinghe 66 NLR 66, 73.  
  
10\. Income Tax Special Purpose Commissioner v. Pemsel (1891) AC 531, 549.  
  
11\. Richards v. McBride (1881) 8 QBD 119, 122.  
  
12\. Spillers Ltd. v. Cardiff Assessment Committee (1931) 2 KB 21, 43.  
  
13\. New Piymouth Borough Council v. Tamak Electric Power Board (1933) AC 680,
682.  
  
14\. R. v. Schildkamp (1971) AC 1.  
  
15\. Uttar Pradesh v. Babu Upadhaya AIR 1961 SC 751.  
  
16\. Premachandra v. Jayawickrame and Another (1944) 2 Sri LR 90.  
  
17\. Re Baker (1890) 44 Ch. D. 262, 270.  
  
18\. Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service (1985)
AC 374, 410.  
  
19\. Somawathie v. Weerasinghe (1990) 2 Sri LR 121.  
  
20\. Dunn v. The Queen (1896) 1 QB 116.  
  
21\. Hales v. The King (1918) 34 TLR 589.  
  
22\. Denning v. Secretary of State for India (1920) 37 TLR 138.  
  
23\. Whiteman v. Sadler (1910) AC 514, 527.  
  
24\. N. Stafford Steel Co. v. Ward LR 3 Ex. 172, 177.  
  
25\. Felix v. Shiva (1982) 3 All ER 262, 266._

**APPEALS** from judgments of the Court of Appeal.

_E. D. Wickremanayake, with L V. P. Wettasinghe, Jayampathi Wickremaratne, M.
A. Q. M. Gazzali, Palitha Matthew, Gaston Jayakody, Amitha Nikapitiya,
Malathie Ratnayake; Anandi Cooray, Shamika Seneviratne, U. A Najeem and
Prasanna Obeysekera for appellant in SC Appeal No. 41/96._

_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC with L. V. P. Wettasinghe, Jayampathi Wickramaratne,_

_M. A. Q. M. Gazzali, Palitha Mathew, Gaston Jayakody, Amitha Nikapitiya,
Malathie_

_Ratnayake, Anandi Cooray, Shamika Seneviratne, U. A. Najeem and Prasanna_

_Obeysekera for appellant in SC Appeal No. 42/96._

_K. N. Choksy, PC with L. C. Seneviratne, PC, Paul Perera, PC, Daya Pelpola,_

_D. M. M. Jayamaha, Laksman Perera, Ronald Perera, Anil Rajakaruna, S. J.
Mohideen, and Nigel Hatch for 1st respondent in SC Appeals Nos. 41 & 42/96 and
added respondent in SC Appeal 41/96._

_S. N. Silva, PC, AG K. C. Kamalasabayson, PC, ASG., S. Gamlath, SSC and_

_U. Egalahewa, SC for 2nd respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

336

October .14, 1996.

**AMERASINGHE, J.**

There are two appeals from the decisions of the Court of Appeal delivered on
the 27th of March, 1996. It was agreed by learned counsel that the two appeals
be heard and dealt with together, since the matters in issue in both of them
were identical.  
  
At the commencement of the hearing, the Attorney-General informed the court
that, in view of the fact that the first respondent in Application No. 41/96
was now seriously incapacitated as a result of a motor car accident, it might
be advisable to add the incumbent Chief Minister as a party to the
proceedings. Learned counsel for the first respondent in the two appeals said
he had no objections and stated that he would additionally represent the
incumbent Chief Minister, if so instructed.

The material facts are identical in both cases and are not in dispute. Those
facts are as follows: The Governor of each of the Provincial Councils
concerned, upon receiving certain complaints with regard to the administration
of the Council, wrote to the Chief Minister of the Provincial Council seeking
advice on the dissolution of the Provincial Council. The Chief Minister
advised against dissolution. When the Chief Minister advised the Governor, the
Board of Ministers, in the opinion of the Governor, commanded the support of
the majority of the Provincial Council. The subsequent events are set out in
the Proclamation made by each of the two Governors in Gazette Extraordinary,
No. 904/7 of January 03, 1996:

* The Governor 'referred the question of [the] dissolution of the Provincial Council . . . for an order and direction to . . . [the President of the Republic] in terms of Article 154 [B] read with Article 154 [F] of the Constitution'.

* The President 'made order and directed' the Governor in terms of Article 154 [B] and Article 154 [F] of the Constitution to dissolve the Provincial Council, in question.

* Acting in terms of the said order and direction' of the President 'in terms of Article 154 [B] of the Constitution read with

337

Article 154 [F]', the Governor dissolved the Provincial Council with effect
from the date of the proclamation. In the case of the North Central Provincial
Council (SC Appeal No. 41/96), and the Sabaragamuwa Provincial Council (SC
Appeal No. 42/96), the date was January 03, 1996.

In Gazette No. 904/13 dated January 04, 1996, the Commissioner of Elections,
acting in terms of section 10 of the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2
of 1988, gave notice of his intention to hold elections to the two Provincial
Councils and called for nominations commencing on January 18, 1996.

On January 08, 1996, the two Chief Ministers filed separate petitions in the
Court of Appeal alleging that, for the reasons stated therein, the dissolution
was unlawful and praying for -

(a) an order declaring the purported dissolution to be null and void and an
order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the order of dissolution
made by the Governor;

(b) the issue and grant of an Order in the nature of a Writ of Certiorari
quashing the notification published by the Commissioner of Elections;

(c) the issue and grant of an Order in the nature of writ of prohibition
against the Commissioner of Elections restraining him from taking any steps to
hold an election to the Council;

(d) The issue and grant of an interim order restraining the Commissioner of
Elections from proceeding to act in terms of his notification pending the
hearing and final determination of the application, and in particular from
receiving nominations;

(e) costs and such other and further relief as to the court may seem meet.

For the reasons set out by their Lordships of the Court of Appeal in their
judgment delivered on March 27, 1996, the court stated as follows:

. . . we are of the view that the Governor when dissolving a Provincial
Council, acting under [the] provisions of Article

338

154 B (8) (c) has no discretion and is bound by the provisions of Article 154
B (8) (d), to act on the advice of the Chief Minister provided the Board of
Ministers commands a majority in the Provincial Council. Therefore we hold
that the Governors . . . have acted contrary to the provisions of Article 154
B (8) (c) and (d) of the Constitution, by seeking the advice of the President,
in a matter they had no discretion, and dissolving the said Provincial
Councils in accordance with the directions given by the President. Hence the
said dissolutions of the said Provincial Councils are illegal and should be
declared null and void.

Accordingly, the Court of Appeal -

* declared the orders of dissolution made by the Governors null and void and issued and granted orders in the nature of Writs of Certiorari quashing the orders of dissolution; and further

* declared the notification published by the Commissioner of Elections illegal and issued and granted orders in the nature of Writs of Certiorari quashing the notification.

The Court of Appeal refused to grant the Writs of Prohibition prayed for
against the Commissioner of Elections on the ground that the question of
holding elections does not arise, as the terms of office of the said
Provincial Councils would be revived by virtue of the order of the Court
holding the dissolution to be null and void and quashing the dissolution.

Each of the Chief Ministers were allowed costs in a sum of Rs. 35,000 against
the respective Governors.

On April 01, 1996, the Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal to the Supreme
Court on the following questions of law:

(a) Whether Article 154 B (8) (c) contemplates a discretionary power by the
Governor and if so whether such power is required to be exercised on the
directions of the President.

(b) Whether Article 154 B (8) (d) contemplates the exercise of the ,
Governor's power solely as a delegate.

339

(c) Whether the proviso appearing immediately after Article 154 B (9) applies
to Article 154 B (8)

(d). These questions were proposed by learned counsel for the first respondent
in CA No 17/96, namely, the Governor of the North Central Province, and
accepted by learned counsel for the first respondent in CA Application No.
18/96, namely, the Governor of the Sabaragamuwa Province, and by the Deputy
Solicitor-General on behalf of the Commissioner of Elections.

Learned counsel were heard on September 23 and 24, 1996, and the court took
time for consideration.

I shall deal with the third question first (1) because the answers to the
other questions depend to some extent on the answer to the third; and (2)
since such an approach minimizes repetition.

**DOES THE PROVISO APPEARING IMMEDIATELY AFTER ARTICLE 154 B (9) APPLY TO
ARTICLE 154 B (8)?**

Paragraphs (8) and (9) of Article 154 B provide as follows:

(8) (a) The Governor may, from time to time, summon the Provincial Council to
meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, but two months shall not
intervene between the last sitting in one session and the date appointed for
the first sitting in the next session.

(b) The Governor may, from time to time, prorogue the Provincial Council.

(c) The Governor may dissolve the Provincial Council.

(d) The Governor shall exercise his powers under this paragraph in accordance
with the advice of the Chief Minister, so long as the Board of Ministers
commands, in the opinion of the Governor, the support of the majority of the
Provincial Council.

(9) without prejudice to the powers of the President under Article 34 and
subject to his directions the Governor of a Province shall have the power to
grant a pardon to every person convicted of an offence against a statute made
by the Provincial Council of that Province or a law made by Parliament on a
matter in respect of which the Provincial Council has power to make statutes
and to grant a respite or remission of punishment imposed by court on any such
person:

340

Provided that where the Governor does not agree with the advice of the Board
of Ministers in any case and he considers it necessary to do so in the public
interest, he may refer that case to the President for orders.

**_The appellants' submissions_**

Learned counsel for the appellants submitted in their arguments, responses to
the arguments of learned counsel for the respondents and in their written
submissions that the proviso found in paragraph (9) applies to all that is
found in Article 154 B before the proviso, and that the Court of Appeal was in
error in confining it to paragraph (9). Consequently, when the Governor did
not agree with the Chief Minister on the question of dissolution and he
considered it necessary to do so in the public interest, he had the option, if
not also a duty as a delegate of the President, to refer the case to the
President for orders, and then carry out those orders. In the circumstances,
the seeking of advice by the Governors was proper, and the orders of
dissolution were lawful and valid.

Following the principles operating in the UK, the USA and India, the Board of
Ministers of a Provincial Council have no say in the matter of pardons for
offences. Even under Article 34 of the Constitution of Sri Lanka 'the Cabinet
of Ministers of the central government, to take an analogy, does not have a
say in the matter of pardons. The procedure for 'acting on advice', was
dispensed with by the present Constitution. It is the President alone who
decides questions relating to the grant of a pardon, respite, or remission
except that where an offender shall have been condemned to suffer death by the
sentence. of any court, the President is required to cause a report to be made
to him by the Judge who tried the case, which report the President is required
to forward to the Attorney-General with instructions that after the Attorney-
General has advised thereon, the report shall be sent together with the
Attorney-General's advice to the Minister in charge of the subject of Justice,
who shall forward the report with his recommendation to the President. It is
the Minister of Justice who recommends, and not the Cabinet of Ministers, and
the President, is not bound by the recommendation.

341

Admittedly, the question of 'advice of the Board of Ministers' mentioned in
the proviso is not stipulated in paragraph 9, 'thus effectively severing any
connection between the two. The proviso in its terms is not applicable to a
pardon, which is the exercise of a prerogative power. Moreover 154 B (9)
refers to 'the public interest' and not to the interests of justice which is
the relevant consideration in matters of pardon. By an 'obvious inadvertence'
the proviso has been placed below Article 154 B (9) 'which has no relevance
whatsoever' to paragraph 9. 'The aforesaid proviso clearly does not apply to
sub-article (9) even though it appears soon after that sub-article. Although a
relative or qualifying phrase is normally taken with the immediately preceding
term or expression, this rule should 'be disregarded if it is against common
sense and the expression used. (Raj Krishna Bose v. Binod Kanungo(1). In any
event, 'the language in the proviso to Article 154 B (9) makes it plain that
it was intended to apply to and/or to have an operation, more extensive than
that of the provision it immediately follows. Therefore it must be given such
wider effect. (Piper v. Harvey) Bindra, Interpretation of Statutes 7th ed. p.
80). Admittedly there is a colon preceding the proviso, but in Raj Krishna
Bose (supra) the Supreme Court of India noted that punctuation was only a
minor element in the construction of a statute and that very little attention
is paid to it in the English courts. Punctuation may have its uses in some
cases, but it cannot be regarded as a controlling element. Craies on Statute
Law goes further and states that punctuation is disregarded in the
construction of statutes - 6th edition p. 197.

In the circumstances, the court should give the proviso a purposive
interpretation. The changes brought about by the Thirteenth Amendment to the
Constitution, which added chapter XVII A to the Constitution creating and
making provisions relating to Provincial Councils, did not impair the unitary
character of the Republic of Sri Lanka. That was the essence of the decision
of the Supreme Court In re the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution and
the Provincial Councils Bill(3). At the core of that decision was the finding
that the President was supreme. In the Thirteenth Amendment case, Sharvananda,
CJ said that 'So long as the President retains the power to give directions to
the Governor regarding the exercise of his executive functions, and the
Governor is bound by such directions superseding the advice of the Board of
Ministers' (emphasis added by counsel) . . . there can be no gainsaying the
fact the President

342

remains supreme or sovereign in the executive field and the Provincial Council
is only a body subordinate to him.

It is Article 154 B (8) (d) that Sharvananda, CJ had in mind when His Lordship
adverted to the right of the President to make binding directions that
superseded 'the advice of the Board of Ministers'. The discretion of the
Governor which is made subject to the directions of the President under
Article 154 F (1) cannot be restricted to the insignificant matters referred
to in Article 154 (B) (10) (a) or (b) and 154 F (4). Article 154 L gives the
President the power to take over the administration of a Provincial Council,
but this is limited in time to one year, and limited to situations when the
administration cannot be carried on in accordance with the Constitution.
Consequently, a corrupt administration may nevertheless administer the
province if the administration can be carried on in accordance with the
Constitution. Moreover, after one year the Council will have to be handed back
to the corrupt Board of Ministers. The supremacy of the President is assured
only by recognizing the power of giving directions superseding the advice of
the Board of Ministers as stipulated in the proviso in 154 B (9) which
controls 154 (8) (d). So important a matter as the dissolution of a Provincial
Council cannot be allowed to remain in the hands of one man - the Chief
Minister.

**_The respondents' submissions_**

The Court of Appeal rightly confined the applicability of the proviso to
Article 154 B (9). The proviso is not misplaced and meaningless in the context
of the paragraph in which it is found. Earlier, the practice was for the
prerogative of pardon, respite or remission to be exercised by the Head of
State on advice. This followed the conventions in the UK. However, when the
present Constitution was enacted, Article 34 conferred the power on the
President without qualification, except in a case where an offender had been
condemned to death. Article 154 B (9) deals with the power of Governor to
grant a pardon, respite or remission relating to offences committed against a
statute made by a Provincial Council or a law made by Parliament on a matter
in respect of which the Provincial Council has power to make statutes. This
power does not limit the power of the President under Article 34. Moreover,
the Governor is subject to the directions of the President, who is the
ultimate authority on the matter. The President, except in one type of case,
is not obliged to seek any person's advice in

343

exercising the powers of pardon, respite or remission. However, the Governor's
powers are not unfettered: Article 154 F (1) provides that There shall be a
Board of Ministers with the Chief Minister at the head and not more than four
other Ministers to aid and advice the Governor in the exercise of his
functions. The Governor shall, in the exercise of his functions, act in
accordance with such advice, except in so far as he is by or under the
Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his
discretion. In a case in which the Governor has to consider whether a pardon,
respite or remission should be granted, he is required by Article 154.F (1) to
seek the advice of the Board of Ministers. In the event of a disagreement with
the Board of Ministers, eg where the Board advises that a certain offender
should be pardoned but the Governor does not wish to pardon the person, he
may, if he considers it necessary to do so in the public interest, in terms of
the proviso to 154 B (9) refer the case to the President for orders, which
orders he will be obliged to carry out. In the circumstances, the proviso is
in its proper place and makes sense.

On the other hand, if, as contended for by the appellants, the proviso applies
to all the preceding paragraphs of Article 154 B, it would make no sense: For
instance, it could not have been the intention of Parliament that the proviso
should regulate Article 154 B (8) (d), for by that provision the Governor is
required to exercise his power of dissolution with the advice of the Chief
Minister. The conflict enabling the Governor to consult the President under
the proviso is concerned with a conflict of opinion with the Board of
Ministers.

Moreover, if the proviso is added to Article 154 B (8) (d), it would create a
contradictory position: whereas under the proviso the Governor may, and
therefore has a discretion to, consult the President, Article 154 B (8) (d)
states that the Governor shall exercise his powers under that paragraph in
accordance with the advice of the Chief Minister, so long as the Board of
Ministers commands, in the opinion of the Governor, the support of the
majority of the Provincial Council.

With regard to the question of alleged corruption and maladministration, there
was no admissible evidence in that regard. In any event, these matters are
irrelevant because the Constitution does not empower the Governor to dissolve
the Provincial Council on these grounds, either on his own initiative or on
the directions of

344

anyone else. Provincial Councils were placed on a different footing from other
local authorities like Municipal Councils, Urban Councils and Pradeshiya
Sabhas, in respect of which express provision is made for dissolution after
inquiry, if the Minister is satisfied that there is sufficient proof of
incompetence or mismanagement. No similar provision exists with regard to
Provincial Councils and it must be taken that Parliament made a deliberate
departure.

**_My View on the Question of the Proviso_**

The proviso is an ancient formula. It enables a general statement to be made
as a clear proposition, any necessary qualifications being kept out of it and
relegated to the proviso. This aids understanding. The formula beginning
'Provided that . . .' is placed at the end of a section or sub-section of an
Act, or a paragraph or sub-paragraph of a schedule; and the intention of which
is to narrow the effect of the preceding words. (Francis Bennion, Statutory
Interpretation, 1984, p. 570). The emphasis is mine. N. S. Bindra,
Interpretation of Statutes, 7th Ed., p. 79, explains that a proviso relates to
the subject-matter of the principal clause. He states that: The proviso cannot
possibly deal with an entirely different topic or subject and it is sub-
servant to the main provision. He adds that it is a cardinal rule of
interpretation that a proviso to a particular provision of a statute 'only
embraces the field which is covered by the main provision. It carves out an
exception to the main provision to which it has been enacted as a proviso and
to no other. Later, Bindra states that although at times it is used to
introduce independent legislation, the presumption is that, in accordance with
its primary purpose, it refers only to the provisions to which it is attached.
Ordinarily, a proviso to a section is intended to take out a part of the main
section for special treatment; it is not expected to enlarge the scope of the
main section.

In the matters before us, the proviso under consideration is placed
immediately after the main clause in Article 154 B (9), and in the light of
what a proviso is intended to do, as a matter of first impression, it seems to
me that the proviso was intended to apply to the words immediately preceding
it in Article 154 B (9).

Learned counsel for the appellants accepted the fact that ordinarily a proviso
must be taken to relate to the words immediately preceding it, but they
submitted, citing Bindra p. 80 and Piper v. Harvey (supra),

345

that exceptionally a proviso may have a wider operation. Piper v. Harvey was a
case in which there was a repeal of sections, but it was held that the proviso
remained because it extended beyond the repealed enactment, whereas usually
the repeal of a section also repeals the proviso. Bindra at p. 79-80 states as
follows:

. . .cases have arisen in which the Supreme Court has held that despite the
fact that a provision is called a proviso, it is really a separate provision
and the so-called proviso has substantially altered the main section. For
example, relying upon the dictum laid down in Piper v. Harvey that if the
language of the proviso makes it plain that it was intended to have a
operation more extensive than that of the provision which it immediately
follows, it must be given such wider effect. It was held that the clear
language of the proviso to subsection (2) of section 202, Cr. P.C., made it
obligatory upon the Magistrate in a -case exclusively triable by the Court of
Session, to proceed to inquire and at such inquiry call upon the complainant
to produce his entire evidence -The emphasis is mine.

There is nothing either in the language of the proviso or in any other part of
Article 154 B suggesting that it was intended to be a separate provision or
that it was intended to have a more extensive application than the usual one
of qualifying the words immediately preceding the proviso in Article 154 B
(9).

On the other hand, as we have seen, Bindra points out that the proviso cannot
possibly deal with an entirely different topic or subject. That, he said, was
a cardinal rule of interpretation. Article 154 B (9) deals with pardon,
respite and remission. The proviso cannot be made applicable to the entirely
different subject of the dissolution of a Provincial Council, which is what
Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d) deals with.

Halsbury, vol. 44 paragraph 881 note 3, refers to several decisions, and draws
attention to the fact that: The danger of construing a proviso, which is
merely a limitation on the enactment to which it is attached, as if it were a
general limitation to other enactments or were itself a positive enactment has
often been pointed out.

The factual circumstances which trigger the operation of a legal provision is
of the utmost importance. The proviso is inappropriate in the context of
Article 154 B (d) which provides that the Governor

346

shall exercise his powers of dissolution in accordance with the advice of the
Chief Minister, so long as the Board of Ministers commands, in the opinion of
the Governor, the support of the majority of the Provincial Council. The
proviso deals with an entirely different factual situation, namely where the
Governor does not agree with the advice of the Board of Ministers and he
considers it necessary to do so in the public interest and refers the matter
to the President for orders. This is not without significance in deciding
whether the proviso is applicable to Article 154 B (8) (d). In the UK, the
power of advising the dissolution of Parliament within the five-year period
prescribed the Parliament Act of 1911, is by convention vested in the Prime
Minister, rather than in the Cabinet of Ministers. O. Hood Phillips and Paul
Jackson, Constitutional and Administrative Law, 7th ed., at p. 150, observe
that: This power of timing is a weapon of great political importance in the
hand of the government, and especially of the Prime Minister. The matter is
further, explained by Wade and Phillips, Constitutional and Administrative
Law, 9th ed., at p. 163 in the following terms:

It is today not necessary that the Cabinet should have decided in favour of
dissolution, although the Prime Minister may have discussed the desirability
of a dissolution with the Cabinet or with selected colleagues. The opportunity
of choosing the timing of a General Election is an important political power
at the disposal of the Prime Minister; thus he may choose a time when there is
a revival in the economy or when opinion polls and by-elections results
indicate that the Government's popularity is rising. It is sometimes said,
that the right to request a dissolution is a powerful weapon in the hands of a
Prime Minister to compel recalcitrant supporters in the Commons to conform.

The proviso makes good sense where it is located, but it would not do so if it
is made applicable to Article 154 B (8) (d). Instead, it would interfere with
a power the Chief Minister alone was obviously meant to have. Moreover, a
reading of the proviso into Article 154 B (8) would create ambiguities where
none exist.

With regard to the submission of learned counsel for the appellant on the
colon immediately preceding the proviso, I agree that although punctuation
forms part of an enactment and is an unamendable descriptive component of such
enactment. Yet, in general, punctuation

347

is of little weight, since the sense of a provision should be the same with or
without its punctuation. Punctuation is a device not for making meaning, but
for making meaning plain. Where mistakes in punctuation occur, we should have
little hesitation in altering them. However in Hanlon v. The Law Society(4)
Lord Lowry said:

I consider that not to take account of punctuation disregards the reality that
literate people, such as Parliamentary draftsmen, punctuate what they write,
if not identically, at least in accordance with grammatical principles. Why
should not other literate people, such as Judges, look at the punctuation in
order to interpret the meaning of the legislation as accepted by Parliament?

Lord Shaw of Dunfermline in Houston v. Burns(5) observed that:

Punctuation is a rational part of English composition and is quite
significantly employed.

In the matters before me, the sense of Article 154 B (9) remains the same with
or without the colon. What the colon does in that provision is to divide the
provision into two parts, carving out from the main clause, which in general
terms sets out the power of the Governor to grant a pardon, respite or
remission which, in terms of Article 154 F (1), he must exercise in accordance
with the advice of the Board of Ministers. The procedure he should adopt,
should he disagree with the advice of the Board of Ministers on the exercise
of his power of pardon, follows the colon. The colon preceding the proviso in
Article 154 B (9) is a circumstance of importance in that it helps to make
clear the meaning of 154 B (9). Ignoring it does not make the proviso
applicable to Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d).

Learned counsel for the appellants urged us to adopt. a 'purposive approach'.
Bennion (op. cit.) points out at page 657 that:

A purposive construction of an enactment is one which give effect to the
legislative purpose by -

(a) following the literal meaning of the enactment where that meaning is in
accordance with the legislative purpose (in this code called a purposive-and-
literal construction), or

348

(b) applying a strained meaning where the literal meaning is not in accordance
with the legislative purpose (in the Code called a purposive-and-strained
construction).

What this court is invited to do is to adopt a 'purposive' and strained
construction.

Lord Diplock in Jones v. Wrotham Park Settled Estates(6), stated as follows
with regard to purposive-and-strained constructions:

. . . I am not reluctant to adopt a purposive construction where to apply the
literal meaning of the legislative language used would lead to results which
would clearly defeat the purposes of the Act. But in doing so the task on
which a court of justice is engaged remains one of construction, even where
this involves reading into the Act words which are not expressly included in
it. Kamins Ballrooms Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Investments (Torque) Ltd. (1971) AC
850 provides an instance of this; but in that case the three conditions that
must be fulfilled in order to justify this course were satisfied. First, it
was possible to determine from a consideration of the provisions of the Act
read as a whole precisely what the mischief was that it was the purpose of the
Act to remedy; secondly, it was apparent that the draftsman and Parliament had
by inadvertence overlooked, and so omitted to deal with, an eventuality that
required to be dealt with if the purpose of the Act was to be achieved; and
thirdly, it was possible to state with certainty what were the additional
words that would have been inserted by the draftsman and approved by
Parliament had their attention been drawn to the omission before the Bill
passed into law. Unless this third condition is fulfilled any attempt by a
court of justice to repair the omission in the Act cannot be justified as an
exercise of its jurisdiction to determine what is the meaning of a written law
which Parliament has passed.

Have the conditions calling for a purposive-and-strained construction been
satisfied?

Although purposive construction. is an almost invariable requirement, a non-
purposive construction may be unavoidable when there is insufficient
indication of what the legislative purpose is or just how it is to be carried
out: l. R. C. v. Hinchy(7), I.R.C. v. Ayrshire Employers Mutual Insurance
Association Ltd.(8). Judges rarely attempt elaborate -and comprehensive
statements of purpose. We usually say what

349

seems to us enough to deal with the point at issue. However, Sharvananda, CJ,
whose judgment in Re. the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution, (supra),
was heavily relied upon by the appellants in their several submissions, at pp.
326-327, stated as follows:

... The Bill does not in any way affect the sovereignty of the people. Instead
of the legislative and executive power of the people being concentrated in the
hands of Parliament and President it is sought to be diversified in terms of
the Directive Principles of State Policies found in Article 27 (4) of the
Constitution. This Article provides that:

The State shall strengthen and broaden the democratic structure of government
and the democratic rights of the People by decentralising the administration
and by affording all possible opportunities to the people to participate at
every level- in national life and government.

Article 27 (1) states that -

the Directive Principles of State Policies contained herein, shall guide
Parliament, the President and the Cabinet of Ministers in the enactment of
laws and the governance of Sri Lanka for the establishment of a just and free
society.

True the Principles of State Policy are not enforceable in a court of law but
that shortcoming does not detract from their value as projecting the aims and
aspirations of a democratic government. The Directive Principles require to be
implemented by legislation. In our view, the two Bills [the Bill for
introducing the Thirteenth Amendment and the Provincial Councils Bill]
represent steps in the direction of implementing the programme envisaged by
the Constitution-makers to build a social and democratic society.

Healthy democracy must develop and adapt itself to changing circumstances. The
activities of central government now include substantial powers and functions
that should be exercised at a level closer to the people. Article 27 (4) has
in mind the aspirations of the local people. Article 27 (4) has in mind the
aspiration of the local people to participate in the governance of their
regions. The Bills envisage a handing over of responsibility for the domestic
affairs of each province, within the framework of a united Sri Lanka. They

350

give new scope for meeting the. particular needs and desires of the people for
each province. Decentralization is a useful means of ensuring that
administration in the provinces is founded on an understanding of the needs
and wishes of the respective provinces. The creation of elected and
administrative institutions with respect to each province - that is what
devolution means - gives shape to the devolutionary principle.

The concept of devolution is used to mean the delegation of central government
powers without the relinquishment of supremacy  
  
Professor Cass R. Sunstein, in a paper entitled Federalism in South Africa?
Notes from the American Experience. The American University Journal of
International Law and Policy, vol. 8 Nos. 2 & 3, Winter/ Spring 1992/1993, 413
at p. 437, states as follows:

Citizen participation in public affairs is highly unlikely at the national
level. Because people perceive the national government at the lower and
smaller levels, a constitutional system can increase participation and
responsiveness, and also cultivate citizenship. This is an important
democratic advantage insofar as a prime goal of democracy is to ensure that
government is responsive to the people's desires and aspirations.

Article 154 B (9) gives the Governor of a Province the power of granting a
pardon, respite or remission to a person convicted in respect of an offence
against a statute made by the Provincial Council or by Parliament in respect
of which the Provincial Council has power to make statutes. In terms of
Article 154 F (1), that function is ordinarily exercised by the Governor on
the advice of the Ministers of the Provincial Council. Where the Governor does
not agree with the advice of the Ministers in any case, and he considers it
necessary to do so in the public interest, he may refer the case to the
President for orders. So, the powers of pardon, respite and remission which
were reposed solely in the President by Article 34 of the Constitution were
devolved on the Governor in respect of certain specified matters of an
essentially Provincial character. However, the supremacy of the President in
that regard was in no way impaired, for (1) Article 154 B (9) expressly states
that that provision is 'without prejudice to the powers of the President'
under Article 34, so that the President may,

351

regardless of the views of the Governor or the Ministers grant. a pardon,
respite or remission in any case; and (2) the Governor's powers are stated in
Article 154 B (9) to be 'subject to [the President's] directions'.

In order to achieve its object of ensuring a more democratic constitutional
regime, Parliament created Provincial Councils by enacting the Thirteenth
Amendment. After considering the proposed provisions of the Thirteenth
Amendment Bill and the Provincial Councils Bill, the Court held in Re the
Thirteenth Amendment (supra) that the proposed structure of Government did not
violate Article 2 of the Constitution which provides that the Republic of Sri
Lanka is a Unitary State: The court found that, although certain functions
were to be exercised by the Provincial Councils, yet in all spheres of
activity, - legislative, executive and judicial \- the government of Sri Lanka
was supreme. On the other hand, if one were to read the proviso in Article 154
B (9) into Article 154 B (8) (d), it might by a side wind negate the purpose
of the Thirteenth Amendment. Bindra, op. cit., at page 80 puts the matter
succinctly: unless the words are clear, the Courts should not so construe the
proviso as to attribute to the Legislature to give with one hand and take away
with another. Sharvananda, CJ was not troubled by the form of Article 154 B
(8) and did not say that the powers of the President were retained by
importing the proviso from Article 154 B (9) in construing Article 154 (8) or
that it was necessary to do so. What his Lordship did point out, citing
Bribery Commissioner v. Ranasinghe(9), was that the imposition of procedural
restraints does not erode the powers of an organ of government. So long as the
Board of Ministers commands, in the opinion of the Governor, the support of
the majority of the Provincial Council, the Governor shall exercise his powers
of dissolution in accordance with the advice of the Chief Minister. The
Honourable Attorney-General submitted that an exercise of the powers of
dissolution even when the Chief Minister commands the support of the majority
of members of the council would not hamper the democratic process, for another
election would be held and perhaps the same political party with an enhanced
majority may be returned. Elections are of vital importance. So is stability.
Professor Herman Schwartz, in his paper, Economic and Social Rights, The
American University Journal of International Law and Policy, volume B, Nos. 2
& 3, Winter/ Spring 1992/1993, points out that governmental structures must
obviously be relatively stable so that the country can function, and so that
people can know and rely upon 'the rules of the game.

352

If corruption and maladministration were meant to trigger Article 154 B (8)
(c) and (d) as an important safeguard of executive supremacy, what is the
explanation for the failure to specifically refer to them? Parliament may have
had no intention of elevating Provincial Councils to the level of co-ordinate
bodies, but, it certainly seems to have had no intention of dealing with them
as if they were bodies like Municipal Councils, (cf. section 277 Municipal
Councils Ordinance, (cap. 252)), Urban Councils (cf. section 184 Urban
Councils Ordinance, (cap. 255),) or Pradeshiya Sabhas (cf. section 185
Pradeshiya Sabhas Act No. 15 of 1987) with regard to the matter of
dissolution. Different 'rules of the game', to use Herman Schwartz's phrase,
were prescribed for Provincial Councils.  
  
In India, the Constitution provides in Article 175 as follows with regard to
the State legislatures:

(2) The Governor may from time to time -

(a) prorogue the House or either House;

(b) dissolve the Legislative Assembly.

Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that, although certain
provisions of the Indian Constitution were closely followed in enacting our
own Constitution, deliberate departures were made in other in stances, one of
them being the procedure for the dissolution of Provincial Councils. This
would appear to be so.

Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d), it seems to me, was designed to promote the
purpose of devolution. When that Article was enacted, Parliament had before it
Article 70 of the Constitution which provides that The President may, from
time to time, by Proclamation summon, prorogue and dissolve Parliament. It is
not without significance that in enacting the Thirteenth Amendment, a similar
power was not conferred on the Governor. Instead, in Article 154 B (8) (c) and
(d) Parliament underscored the purpose of the Thirteenth Amendment by enacting
that the Governor shall exercise his powers of dissolution in accordance with
the advice of the Chief Minister, so long as the Board of Ministers commands,
in the opinion of the Governor, the support of the majority of the Provincial
Council. There is no suggestion that the President has greater powers in
dissolving

353

Parliament than in dissolving Provincial Councils. The powers of the President
are not in issue in this case. The power of dissolving a Provincial Council is
vested by Parliament in the Governor, and not in the President: and in the
exercise of that power, the Governor is subject to certain procedural
safeguards which have been imposed by Parliament, having regard to the purpose
of the Thirteenth Amendment, for the benefit of the voters and their elected
representatives at a Provincial level, who might be affected by the exercise
of the Governor's power of dissolution.

In the circumstances, I should give what Bennion (op. cit., p. 657) called a
purposive-and-literal construction to Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d), that is,
one which follows the literal meaning of the enactment because that meaning is
in accordance with the legislative purpose. The construction suggested by the
appellants would be inimical to the legislative purpose.  
  
Halsbury, (op. cit., paragraphs 856 and 857) states as follows:

856\. The object of all interpretation of a written instrument is to discover
the intention of the author as expressed in the instrument. The dominant
purpose in construing a statute is to ascertain the intention of the
legislature as expressed in the statute, considering it as a whole and in its
context. This intention, and therefore the meaning of the statute, is
primarily to be sought in the words used in the statute itself, which must, if
they are plain and unambiguous, be applied as they stand, however strongly it
may be suspected that the result does not represent the real intention of
Parliament.

857\. If the words of a statute are clear and unambiguous, they themselves
indicate what must be taken to have been the intention of Parliament, and
there is no need to look elsewhere to discover the intention or their meaning.

Halsbury, (op. cit., paragraph 858) points out that it is only where a statute
is ambiguous that 'the intention of Parliament' must be sought by reference to
such matters as what was the law before the law in question, the mischief or
defect for which the law did not provide, the remedy Parliament resolved and
appointed to 'cure the disease' and the 'true reason of the remedy'.

354

Learned counsel for the appellants contended that a construction that a
Governor must act on the advice of the Chief Minister would place the power of
dissolution in the hands of one man - the Chief Minister. That submission
overlooks the fact that the Chief Minister's advice is of value because of his
representative character in a democratic institution. His power base lies in
the majority in the Council. The Chief Minister's advice on the question of
dissolution must be followed so long as the Board of Ministers commands, in
the opinion of the Governor, the support of the majority of the Provincial
Council. (Article 154 B (8) (d)). Article 154 F provides as follows:

(4) The Governor shall appoint as Chief Minister, the member of the Provincial
Council constituted for that Province who, in his opinion, is best able to
command the support of a majority of the members of that Council:

Provided that where more than one-half of the members elected to a Provincial
Council are members of one political party, the Governor shall appoint the
leader of that political party in the Council as Chief Minister.

(5) The Governor shall, on the advice of the Chief Minister, appoint from
among the members of the Provincial Council constituted for that Province, the
other Ministers.

A Provincial Council is constituted upon the election of members of such
Council in accordance with the law relating to Provincial Councils elections.
(Article 154 A (2)).

The second condition for the adoption of a purposive-and-strained construction
set out by Lord Diplock in Jones v. Wrotham Park Settled Estates, (supra), was
that it must be 'apparent that the draftsman and Parliament had by
inadvertence overlooked, and so omitted to deal with, an eventuality that
required to be dealt with if the purpose of the Act was to be achieved'.

The Constitution and Acts of Parliament are produced by 'precision drafting'
(as distinguished from 'disorganized composition'), where (although there are
occasional lapses and errors) the draftsman aims to use language accurately
and consistently. There is nothing to suggest that the Thirteenth Amendment or
any of its provisions was

355

sloppily drafted, so that the text is confused, contradictory or incomplete in
expression. We must presume that the drafting was competent. This is an aspect
of the maxim omnia praesumuntur rite et solemniter esse acta - all things are
presumed to be correctly and solemnly done. Cf. Bennion, op. cit., at 177-180.
Accordingly, I should prefer to follow a construction which flows from a
reading based on correct and exact drafting rather than one based on error.
Halsbury, (op. cit., paragraph 862), states that There is a strong presumption
that Parliament does not make mistakes. If blunders are found in legislation,
they must be corrected by the legislature, and it is not the function of the
court to repair them. . . Eventually, the Thirteenth Amendment must be seen as
an Act of Parliament and in the circumstances it is usual for a court to
proceed on the assumption that 'the legislature is an ideal person that does
not make mistakes'. See per Lord Halsbury in Income Tax Special Purposes
Commissioner v. Pemsel (10); Richards v. McBride(11). I am unable to accept
the submission for learned counsel for the appellants that the proviso was
placed in Article 154 B (9) as a result of 'obvious inadvertence'. The burden
of establishing such a submission lies heavily upon those who assert it. Cf.
the observations of Lord Hewart, CJ in Spillers Ltd. v. Cardiff Assessment
Committed( 12) approved by Lord Macmillan in New Plymouth Borough Council v.
Taranak Electric Power Board(13). In my view, the appellants have failed to
discharge that burden. Indeed everything points in the opposite direction. The
words as they are can be given a sensible meaning; indeed, what we are invited
to do will have the effect of causing ambiguity; there is no need to supply
omitted words or to transpose, interpolate or otherwise alter words to avoid
manifest absurdity or injustice. I must give the words in Article 154 B (8)
(c) and (d) its 'ordinary and primary meaning. As Halsbury, (op. cit.,
paragraph 864) observes:

If the result of the interpretation of a statute according to its primary
meaning is not what the legislature intended, it is for the legislature to
amend the statute construed rather than for the courts to attempt the
necessary amendment by investing plain language with some other than its
natural meaning to produce a result which it is thought the legislature must
have intended.

The third condition for adopting a purposive-and-strained interpretation was
said by -Lord Diplock in Jones v. Wrotham Park Settled Estates, (supra), to be
the possibility of stating with certainty what

356

were the additional words that would have been inserted by the draftsman and
approved by Parliament. Arguably, Lord Diplock's third point was overstated.
(See R v. Scfuldkamp(14)). The suggestion of learned counsel for the
appellants was that the additional words to be placed in Article 154 B (8) (d)
are the words in the proviso to Article 154 B (9). As I have pointed out, this
is not feasible because it would introduce ambiguity and uncertainty into
Article 154 B (8) (d). It would also undermine the purpose of the Thirteenth
Amendment by conferring a discretion on the Governor even where the advice
tendered is that of a Chief Minister of a Council with a Board of Ministers
which commands the support of the majority of the Council. I am therefore
unable to hold that the words of the proviso in Article 154 B (9) were
intended by Parliament to be inserted into Article 154 . B (8) (d).

I am of the view that the proviso appearing immediately after Article 154 B
(9) does not apply to any other paragraph or sub paragraph of Article 154 B,
including Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d).

**DOES ARTICLE 154 B (8) (C) CONTEMPLATE A DISCRETIONARY POWER BY THE GOVERNOR
AND IF SO IS SUCH POWER REQUIRED TO BE EXERCISED ON THE DIRECTIONS OF THE
PRESIDENT.**

This ground of appeal raises two questions: (1) whether Article 154 B (8) (c)
confers a discretionary power on the Governor; and if so (2) whether such
power has to be exercised on directions given by the President.

**_The submissions of the appellants on the question whether Article154 B (8)
(c) contemplates a discretionary power._**

Article 154 B (8) (c) of the Constitution which provides that: 'The Governor
may dissolve the Provincial Council' stands by itself and is not in any way
qualified. If, on the other hand, Article 154 B (8) (d) is to be interpreted
as qualifying all the provisions in paragraph (8), this would make paragraph
(8) (a) meaningless, for how can the Governor in terms of (a) act as he
'thinks fit and at the same time be bound by the advice of the Chief Minister?
Moreover, such an interpretation could lead to conflict where the Governor and
Chief Minister would both have power to summon the Provincial Council.

357

Article 154 B (8) (a) states that the Governor shall exercise his powers . . .
in accordance with the advice of the Chief Minister. Although shall in its
ordinary signification is mandatory, yet, having regard, inter alia, to the
nature and design of the statute, the consequences which would flow, and the
impact of other provisions, the real intention of Parliament might be that the
provision was directory. (Bindra, op. cit., page 1113); Uttar Pradesh v. Babu
Upadhaya(15).

Article 154 F (2) provides that if any question arises whether any matter is
or is not a matter as respects which the Governor is by or under the
Constitution required to act in his discretion, the decision of the Governor
in his discretion shall be final, and the validity of anything done by the
Governor shall not be called in question in any court on the ground that he
ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion. If, therefore, the
Governor in his discretion decided that Article 154 B (8) (c) gave him a
discretion to dissolve the Provincial Council despite the provisions of
Article (154 B (8) (d), such a decision is final and cannot be challenged. The
decision whether Article 154 B (8) (c) gives the Governor a discretion is also
a matter to be exercised according to the Governor's discretion. The question
of law whether Article 154 B (8) (c) contemplates a discretionary power by the
Governor has already been answered by the very act of the Governor in deciding
in his discretion that the dissolution of the Council is a matter as respects
which he can act in his discretion.

It is only by 'reading a discretion into Article 154 B (8) (c) that directions
by the President regarding dissolution can be given. Full effect must be given
to Article 4 (b). It is the existence of a discretion in regard to the
dissolution of the Council enabling directions from the President that ensures
that the executive supremacy of the President is effectively achieved. This is
essential for the preservation of the unitary character of the Republic: Re
the Thirteenth Amendment; (supra).

The submissions of the respondents on the question whether Article 154 B (8)
(c) contemplates a discretionary power.

Article 154 E provides that a Provincial Council shall, unless sooner
dissolved, continue for a period of five years from the date appointed for its
first meeting and the expiration of the said period of five years shall
operate as a dissolution of the Council. The Provincial Councils

358

(Amendment) Act No. 27 of 1990 provides that where more than one -half of the
total membership of a Council repudiates allegiance to the Constitution, the
Governor is required to communicate such fact to the President. Upon such
communication being made, the Council stands ipso facto dissolved. The
dissolution takes place by operation of law and not by direction of the
President. The only other provision that provides for a dissolution of a
Council before five years is to be found in Article 154 B (8). The power of
dissolution set out in Article 154 B (8) (c) must be exercised in accordance
with the advice of the Chief Minister, so long as the Board of Ministers
commands in the opinion of the Governor the support of the majority of the
Provincial Council, for Article 154 B (8) (d) states that the Governor shall
do so. The power of dissolution given by Article 154 B (8) (c) is not
discretionary.

The Governor's functions under the Constitution fall into three categories:
(a) those exercised by him on the advice of the Board of Ministers; (d) those
exercised by him on the advice of the Chief Minister: and (c) those exercised
by him in his discretion. Chapter XVII A of the Constitution does not
catalogue the matters that are within the discretion of the Governor. Article
154 F (1) provides that the Governor shall act in accordance with the advice
of the Board of Ministers, except insofar as he is required by the
Constitution to act in his discretion. In the matter of dissolution, the
Governor is required by Article 154 B (8) (d) to act on the advice of the
Chief Minister. Since it is not a matter in which he has a discretion, Article
154 F (2), which states that the exercise of the Governor's discretion shall
be on the President's direction, has no applicability. Where a Constitutional
duty is expressly cast on the Governor, he has no discretion and must carry
out his legal duty in accordance with the relevant provision: Premachandra v.
Jayawickrame and another(16).

Article 4 (b) has no application here. Article 4 (b) designates or identifies
the Constitutional organs in which are deposited the three aspects of
sovereignty referred to in Article 3. It confers on each organ, i.e
Parliament, the President and the Courts, their respective powers in general
terms. In the case of the executive power of the people, it is provided that
it shall be exercised by the President. But it does not, and cannot, follow in
law or in common reason that Article 4 (b) dominates the entire spectrum of
executive action and overrides all other provisions of the Constitution
applicable to the exercise of executive power, including Articles of the
Constitution which make specific or express provision for the exercise of

359

a particular executive power in a particular manner. eg Articles 43 (3), 70
(1) (a), 70 (1) proviso (b) and (c), 154 F (4), 154 F (4) proviso and 154 F
(5) show that Article 4 (b) does not give the President the degree of
executive power claimed. If the President has the powers claimed by reason of
the provisions of Article 4 (b), the greater part of the Constitution will be
rendered nugatory and the President will be in a position to override the
Constitution at will. Such an interpretation, elevating Article 4 (b) to such
a supra-level, is wholly unacceptable.

In Re The Thirteenth Amendment, (supra), the court was principally concerned
with the question whether the proposed amendment detracted from Article 2
which declares that the Republic of Sri Lanka is a unitary state. The dicta at
pages 318-327 and 357-359 show that the court regarded the President's right
to give directions to the Governor in the exercise of the Governor's
discretionary powers was an adequate retention of power in the centre to
prevent Provincial Councils being regarded in constitutional law as co-
ordinate bodies. The court did not rule that the President retained overriding
executive powers under Article 4 (b) which supersede the express provisions
relating to Provincial Councils contained in the Constitution.

**_My view on the question whether Article 154 B (8) (c) contemplates a
discretionary power._**

S. A. de Smith, Lord Woolf and Jeffrey Jowell in Judicial Review of
Administrative Action, 1995, 5th ed. 295, observe as follows:  
  
An administrative decision is flawed if it is illegal. A decision is illegal
if

(1) it contravenes or exceeds the terms of the power which authorises the
making of the decision;

(2) if it pursues an objective other than that for which the power to make the
decision was conferred.

The task for the courts in evaluating whether a decision is illegal is
essentially one of construing the content and scope of the instrument
conferring the power in order to determine whether the

360

decision falls within its 'four corners'. In so doing the courts of law
enforce the rule of law, requiring administrative bodies to act within the
bounds of the powers they have been given. They also act as guardian of
Parliament's will-seeking to ensure that the exercise of power is what
Parliament intended.

O. Hood Phillips and Paul Jackson, Constitutional and Administrative Law, 7th
ed., at p. 662, observe as follows:  
  
A Minister, a local authority and any public body may only validly exercise
powers within the limits conferred on them by the common law or statute. A
decision may fall outside those powers and so be ultra vires because the body
concerned has attempted to deal with a matter outside the range of the power
conferred on it \- substantive ultra vires - or because it has failed, in
reaching its decision, to follow a prescribed procedure - procedural ultra
vires.

After discussing the question of judicial review of prerogative powers,
Phillips and Jackson, (ibid), state as follows:

As regards the innumerable statutory powers, the question is one of the
interpretation of the statute concerned. The acts of a competent authority
must fall within the four comers of the powers given by the legislature. The
court must examine the nature, objects and scheme of the legislation, and in
the light of that examination must consider what is the exact area over which
powers are given by the section under which the competent authority purports
to act.

Sir William Wade and Christopher Forsyth, Administrative Law, 1994, 7th ed.,
p. 245, states as follows:

When the question arises whether a public authority is acting unlawfully, the
nature and extent of the power or duty has to be found in most cases by
seeking the intention of Parliament as expressed or implied in the relevant
Act. The principles of administrative law are generalized rules of statutory
interpretation.

The matter in issue is whether the dissolution of the Provincial Council by
the Governor was legal or illegal. Did the act of dissolution fall within the
four comers of Article 145 B (8)? Did the Governor contravene or exceed the
terms of Article 154 B (8) which authorises

361

him to dissolve a Provincial Council? Did he follow the procedure for
dissolution prescribed by that Article, or did he follow some other procedure?
The Governor maintains that he acted in his discretion in terms of the power
conferred on him by Article 154 B (8) (c) of the Constitution, and he,
therefore, consulted the President, and acted on the orders of the President
as he .was obliged to do. The Chief Minister maintains that, since the
Governor had disregarded his advice in-dissolving the Provincial Council when,
in the opinion of the Governor, the Board of Ministers commanded the support
of the majority of the Provincial Council, the Governor had acted illegally,
and therefore the dissolution of the Council is void.

The answer to the matter in issue depends on what the relevant provision of
the Constitution states and means. The relevant provision is Article 154 B (8)
of the Constitution. Taken in isolation, Article 154 B (8) (c) would seem to
confer a discretionary power, for the provision states that the Governor may
dissolve the Provincial Council'. However, Article 154 B (8) (d) prescribes
the manner in which the power of dissolution may be exercised, if it needs to
be exercised at all: The Governor shall exercise his powers under this
paragraph in accordance with the advice of the Chief Minister, so long as the
Board of Ministers commands, in the opinion of the Governor, the support of
the majority of the Provincial Council. It was not in dispute that the
relevant provision of law applicable to the question of dissolution was
Article 154 B (8), nor was there any dispute that the factual circumstances
that were required to trigger the application of that provision existed: the
Board of Ministers, in the opinion of the Governor, did command the support of
the majority of the Provincial Council.

It was contended that the qualification of the exercise of discretionary power
set out in Article 154 B (8) (d) could not have been intended to apply to the
preceding provisions of the paragraph because to do so would cause ambiguity.
Perhaps, as suggested by learned counsel for the appellants, there may be some
ambiguity when Article 154 B (8) (d) is read with Article 154 B (8) (a). There
may be not. It is a matter that will need consideration when a question with
regard to the Governor's powers to summon the Provincial Council to meet
requires consideration. I am concerned with the question of dissolution, and
in that regard, it is my view that Article 154 B (8) (c) is subject to Article
154 B (8) (d), for it is clearly stated in Article 154 B (8) that the Governor
shall exercise his powers under this paragraph

362

the manner prescribed therein. This paragraph obviously refers to paragraph
(8) of Article 154 B. Article 154 B (8) (c) confers a power expressed in
permissive language because the word used is may. See per Cotton, W in Re
Baker(17). However, when a power is given to a person by the word 'may', but
it is coupled with a duty to refrain from exercising it in certain prescribed
circumstances, it becomes his duty not to exercise it in those circumstances.
(Cf. Wade and Forsyth,. Administrative Law, 7th ed. at 265 where the converse
case is dealt with). A Governor may dissolve a Provincial Council in terms of
Article 154 B (c) but he must do so in accordance with the duty prescribed by
Article 154 B (8) (d). Article 154 B (8) (c) read with Article 154 B (8) (d)
presents no ambiguity either in respect of the verbal formula that constitutes
the relevant law nor in its application to the facts of the instant cases.
There is no doubt as to the legal meaning and the legislative intention
conveyed by Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d) and it is both unnecessary and
improper in the circumstances to attempt to give. it some other meaning by
calling in aid other provisions of the Constitution.

It is of importance to decide whether a statutory duty is mandatory - words
such as 'absolute', 'obligatory', 'imperative' and 'strict' may be used
instead - or whether it is directory. ('Permissive' is sometimes used, but the
use of the term 'directory' in the sense of permissive has been criticised by
Craies, Statute Law, 7th ed. 1971 p. 61 n. 74.) Ordinarily, where the relevant
statutory duty is mandatory, failure to comply with it invalidates the thing
done. Where it is merely directory the thing done will be unaffected, though
there may be some sanction for disobedience imposed on the person bound. If
the Governor's duty to act on the advice of the Chief Minister was mandatory
and not directory, then failure to comply with his duty invalidated the
dissolution. Article 154 B (8) (d) uses the word shall in describing the
manner in which the Governor should exercise his power of dissolution. I am in
agreement with the view that although the word shall ordinarily imposes a
mandatory duty, there may be cases in which it has the same meaning as 'may'.
However, I find no reason adduced in the matters before us to give Article 154
B (8) (c) read with Article 154 (8) (d) any meaning other than that the
Governor will have to or must, if the Board of Ministers commands, in the
opinion of the Governor, the support of the majority of the Provincial
Council, exercise his powers of dissolution in accordance with the advice of
the Chief Minister. Wade and Forsyth, op. cit., p. 245 observe that: Powers

363

confer duties whether to act or not to act, and also in many cases, what
action to take, whereas duties are obligatory and allow no option. De Smith,
Woolf and Jowell, op. cit., p. 296, observe that: if only one course can
lawfully be adopted, the decision taken is not the exercise of a discretion
but the performance of a duty. Since the Board of Ministers in the opinion of
the Governor commanded the support of the majority of the Provincial Council,
there was only one, uniquely right course of action prescribed \- to follow
the advice of the Chief Minister in deciding whether to exercise his power of
dissolution. There was no discretion. By his failure to act in accordance with
the duty imposed on him by law, the Governor acted illegally.

I am unable to accept the suggestion that if a Governor supposes or believes
something to be in his discretion, it becomes finally and conclusively a
discretionary matter on which he should consult the President, and therefore
if he consults the President, then, he is obliged to follow the directions of
the President. Article 154 F (2) states as follows:

If any question arises whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects
which the Governor is or by or under this Constitution required to act in his
discretion, the decision of the Governor shall be final, and the validity of
anything done by the Governor shall not be called in question in any court on
the ground that he ought or ought not to have acted in his discretion. The
exercise of the Governor's discretion shall be on the President's directions.

With !regard to the dissolution of the Provincial Council, there was nothing
'forming, or capable of forming, the basis of a problem, nor any difficulty or
doubt or uncertainty as far as the Constitutional provisions of Article 154 B
(8) (c) and (d) were concerned. There was no question whether the Governor was
required to act in his discretion. The fact that he honestly believed there
was one, did not make it so. Perhaps, the Governor misunderstood the law? It
is the duty of the decision-maker to understand correctly the law that
regulates his decision-making power and give effect to it: Council of Civil
Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service(18).

It was not said by Sharvananda, CJ in Re the Thirteenth Amendment, (supra),
that the Amendment was not violative of Article 2 (which states that Sri Lanka
is a Unitary State), because the President had

364

unlimited executive powers. What he did say in relation to executive powers
was that there was. a sufficient retention of powers by the President in
relation to discretionary powers so as to ensure the position that Sri Lanka
remained an unitary state. There was no suggestion that the President had to
have powers additional to those conferred by the Thirteenth Amendment, eg in
the matter of dissolution, in order to maintain the status of Sri Lanka as a
unitary state, nor was there any suggestion that, because Parliament had
imposed procedural restraints on the manner in which executive power may be
exercised, the President's position, as the person exercising the executive
power of the People, was undermined. On the other hand, it was acknowledged
that procedural restraints on the exercise of power did not limit supremacy in
the relevant sphere of activity: See Re Thirteenth Amendment, (supra), at pp.
320-321.

If, as I have said, Article 154 B (8) (d) introduced procedural safeguards on
the exercise of the Governor's power of dissolution for the benefit of the
voters and their elected representatives who might be affected by the exercise
of the power, - what other reason could there have been?-, then we have
another reason for concluding that the Governor's power was not discretionary.
Wade and Forsyth, op. cit., p. 255, observe:

Procedural safeguards which are so often imposed for the benefit of persons
affected by the exercise of administrative powers are normally regarded as
mandatory so that it is fatal to disregard them.

I am of the view that Article 154 B (8) (c) does not contemplate a
discretionary power by the Governor.

In view of that conclusion, the further question in ground (a) for appeal,
namely, if so whether such power is required to be exercised on the directions
of the President does not arise.

**DOES ARTICLE 154 B (8) (C) CONTEMPLATE THE EXERCISE OF THE GOVERNOR'S POWER
SOLELY AS A DELEGATE?**

**_The Submissions of the Appellants_**

If Article 154 B (8) (c) is subject to Article 154 B (8) (d), then the
Governor must exercise his powers as a delegate, for the Governor's

365

role is that of a delegate. See the judgment of Sharvananda, CJ in Re the
Thirteenth Amendment, at pages 322-323. Article 154 B (2) provides that: The
Governor shall be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand, and
shall hold office, in accordance with Article 4 (b), during the pleasure of
the President. The Governor's position is unlike that of the Auditor-General,
the Commissioner of Elections or Judges of the Superior Courts who, although
appointed by the President, cannot be removed from office at will. The
subjection of Article 154 B (2) to Article 4 (b) makes the Governor an agent
and representative of the President in the Provincial area. The Governor
derives his authority from the President and exercises executive power vested
in him as a delegate. The dissolution of the Council is an executive act. In
Re the Thirteenth Amendment, (supra), the court emphasized that, so long as
the President retains the power to give directions to the Governor regarding
the exercise of his executive functions and the Governor is bound by such
directions, superseding the advice of the Board of Ministers; and the
President can take over the functions and powers of the Provincial Council by
virtue of Articles 154 K and 154 L, there can be no gainsaying the fact that
the President remains supreme or sovereign in the executive field and the
Provincial Council is only a body subordinate to him. The notion that the
Chief Minister should prevail over the Governor who is acting as a delegate
and/or on the directions of the President as regards the dissolution of a
Council, is contrary to the decision in Re the Thirteenth Amendment, (supra),
on the question of the exercise of executive sovereignty. It is the
discretionary power to dissolve a Council that ensures executive supremacy.
The temporary take over of the Council for a year under Article 154 K in no
way achieves this supremacy.

In the performance of his functions, the Governor is required to act in his
discretion (the test of which is the Governor's conception of the discretion),
the Governor is obliged to seek the President's directions. The resulting
action then arises from the President's fiat, the Governor being a mere
instrumentality. No doubt the Governor has a part to play, namely, to decide
that there exists a discretionary matter, and to seek the President's
directions before the Governor exercises his discretion. It is only in
situations of discretion arising from powers conferred on the Governor by the
Thirteenth Amendment that the Governor acts as a delegate of the President.
Article 154 B (8) (c) contemplates a discretionary power. Consequently in
exercising this power in terms of Article 154 (8) (d), the Governor is acting

366

solely as a delegate of the President. So much so that for this purpose, the
word shall occurring in the said Article need not be construed as may, since
the President can give directions superseding the advice of the Board of
Ministers. To the extent that the ensuing action has the President's approval
(through his directions), the Governor is giving effect to the President's
fiat and so acting as a delegate.

**_The Submissions of the Respondents_**

The fact that a person is appointed by the President, eg the Auditor General,
the Commissioner of Elections or Judges of the Superior Courts, does not cant'
with it the corollary that he becomes the agent or delegate of the President
and must therefore carry out his orders and directions. The executive power of
the President in regard to Provincial Councils can be exercised only in two
situations: (i) where express provision is contained (eg Articles 154 K and
154 L); (ii) where the Governor is exercising a discretionary power, in which
case he can seek the advice and directions of the President in terms of
Article 154 F (2). Otherwise the Governor is obliged to carry out his
functions as laid down in the various Articles of the Constitution. In
Premachandra v. Jayawickrame and another, (supra), the Supreme Court held that
the Governor was not exercising a discretionary power and that, therefore,
Article 154 F (2) did not apply. The present case is the same. It is only in
instances where the Governor is acting in pursuance of a discretionary power
that he can seek the President's advice under Article 154 F (2), and not
otherwise.

A Provincial Council, like Parliament, is an elected body. Accordingly,
Article 154 (8) (c) and (d) makes specific provision for the manner of
dissolution. This provision alone must apply to dissolution. Neither the
President, nor the Governor claiming to act through the President, can ignore
this Article and take refuge under Article 4 (b). Even if the Governor is a
delegate of the President as claimed (which is not conceded), neither the
President nor the Governor were entitled to act in the manner complained
against. The only relevant Article is Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d). All that
is required is that it should be applied to determine whether or not the
Governor has acted constitutionally in dissolving the Provincial Council. If
the words of a statute are clear and unambiguous, they themselves indicate
what must be taken to have been the intention of Parliament, and there is no
need to look elsewhere to discover their intention or their meaning.
(Halsbury, 4th ed. vol. 44 paragraph 857); see also

367

Somawathie v. Weerasinghe(19); Halsbury, op. cit., paragraph 857; Basu, page
33; Bindra, op. cit., page 941.

Article 154 B (2) does not have any application in the present case. This
Article relates only to the appointment of a Governor. The reference in it to
Article 4 (b) is only for the purpose of showing that his appointment is in
pursuance of the President's executive powers. The reference to Article 4 (b)
does not mean that all the duties and functions of a Governor referred to in
Article 154 B are made discretionary, or that the Governor must act in
accordance with the President's directions, notwithstanding express provision
to the contrary governing the exercise of a particular duty or function in
Article 154 B itself.

In any event, the maxims generalia specialibus non derogant, and expressio
unius est exclusio alterius apply and effect must be given to the specific
provision contained in Article 154 B (8) (c) and (d): Halsbury, op. cit.,
paragraph 875.

**My View on the Question**

It has been observed that an element which is essential to the lawful exercise
of power is that it should be exercised by the authority upon whom it is
conferred, and by no one else. (See Wade and Forsyth, op. cit., at 347), and
that there is no general principle that administrative functions are
delegable; and that the principle is rather that, where any decision has to be
made, it must be made by the authority designated by Parliament and by no one
else: (Wade and Forsyth, op. cit., at 353). The power of dissolution of a
Provincial Council is conferred by Parliament on the Governor by Article 154 S
(8) (c). Parliament has not given that power to the President and made it
delegable to the Governor. When a decision has to be made on the question of
dissolution, the decision must be that of the Governor, whatever other
descriptive labels may or may not be attached to him, and regardless of the
course of action that may be open to him to follow or may be obliged to follow
in respect of other matters. Where the Chief Minister advised the Governor
against dissolution, the Governor had no option in the matter: He was required
by Article 154 B (8) (d) to act in accordance with the advice of the Chief
Minister, for the Governor was of the opinion that the Board of Ministers
commanded the support of the Provincial Council. As I

368

have pointed out earlier, he had a legal duty in the circumstances to act on
the advice of the Chief Minister.

Nowhere in the Constitution is the Governor described as a 'delegate', nor are
the duties and functions of the Governor or how they should be exercised,
defined or described in terms of his being a 'delegate'. The description of
the Governor as a 'delegate' occurs in the following observations of
Sharvananda, CJ in Re the Thirteenth Amendment, (supra), at op. 322-323:

The Governor is appointed by the President and holds office in accordance with
Article 4 (b) which provides that the executive power of the people shall be
exercised by the President of the Republic, during the pleasure of the
President (Article 154 B (2)). The Governor derives his authority from the
President and exercises the executive power vested in him as a delegate of the
President. It is open to the President therefore by virtue of Article 4 (b) of
the Constitution to give directions and monitor the Governor's exercise of
this executive power vested in him. Although he is required by Article 154 F
(1) to exercise his functions in accordance with the advice of the Board of
Ministers, this is subject to the qualification 'except insofar as he is by or
under the Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in
his discretion'. Under the Constitution the Governor as a representative of
the President is required to act in his discretion in accordance with the
instructions and directions of the President. Article 154 F (2) mandates that
the Governor's discretion shall be on the President's directions and that the
decision of the Governor as to what is in his discretion shall be final and
not be called in question in any court on the ground that he ought or ought
not to have acted in his discretion. So long as the President retains the
power to give directions to the Governor regarding the exercise of his
executive functions; and the Governor is bound by such directions superseding
the advice of the Board of Ministers and where the failure of the Governor or
Provincial Council to comply with or give effect to any directions given to
the Governor or such Council by the President under Chapter XVII of the
Constitution will entitle the President to hold that a situation has arisen in
which the administration of the Province cannot be carried on in accordance
with the provisions of the Constitution and take over the functions and powers
of the Provincial Council (Article 154 K and 154 L), there can be no
gainsaying the fact that the President remains supreme or sovereign in the
executive field and the Provincial Council is only a body subordinate to him.

369

Article 55 (1) of the Constitution provides that the appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers is vested in the Cabinet
of Ministers, and that all public officers shall hold office at pleasure. (The
emphasis is mine.) in the UK, public servants hold office during the pleasure
of the Crown. (Cf. Dunn v. The Queen(20); Hales v. The King(21); Denning v.
Secretary of State for India(22), unless otherwise provided. The rule, even in
England, is not based on connection with the royal prerogative, except,
perhaps in a loose sense, but rather on the ground that 'the government should
be able to disembarrass itself of any employee at any moment': Wade and
Forsyth, op. cit., at pp. 70-71. Paradoxically, both in the UK and in Sri
Lanka, there are legal restrictions on the exercise of the 'pleasure'
principle. It seems to me that when Article 154 B (2) provided that the
Governor shall be appointed by the President, and that the Governor shall hold
office, in accordance with Article 4 (b), during the pleasure of the
President, an exception was created to Article 55: what was sought to be done
was to enable the President, instead of the Cabinet of Ministers, to appoint
and remove a Governor. It does not mean that because the Governor holds office
during the pleasure of the President, he is obliged to comply with the
directions of the President, disobeying the provisions of the Constitution,
which in its Preamble is stated to be the Supreme Law, and which the Governor
has, in terms of Article 154 B (6) solemnly undertaken to uphold.

Article 154 B (2) provides that the Governor shall be appointed by the
President and shall hold office, in accordance with Article 4 (b), during the
pleasure of the President. His tenure of office is therefore less secure than
that of certain others who are also appointed by the President. The fact that
his employment is precarious because he holds office during the pleasure of
the President may, as a matter of self-interest, make it desirable for him
consult the President in matters of importance. There is no disagreement that,
although generally the Governor must act on the advice of the Board of
Ministers, he is not required to do so where he is by or under the
Constitution required to exercise his functions or any of them in his
discretion. Where he so acts in the exercise of his discretion, he is subject
to the directions and orders of the President. (Article 154 F (1) and (2)). It
is not only prudent but also a constitutional requirement prescribed by
Article 154 F (2) that he shall exercise his discretion on the President's
directions. It may be appropriate in matters where the Governor is required by
the Constitution to act in his discretion to describe him as a 'delegate'
because he is required

370

to exercise his discretion on the President's directions and might be taken to
have been deputed to act for the President.

For the reasons I have already given, the Governor had no discretion in the
circumstances of the case in the matter of the dissolution of the Provincial
Council. Article 154 F (2) which requires the exercise of the Governor's
discretionary powers on the directions of the President has no applicability
in this matter. Parliament in its wisdom in Article 154 B (8) expressly
conferred the power of dissolution on the Governor, and not on the President,
and specifically and unambiguously in apt words provided the manner and
circumstances in which the Governor should exercise his power of dissolution.
The power cannot be exercised by implication having regard to Article 4 (b)
read with Article 154 B (2) and Article 154 F. Admittedly, the general words
in Article 4,(b) are wide enough to cover the case of the dissolution of a
Provincial Council; however, it does not do so because specific provision is
made in that regard by Article 154 B (8). Bennion, op. cit., p. 378 explains
the matter in the following words:

General bus specialia derogant Where the literal meaning of a general
enactment covers a situation for which specific provision is made by some
other enactment within the Act or instrument, it is presumed that the
situation was intended to be dealt with by the specific provision.

Conversely, general words are taken not to be intended to disturb express
stipulations - clausula generalis non referta ad expressa; and general
provisions do not override special ones - generalia specialibus non derogant

Halsbury, (op. cit., paragraph 875), states as follows:

Whenever there is a general enactment in a statute which, if taken in its most
comprehensive sense, would override a particular enactment in the same
statute, the particular enactment must be operative, and the general enactment
must be taken to affect only the other parts of the statute to which it may
apply. This is merely one application of the maxim that general things do not
derogate from special things.

Therefore, in my view, since Article 4 (b), taken in its most comprehensive
sense, would not override Article 154 B (8), I hold that Article 154 B (8)
must be operative on the question of the power of the Governor to dissolve a
Provincial Council.

371

No inference is proper if it goes against the express words Parliament has
used. Expressum facit cessare tacitum. As Lord Dunedin observed in Whiteman v.
Sadler(23), Express enactment shuts the door to further implication. The chief
application of the principle expressum facit cessare taciturn lies in the so-
called expressio unius principle. Article 4 does state that the executive
power of the people shall be exercised by the President. However, Article 154
B (8) creates an express exception to that provision, and the principle
expressio unius est exclusio alterius must apply. It is an ordinary rule that:
if authority is given expressly, though by affirmative words, upon a defined
condition, the expression of that condition excludes the doing of the act
authorised under other circumstances than those so defined: expressio unius
est exclusio alterius. (Per Willes, J in N. Stafford Steel Co. v. Ward(24). In
Felix v. Shiva(25), Everleigh, LJ said: If a power is given by statute, and
the statute lays down the way in which the power is to be brought into
existence, it must be brought into existence by that method and none other.

A Governor is bound to act in accordance with the express provisions in
Article 154 B (8). He cannot rely on the fact that the executive power of the
people is ordinarily exercised by the President. If the Governor is advised
against dissolution by a Chief Minister, so long as the Board of Ministers
commands, in the opinion of the Governor, the support of the majority of the
Provincial Council, the Governor must act on the advice of the Chief Minister.
He is neither required by the Constitution, nor is he permitted, in those
circumstances, to act in his discretion or on the orders and directions of the
President. Where Parliament has prescribed the manner in which a power may be
exercised, no one has any discretion to ignore those directions. Unless he
complies with the directions, he acts illegally. The rule of law requires the
Governor to justify his action as authorised by law. (See de Smith, Woolf and
Jowell, op. cit., p. 295 quoted above). This he has failed to do.

It was suggested by the appellants that, since the Governor was a delegate,
his action in dissolving the Provincial Council could not be questioned
because of the immunity from suit conferred on the President by Article 35 of
the Constitution. The matters before the court do not concern the President's
acts or omissions. The respondents challenge the exercise of the powers of the
Governor, not as a delegate, but as a person directly conferred by Parliament
with the

372

power of dissolution. The Governor has no immunity from suit. He is not beyond
the reach of the law, and it is not appropriate to invent new official
immunities.

A. V. Dicey, Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution, 10th
ed., 1965, p. 193, observed as follows:

Every man whatever his rank or condition is subject to the ordinary law of the
realm and amenable to the jurisdiction of ordinary tribunals . . . with every
official from Prime Minister down to a constable or a collector of taxes is
under the same responsibility for every act done without legal justification
as any other citizen.

My answer to the question whether Article 154 B (8) (c) contemplates the
exercise of the Governor's power solely as a delegate is that it does not. The
power of dissolution is one that is expressly conferred on the Governor by
Article 154 B (8) of the Constitution. It is not a power of the President
exercised by the President by means of the Governor. In the matter of
dissolution, the Governor derives his authority from a specific provision of
the Constitution that confers that power on him and on no other person. His
power does not come to him vicariously by reason of his position as a person
substituted for the President. The power has been conferred on the Governor by
Parliament and it is his duty to exercise that power exactly in the manner
prescribed by Parliament.

**ORDER**

For the reasons set out in my judgment, I affirm the decisions of the Court of
Appeal in respect of SC Appeal No. 41%96 and SC Appeal No. 42/96 and dismiss
the appeals in both cases.

The first appellant in each of the appeals shall pay Rs. 7,500 as costs.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

**_Appeals dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/23.html_  

