##  Senerath v. Chandraratne, Commissioner of Excise and Others - SLR - 209,
Vol 1 of 1995 [1995] LKSC 23; (1995) 1 Sri LR 209 (3 August 1995)

**209**

**SENERATH** **  
v.** **  
CHANDRARATNE,**

**COMMISSIONER OF EXCISE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
AUGUST 03, 1995.

_Fundamental Rights - (1) Constitution, Article 12(c) and (2) - Discrimination
- Can Supreme Court review its order granting leave to proceed ? -
Presidential immunity under Article 35 of the Constitution -Burden of proof-
-per incuriam_

The petitioner alleged that the respondent had not renewed his liquor licence
at the instigation of Mrs. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga, President of
the Republic. Leave to proceed was granted by the Supreme Court on 21st July
1995. On a preliminary objection being taken that the proceeding was barred by
provisions of Article 35 conferring immunity on the President and should have
been dismissed in limine-

**Held:**

The decision granting or refusing leave to proceed is final as far as the case
is concerned. In general the Court cannot re-hear, review, alter or vary such
decision. However the Court has limited power to clarify its judgment and to
correct accidental slips or omissions. The Court has also the power to correct
manifest error or an order made per incuriam. A Court has also the power to
open up a judgment given in the absence of one of the parties." (ex paste
order). But the order which is being sought to be varied is not an ex parte
order in that sense, for neither Article 126(2) nor the Rules of the Supreme
Court confer a right to the respondents to be heard before leave to proceed is
granted. It is an order _sui genesis_ , not having the character of an ex
parte judgment, which may re-open the exercise of the inherent power of the
Court or otherwise set aside, as may be provided by the statute.

Article 35(3) states that the immunity conferred by Article 35(1) shall not
apply to any proceedings in Court in relation to the exercise of any power
pertaining to any subject or function assigned to the President or remaining
in his charge under Article 44(2) or to proceedings in the Supreme Court under
Article 129(2) (proceedings for impeachment) or Article 130(a) relating to the
election of the President or the validity of a referendum or to proceedings in
the Court of Appeal under Article 144 or in the Supreme Court, relating to the
election of a Member of

210

Parliament. Provided that any such proceedings in relation to the exercise of
any power pertaining to any such subject or function shall be instituted
against the Attorney-General. Parliament has thereby narrowed down the
President's immunity in areas in which it may become necessary to implead his
political conduct in seeking reliefs provided for by the Constitution.

The Supreme Court has inherent powers to correct its errors which are
demonstrably and manifestly wrong and where it is necessary in the interests
of justice. Decisions made per incuriam can be corrected. These powers are
adjuncts to existing jurisdictions to remedy injustice - they cannot be made
the source of new jurisdictions to revise a judgment rendered by that Court.
Whether the question is one of interpretation the order cannot be one made per
incuriam. Hence the order of 21st July 1995 was not made per incuriam. Article
35 of the Constitution provides for the personal immunity of the President
during his tenure of office. It bars the institution of proceeding, against
him in any Court. The reference is to proceedings in which some relief is
claimed or liability is alleged, by way of an action or a prosecution. In the
instant case the petitioner has not filed proceedings in a Court seeking
relief against the President. The respondents to the application are
officials. Relief has been sought against the officials only.

There is no legal obligation for the President to file an affidavit. The
burden is clearly on the petitioner. The respondents are at liberty to decide
what material they will place before this court, as advised. As such no
question of evasion of Article 35 arises. The rule of construction against
evasion that what a person or Court may not do directly, it may not do
indirectly or in a circuitous manner does not apply.

There are no exceptional circumstances for reversing the order of 21st July
1995 by the exercise of the inherent powers of court.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne S.C. Application No. 127/94 Supreme Court
Minutes of 04th July 94._  
_2\. Gargial v. Somasunderam Chetty 9 NLR 26, 29._  
_3\. Kumaratunga v. Jayakody (1985) 2 Sri LR 124._  
_4\. Alasupillai v. Yapetipullai 39 CLW 107._  
_5\. Huddersfield Police Authority v. Watson (1947) 2 All ER 193._  
_6\. Morelle Ltd. v. Wakeling (1955) 1 All ER 708, 718._  
_7\. Ganeshananthan v. Goonewardena (1984) 1 Sri LR 321._  
_8\. Magdalen College Case (1616) 11 Rep. 661._  
_9\. Cross v. Watts (1863) 32 W MC 73._  
_10\. Kodakan Pillai v. Mudannayake 54 NLR 433, 438._

211

  
_11\. Band v. Weeraratne (1981) 1 Sri LR. 10._  
_12\. Hirdaramani v. Ratrrevale 75 NLR 67; 113,_  
_13\. Ashutosh v. State of Delhi A1 R 1953 SC 451._

**PRELIMINARY** objection to maintenance of fundamental rights application.

_T. G. Marapone, P.C. with D. Weerasuriya and N. Ladduwahetty for petitioner._  
  
_Shibly Aziz, PC. Attorney-General with A. S. M. Perera, Addl. S. G. and Tony
Fernando, S.C. as amicus curiae._

_Cur. adv. Vult._

August 24, 1995.  
**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J. read the following Order of Court.**

The petitioners sought relief against the 1st respondent (Commissioner of
Excise) and other officials on the ground that by reason of their failure to
renew the petitioner's licences for 1995 to sell liquor, his rights under
Articles 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1) (g) have been infringed. The petitioner has
joined as parties to this application for persons to whom liquor licences have
been issued. He alleges that such issue establishes unlawful discrimination.
He also applied for an interim order for the renewal of his licences pending
the determination of this application, to avoid "irreparable loss' to his
business which would otherwise result from the failure to grant the licences
sought by him.

On 21.07.95 we granted the petitioner leave to proceed in respect of the
alleged infringements of Articles 12(1) and 12(2); the Counsel for the
petitioner did not press for relief in respect of Article 14(1) (g). We issued
the interim order sought until 28.07.95 and directed that this case and a few
similar cases be listed on 28.07.95 for a decision on the question of the
interim order. The Attorney-General was requested to assist the Court on that
matter.

On 28.07.95 the Attorney-General himself appeared and objected to the
extension of the interim order sought in this case and further submitted that
leave to proceed should not have been granted in view of certain averments in
the petition wherein the petitioner alleges that the respondents had not
renewed his licences, at the instigation

of Mrs. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga who had not recommended the renewal
of licences for his liquor shop situated at Nittambuwa. It was submitted that
this application should have been dismissed in limine, presumably on the
ground that this is a proceeding against the President of the Republic in
breach of Article 35 of the Constitution; whereupon, the Bench which heard the
matter directed that it be listed before the Bench which gave leave to
proceed. Consequently, we heard the Attorney-General and Counsel for the
petitioner on the aforesaid objection and reserved our order thereon.

The Attorney-General submitted that we should set aside our order dated
21.07.95, refuse leave to proceed and dismiss this application. On behalf of
the petitioner, Mr. Weerasuriya submitted that there is no basis on which the
said order may be set aside.

The impugned order is an order of the Supreme Court made under Article 126(2)
of the Constitution which requires a petitioner seeking relief thereunder to
obtain leave from the Court to proceed with the application "which leave may
be granted or refused". it has been held that such decision is final, as far
as the case is concerned; and that in general the Court cannot re-hear,
review, alter or vary such decision. However, the Court has limited power to
clarify its judgment and to-correct accidental slips or omissions. The Court
also has the power to correct manifest error or an order made per incuriam.
Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne (1)

A Court also has the power "to open up a judgment given in the absence of one
of the parties" (ex parte order) Gargial v Somasundram Chetty (2). But the
order which is sought to be varied is not an ex parte order in that sense; for
neither Article 126(2) nor the Rules of the Supreme Court, confer a right to
the respondents to be heard before leave to proceed is granted. It is an order
_sui generis_ not having the character of an ex parte judgment, which may b
reopened in the exercise of the inherent power of the Court o otherwise set
aside, as may be provided by statute.

We have to decide (a) whether this application should have been dismissed in
limine; (b) whether we may set aside the order made on

213

21.07.95; and (c) if so, what is our power to vary that order? The main
submission advanced by the Attorney-General was that the Court has overlooked
Article 35(1) of the Constitution which reads:

"While any person holds office as President no proceedings shall be instituted
or continued against him in any Court or tribunal in respect of anything done
or omitted to be done by him either in his official or private capacity".

Article 35(3) states that the immunity conferred by Article 35(1) shall not
apply to any proceedings in Court in relation to the exercise of any power
pertaining to any-subject or function assigned to the President or remaining
in his charge under Article 44(2) or to proceedings in the Supreme Court under
Article 129(2) (proceedings for impeachment) or Article 130(A) relating to the
election of the President or the validity of a referendum or to proceedings in
the Court of Appeal under Article 144 or in the Supreme Court, relating to the
election of a Member of Parliament. Provided that any such proceedings in
relation to the exercise of any power pertaining to any such subject or
function shall be instituted against the Attorney-General.

It is to be noted that in terms of the above provisions the President can be
personally sued in proceedings for his impeachment or in proceedings for
challenging his own election as President or a referendum or the election of a
Member of Parliament. It is significant that the provision for personal suit
against the President in respect of a referendum or the election of a Member
of Parliament was added by the 14th Amendment to the Constitution. Parliament
has thereby narrowed down his immunity in areas in which it may become
necessary to implead his political conduct in seeking reliefs provided for by
the Constitution. Prior to this amendment, an election petition could not be
validly filed making the President a respondent. Kumaratunga v. Jayakody (3).

The immunity conferred by Article 23(1) of the 1972 Constitution on the
President was identical with the immunity conferred by Article 35(1) of the
1978 Constitution. However, the President under that Constitution was a
constitutional figure head who was required to act on the advice of the Prime
Minister.

214

Even after the amendment of Article 35, the immunity conferred thereby remains
very wide especially when it is compared with the immunity of the President of
India under Article 361 of the Indian Constitution. In India, the immunity
protects the President against criminal proceedings only whilst civil
proceedings in respect of his personal acts can be instituted in a Court, two
months next after a notice of such action in writing delivered to him.

During a period of about two months, about 184 applications have been filed
before this Court complaining of similar infringements of fundamental rights
arising out of the failure of the respondents to renew liquor licences for the
year 1995. The petitioners allege that although their applications for fresh
licences have been recommended by the Divisional Secretary, the Officer-in-
Charge of the Police Station, the area Superintendent of Excise and the
Assistant Commissioner of Excise for the district, licences have been issued
only to persons recommended by the People's Alliance Member of Parliament of
the area or in the absence of a People's Alliance Member of Parliament, to
persons recommended by the People's Alliance area organiser. They add that
such recommendations are monitored by an Addl. Secretary to the President
operating from the Presidential Secretariat (the 9th respondent-in-this case).
He sends down a list of such eligible applicants to the 1st respondent who
then issues licences to them.

The generality of the petitioners in the above cases claim to be supporters of
the United National Party. But the petitioner in this case claims to have been
an active Member of Sri Lanka Freedom Party from 1965. After the
reorganisation of the party hierarchy and the formation of the PA., he
desisted from working for the S.L.F.P and the PA. He states that this
displeased Mrs. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga whose recommendation was
required for the renewal of his licences. Due to such displeasure, he avers,
she did not recommend the renewal sought by him; and that on her instigation,
the 1st and 4th respondents refused to renew his licences and thereby
subjected him to hostile discrimination.

215

The Attorney-General, argued that the allegation made by the petitioner
impinges on the private conduct of the President which in turn would compel
the President to file an affidavit (denying the allegation); that in default,
the Court may find her culpable; that Article 35 protects the President from
such treatment; that the immunity under that Article is very wide; that the
Court should not permit the petitioner to make allegations against the
President which would be tantamount to doing in an indirect or circuitous
manner that which it has prohibited or enjoined; that "a Constitution must not
be construed in a narrow or pedantic manner, and that construction most
beneficial to the widest possible amplitude of its powers, must be adopted".
He cited in support Maxwell 12th Edt. Chapter 6 Bennion "Statutory
Interpretation" pages 347-350, 714, 715 and 718720. Seervali "Constitutional
Law of India" 4th Edt. Chapter II.

In the alternative, the Attorney-General relied on Hettiarachchi's case
(supra) as an authority for justifying the review of the order of this Court
made on 21.07.95.

Mr. Weerasuriya argued that there is no legal basis for canvassing the order
of this Court; that the Attorney-General has sought to give an interpretation
to Article 35 which, on a plain reading, only gives a personal immunity
against instituting proceedings in a Court; that being so, the question which
has been raised is merely one of interpretation; hence there is no order made
per incuriam. Counsel argued that in any event the petitioner has sought
relief against officials and not against the President.

In the case of _Alasupillai v. Yapetipillai_ (4) Basnayake, J. (as he then
was), following the case of _Huddersfield_ Police _Authority v. Watson_ (5)
stated "A decision per incuriam is one given when a case or a statute has not
been brought to the attention of the Court and it has given the decision in
ignorance or forgetfulness of the existence of that case or statute". In
_Morelle Ltd. v. Wakeling_ (6) the Court observed.

"As a general rule the only cases in which decisions should be held to have
been given per incuriam are those decisions given in ignorance or
forgetfulness of some inconsistent statutory provisions or of some authority
binding on the Court concerned;

**216**

216 in this page have not content.

217

We are of the opinion that Hettiarachchi's case has no application to the case
before us. That was a case in which the Court granted relief to the
petitioner, on further submissions being made, based on the petition, in the
exceptional circumstances of the case. Here the application is to vacate an
order by which relief was granted. That order was not made per incuriam and
there are no exceptional circumstances for reversing the order. On this basis,
the objection raised by the Attorney-General fails. However, in deference to
the submissions addressed to us, we consider it appropriate to express our
views on the points raised, as to the nature and scope of the immunity
conferred by Article 35.

The Attorney-General relied on the rule of construction against evasion. It
has been held that "the office of the Judge is, to make such construction as
will suppress the mischief and advance the remedy, and to suppress all
evasions for the continuance of the mischief" - _Magdalen College Case_ (8).
In this connection, it is observed that the rule that you cannot do in an
indirect or circuitous manner that which the statute has prohibited or
enjoined, applies to persons, the Legislature and even a Court.

Thus, a shopkeeper who was licensed only to sell beer for consumption off the
premises was held to be in breach of the relevant statute if he sold beer to
be drunk on a bench which he provided for his customers close to the shop, the
intention making it, virtually, a sale for consumption on the premises _Cross
v. Watts_ (9). As regards the Legislature, in Kodakan _Pillai v. Mudannayake_
(10) the Privy Council observed:

" ... there may be circumstances in which legislation so framed so as not to
offend directly against a constitutional limitation of the power of the
legislature may indirectly achieve the same result, and that in such
circumstances the legislation would be ultra vires".

In Bandaranaike v. Weeraratne (11) this Court dismissed in limine an
application for a writ of certiorari to quash a recommendation for imposition
of civic disability made under S. 9 of Law No. 7 of 1978 in

218

view of the fact that Parliament had already passed a resolution under Article
81 of the Constitution subjecting the petitioner to civic disability; and
Article 81(3) provided, inter alia;

"No Court or tribunal shall ... in any manner call in question the validity of
such resolution on any ground whatsoever".

At page 16, Samerawickrama, J. said that if the Court were to entertain the
application it would be acting in violation of the preclusive clause. He also
said:

" _There is a general rule in the construction of statutes that what a Court
or a person is prohibited from doing directly, it may not do indirectly or in
a circuitous manner "_

Article 35 of the Constitution provides for the personal immunity of the
President during his tenure of office. It bars the institution of proceedings
against him in any Court. The reference is to proceedings in which some relief
is claimed or liability is alleged, by way of an action or a prosecution. The
mode of institution of an action is set out in Chapter VII of the Civil
Procedure Code whilst the procedure for institution of a prosecution is set
out in S. 136 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

In the instant case, the petitioner has not filed proceedings in a Court
seeking relief against the President. The respondents to this application are
officials. Relief has been sought against the officials only. The complaint is
that the refusal by the 1st and 4th respondents to renew the petitioner's
liquor licences was mala fide, capricious and due to extraneous considerations
to wit, the policy of issuing licences only to persons recommended by a PA.,
M.P. or PA. Organiser for the area. In the context, it is also alleged that
Mrs. Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga who is the political authority whose
recommendation is required for issuing licences for the Nittambuwa area is
displeased with the petitioner; and it is further alleged that the respondents
refused to renew the licences of the petitioner, acting on her instigation. As
observed by Samerawickrama, J. in _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ (12) . The burden
of proving such an allegation is on the

219

party who makes it and it is a very heavy burden to discharge. The raising of
mere suspicion is not sufficient - Vide _Ashutosh v. State of Delhi_ (13)

There is, therefore, no warrant for the opinion expressed by the Attorney-
General that the President is obliged to "answer the allegation" and that in
the instant case, the President has to file an affidavit. We are of the view
that there is no such legal obligation, The burden is clearly on the
petitioner. The respondents are at liberty to decide what material they will
place before this Court, as advised. As such, no question of evasion of
Article 35 arises. The petition does not contain any averment referring to the
President. As such the reference to the President is but a natural consequence
of the fact that the President is also a leader of the ruling political party,
a factor which Parliament has already taken cognizance of in amending Article
35.

We are also confident that the interpretation of Article 35 which we have
given is supported by the plain meaning of its language. There is no need to
give a wider meaning to that Article, especially in the light of Article 4(d)
which reads:

"The fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and recognized
shall be respected, secured and advanced by all organs of the government, and
shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the manner and to the
extent hereinafter provided".

The objection raised by the State is accordingly rejected. The petition is set
down for hearing on the merits.

_Preliminary objection overruled._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/23.html_  

