##  Thavarasa and Two Others v. Gunasekera and Others - SLR - 357, Vol 2 of
1996 [1994] LKSC 24; (1996) 2 Sri LR 357 (10 August 1994)

**357**

**THAVARASA AND TWO OTHERS  
v.  
****GUNASEKERA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.R.T. D. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA,J.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 224/94.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 225/94.  
S. C. APPLICATION NO. 226/94.  
(CONSOLIDATED)  
02, 20 JUNE, 7, 13 JULY AND 01 AUGUST 1995.

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Illegal arrest and illegal detention ‑ Constitution
‑Article 13 (1) and Article 13(2) ‑ Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981,
section 74(1) which prohibited the pasting of posters in public places ‑Code
of Criminal Procedure Act, section 116(1)._

The three Petitioners were campaign supporters of Anura Bastian former Member
of Parliament and U.N.P. organiser for Colombo West and U.N.P. candidate for
Colombo District of the Parliamentary Elections of August 1994.

Of two widely divergent versions of the facts the Court accepted the version
of the 1st and 2nd Respondent Police Officers. According to the version
accepted by Court:‑

Police found a group of persons pasting posters on behalf of Anura Bastian on
the public road and environs. The pasting of such posters was an election
offence.

The 1st Respondent ordered the persons who were committing these election
offences to stop doing so. They ignored his orders and continued committing
these offences. The three Petitioners were among the crowd committing these
offences and were the leaders and one of them (Ramanathan) became extremely
aggressive towards the 1st Respondent. There were 49 others with the
Petitioners and all were arrested. Ramanathan pulled out a pistol from his
waist and attempted to shoot the 1st Respondent and acted in a manner to
voluntarily obstruct the 1st Respondent a public servant in the performance of
his duty.

Two Police Officers, A.S.P. Kulatilleke and S.P. Paranathala denied knowing

**358**

of the allegation of attempted murder until the following morning. There was
quite insufficient ground for the C.I.D. submitting a second B report or
stating that the allegation has not been supported beyond reasonable doubt.
The C.I.D. operation was described on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Respon­dents
as fraudulent.

**Held :**

(1) The duty of the 1st Respondent as a public servant had to perform is set
out in section 74(5) of the Parliamentary Elections Act No.1 of 1981 and
**empowered** the Police to take such steps and use such force as may be
reasonably necessary for prevention of contravention of election laws. Section
74(1) (b) of the Act prohibits the display of posters in a place where the
public have a right of access. The offence of such display of posters is a
cognisable offence punishable with fine or imprisonment or both. Therefore the
police arrested everybody at that time and that arrest was lawful.

The protection afforded by Article 13(1) is the protection against unlawful
arrest and the recognition of the individual's right to know the reason for
the arrest. The Petitioners who were perpetrators of a prohibited act have
been caught redhanded. The offenders were caught on the road in _flagrante
delicto_ and in the circumstances there is no need to explain the reason for
the arrest. There is therefore no infringement of the rights of the
petitioners as contained in the second part of Article 13(1).

Section 116(1) (of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.) is directory and not
imperative or mandatory. Despite its language there lies a discretion with the
Police to produce a suspect before a Magistrate instead of relasing him on
bail to appear in court although the offences of obstruction and intimidation
are bailable. The Petitioners were treated by the 1st and 2nd Respondents as
organisers or ring leaders and that was the distinction made as against the 49
others arrested and given Police bail. Those 49 were treated merely as workers
or helpers who actually pasted the posters given to them by the organisers.

The version of the 1st and 2nd Respondents shows a massive obstruction to
public officers. The words used are not mere words of protest. They are words
of intimidation, threat to employment, threat of transfer to a war zone,
clearly intended to defer a police officer from doing his lawful duty of
preventing election offences being committed, words likely to dissuade to
hinder or prevent a public servant from doing his duty. These words uttered on
the public road in the company of about 50 of their helpers amounts to
offences punishable under sections 183 and 486 of the Penal Code. The Police
wisely produced the disputing party, disputing their arrest, before a
Magistrate.

**359**

Procedures regarding detention vary with the relevant law governing the
arrest. The prescribed period of detention following arrest under the
Parlia­mentary Elections Act is governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
and is the outer limit within which the **arrestee must be** brought before a
judge. That is the essence of this sub‑article (Article 13(2)) and is one of
the checks the law provides to protect the freedom of the individual.

A violation of Article 13(1) (illegal arrest) does not necessarily result in a
violation of Article 13(2). Article 13(2) seeks to ensure that persons are not
detained arbitrarily by persons like Police Officers who perform executive
functions. Detention untill 11 a.m. was not arbitrary but justifiable in the
circumstances. There was therefore no infringement of the provisions of
Article 13(2).

Any finding on the allegation of attempted murder, which really is a matter
for a trial Court, will not affect the decision regarding Article 13(1). The
2.30 a.m. entry of the 1st Respondent containing information of an attempt to
shoot at him was a prompt contemporaneous entry made in the course of
inquiries and is not belated. The Court is not impressed with the denial of
the petitioners of the 1st Respondent's allegation of an attempt to shoot at
him. The Court is unable to hold that the 1st Respondent has not done an
impartial inquiry or that he has fabricated evidence against Ramanathan in
particular. The role of A.S.P. Kulatilleke and S.P. Paranathala and of the
C.I.D. was suspicious and unacceptable.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Muthusamy v_. _Kannangara_ 52 N.L.R. 324, 329.

2\. _Co rea v. The Queen _(1954) 55 N. L. R. 457.

3(a). _Abeywickrema v. Pathirana_ 1986 I SLR 171

3(b). _Uparis v. Robert_ 36 NLR 325

3(c). _Christie v. Leachinsky_ (1947) A.C. 573, 593.

4. _Tunnaya alias Gunapala v. O.I.C. Police, Galewela_ (1993) 1 Sri L.R. 61, 66.

5. ___Police Sergeant v. Razak_ 13 C.L.W. 39.

6. ___Police Sergeant v. Simon Silva_ 15 C.L.W. 13.

7. __ _Selvakumar v. Devananda_ S.C. Application 150/93. S.C. Minutes of 13.7.94. __

8. __ _Kumara v. Rohan Fernando_ S.C. Application 22/90‑ S.C. Minutes of 21.7.94. 

9\. _Mahinda Rajapakse's case_ S.C. Application No. 2/93 _._ S. C. Minutes of
31.3.94 _._

10. __ _Faiz v. A. G_. S.C. Application No. 89/91 S.C. Minutes of 19.11.93.

**360**

**APPLICATION** alleging infringement of Fundamental Rights guaranteed un­der
Article 13(1) and 13(2).

_D.S. Wijesinghe, P.C._ with _Manohara R. de Silva_ for Petitioner, _V.
Thavarasa_.

_F. Mustapha, P.C._ with _S. Jayawardena for _Petitioner S. Ramanathan.

_R.K.W. Goonesekera_ for Petitioner S. Balachandran.

_E. D. Wikramanayake_ for 1st and 2nd Respondents.

_Nihara Rodrigo,_ Senior State Counsel for 3rd and 4th Respondents.

November 17, 1995.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

These Petitions contain complaints against officers of the Mount Lavinia
Police in regard to an incident which took place on 7th/8th August 1994 during
the campaign and run‑up to the Parliamentary General Election held on 16th
August 1994 when the Peoples Alliance won the election and formed a
Government. This was a period of intense political activity by contesting
candidates and their supporters.

**FACTS:**

**Brief statement of events leading to arrest:**

The Petitioners were campaign supporters of Mr. W. D. I. Anura Bastian former
Member of Parliament and UNP organiser for Colombo West and UNP candidate for
Colombo District.

The three Petitions were taken up and heard together of consent as the facts
were common to all. But it was pointed out that the in­volvement of each
Petitioner was different and this must be kept in mind when the Court
considered the affidavits and other evidence in the background of applicable
Election Laws and Penal Laws.

Petitioner Velauthan Thavarasa is an Attorney at law and avers he had been
retained by Mr. Anura Bastian to advice, represent and appear for Bastian's
supporters during the campaign, He is a mem­ber of the National Executive
Committee of the United National Party.

**361**

Petitioner S. Ramanathan is a member of the United National Party and is also
a member of its National Executive Committee besides being a Colombo
businessman. The businesses mentioned by him in his petition are:

Chairman of Groundmet Travels and Tours (Private) Ltd. an Airline Travel and
Ticketing agency of 4 York Street Colombo 1. and Sole Agent for Beeman
Bangladesh Airline and Royal Nepal Airline; he says he is also a passenger
ticket sales agent for Air Lanka, Emirates Airlines, Air India, Cathay‑Pacific
Airlines, Singapore Airlines, Balkan Airlines and Royal Jordanian Airlines. He
is also President of the Union Importers Association.

Petitioner Sathasivam Balachandran is a brother of Petitioner Velauthan
Thavarasa and is a businessman.

This incident occurred during the period of permitted meetings regulated by
the Parliamentary Elections Act No: 1 of 1981. Election Laws prohibited the
pasting of posters of candidates in public placesvide section, 74(1). On
7.8.94, there had been a public meeting at Soysapura in support of former MP
and Minister Tyronne Fernando also a UNP candidate at the said election
contesting Colombo District. This public meeting continued into the night.
Both the Petitioners and the Respondents state they had been present at that
meeting. Both parties had to return along Galle Road to reach Mount Lavinia
and Colombo.

There had been a group of persons pasting posters on behalf of Mr. Anura
Bastian on the public road and environs. The road has a dual carriage way.
There were street lights. The posters were of Anura Bastian singly, of Bastian
with former President D. B. Wijetunge and of Bastian with former Prime
Minister Ranil Wickramasinghe. This place of incident was close to the Basic
Technical Training Institute Ratmalana and close to a junction known as Belek
Kade Handiya.

We now come to the point where the 1st and 2nd Respondents proceed to the
scene at about midnight consequent to a telephone message from Assistant
Superintendent of Police J. Kulathilaka.

**362**

Jayantha Kulathilaka who, whilst returning from Soysapura himself had seen
several vehicles and people pasting UNP posters on parapet walls and on the
road near Belek Kade Junction had directed the 1st Respondent to take steps
according to law. The relevant police entry has been produced marked 1R1 being
an extract from the Election Information Book of the Mount Lavinia Police and
the time of that entry is at 00.20 a.m. on 8.8.94.

The 1st Respondent who was at Soysapura, assembled a police party and came to
a spot near the Technical College where he says was a crowd of persons and
several vans parked and, _inter alia,_ pasting posters of Anura Bastian which
acts constituted offences. The 1st Respondent states he ordered the persons
who were committing elections offences to stop doing so. They ignored his
orders and continued committing offences. The three Petitioners were among
this crowd of persons committing offences. S. Ramanathan was directing the
others and all three Petitioners became extremely aggressive towards him.
There were 49 others whom he apprehended at the time besides the Petitioners.

The Court will deal with the particulars relating to the conduct of each of
the Petitioners, from the time of the first confrontation with the 1st and 2nd
Respondents, as presented by the versions before court.

At this point however I allude to the versions of the Petitioners as to the
circumstances in which they came to be confronted by the police. The
Petitioners state that at about 12.30 a.m. on 8.8.94 after attending the said
meeting at Soysapura Moratuwa, they left for Colombo in a van driven by driver
Alagarathnam. On the way the Peti­tioners received a telephone call from one
Nirmalan, a Bastian supporter, that some of Bastian's supporters were being
assaulted by the police at Ratmalana. Simultaneously the Petitioners saw a
gathering of almost 50 persons on the road opposite the Technical Training
Institute and some persons were being assaulted by the police. They stopped
their van, got down and made their way to the police officers. Petitioner
Thavarasa identified himself as an attorney at law looking after the interests
of candidate Anura Bastian.

Before the Court considers the conflicting versions of the parties _i.e._
facts supportive of the claim of the Petitioners of an infringement

**363**

of their fundamental rights on the one hand, and facts inconsistent with the
Petitioners version which may show that the police officers conducted
themselves within the law to enforce the law by preventing its breach on the
other, it would be useful and convenient to set down briefly the successive
events that took place after the police took the three Petitioners and 49
others to the police station and took into custody several vehicles and
posters and articles used for the pur­pose of pasting posters.

**BRIEF STATEMENT OF EVENTS AT POLICE STATION AFTER ARREST.**

From documents produced at this hearing we find that, after sev­eral people
were brought to the police station that night, the 1st Re­spondent pleads that
he informed the Petitioners of the charges of committing prohibited acts under
elections laws and other offences such as intimidation and attempted murder
punishable under the Penal Code against them and took them into custody. An
entry to this effect has been made in notes made by the 1st Respondent in the
aforesaid Elections Information Book and produced marked 1R1. This note
commences at 2.30 a.m. on 8.8.94. It is a continuation of the earlier entry
made at 00.20 a.m. in 1R1. This later entry also contains notes pertaining to
the extremely aggressive intimidatory conduct of these Petitioners and the
threats they made against the 1st and 2nd Respondents, details of which will
be set out in due course.

The Assistant Superintendent of Police Mt. Lavinia Jayantha Kulatileke on
information given by telephone by the 1st Respondent HQI, visited the Mt.
Lavinia Police station at 1.15 a.m. on 8.8.94. His notes entered in the
Officers Visit Book commonly referred to as the OVB commence at 1.15 a.m. and
have been marked 1R2. According to that note, when he went to the police
station he saw 5 vans parked outside and inside the police station premises,
about 45‑50 persons alleged to have been caught pasting election posters on
the public road, and the three Petitioners along with the 1st and 2nd
Respond­ents and several other police officers present. He questioned the 1st
Respondent regarding the incident. The notes of the ASP at this point do not
refer to the 1st Respondent having informed him that Petitioner Ramanathan
fired at him with a pistol. This omission is a point stressed by all Counsel
for the Petitioners. It was by their submission that the

**364**

allegation of attempted murder was an afterthought. The note continues to
state that he separately questioned the Petitioners and they told him that
they were assaulted by police officers and taken into custody on the road upon
an allegation of pasting posters and brought to the station, that the 1st
Respondent took Ramanthan's licenced pistol and a bag containing Rs.82,000/‑
and the Celltell phone belonging to Petitioner Thavarasa (which has been
returned). The note continues and refers to Anura Bastian coming to the police
station at 2 a.m. and asking for the release of the Petitioners. At 2.15 a.m.
ASP notes he received a telephone call from C.V. Gooneratne (PA candidate from
Colombo District at the general election) informing him that a crowd of Anura
Bastian's supporters committing election offences have been arrested, that
they have attempted to shoot police officers and that he informed the IGP and
requested me to act according to law. ASP informed the SP. J. Paranathala of
the inci­dent. Also, it is noted that at the urgent request of AAL Thavarasa
and Mrs. Thavarasa for bail, he will consider the matter. At this point is a
full stop in the note. It continues on the same line thus:

Thus the ASP's note pointedly records the time at which he says an information
was given to him by the 1st Respondent namely, that Petitioner Ramanathan
attempted to shoot him with a pistol at the time of arrest and for that reason
they cannot be released on bail. Counsel for the Petitioners rely on this
entry contained in 1R2 in making the submission that it was only at about 7
a.m. on 8.8.94 that the 1st Respondent for the first time made the allegation
of an attempt made by Petitioner Ramanathan to shoot at him at the time of his
arrest. I have used the word "pointedly" because the said time has been noted
within brackets.

Nowhere else in the ASP's note 1R2 has any time been placed within brackets
although specific times have been given regarding the arrival of Anura Bastian
at 2 a.m. and C.V. Gooneratne's telephone call at 2.15 a.m. Counsel for the
1st Respondent submits that the (7 a.m.) entry is a false entry in the
circumstances and has been done pur‑

**365**

posely by the ASP in the morning to ensure that the Petitioners are released
from custody on bail as all other offences were bailable. The circumstances
1st Respondent's counsel alludes to are:

(a) That other specific times contained in 1R2 have not been placed within
brackets;

(b) C.V. Gooneratne telephones the ASP at 2.15 a.m. and informs him
specifically of the attempt made by those committing elections offences to
shoot at police; This information is thus available to the ASP at 2.15 a.m.
Someone, perhaps a member of the public at Belek Kade Junction had informed
Mr. Gooneratna.

(c) The 1st Respondents notes 1R1 commencing at 2.30 a.m. refers to the
attempt to shoot him with a pistol.

(d) That Anura Bastian came at 2 a.m. and requested that all those people
arrested be released ‑ 1R2. This was not done. They were not released. Why?

(e) Subsequent events confirm that quite unusual steps have been taken to
report to court by 4 p.m. the same day that, contrary to the B report already
filed by the 1st Respondent ‑ P2 the allegation of an attempted murder by
shooting cannot be seriously supported upon the available evidence. So
Petitioner Ramanathan comes home on bail the same day.

ASP Kulatileke in 1R2 has inspected the pistol P1 and the misfired bullet P2
at 8.30 a.m. having been given same by reserve PS12298. ASP had seen an
indentation on bullet P2 (This marking of P2 is what had been given by the Mt.
Lavinia police in their investigation.) This portion of his note 1R2 is marked
3RY2. To continue the narrative of events, the three Petitioners were produced
before the JMO by the 1st and 2nd Respondents that morning despite their
objection. No injuries were seen. Thereafter they were produced before the
Magistrate with B report P2 at about 11 a.m. The Magistrate did not wish to
hear the case but transferred it to the Additional District Judge who made an
order of remand in custody as against Petitioner Ramanathan against whom there
was a specific allegation whilst granting the other two Pe‑

**366**

titioners bail. The B report P2 contained allegations of offences pun­ishable
under sections 183,300,486 (Le) obstruction; attempted murder and criminal
intimidation. The police did not object to bail as against Petitioners
Thavarasa and Balachandran probably because it involves questions of law such
as common intention.

**INTERVENTION OF THE CID:**

Concurrent with the events of the 1st and 2nd Respondents taking the
Petitioners in the morning of 8.8.94 for a medical examination by the JMO at
about 7.30 a.m. and later producing them in Court at 11 a.m. other happenings
with regard to this matter have been placed before the Court by learned Senior
State Counsel representing the In­spector General of Police and the Attorney
General, the 3rd and 4th Respondents. Letter 3R1 was produced before us; this
is a photocopy of a letter written by Anura Bastian to Deputy Inspector
General of police CID (Amarasena Rajapakse since retired). The letter is
un­dated. It is in the English language. It reads as follows:

................  Quote.........  "Strong representations are being made to me
by a large number of supporters regarding the HQI, Mt. Lavinia, to have them
remanded till the election is over.

One such case is one Ramanathan against whom the HQI has made a case where
Ramanathan has attempted to shoot him.

As this is going too far I would like you to take an interest and see that
justice is done."

Sgd:

Ex: MP. Anura Bastian "..unquote. On this letter, Amarasena Rajapakse side
lines the 2nd para marking it "X" and minutes as follows:

Sgd:

..............Quote................. ". On the direction of IG police please
send a team under the direction of SP. Mr. Othnapitiya particularly about the
alle­gation at "x" above and report."

Sgd:

(8.8.94 DIG). Thereafter 3R1 reaches SP Othnapitiya (SP, CID, Interpol
Division)

**367**

(It would appear that it was DIG\CID, who selected the SP in charge of
Interpol Division to conduct inquiries against police officers of Mt.
Lavinia.) Overleaf of 3R1 is another minute addressed to E10 marked 3R2‑
requesting E10 to look into these allegations and report ‑ comply with orders
of DIG/CID. Thereafter at 9.05 hrs. on 8.8.94 Othnapitiya's notes, also found
in document 3R1, states that DIG/ CID and Director CID are present. DIG
informs him that Mt. Lavinia Police had arrested some persons in connection
with offences relat­ing to election offences Viz: UNP supporters putting up
posters on behalf of Mr. Anura Bastian and that a person named Ramanathan has
been taken into custody for attempting to shoot HQI Mt. Lavinia.

The note continues stating DIG has said that the IGP has ordered an impartial
inquiry be conducted by the CID since allegations have been made that police
had not done an impartial inquiry.

Thereafter Director/CID was asked to form a team immediately under
Othnapitiya's command to conduct inquiries.

Next, Othnapitiya's notes of inquiry are marked 3R3. They read as follows:
10.45 hours police station Mt. Lavinia. Now to SP's office.

I met SP Mr. J. Paranathala and ASP J. Kulatileka. They briefed me facts of
the case. According to SP/ASP., the HQI had not in­formed them of the alleged
attempted shooting incident until this morning although HQI had met the ASP
immediately after the incidents last night. There had been several armed
police officers together with the HQI at the time of the alleged incident. I
instructed CI Upasena to record a statement of ASP in his office. I shall get
down the other police officers and question them.........sgd. SP Othnapitiya.
The next entry of Othnapitiya has been marked 3R4 and reads thus:

8.8.94 13.45 hrs: Director/CID telephoned me and informed that the IG Police
had directed DIG/CID to file a report in Court on the basis of the material as
it is strongly suspected that HQI Mt: Lavinia has fabricated evidence against
3 persons, namely Ramanathan and two others implicating them in a case of
alleged attempt to shoot. Director/CID instructed me (Othnapitiya) to move
Courts that the CID is making detailed inquiries into this matter and submit a
report on

**368**

completion of the investigation and CID has no objection to releasing the
suspects on bail. **Unquote**

**COURT PROCEEDINGS ON CID REPORT.**

The next thing that took place as far as the Court proceedings were concerned,
was the filing of a 2nd B Report at 4 p.m. on the same day by CI. Rohan
Upasena of (Interpol Division). In his report he says that the CID was
conducting a wide investigation at MT. Lavinia Police Station and has obtained
a statement from ASP Jayantha Kulatileka of Mt. Lavinia and that "according to
the evidence so far collected, facts to show that there had been any attempted
murder or a threatening by aiming a pistol have not been revealed beyond
reasonable doubt. Therefore I move that these suspects (1) W. P. Thavarasa.
(2) S. Balachandran and (3) S. Ramanathan who have been produced before court
now, be discharged on bail under section 114 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Act No 15 of 1979."

Upon this 2nd B Report the Magistrate, now decides to deal with the case
regarding Ramanathan, and stating that ‑ quote "the 2nd B report produced
reports that there is no evidence to support the facts stated in the first
report in respect of suspect Ramanathan
"..................unquote..................and decides
....................quote....................." accordingly I am ordering bail
to him since it is an infringement of his rights to remand him. Accordingly I
am ordering same bail to him as ordered to the other suspects. I am ordering
this 1st suspect (Ramanathan) Rs.2500/ ‑ cash/certified bail. Call case on
22.08.94........"unquote"........

Next, CI. Rohan Upasena giving evidence before the Magistrate on 10.08.94,
produces a pistol bearing serial No.A3404 of Czechoslo­vakian make and live
bullets and a misfired live bullet with a mark as though hit by the firing pin
which he says he received from the 1st Respondent and placed the seal on the
package. Witness moves to send productions to the Government Analyst for
examination and report. The Magistrate makes order that productions P1‑P4 be
so sent to the Analyst. He further orders that the
productions".........quote.....be handed over to Chief Inspector Rohan Upasena
to be sent to the Government Analyst".......At this point of the proceedings
on 10.08.94, Attorney at Law Kanthilal Kumarasiri appearing for the present

**369**

Petitioners (who were accused in the Magistrates Court) in the course of
submissions has stated to Court"...........quote........" The firearm had not
been sealed and on the following day at 9 a.m. the police officers have
forwarded it to the CID. My request is that reports on the production be
obtained and the Analyst's report and the productions be kept in special
custody of Court". But the Magistrate made order........quote....." in
accordance with the request of Mr. Kumarasiri, I order that the productions be
sent to CID through CI. Rohan Upasena and that they be kept in their
charge.........I reject the application made to keep the productions in Court.
I order that they be kept with CID"....... The Magistrate in so ordering, has
referred to a JSC circular sent in 1983 against keeping of fire arms in court
premises in the wake of massive disturbances in Colombo.

Chief Inspector Upasena filed in court a further report P5. This report refers
to statements recorded of thirteen persons. The statements of the two
Respondents and three other police officers, namely Inspector Dhanandaya,
SubInspector S. Jayamaha and police sergeant 1965 Mathes all support the 1st
Respondent's assertion that Petitioner Ramanathan who was wearing a sarong, at
one point took a pistol from his waist and pointed it at the 1st Respondent.
We do not know how far away from the HQI these witnesses were. The 2nd
Respondent and PS. Mathes corroborate. The 1st Respondent states that
Ramanathan pulled the trigger. Inspector Dhanandaya and Jayamaha say
Ramanathan pulled out the pistol and pointed the pistol upwards at the HQI
when the HQI caught him and wrested the pistol from him.

As against this, the summary of the statement made by SP Jayantha Paranathala
is to the effect that at about 2 a.m. on 8.8.94 ASP Kulatileka informed him
that a group of persons pasting posters were obstructing the police and that
they were detained at the police station; no one informed him of this shooting
till next morning although they were bound to inform him of such serious
incidents immediately.

The summary of ASP Kulatileka's statement in P5 is that whilst returning home
from the Moratuwa meeting he noticed persons affixing posters on the road. He
informed HQI Mt. Lavinia the 1st Respond­ent to take action. Again at about 1
a.m. he had to come to the police

**370**

station to settle a dispute that was ongoing between those caught and the HQI.
The HQI informed that the Petitioners had obstructed him in his duties. He
questioned the petitioners who informed him that the police had taken into
custody Ramanathan's bag containing Rs.82,000/‑ and they assaulted him but
that no information regarding an alleged shooting at the HQI was given to him
that night but that he knew it for the 1st time next morning when reading the
B report that had been prepared.

Alagaratnam's affidavit P8 shows he did not get down from the van.

An examination of the Information Books of the Mt. Lavinia Police shows.

(i) That the routine information book 3R5 at page 319 para. 1373 contains an
out entry at 17.30 hrs. on 7/8/94 marked 3R5 A that officers are going for
election duty at Moratuwa. This confirms the affidavits of 1st and 2nd
Respondents.

(ii) Next is an entry in the Election Information Book 3R6 at 00.40 am.
although date on page is 7.8.94 Senior State Counsel submits that it has to be
on 8.8.94 having regard to other entries. Court is satisfied that this is so.
This entry is marked 3R6B.

(iii) There are entries regarding the handing over of suspects to the reserve.
Then bail has been granted to 46 named persons on orders of the ASP at 5.45
a.m. on 8.8.94 ‑ vide page 199 at para .70. This entry is marked 3R7B.

(iv) After that there is another out entry at p.202 para. 71. at 7.15 a.m.‑HQI
taking 3 named suspects to Kalubowila Hospital for exami­nation by the JMO.
This entry is marked 3R8B. The relevant provision to do this is section 122(1)
of the Criminal Procedure Code.

(v) An entry at p.122 para 388 at 1 P.M. on 8.8.94 made in the Beat
Information Book explains why 1st Respondent had to start a new book at Mt.
Lavinia police as books had been removed by the CID. This entry has been
marked 3R9C.

**371**

(vi) A second Election Information Book had to be opened by Mt. Lavinia Police
on 8.8.94 at 22.15 hours as the earlier book had been removed by the CID. This
is marked 3RX.

(vii) 1R1 already referred to are notes made by the 1st Repondent in his crime
note book pages 20 and 21 at 00.20 hrs: and pasted. Pasting commences at 22.30
hours ‑ vide page 34 on 8.8.94‑marked 3RX1. Again notes made in this crime
note book by the 1st Respond­ent commencing on 8.8.94 at 2.30 a.m. are also
pasted marked 3RX2.

(viii) Entry made by ASP Kulatilake at P.362 at 8.30 a.m. on 8.8.94 in the
Officers Visit Book 3RY1 that he inspected the pistol and bullet presented to
him by PS 12298 and that he saw an indentation on a bullet is marked 3RY2.

The Government Analysts report P10 dated 7.10.94 states that he received 3
parcels from Magistrate Mt. Lavinia with seals intact. The parcels contained.

P1 |  - |  9x19 mm CZ75 pistol  
---|---|---  
P2 |  - |  9x19 mm ‑ cartridge with indentation  
P3 |  - |  9x19 mm ‑ 11 cartridges  
P4 |  - |  cartridge case.  
  
**GOVERNMENT ANALYST'S OPINION:**

Opinion of the Government Analyst:

P1 is a firearm as described in the firearms Ordinance.

P1 barrel had smell of spent gun powder residues denoting P1 had been fired
but one cannot say when P1 was last fired.

P2 cartridge with indentation was compared with test rounds fired. The
indentation seen on P2 was different to indentations on test rounds fired with
P1. P2 has not been fired from P1.

**Submissions of Counsel on behalf of Petitioners**

To summarise submissions of Counsel in these applications, on

**372**

behalf of Velauthan Thavarasa, Petitioner in application 224/94 D.S.
Wijesinghe PC submitted.

(a) The police say he was pasting posters on the public roadvide 1R3.
Petitioner denies it. He says he got to the scene after the police. On
reaching the scene when he saw the police assaulting their helpers on the road
he protested as an Attorney looking after the interests on Anura Bastian but
the police taking umbrage at his protests took him and others to the police
station. Thus the only allegation that can possibly be made against him is one
of obstruction for the protest he made.

(b) Mere words of protest do not amount to obstruction of a public servant, an
offence punishable under section 183 of the penal code. In support of this
contention he cited: _Muthusamy v. Kannangara_ (1)

Again, the true reason for an arrest must be made known to the arrestee _Corea
v. The Queen_ (2)

The case _Abeywickrema v. Pathirana_ (3a) __ and the case reported in SC
212/87; SC minutes of 24.7.89 were also cited.

(c) There is an important contradiction between the 1st and 2nd Respondents
version on the one hand and that of the ASP's and SP's Kulatilake's and
Paranathala's on the other as to the time the allegation of attempted shooting
was made. The ASP says he knew of it for the first time at 7a.m. whereas the
Respondents seek to put the time much earlier to about 1.15 a.m. The
investigation done by the CID tend to confirm the position of the ASP and SP
that there is substan­tial doubt in regard to the allegation of an attempt to
shoot the 1st Respondent. If so then the police are left only with the
allegations of obstruction and intimidation of a public servant both of which
are bailable offences for which police bail could have been given. The fact
that bail was refused shows the _mala fides_ of the Respondents. The
allegation of pasting posters is denied. The allegation of threats and
intimidatory behaviour by the Petitioner is also denied. Petitioners statement
recorded at 4.30 a.m. in the GC1 B (II) at p.144/145 makes no reference to
obstruction or attempted murder. There was in fact no reasonable ground for
arrest. There is therefore an infringement

**373**

of Article 13(1) and continued unnecessary detention violative of Article
13(2).

(d) There is a difference in the number of bullets said to have been taken
from Petitioner Ramanathan between what is stated in the First‑B report and
the 1st Respondent's objection filed in the case. (Counsel for Respondents
admits a mistake having been made as books were not available to them as CID
had removed the books)

(e) Counsel wished the Court to look at the entries made by police officers at
Mount Lavinia intrinsically. On behalf of S. Ramanathan Petitioner in
application 225/94 Faisz Mustapha PC contended that:

(A) There were two issues the Court has to consider in regard to the
Petitioner's claim of violation of his rights of freedom from unlawful arrest
and unlawful detention ‑ protected by Articles 13(1) and 13(2) of the
Constitution.

They were:

(i) As the Petitioner got to the scene after the police, was there reasonable
grounds for his arrest. Has the true reason for arrest been given? Mere words
do not amount to obstruction of a public servant. Counsel adopted the
submissions of other Counsel. Was continued detention overnight warranted?

(ii) Offences set out in section 74(2) of the Parliamentary Elections Act as
well as the offences of criminal intimidation and voluntary obstruction of a
public servant from performing his duty punishable under sections 486 and 183
of the Penal Code as set out in the B Report presented by the 1st Respondent
were bailable. Under section 116(1) of the criminal procedure code, the police
should have granted bail without producing him before the Magistrate. There
has therefore been unlawful detention until 11 a.m. on 8/8/94.

(B) The allegation of attempted murder is entirely false. Petitioner had a
licensed pistol for the protection of his business. The licence was produced
that night. The gun was in his bag with Rs:82,000/‑ which is missing.

(ii) Test the 1st Respondent's version in 1R1 in the light of ASP

**374**

Kulatilake's notes in 1R2. The allegation of attempted shooting has been
entered in the notes made by the 1st Respondent in 1R1 after 2.30 a.m. after
Mr. C.V. Gooneratne's telephone call at about 2.00 a.m. to the ASP informing
him of a shooting incident at Belek Kade Junction. How Mr. Gooneratne came to
hear of such an event remains unexplained. The ASP's note at 1R2 that he heard
of the attempted shooting only at 7 a.m. on reading the B report destroys 1st
Respond­ents notes made at 2.30 a.m. for if it were so, the 1st Respondent
should have informed the ASP of that fact which he has failed to do. Therefore
1st Respondent's allegation is unreliable.

(C) Petitioner complained of loss of money Rs:82,000/‑ to the ASP that night.
Therefore this false allegation of attempted shooting has been foisted on the
Petitioners; they learnt of this allegation only at 11 a.m. in Court.

(D) Government Analyst's Report P10 contradicts any possibility that
unexpended bullet with markings made by a firing pin, had been fired from the
production pistol;

(E) SP Paranathala supports ASP Kulatilake that 1st Respondent had not
mentioned about the gun incident before 7a.m.

(F) Statement of Petitioner recorded at 4.30 a.m. does not bear a specific
reference to the attempt to shoot. There is no denial or admis­sion of same
although there is a reference to the gun and the loss of money. Petitioner
made allegations to the ASP against the police. Thus if the allegation of
attempted shooting is false, there was no reason to arrest. He should have
been released along with the 49 others by 7 a.m. As a false reason has been
given continued detention violates petitioners rights under Article 13(2).

On behalf of **Balachandran** Petitioner in application 226/94 R.K.W.
Gunasekara contended:

(A) When Petitioners were produced before the ADJ Mt. Lavinia at 11 a.m. they
thought there was only a "pasting of posters" charge. Now they found a charge
of attempted murder. A lawyer for PAFFERAL organisation Mr. Mendis appeared
and objected to bail for Ramanathan.

**375**

Ramanathan was remanded whilst Petitioner also on a section 300 Penal Code
charge was released on bail. How?

(B) According to the police these were two incidents

(a) of pasting posters;

(b) of obstruction to the police and of attempt at firing a pistol.

It was submitted that the latter part of 1st Respondent's story was fabricated
to make charges more severe as Thavarasa had protested at the arrest of the
other 49 helpers. Although the three Petitioners came in a van together later,
they were also taken with the 49 others pasting posters. Verbal protest was
made. That is not obstruction of a public servant.

(C) Senior officers were not informed until 7 a.m. the next morning of the
matter of the attempt to shoot as they should have been. Therefore the
Respondents version was improbable.

(D) CID investigation report is supportive of the senior officers claim that
they were not informed of the attempt to shoot until the following morning.
Therefore Magistrate granted bail to Ramanathan. All Peti­tioners were
discharged on 9.10.94 and all proceedings discontinued.

(E) Only supportive evidence was of obstruction by Thavarasa as he protested
both at the scene and at the police station. That was the shouting match
referred in 1R2.

(F) Petitioner Balachandran had nothing to do with the alleged attempted
shooting incident or of obstruction or of pasting posters. Therefore he has
been wrongfully arrested and detained.

**Submissions of Counsel for 1st and 2nd Respondents**

Submissions made by Counsel on behalf of the 1st and 2nd Re­spondents on
specific matters have been **** set down in earlier parts of this judgment. A
summary is

(a) That the Petitioners were at the scene directing the operation of pasting
posters when the police got there on instructions of ASP Kulatileka;

**376**

(b) That Thavarasa, Ramanathan and Balachandran out of the crowd who were
acting in contravention of election laws challenged the police, abused and
threatened them. Ramanathan pulled out a pistol attempted to shoot the 1st
Respondent and acted in such a manner as to amount to voluntary obstruction of
a public servant in the performance of his duty. That duty is contained in
section 74(5) of Act No 1 of 1981 empowering the police to take such steps and
use such force as may be reasonably necessary for prevention or contravention
of election laws. There is a prohibition against the display of posters in a
place where the public have a right of access ‑ vide section 74(1) (b) of the
Act. The offence of such display of posters is a cognisable offence punishable
with fine or imprisonment or both. Therefore the police arrested everybody at
that time, and that arrest was lawful.

(c) That to say that it was only at 7 a.m. that ASP Kulatilake learned of an
attempt to murder was an untruth. The 1st Respondent had informed him of it
when ASP came to the station about 1 a.m. The ASP also learned of it from Mr.
C.V. Goonaratne. ASP's conduct in bracketing the time thus (7a.m.) is
indicative of a desire to draw attention to that time in his note. SP
Paranathala's statement to CI Upasena cannot be true.

(d) The conduct of DIG/CID Amarasene Rajapaksa is very unusual. Why did ****
he choose Interpol to investigate the conduct of the Mt. Lavinia Police. Is
not the police hierarchy in charge of administration of the Mt. Lavinia police
division the proper authority to have investigated allegations such as this.
That would have been normal procedure. How can anyone say that police
hierarchy in the Mt. Lavinia police division is less independent or less
competent than the international crimes division. This puts the entire
investigation of CI Upasena in a suspicious perspective. Were handpicked
supporters of the political party of which two of the Petitioners were
executive committee members solicited to ensure that one of them, Ramanathan,
is released on bail the same day. The report of CI Upasena is unac­ceptable as
it does not deal with important aspects of the material available to him;

(e) The Magistrate's order placing the production pistol and cartridges etc:
in the hands of CI Upasena is not proper in the

**377**

circumstances of this case. The Magistrate's Court has not opened the parcel
presented by Upasena, inspected its contents as it should have, and resealed
it with the Court seals. This failure results in a possible challenge to the
Government Analyst. Thus the 1st and 2nd Respondents challenge the production
unspent cartridge with marks of indentation of the firing pin examined by the
Analyst as not the same one taken into custody from the Mt. Lavinia police by
Upasena. This challenge is warranted in the suspicious circumstances of the
CID investigation already adverted to. It was all a ruse to have Ramanathan
released on bail by 4 p.m. the same day.

(f) The contradictory positions taken by the Petitioners as to where the gun
was remaining is unexplained. Ramanathan says it was in his bag along with
cash Rs: 82,000/‑. Nanayakkara who has filed affidavit in favour of the
Petitioners puts the pistol under the carpet in the van.

The Respondents say it was in Ramanathan's waist. This is more probable as the
Analyst has found gun powder residues in the barrel and says it has been
previously fired. Again, Mrs: Thavarasa went to the police station with. Anura
Bastian at 2.00 a.m. and produces the licence. Why rush in with the licence at
that time if the gun had been harmlessly lying in a bag or in the van. On the
contrary does not that suggest that the gun has assumed significant relevance
in the inquir­ies by 2.00 a.m.

(g) The allegation of loss of cash Rs: 82,000/‑ is denied and is palpably
false made to superior officers and introduced by Ramanathan to embarrass the
police for arresting him and not giving in to his intimidatory tactics. For
one thing, there was no need to carry such a large amount of money as helpers
had been fed and transported by Anura Bastian. For another, the CID inquiry is
silent about the loss of money.

(h) The 1st and 2nd Respondents were merely doing their duty as ordered by
their ASP when they were subjected to much abuse, threats of transfers to
unpopular stations and even physical threats. They were subjected to massive
obstruction. The police were fully entitled to arrest everyone involved in
pasting posters at midnight on the road.

**378**

The 49 others were released on bail as they did not behave in an improper
manner but stopped doing prohibited acts. The 1st and 2nd Respondents were
justified in what they did. They were prevented from making necessary entries,
as their books were removed by the CID and they had therefore to open new
books. This explains the minor inconsistencies pointed out by Counsel for
Petitioners. Also only 12 bullets were found ‑ vide first B report and not 13
as mistakenly stated in the objections. Objections were filed whilst the
information books were not available to the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

(i) There has been no infringement of any of the Fundamental Rights of the
Petitioners. Counsel submitted that the 1st and 2nd Respondents have been
unable to present themselves before promotion Boards because of this case and
asked for costs.

**CONCLUSIONS**

**[A]**

**The question whether the Petitioners were on the public road participating
in the commission of prohibited acts under Elec tions laws when the police
arrived.**

The burden of proof to show an infringement of their fundamental rights lies
with the Petitioners. The record of entries made by inquiring officers, and
their statements and reports have been recounted in detail as have the
submissions of Counsel. The repetition of some facts at this stage also is
unavoidable and has to be endured.

A vital matter the Court has to address its mind to at the threshold of the
decision making process in this case is whether this Court is satisfied that
the Petitioners got to the scene where election offences were being committed
after the police as they all say, consequent to receiving a telephone call to
the cellular telephone in the van in which they were travelling or whether
they were there before the police !

There is no dispute that the police got there consequent to a direction from
the ASP. In regard to the Petitioners claim there are the fol­lowing
circumstances:

**379**

(a) Some helpers had had their dinner at Anura Bastian's house that night.
They also took meals to other workers and helpers that night. Helpers
Mangaleswaran and Thiruchanderan did so at midnight ‑ They went to Ratmalana
with dinner packets ‑ vide P6 and P7 also Nirmalan says he hired 4 vans to
take workers to Ratmalana. This suggests ‑ that people involved in Bastian's
election campaign knew that workers were hard at work at Ratmalana at
midnight. Chandrakapila and Gomez in their affidavits P14 and P16 admit going
to Bastian's house at about 7 p.m. being given dinner there and with several
others being transported to Galle Road Ratmalana to paste posters. Belekkade
junction is in Ratmalana. Therefore it can safely be inferred, that these
Petitioners knew of the activity of their workers at Belekkade junction at
around midnight. Petitioner Thavarasa being a lawyer should have been aware of
the provisions of the Parliamentary Elections Act ‑ viz ‑ the prohibition
against pasting posters in places where the public have a right of access.
Thavarasa is specifically retained to overlook Bastian's election campaign
situations. Can such a person say he was only made aware of a crowd at
Belekkade junction by a telephone call? Or is it not much more likely that
Thavarasa and his companions well knew beforehand that posters were to be
pasted on the road at Ratmalana and he was at hand to supervise whilst his
workers were engaged in unlawful activity. It is not denied that posters were
indeed pasted by Bastian's campaign workers that night.

(b) Coupled with above there are the affidavits of 1st and 2nd Respondents
that Thavarasa on being challenged stated ‑Quote‑ "What is the law prohibiting
the pasting of posters?" This suggests that Thavarasa participated in pasting
posters in some way.

(c) The serious contradictions in the Petitioners case regarding the denial
that the pistol was in the waist of Ramanathan; viz: Ramanathan says the
pistol was in a bag with money in the van, whereas K. A. Sumith Nanayakkara
says the pistol was under the carpet near the front seat ‑ vide P5. These
contradictory versions do not seriously challenge the 1st Respondent's
narrative that the pistol was in Ramanathan's waist. If he was standing on the
road with his helpers at midnight participating in committing offences and he
owned a pistol for his safety, it is not improbable that he had his pistol at
hand.

**380**

(d) Several vans have taken workers and their meals to Ratmalana. There were
nearly 50 workers with all the necessities required for the job at hand. Would
they not need some supervision and advice and some protection in the middle of
the night? It is obvious that the operation of pasting posters was to be kept
secret perhaps both from the public authorities as well as the supporters of
Tyronne Fernando of Moratuwa the other UNP candidate close to whose territory
Ratmalana was. Therefore they chose late night. In such circumstances it is
natural to have supervisors. i.e. ‑ someone accountable to the candidate. ASP
Kulatilake saw people committing election offences, why did he not stop and
challenge them and call for assistance? He goes home. Is it that he did not
wish to interfere with the ruling party? This conduct is significant when
considering his subsequent conduct.

(e) In all the above circumstances taken together, the Court has serious
doubts in regard to the Petitioners version that they reached the scene after
the police. It could well be that Petitioners also went to listen to the
meeting at Moratuwa earlier that evening. But Belekkade junction is proximate
enough to Moratuwa so that the Petitioners had an opportunity to have got back
to Ratmalana long before the police. In view of the above, the supportive
material contained in affidavits filed on behalf of the petitioners that the
police were there before the Petitioners got there is unconvincing and is
suspicious. The only alternative version before the court is that the 1st and
2nd Respondents with a police party upon proceeding to the scene, found a
large crowd of about 50 people committing elections offences. They had to use
some force to bring things under control as they were empowered to do. The
three Petitioners were among that crowd of persons.

It is the contention of the Petitioners, that the note made regarding the
arrest was made only at 2.30 a.m. at the police station ‑ 1R1 ‑ and that by
that time the Petitioner had been protesting at the purported assault on their
supporters having come upon the scene after the police, and objecting to their
arrests which angered the 1st Respondent and his subordinates and resulted in
an attempt being made by the 1st Respondent to falsely implicate the
petitioners, not only with elections offences but also with obstruction and
intimidation and

**381**

attempted murder charges whilst at the same time stealing their money Rs:
82,000/‑.

Looking at this submission, one has also to keep in mind the state of things
at the time. Between 00.20 hrs: and 2.30 hrs: on 8/8/94 a crowd of above 50
persons had to be prevented from committing pro­hibited acts, apprehended,
herded into their own vehicles with all the materials used by them to commit
offences and brought to the police station. All the while there appears to
have been a shouting match between these petitioners and the police. The ASP
is informed. He comes. Mr. Anura Bastian and Mrs. Thavarasa come and there is
much talk. In the circumstances the 2.30 a.m. entry in 1R1 can be regarded as
a contemporaneous entry setting out the circumstances of arrest.

The Court is of the view that the case sought to be made out by the
Petitioners is highly unlikely. No investigation whatever has been made by the
CID regarding the loss of cash. Considering all these circumstances the Court
sees no sensible compelling reason to suspect or reject the Respondents
version that the Petitioners were among the crowd committing elections
offences on the road at midnight when they got there. The Court accepts the
Respondents version on this matter. The petitioners have failed to prove this
important matter that the police had reached the scene before them and were
assaulting their workers and that they came there later.

[B]

**The question whether the arrests of the Petitioners was lawful.**

The protection afforded by article 13(1) is the protection against unlawful
arrest and the recognition of the individuals right to know the true reason
for his arrest. Thus the court has to consider whether the arrests were
lawful. The offences complained of against the Petition­ers as reflected both
in 1R1 and in the body of the first B report filed were for committing
prohibited acts under the elections laws besides intimidation, obstruction and
attempted murder. At this point I will only be dealing with the allegations of
elections offences, obstruction and intimidation. The allegation of attempted
murder will be considered later in this judgment. Counsel for Petitioners
argued that the offences

**382**

of voluntary obstruction of a public servant from doing his duty and criminal
intimidation were not made out on the Petitioners version of the facts, _viz_
that the petitioners, finding the police at the scene made verbal protests
which did not amount to obstruction and/or intimidation and that therefore the
arrests were unlawful. But the court is of the view that the case law cited in
support of this contention can be distinguished upon a proper view of the
events of that night. It is obvious that it was the pasting of posters on the
public road that attracted the police. The ASP informed the 1st Respondent of
it ‑ vide first part of 1R1‑which the ASP admits and which the 1st Respondent
found happening when he reached the scene and which he ordered to be stopped;
that is the point at which the police intervened and used force. It is the
pasting of posters which was the primary offence committed and for which the
culprits were arrested. All else stem from that initial unlawful act. The
police went there to prevent it and in so doing took everyone into custody.
Thus when in the objections of the Respondents, it is stated at paragraph 12
that the arrest was made in respect of the offence of attempted murder and
offences under election laws, it merely restates the fact that both those
offences are cognisable offences wherein the police have the power to arrest
without warrant, unlike the other offences averred, and both were committed in
the same transaction. The fact that mention of attempted murder is made makes
no difference to the view of the Court that the arrest was primarily to
prevent prohibited acts being committed under elections laws.

Section, 74(1) (b) of the Parliamentary Elections Act No. 1 of 1981 prohibits
the display of posters in a place where the public have a right of access..
Section 74(1) (e) of the Act provides for punishment ‑ fine or imprisonment or
both. Section 74(4) of the act provides that it is a cognisable offence when
an arrest can be made by a police officer without a warrant. Thus, the 1st and
2nd Respondents could have lawfully made the arrests they made, in the manner
in which they were made. The above were the enabling provisions of law under
which the police could have properly acted, and the police say the Petitioners
were participants in the commission of that offence, the leaders of that
group.

The police are required to make an assessment of a factual situation and take
necessary action. Here there is no question but that

**383**

the police had to take the action they took. Thus the physical act of arrest
is lawful and justifiable. There has been no infringement of Article 13(1) of
the Constitution affecting the rights of the Petitioners on this ground.

The next question is whether the right of a citizen to know or to be told of
the reason for depriving him of his freedom at the time of arrest or so soon
after has been avoided. Petitioners complain they were not informed as to why
they were arrested. Counsel spent much time on this matter in their
submissions. They cited _Corea v. Queen_ ( _supra_ ) and _Uparis v. Robert_
(3b) Has the true reason for the arrest been intimated to the arrestees? In
the instant case the perpetrators of a prohibited act have been caught
red‑handed. The offenders were caught on the road in flagrante _delicto._
Observations of Lord Simonds in _Christie v._ _Leachinsky_ (3c) __ are apt and
applicable to the instant situation. Quote..........." It is clear that the
constable has not been guilty of an illegal arrest if he reasonably suspected
that murder had been done. Again I think it is clear that there is no need for
the Constable to explain the reason for arrest if the arrested man is caught
red ‑handed and the crime is patent to high Heaven..." I am in respectful
agreement with this statement of the law which is the same in Sri Lanka as it
is in England in this area. Again, it is found that Gratiaen, J. has approved
of this same proposition in _Corea v. The Queen_ (2) Quote...... " a police
officer acts illegally if he arrests a man without a warrant on a mere
unexpressed suspicion " that a particular cognisable offence has been
committed ‑ unless of course " the circumstances are such that the man must
know the general nature of the offence for which he is detained or unless the
man himself produces the situation which makes it practicably impossible to
inform him....." The version of events narrated by the police which the Court
accepts combine the observations of the learned judge quoted above. The Court
is therefore satisfied that there has been no infringement of the rights of
the Petitioners as contained in the second part of Article 13(1) either.

**[C]**

**Scope of Section 116(1) of the criminal procedure code, and con­sideration
of Article 13(2) ‑the allegation of unlawful detention.**

I now turn to the contention of the Petitioners that, even if the arrest was
justifiable under the election laws, (although they contend

**384**

that the arrest was unlawful) still such offences were bailable being the
offences of obstruction and intimidation, and the police being enpowered by
section 116(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code to grant bail, did not do so but
instead, produced the petitioners before the JMO Colombo South for medical
examination whilst in custody and thereafter kept them in further detention
until 11 a.m. on the same day. The police then did not object to bail in
respect of Thavarasa and Balachandran and the Court granted bail. They were
thus detained in custody for a time longer than necessary. It was contended
that the police are obliged to release persons in custody accused of bailable
offences as soon as reasonably possible. Here those inquiries were over by
about 7.30 a.m. when they were taken to hospital; the police inquiry notes
having been made and the suspects, statements re­corded etc. There was thus,
according to the contention of Counsel for Thavarasa and Balachandran, an
infringement of their rights protected by article 13(2) of the Constitution
(ie) freedom from unlawful detention. The above submission was made on the
further contention that the charge of attempted murder was false and therefore
ought not to be taken into account in ascertaining whether there was an
infringement of Article 13(2).

The first answer to this question is that the empowering section viz: section
116(1) of the Criminal Procedure Code is directory and not imperative or
mandatory. Despite its language there lies a discretion with the police to
produce a suspect before a Magistrate instead, depending on the circumstances
of the case. For example, the suspect may have received serious injury from
some other unknown cause, may be even self inflicted wounds, where a
Magistrate ought to be informed of the case. Again, the suspect may be
physically or mentally unable to cope with freedom and needs assistance. The
law thus keeps the matter open to enable the police to deal with different
situations. I have held in _Tunnaya alias Gunapala v. OIC Police, Galewela,_
(4) that where an offence is bailable, it is permissive for a police officer,
acting in terms of section 116(1), to take security from a suspect for his
appearance before Court. An examination of the provisions of sections 38 and
39 of the Criminal Procedure Code support this view. Section 38 requires an
OIC in charge of a station to report to Court all cases of arrest without
warrant whether admitted to bail **or otherwise.** Similarly, Section 39 of
the code stipulates that a person arrested

**385**

without a warrant shall not be discharged (from custody) except on his own
bond or on bail **or under the special order in writing of a Magistrate.** An
interpretation which narrows the scope of this section, which is a pivotal
point in an investigation, ought not to be adopted. Such an interpretation
could also expose the police to allegations of abuse or misuse of power. A
discretionary act by a police officer at this point would better promote the
ideal of good judgment by a responsible public officer upon a proper
consideration of relevant data reflecting good faith, rather than an
interpretation which compels a police officer to grant bail even against his
good sense without taking into account surrounding circumstances. I hold that
the powers contained in section 116(1) aforesaid are discretionary and that
the 1st Respondent could have, instead of granting bail himself to these
petitioners who he says were the ringleaders, decided to produce them before a
Magistrate. Other relevant considerations which justified the 1st Respondent's
refusal of police bail were numerous. For Example:

(i) The Petitioners complained of police assault‑vide statements of the
Petitioners recorded at 4.30 a.m. by SI. Bandara in the GCIB II of Mt. Lavinia
police PP:144, 146, 148, 149, and signed by them, and the notes of ASP‑1R2. In
the face of such a recorded complaint against the police it is plain good
sense to produce suspects for a medical examination promptly. If police bail
is granted to such a suspect, he is being given a tool, an opportunity, to
fabricate evidence against the police.

**The offence of voluntary obstruction of a public servant.**

(II) The Petitioners were treated by the 1st and 2nd Respondents as organisers
or ringleaders and that was the distinction made as against the 49 others
arrested and given police bail. Those 49 were treated merely as workers or
helpers who actually pasted the posters given to them by the organisers. The
question is whether the evidence justifies this distinction. To answer that we
go to the notes made by the 1st Respondent recorded in the Election
Information Book at 2.30 a.m. and produced as 1R1. Referring to the protests
raised by the Petitioners at the scene on the road after midnight, while the
police were preventing the commission of prohibited acts under election laws,

**386**

Petitioner Ramanathan Sathasivam threatened thus".......quote..." From which
police are you. If you become too active you will be sent to Jaffna. Yesterday
we drove away SP. Ignatious. We are UNP'ers, Anura Bastian' people. Why can't
we paste posters. We are working for the government. We know the President and
Prime Minister very well. Therefore your coat will be removed and you will be
transferred to Jaffna immediately. At that time Attorney at Law Thavarasa
said........quote.... "What is the law that prohibits pasting of
posters........ do you want us to get permission from A. S. Seneviratne (DIG)?
if you get too officious you will be sent to Jaffna........ You will be
dismissed from service. Sathasivam Balachandran said....... quote..."..You
cannot stop us pasting posters.......l know His Excellency and the Prime
Minister....... If you talk too much you will be sent to Jaffna... You will be
dealt with."

The above, if true shows a massive obstruction to public officers. These are
not mere words of protest. They are words of intimidation, threat to
employment, threat of transfer to a war zone, clearly intended to deter a
police office from doing his lawful duty of preventing election offences being
committed, words likely to dissuade, to hinder or prevent a public servant
from doing his duty. These words uttered on the public road in the company of
about 50 of their helpers amounts in my view to offences punishable under
section 183 and 486 of the Penal Code. Case law cited by Respondents Counsel,
to wit: _Police Sergeant v. Razak_ (5) __ which held that "words may be as
potent as physical acts" and _Police Sergeant v. Simon Silva_ (6) _._ Which
held there is "voluntary obstruction" when "the interference complained of
hinders or is likely to deter an officer from discharging his duty" are to my
mind on all fours with the evidence of obstruction in the instant case and
should be adopted. The case of _Muthusamy v. Kannangara (supra)_ can be
distinguished and is inapplicable to this case, as that case dealt with an
attempt to search premises without a search warrant so that the police officer
was acting unlawfully and the prevention of such a search by asking the
officer to get out of the premises was not regarded as words sufficient to
constitute an obstruction of a public servant. The words attributed to each of
the Petitioners shows them acting in concert with a common attitude and frame
of mind using common intimidatory language. Thavarasa the Attorney, says "why
can't we paste posters?" This supports the view that he had to impress

**387**

his men that he was looking after their interests. Thus we have a situation
where the police are not playing their normal role of investigating the
complaints of disputing parties. Here they are one of the parties to a dispute
and they have in the lawful exercise of their powers arrested the other party.
In these circumstances, in the face of an allegation of assault too, the
police wisely produced the disputing party, disputing their arrest, before a
Magistrate. The police have acted quite properly in these circumstances and
_prima facie_ a case of obstruction has been made out. In this back ‑ground I
get on to the Petitioners' contention of unlawful detention resulting in an
infringement of Article 13(2) of the Constitution.

**The allegation of unlawful detention:**

Procedures regarding detention vary with the relevant law governing the
arrest. (eg) for offences under the normal law the criminal procedure code
would apply whereas if the arrest is under emergency regulations or other
special laws, the provisions operative under those laws or regulations would
apply: The prescribed period of detention following arrest under the
Parliamentary Elections Act is governed by the Criminal Procedure Code and is
the outer limit within which **the arrestee must be brought before a Judge,**
That is the essence of this sub-article and is one of the checks the law
provides to protect the freedom of the individual ‑‑see _Selvakumar v.
Devananda_ (7) __ and _Kumara vs. Rohan Fernando_ (8) _._

There are dicta in some decisions suggesting that if Article 13 (1) is
violated because the arrest is 'illegal' or 'unlawful' it follows that Article
13(2) is violated and that if the detention is excessive in the sense that it
was very long simpliciter ‑there is a violation of Article 13(2). In _Mahinda
Rajapakse's case ‑ S.C. Application No.2/93, SC Minutes of 31/03/94_(9) __ I
held that the Petitioners had not been arrested according to procedure
established by law and that their arrests were violative of Article 13(1).
However I rejected the submission of Coun­sel that a violation of Article
13(1) necessarily resulted in a violation of Article 13(2). I held that while
detention is integral of the act of arrest Article 13 (1) is concerned with
what the persons making the arrest do, whereas Article 13(2) is not concerned
with the lawfulness of the arrest but with the question of ensuring "the
containment of executive power".

**388**

By requiring a person arrested to be brought before a neutral person, namely a
Judge, Article 13(2) seeks to ensure that persons are not detained arbitrarily
by persons like police officers who perform executive functions. In that case
I held that even though Article 13(1) was violated, Article 13(2) was not
violated. In the instant case the arrest has been lawful. The view that
questions of "unlawfulness or illegality of the arrest resulting in a
violation of Article 13(1) is irrelevant in deciding whether article 13(2) has
been violated" was also stated by Goonawardene, J. in _Faiz v. A. G._ (10) __
It was held that it was unnec­essary to ‑‑ quote "characterise any action that
does not conform to the provisions of Article 13(1) as an **illegal arrest ".
**It is my view that the refusal by the 1st Respondent to grant bail was
justifiable. It, is seen that even ASP Kulatilaka in his note has stated that
the question of bail is being considered ‑vide his notes at ‑1R2 just before
the [7AM] entry when he says he was informed of the attempted shooting. It is
my view for the reasons given in this part of the judgment, that detention
until 11 a.m. was not arbitrary but justifiable in the circumstances. There is
therefore no infringement of the provisions of Article 13(2).

**[D]**

**Challenge against allegation of attempted murder**

The Petitioners challenge this allegation made more specifically against S.
Ramanathan by the 1st and 2nd Respondents upon the facts, as being false,
malicious and revengeful. The Petitioners contend that such a thing never
happened and complain that it has been added to counter the allegation of
theft of Rs. 82,000/‑ made against the police, as a means of refusing police
bail and keeping S. Ramanathan and the others in custody on remand as
punishment, thereby depriving them of their freedom and causing an
infringement of their rights protected by Article 13(1).

Petitioners' Counsel have had at the forefront of their submis­sions, the
contention that it was this pretext, this false allegation upon which the
arrest of the Petitioners and their continued detention was sought to be
justified by the Mt. Lavinia Police.

I have already held in this judgment that the arrest, on the evidence,
certainly shows it could have been made, and was indeed

**389**

made for the commission of elections offences and that the detention was
justified in the circumstances without the grant of police bail. In the
result, any finding on the allegation of attempted murder, which really is a
matter for a trial Court, will not affect the decision of this Court regarding
Article 13(1). Petitioners' Counsel have advisedly chosen to present their
case contesting the allegation of attempted shooting as the starting point for
unlawful arrest and detention.

In view of this contention it behoves the Court to consider the arguments on
this matter. The Court has therefore to look at, not only the conduct of the
Mt. Lavinia Police but also all other consequential events that took place,
including the investigations by the Interpol division of the CID, the contents
of the second B report presented to court, the productions and the Analyst's
Report and the steps taken by the Mt. Lavinia Magistrate and his orders, as
all of this presents a composite whole in regard to this aspect of the case.

Petitioners arguments have been presented on the premise that the 1st
Respondent divulged to the ASP this matter of an attempt to shoot at him for
the first time only at 7 a.m. on 8.8.94, but that the 1st Respondent had an
opportunity from 01.15 a.m. that night of informing his superior officer of
such an important matter when the ASP visited the station but which he failed
and neglected to do. Therefore the 1st Respondent's assertion is belated,
untrustworthy and in fact palpably false, as in the meantime, petitioner S.
Ramanathan had accused the police of stealing his money. This accusation had
been made to the ASP by Ramanathan long before even his statement was recorded
at 4.30 a.m.

We therefore have to look at both entries in 1R1 i.e. the 00.20 a.m. entry and
the later entry at 2.30 a.m. the ASP's notes at 1R2, Anura Bastian's letter to
DIG/CID‑3R1 and Cl Upasena's inquiries and report P3.

1st Respondent's entry at 2.30 a.m. on 8.8.94 in 1R1 contains the alleged
event of Ramanathan being dressed in a sarong and shirt pulling out a pistol
from his waist and pulling the trigger when 1st Respondent was seeking to
prevent the commission of prohibited acts under election laws. 1st Respondent
grappled with Ramanathan, dis‑

**390**

armed him and brought him under control. As against this, ASP Kulatilake's
notes commence at 01.15 a.m. on 8.8.94‑vide 1R2. It refers to a visit by Anura
Bastian to the station at 2.00 a.m. in the company of Mrs: Thavarasa asking
for bail for his men; it also refers to a telephone call being received from
C.V. Gooneratne at 02.15 a.m. who had informed that Anura Bastian's workers
had been arrested for pasting posters on the road and that they had attempted
to shoot police officers and requested him to act according to law. The note
continues and states that he (ASP) will consider grant of bail if possible.
Then an entry of the time [07.00AM] in brackets, followed by a note that the
1st Respondent informed him that when he was seeking to arrest the crowd of
persons (pasting posters),

.............Quote.....Ramanathan attempted to shoot him. This entry in 1R2 is
the basis upon which the case for the applicants have been presented. What is
of utmost significance however in this entry, and which should be forthwith
noted, is that it contains an admission by ASP Kulatilake that the 1st
Respondent had told him that it was in the process of taking these persons
into physical custody that Ramanathan shot at him." These persons" must in the
context mean the persons committing elections offences. So this note contains
an admission that the arrest were being made was for committing elections
offences. This reiterates and supports the view of this Court, expressed
earlier, that the arrests were lawfully made under powers given by the
Parliamentary Elections Act Section 74(4) and (5). But what is presently
sought to be discussed is the submission of Petitioners Counsel, that it was
only at about 7 a.m. and not before, that the 1st Respondent informed the ASP
for the first time of the attempt to shoot him. What are the relevant matters
pertaining to this submission? We know that it was the ASP himself who first
came across elections offences being committed on the road. Instead of
confront­ing the lawbreakers himself, he informs Policemen on duty at Tyronne
Fernando's meeting to take action according to law and goes home. Then at
01.15 a.m. on 8.8.94 on information received from the 1st respondent, he goes
to the police station. At 2.00 a.m. Mrs: Thavarasa turns up with Anura Bastian
and with Ramanathan's gun licence bearing reference No: /1/C 544 marked x‑
vide‑1R2‑and P5 statement of Goury Thavarasa to Rohan Upasena to show that the
pistol in police custody is a licensed weapon. Who told her that the

**391**

police had taken the pistol into custody is not known. Obviously it had become
known to Mrs: Thavarasa before 2.00 a.m. that Ramanathan's pistol has become a
significant item of evidence in the ongoing inquiry and she has collected the
licence apparently from the Ramanathan household that night. Otherwise her
conduct in producing this licence at that time is inexplicable. At paragraph
15 of 1st Respondent's objections he has stated that a large number of persons
unconnected with the incident gathered on the road and were witnesses to the
incident and that the use of a pistol against the 1st Respondent became a
sensational and notorious fact that in a short while it reached the ears of
C.V. Gooneratne; so also could it have reached the ears of Mrs: Thavarasa to
rush in with licence. At 2.15 a.m. C.V. Gooneratne informs ASP of an attempt
to shoot at police officers by Anura Bastian's people committing elections
offences ‑1R2.

Thus the pistol's licence in the name of Ramanathan and C.V. Gooneratne's
telephone call are known to the ASP at about 2.15 a.m. With the confrontation
taking place in his presence between his police officers and these people
brought to station for committing offences as is evident by 1R2 with Anura
Bastian and Mrs. Thavarasa joining in, how can ASP be believed when he says he
was not informed of an attempted shooting at the Inspector until the next
morning? In the circumstances any normal person would inquire from the
Inspector as to whether there was any truth in the information given by C.V.
Gooneratne. He has not done that according to 1R2. That is quite unusual
conduct. It is now known that five police officers of Mt. Lavinia police have
confirmed to CI. Upasena that Ramanathan pulled out a pistol from his waist
when challenged whilst persons were committing prohibited acts under election
laws. There is also the ASP's own note in 1R2 **made by him before his [7.00
Am] entry,** that he is considering the grant of police bail at the urgent
request of Anura Bastian and Mr. Thavarasa. What was there to consider when
the other offences allegedly committed were elections offences, obstruction
and criminal intimidation, all bailable. Nor were the petitioners demanding a
medical examination for assault on their persons although they had complained
of assault. So if he was unaware of any attempt at shooting at anyone, police
bail could have been ordered by him for these Petitioners too as he did to the
49 others. If the 1st Respondent refused

**392**

bail, he would also have questioned the 1st Respondent as to the reason for
his refusal. Something stayed his hand. The only thing that could have
deterred him at that point of time, long before morning surely was that he was
aware of an allegation of attempted murder being made by the Inspector. All of
these circumstances taken together makes ASP Kulatilake's version extremely
unlikely, highly suspicious and unacceptable. It would appear that the truth
is being suppressed.

In the same vein, SP Paranathala's denial of knowing anything of the
allegation of attempted murder until the following morning is also suspicious
questionable and quite unacceptable. ASP Kulatilake should have informed the
SP of the events at the police station that night involving informations of
trying to shoot police officers, which at least according to his own admission
he had got on the telephone. Paranathala lived next door to the Police
Station.

His denial being unacceptable it seems more likely that the truth is being
suppressed by the ASP and the SP Messrs: Kulatilake and Paranathala. Their
conduct is unnatural and does not inspire any con­fidence in their
credibility.

This Court is unable to accept their position that they knew nothing of an
attempted murder allegation until the following morning. In the result the
Court is of the view that the 2.30 a.m. entry of the 1st Respondent containing
information of an attempt to shoot at him was a prompt contemporaneous entry
made in the course of inquiries and is not belated and that this matter with a
pistol was known to everyone at the police station that night.

The ASP examined the production pistol and cartridges with the reserve officer
and noted that one cartridge bore indentations as if the fireing pin of a
pistol had struck it. These productions had been handed over to CI. Upasena.
CI. Upasena took away the police books at Mt. Lavinia and therefore new books
had to be opened.

Details of the investigations done by the Interpol Division of the CID have
been particularised in an earlier part of this judgment. That investigation
deserves special mention. The documentation produced ‑3R1‑ begins with
handwritten orders being given by former DIG/CID

**393**

Amarasena Rajapakse on an undated letter written by Anura Bastian. There is
mention of orders coming from the IGP but no document showing such an order
has been produced. Who or why the International division (Interpol) was chosen
for this task is not divulged to the Court. SP Othnapitiya and CI Upasena are
harnessed for the task. Ordinarily one would expect the higher administrative
authorities of the police department overlooking the work of a police station
or division to initially look into complaints against the police. This was not
done. In this case this mysterious step of involving Interpol has been taken.
One would have thought that Interpol would have been better employed looking
for "Carlos" rather than looking into the misdeeds of a suburban police
station in this country. Mr. Wikramanayake submits that it was to ensure that
obliging police officers would submit a report to court so as to enable the
grant of bail to Petitioner Ramanathan forthwith.

The inquiries of SP Othnapitiya commence at 9.05 a.m. on 8.8.94 into
allegations that Mt: Lavinia police have not done an impartial inquiry. At
10.45 a.m. ‑3R3‑ Othnapitiya meets SP Paranathala and ASP Kulatilake of Mt.
Lavinia. According to these two officers, HQI Mt. Lavinia had not informed
them of the alleged attempted murder incident until that morning although HQI
had met the ASP. This then was the crux of the matter supposedly being
inquired into.

At 1.45 p.m.‑3R4‑Director CID allegedly telephoned Othnapitiya and informed
that "...quote... the IGP has directed DIG/CID to file a report in Court on
the basis of the material as it is strongly suspected that HQI Mt. Lavinia has
fabricated evidence against 3 persons, namely Ramanathan and two others
implicating them in a case of alleged attempt to shoot"..."and that the CID is
conducting detailed inquiries....... and will submit a report on completion of
investigations ...........and that....... the CID has no objection to
releasing the suspects on bail." No documents to prove that the IGP in fact
made these orders or that Director CID did in fact give the aforesaid orders
to Othnapitiya have been produced for the scrutiny of the Court. Again the
report filed in Court upon the order contained at 3R4 above is the report of
CI. Upasena marked P3 setting out the "basis of the material". It merely says
that the CID is conducting a wide investigation at Mt: Lavinia Police Station
but only sets out that ‑ ASP Jayantha Kulatilleke has made a

**394**

statement and that "according to the evidence so far collected" facts to show
that there has been any attempted murder or threats by aiming a pistol have
not been revealed beyond reasonable doubt... Therefore I move that the
suspects Thavarasa, Balachandran and Ramanathan..................... be
discharged on bail..." The contents of P3 are spurious. The only evidence
referred to is a statement of ASP Kulatilleke. No other evidence suggesting
any fabrication is revealed. Therefore there was quite insufficient ground to
either file a second B report or state that the allegation of the HQI has not
been supported beyond reasonable doubt. In fact, as stated earlier, 4 other
officers of Mt. Lavinia Police have supported the HQI as is divulged in the
later report P5 filed by CI. Upasena. Again, according to report P3,it is the
CID that moves for the discharge of suspects and that they be given bail. This
is quite abnormal conduct by the CID. This is obviously meant to countermand
the application of the HQI in the first B report. Is the Interpol Division of
the CID appearing on behalf of the suspects? Between 9.05 a.m. and 1.45 p.m.
the CID have done their investigation and decided to move for bail in respect
of the suspects. This supports the 1st Respondent's complaint of massive
obstruction by the Petitioners on the road and at the police station-conduct
propelled by political clout. Mr. Wikramanayake submits that the entire CID
operation has been fraudulent. Certainly he has good reason to say so. There
is also the fact that no serious inquiry has been made by the CID in relation
the allegation of theft of cash Rs:82,000/- by the Mt. Lavinia police which
they deny. Was that allegation a red herring?.

The Magistrate holds that the 2nd B report produced shows that there is no
evidence to support the fact stated in the first B report in respect of 1st
suspect (Ramanathan) and he orders bail to Ramanath in a sum of Rs: 2500/-
cash/certified bail. It is noted that the only material filed before the
Magistrate contra the 1st Respondent's B report is a reference to a position
taken by the ASP No other material was placed before the Court. No evidence or
affidavit of the ASP was placed before Court. No information from the HQI's
Information book entries have been revealed. The fact that [7a.m.]is
highlighted in 1R2 has not been revealed; No reference to the evidence of
other police officers of the Mt. Lavinia Station supportive of the HQI has
been made No information that C.V. Gooneratne informed ASP at 2.15 a.m. that
there has been an attempt to shoot police officers (as in 1R2) has been
revealed.

**395**

Nor have the contradictory positions of Ramanathan and his helpers as to where
in fact the pistol was in the van been referred to in P3.

The Magistrate has merely preferred the contents of one report to that of the
other. Had he asked HQI Mt. Lavinia (1st Respondent) for his views about the
Interpol report, he may have been told that it is quite unreliable upon all
the circumstances, unfair, and suggestive of an unwarranted interference with
the course of juctice, which may have impelled a Magistrate acting judicially
to reject the contents of the second B report or have it inquired into.

Taking all of the above features and all matters set down in this part of the
judgment into account, the Court is not impressed with the denial by the
Petitioners of the 1st Respondent's allegation of an attempt to shoot at him.
The Court is unable to hold that the 1st Respondent has not done an impartial
inquiry or that he has fabricated evidence against Ramanathan in particular.
If the pistol was in the van, the HQI would not know to whom it belonged or
who possessed it. The mere fact that Mrs: Thavarasa produced the licence at
about 2a.m. and that licence was in the name of Ramanathan, does not mean that
Ramanathan brandished it. No particular reason is given or suggested as to why
the HQI picked on Ramanathan to foist a false allegation of improper use of
the pistol. The conduct of all three petitioners amounts to obstruction and
intimidation claims the 1st Respondent. All of these factors militate towards
a conclusion that the HQI is speaking the truth and no more. In the result the
Court holds that the allegation of the Petitioners of partiality and
fabrication of evidence upon which a false arrest was made has not been
proved. There was therefore no infringement of the rights of the Petitioners
of unlawful arrest on this ground.

**[E]**

This really concludes this order. However there are a few other matters that
need be mentioned. CI Upasena produced a parcel containing the pistol, one
cartridge "suspected to have been struck by a trigger" and live cartridges and
magazine case before Court. Attorney at law Kumarasiri appearing for the
present Petitioners who were the suspects before that Court, stating that the
pistol had not been

**396**

sealed but forwarded to the CID, and moved that the productions be kept in
special custody of Court and sent to the Government Analyst for report. To
this request, the Magistrate, stating that...... they can not be kept in the
Court house quoted a JSC circular to that effect, and made order that the
productions be sent to the CID through CI Upasena to be sent to the Government
Analyst. There is no material to show that the parcel was opened and checked
by the Court as it should have been, nor were the Court seals put on the
parcel. By this means, Mr. Wikramanayake pertinently submitted, "the jackal
was put in charge of the chicken coop". The JSC circular referred to JG 44/1
was issued on 8th September 1983 consequent to the extreme communal unrest in
Colombo and the burning of the Mount Lavinia Magistrate's Court. It directed
that ‑ all firearms, explosives and ammunition "in the custody of the Court"
be handed over to the police after making necessary entries in the relevant
registers. Such production had hitherto been kept in safe custody by the Court
and the Court had to take steps to ensure safe custody of guns and other
firearms, explosives and ammunition. On receipt of productions, section 27(1)
of the Judges Manual required the production clerk to enter the productions in
separate productions registers and see that they were well tagged with the
production labels and sealed where necessary. Particulars such as the case
number assigned to it has to be noted. The circular was redistributed in June
1987. It required that the handing over of productions to the police be done
after making the necessary entries in the relevant registers. So once Upasena
handed over the productions to Court, section 27(1) aforesaid should have been
followed and the contents noted in the register, the productions labelled,
tagged and sealed and the sealed productions containing the Court seals could
have been handed over to the police. There is no material whatsoever to show
that all this was done. Rather, the parcel produced by Upasena was handed back
to him to be taken to the Government Analyst. In the circumstances of this
case it would have been preferable if the Magistrate had not handed back the
production parcel to CID. The analyst's report P10 throws no light on this
either. Thus the finding of the Analyst ‑ vide‑P10 ‑ that the cartridge
bearing indentations made by the striking of the trigger pin has not been made
by firing the production pistol is, according to Mr. Wikramanayake, not a
significant fact in this case. Viewed in the background of the many
unsatisfactory features found in report P3 as well as that we do not

**397**

know if in fact the unfired cartridge with indentation taken from Mount
Lavinia Police was identical to that examined by the Analyst, the Court is not
able to come to any conclusion on this matter and therefore the Analyst's
finding does not militate against the 1st and 2nd Respondents.

**FINDINGS AND JUDGMENT**

**[F]**

Learned Counsel for the 1st and 2nd Respondents brought to the notice of Court
that these Respondents were only doing their duty as public servants according
to law. They have, by these applications suffered much mental stress and
strain besides pecuniary loss; their promotional prospects too have been
jeopardised in that, pending these applications, they were not allowed to
present themselves before promotion boards which were constituted; nor were
they represented by the Attorney General in the normal way.

**[G]**

Leave to proceed was granted only in respect of the alleged violations of
Articles 13(1) and 13(2). This Court is of the view that the Petitioners have
failed to prove infringement of their fundamental rights protected by Articles
13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution. Each of the applications is accordingly
dismissed with costs as specified below: ****

Each of the petitioners shall deposit in Court, on or before 15th December
1995 a sum of Seventy Thousand Rupees (Rs.70,000/‑). Out of the total sum of
Two Hundred and Ten Thousand Rupees (Rs.210000/‑) thus deposited, a sum of Ten
Thousand Rupees (Rs.10,000/‑) shall go to revenue as costs of the state.

Of the balance, each of the 1st and 2nd Respondents will be entitled to a sum
of One Hundred Thousand Rupees (Rs.100,000/‑).

**R. N. M. DHEERARATNE, J. **‑ I agree

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** ‑ I agree

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/24.html_  

