##  Nanayakkara v. Warnakulasuriya - SLR - 289, Vol 2 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 24;
(1993) 2 Sri LR 289 (11 November 1993)

**289**

**NANAYAKKARA  
v.  
WARNAKULASURIYA **

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. de SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 34/93.  
C.A. NO. 348/82 (FINAL).  
D.C. HATTON NO. 912 DE.  
OCTOBER 14, 1993.  
  
   _  Civil Procedure - Failure to hypothecate money deposited as security for
costs of appeal - Section 759 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code.  
_  
The power of the Court to grant relief under s. 759 (2) of the Code is wide
and discretionary and is subject to such terms as the Court may deem just.
Relief may be granted even If no excuse for non-compliance is forthcoming.
However, relief cannot be granted if the Court is of opinion that the
respondent has been materially prejudiced in which event the appeal has to be
dismissed.  
  
Where notice of appeal was given accompanied by security for respondent's
costs of appeal as required by Section 755 (2) (a) but there was failure to
hypothecate the sum deposited as security by bond as required by s. 757 (1)
(and petition of appeal was filed in terms of s. 755 (3) and the court ordered
the record to be forwarded to the Court of Appeal as required by s. 755 (4)),
the negligence of the attorney in not hypothecating may be relevant but it
does not fetter the discretion of the Court to grant relief where it is just
and fair to do so. The rule that negligence of attorney-at-Law is the
negligence of the client does not apply.  
  
**Per Kulatunga, J.**  
  
Even though the District Court appears to have no power to reject a notice of
appeal for failure to hypothecate security, it may perhaps call upon the
appellant to rectify the defect where the non-compliance is observed at the
stage when notice of appeal is given. If this were done, it may help in
reducing the volume of incidental proceedings before the Court of Appeal
resulting from the failure to hypothecate security by bond '.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**  
1\. Sameen v. Abeywickrema 64 N.L.R. 533 P.C.  
  
2\. Martin v. Suduhamy (1991) 2 Sri L.R. 279.  
  
3\. Mendis v. Jinadasa 24 N.L.R. 188.

**290**

**APPEAL** from order of the Court of Appeal.  
  
R. K W. Goonasekera with Upali Ponnamperuma for defendant - appellant.  
  
Faiz Musthapha, P.C. with Hemasiri Withanachchi for the plaintiff-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

  
November 11, 1993.  
**KULATUNGA, J.  
  
**This is an appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing the
defendant's appeal on a preliminary objection that he had failed to
hypothecate the sum of Rs. 150 deposited as security for the respondent's
costs of appeal. The Court held that the appellant had failed to tender an
explanation for his lapse and hence no relief could be granted in terms of s.
759 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
The power of the Court to grant relief under s. 759 (2) of the Code is wide
and discretionary and is subject to such terms as the Court may deem just.
Relief may be granted even if no excuse for non-compliance is forthcoming.
However, relief cannot be granted if the Court is of the opinion that the
respondent has been materially prejudiced in which event the appeal has to be
dismissed. The principles applicable to the exercise of this power have been
clearly laid down, particularly in Sameen v. Abeyewickrema and in the recent
decision of this Court in Martin v. Suduhamy (2).  
  
Whether or not relief may be granted in a particular case will depend on its
facts and circumstances. It would, therefore, be necessary to examine the
facts of the case before us.  
  
The plaintiff sued the defendant who was the tenant of the premises in suit
for ejectment and damages on the ground that the premises had deteriorated
owing to acts committed by the defendant, to wit, making structural
alterations thereto and the demolition of a wall for that purpose, without the
plaintiffs permission. On 20.07.82 the learned District Judge gave judgment
for the plaintiff for ejectment of the defendant and damages in a sum of Rs.
750 and further damages at the rate of Rs. 50 per month from 01.11.80 until
the plaintiff is restored to possession of the premises.

**291**

R. R. Sivalingam was the registered Attorney for the defendant on record until
24.11.87. He gave notice of appeal under s. 754 of the Civil Procedure Code on
behalf of the defendant on 03.08.82 which was accompanied by security (in a
sum of Rs. 150) for the respondent's costs of appeal, as required by s. 755
(2) (a). However, he failed to hypothecate the said sum by bond as required by
s. 757 (1). Thereafter, the petition of appeal in terms of s. 755 (3) was
filed on 09.09.82 ; whereupon the District Judge ordered that the record be
forwarded to the Court of Appeal as required by s. 755(4).  
  
The plaintiff then applied to the District Court for execution of the decree
pending appeal. This was settled and of consent the Court ordered stay of
execution of the decree on condition that the defendant deposited cash
security to the credit of the action in a sum of Rs. 5000. This sum was
deposited. Those proceedings were concluded on 17.02.83. The record shows that
Mr. Sivalingam had been appearing for the defendant up to that date.  
  
On 06.12.84, the Registrar of the Court of Appeal sent a letter to Mr.
Sivalingam calling upon him to deposit a sum of Rs. 125 for preparation of the
brief. This was replied by Miss Damayanthi Fernando, Attorney-at-Law who
forwarded a money order for that sum and requested that the brief by sent to
the defendant personally. We next have a bank receipt dated 29.10.87 for the
payment of balance fees for the brief. According to this receipt a sum of Rs.
115 had been " received from Mr. Sivalingam, Attorney-at-Law ". However, on
06.11.87 Mr. A. W. Leelaratne, Attorney-at-Law made a written request to the
Registrar to issue to him " Mr. Sivalingam's " copy of the brief. Acting on
this request, the Registry has handed over the defendant's: brief personally
to Mr. Leelaratne who is described in the note made in the Court of Appeal
record as " the Attorney-at-Law attending to the appeal ".  
  
On 24.11.87 D. Nanayakkara, Attorney-at-Law filed. a fresh appointment as
registered Attorney for the defendant-appellant in place of Mr. Sivalingam for
the reason that the latter had left Sri Lanka. On 08.01.91 (the first date of
hearing) President's Counsel appeared for the parties and the Court has made
order that the case stand out, to be listed in due course. On 01.02.91 an
application was filed on behalf of the defendant-appellant (supported by his
affidavit) seeking relief under s. 759 (2) for failure to hypothecate

**292**

security by bond. The explanation given for non compliance is that the
appellant had paid the requisite sum to Mr. Sivalingam which he has deposited
; however, there is no bond hypothecating that sum in the-record ; the
appellant himself cannot remember whether he signed a bond and was unable to
verify the facts as Mr. Sivalingam had left the Country during the ethnic
disturbances in 1983.  
  
The said application was finally argued on 29.03.93 after which the Court of
Appeal by its judgment dated 02.04.93 refused to grant relief and dismissed
the appeal, upholding the preliminary objection by Counsel for the plaintiff-
respondent. The Court cited several of its own decisions and said  
  
" all the cases show that relief can be granted if the lapse is explained  


The Court distinguished the decision in Mendis v. Jinadasa (3) on the ground
that relief was granted there as the omission was not deliberate but due to an
oversight.

  
The Court of Appeal makes no reference to the decision in Martin v. Suduhamy
(Supra) (cited in the written submissions of the plaintiff-respondent) where
this Court cited with approval the Lord Chancellor's dicta in Sameen v.
Abeywickrema (Supra) that relief may be granted even if no excuse is
forthcoming, though the existence of an excuse is relevant.  
  
Learned Counsel for the defendant-appellant submitted that the Court of Appeal
has refused relief arbitrarily, as a matter of course and failed to apply the
principles reiterated in Martin v. Suduhamy (Supra) ; and that in granting
relief under s. 759 (2) the fault of the registered Attorney should not have
been held against the appellant.  
  
The learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent argued that the
failure to hypothecate security was due to gross negligence or carelessness of
the registered Attorney and hence the Court of Appeal had correctly exercised
its discretion against the application for relief, which was made 9 years
after the lapse.

**293**

Negligence of the Attorney-at-Law (but not a mere mistake or inadvertence)
will defeat an application for relief against ex-parte orders of the District
Court entered by reason of default of parties, curable by showing " reasonable
grounds " therefor. Relief will also not be granted for default in prosecuting
an appeal attributable to such negligence curable by adducing " sufficient
cause ". Such preconditions for granting relief are expressly provided by
Sections 86 (2), 87 (3) and 771 of the Civil Procedure Code. Packiyanathan v.
Singarajah . In an application for relief under s. 759 (2), the rule that the
negligence of the Attorney-at-Law is the negligence of the client does not
apply as in the cases of default curable under Sections 86 (2), 87 (3), and
771. Such negligence may be relevant but it does not fetter the discretion of
the Court to grant relief where it is just and fair to do so.  
  
There is nothing in the facts of this case to show that the failure to
hypothecate security was deliberate. Mr. Sivalingam appears to have been
negligent in failing to hypothecate security by bond or at least to verify
whether this had been done, before the record was forwarded to the Court of
Appeal. However, the available material indicates that Mr. Sivalingam had
disappeared in 1983 ; the fact that other Attorneys-at-Law had been attending
to his matters after 17.02.83 supports the averment that he had left the
country in or about 1983. As such, the person who could have best explained
the lapse is not available, for reasons which are beyond the control of the
defendant-appellant.  
  
I am of the opinion that the plaintiff-respondent has not been materially
prejudiced by the omission to hypothecate security and that in all the
circumstances relief should be granted under s. 759 (2), subject however, to
an order for the payment of costs. The evidence of the defendant-appellant
shows that he is carrying on business and owns a shop in Nuwara Eliya.
Accordingly, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal
and direct that the defendant-appellant be permitted to furnish a bond
hypothecating the sum deposited and thereafter the appeal be heard on the
merits, subject however to the condition that the defendant-appellant pays the
plaintiff-respondent a sum of Rs. 7500 (Rupees Seven Thousand Five Hundred) as
costs on or before 15.01.94. In the event of non compliance with this order as
to payment of costs, the defendant-appellant's appeal to the Court of Appeal
will stand dismissed.

**294**

Before concluding this judgment, I wish to make an observation. Even though
the District Court appears to have -no power to reject a notice of appeal for
failure to hypothecate security, it may perhaps call upon the appellant to
rectify the defect where the non-compliance is observed at the stage when
notice of appeal is given. If this were done, it may help in reducing the
volume of incidental proceedings before the Court of Appeal resulting from the
failure to hypothecate security by bond.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA C.J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/24.html_  

