##  Wimal Vidyamani v. Jayatilleke, Lt. Col and Others - SLR - 64, Vol 2 of
1993 [1992] LKSC 24; (1993) 2 Sri LR 64 (16 June 1992)

**64**

**WIMAL VIDYAMANI  
v. **  
**LT. COL JAYATILLEKE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO J.,

KULATUNGA J. AND

WADUGODAPITIYA J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 852/91 SPL  
JUNE 16, 1992.

_     Fundamental Rights - Illegal detention - Torture - Articles 13 (1), 27,
11 of the Constitution. _

The petitioner who was the Mill Security Officer at the Embilipitiya Mill of
the National Paper Corporation was arrested and detained by the Police under
emergency regulations for being allegedly concerned in a subversive J.V.P
attack on the Paper Mill. Thereafter, he was transferred to the Pelawatte
Detention Camp and detained under a Preventive Detention Order. The petitioner
had an exemplary record of service and had won the confidence of his employer.
There was no material to warrant the suspicion that the petitioner had J.V.P.
links or was concerned in the subversive attack on the Paper Mill. An
allegation that he was absent from his place of work during the attack was
contradicted.

The Judicial Medical Officer found 16 injuries on the petitioner. It was not
alleged that the petitioner had these injuries at the time of his arrest. Even
in the absence of a clear medical opinion, as to the cause of these injuries,
these injuries could be understood as having being caused by the use of blunt
force during an assault by police officers whilst the petitioner was in police
custody.

65

**Held** :

(1) The validity of arrest under Regulation 18 (1) has to be determined by the
application of the objective test upon adequate material placed before Court.
The validity of an Order under Regulation 17 (1) is determined by the
application of the test of reasonability, in the wide sense. The Secretary
making such order may, in particular circumstances, become obliged to place
before Court relevant grounds to justify his claim that he was of the opinion
that it was necessary to order detention in the interest of national security
or the maintenance of public order.

(2) The petitioner's arrest and detention were unlawful, there was proof of
torture and these were infringements of his fundamental rights.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Wickremabandu v. Herat and others [1990] 2 Sri L.R. 348._  
_  
2\. Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera [1985] 2 Sri LR. 375, 385._  
_  
3\. Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale 75 NLR 67._  
_  
4\. Sasanasiritissa Thero v. P. A. de Silva [1989] 2 Sri L R. 356, 380 - 381._  
_  
5\. Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku [1987] 2 Sri L.R. 119._  
_  
6\. Geekiyanage Premalal Silva v. Rodrigo S.C. Appeal No. 24/89 S.C. Mins. of
05.09.90._  
_  
7\. Jayarathe v. Tennakoon S.C. No. 18/89 and 10/89 S.C. Mins. of 04.07.91._  
_  
8\. Gamlath v. Neville Silva S.C. Application No. 78/90 Mins. of 27.09.91._

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
L.C.M. Swarnadhipathi for petitioner.

_1st respondent absent and unrepresented._

  
_Shavindra Fernando, S.C. for the 2nd and 3rd respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 22, 1992\.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

By his letter dated 18.3.91 addressed to His Lordship the Chief Justice the
petitioner who had, at the relevant time, been a member of the Security
Service at the Embilipitiya Mill of the National Paper Corporation complained
that he was in illegal detention at the Pelawatta Detention Camp having been
unlawfully arrested by the Embilipitiya Police on 19.10.90. He also complained
that until his transfer to the said camp on 17.11.90, he was unlawfully
detained at the Embilipitiya√Ç

66

Police Station during which period the police officers there subjected him to
various acts of torture. His affidavit was filed on 34.07.91 wherein he sought
relief for alleged infringement of his rights under Articles 11, 13 (1) and
(2) of the Constitution. On 04.09.91, he filed an amended affidavit in which
he stated inter cilia, that on 10.08.91, he had been transferred to Ratnavali
Rehabilitation Camp, Anuradhapura. The petitioner was then granted leave to
proceed ; at the same time, this Court directed the Judicial Medical Officer
Anuradhapura to examine the petitioner for any injuries he had sustained and
to make a report to this Court. Pursuant to the said direction, the J.M.O.
examined the petitioner on 26.09.91 and forwarded his report dated 10.10.91.

The petitioner joined the National Paper Corporation in 1980 as a Security
Officer. He was promoted to the post of Executive Security Officer in 1983 and
to the post of Mill Security Officer in 1985. The evidence adduced before us
shows that he has, as an employee of the Corporation, maintained an exemplary
record of service. This is supported by documentary evidence which I summarise
as follows:

1\. 29.06.84 : commendation by the Corporation for assistance given in
detecting a gambling den conducted by certain employees of the Corporation and
in apprehending the offenders. (P5)

2\. 07.09.84 : commendation by the Head Quarters Inspector Embilipitiya Police
Station for assistance rendered in the recovery of a water pump belonging to
the Corporation, which had been stolen. (P6)

3\. 19.09.84 : appreciation by the Mahaweli Authority of his service in giving
the officers of the Authority .a demonstration in fire fighting. (P3)

4\. 13.11.84 : commendation by the HQI Embilipitiya Police station for
assistance rendered in the recovery of stolen tractor spare parts worth Rs.
20,000 belonging to the Corporation. (P7)

5\. 12.12.84 : commendation by the Corporation for his " devoted, dedicated
and loyal service " to the Corporation in conducting a basic course of
training for its security staff, including on the subjects of fire-fighting
and self defence. (P2)

67

6\. 26.06.86 : certificate of specialised training in security duties (armed
and unarmed) provided by the Ministry of Security for Industrial and
Commercial Establishments which states that the petitioner had obtained the
1st place in the course. (P1)

7\. 15.01.89 : appreciation by the Commanding Officer of the Army Training
Centre Embilipitiya for a lecture given to the new recruits on the subject of
fire-fighting. (P4)

8\. 13.02.89 : payment of a reward of Rs. 259 to the petitioner by the
Corporation for assisting in the recovery of a stock of paper which had been
stolen from the Corporation. (P8)

We then have the petitioner's report (P9) dated 17.09.90 addressed to the
Chairman of the Corporation regarding subversive attacks on the Embilipitiya
Paper Mill in October and November 1989 and the action taken in that regard.
On 9.10.89 subversives attacked the Mill and damaged 20 vehicles and assaulted
the employees. The Army COD H.Q (Embilipitiya) and the Embilipitiya Police
were informed ; but they visited the Mill only in the morning of the next day.
Thereafter, the petitioner visited the Embilipitiya Police Station from time
to time with a view to adopting security measures but he was informed that
Police Officers were unable to intervene without a directive from the Ministry
of Defence. On 21.10.89 the petitioner liaised with Army Head Quarters
Embilipitiya and arranged for assistance to be given against further
subversive attacks on a signal being by the blowing of the siren. On 11\.
11.89 subversives attacked the Mill again, damaged its property and set fire
to the Mill. Mr. Gunasena Kuruppu managed to blow the siren, whereupon the
army arrived and the subversives fled. They were thereby able to save the
paper machine. Mr. Kuruppu was assaulted by the subversives on that occasion
and was consequently hopitalised for 3 days. The General Manager of the
Corporation has, by a writing dated 06.05.92 (P13) confirmed the facts
relating to the two subversive attacks referred to in P9 and further confirmed
that the petitioner was present at the station during the said attacks and
duly attended to his duties by extinguishing the fire and salvaging the
property of the Corporation.

It is common ground that on 15.11.89 a police post was established inside the
Mill premises to tighten the security there. The petitioner states that on
29.05.90 he was arrested by Sgt. Bandara of the

68

Embiliptiya Police who was illdisposed towards him ; he was not informed of
the reason for his arrest ; and he was detained at the Embilipitiya Police
Station until 31.05.90. Shortly before he was released, a Police Officer
recorded a statement from him about subversive activities at the Mill
premises. On 04.06.90 the General Manager of the Corporation called for a
report from the Assistant Superintendant of Police Embilipitiya regarding the
said arrest: However, no report was received, despite a reminder on 1.10.90
(P14a). The petitioner alleges that in the meantime Sgt. Ariyadasa and other
police officers were stealing the property belonging to the Corporation. On
05.06.90 the petitioner made a report (P10) to the Chief Security Officer
detailing the alleged acts of theft. In-hat report, the petitioner states that
property including stocks of paper were being removed by the police without
gate passes claiming that the Management had permitted such removal.

On 12.09.90 the General Manager of the Corporation addressed a letter (P11) to
the Superintendant of Police Ratnapura giving a detailed account of alleged
acts of misconduct by Police Officers attached to the police post at the Mill
(between 22.08.90 and 11.09.90) including the unauthorised removal of empty
barrels, bleaching powder, paper and exercise books, misuse of Corporation
vehicles, assaulting a security guard and taking two employees into custody.
The General Manager also arranged for the Chief Security Officer of the
Corporation (who was accompanied by the petitioner) to discuss the matter with
the S.P. The petitioner states that after discussions, all the Police Officers
attached to the Police post at the Mill were transferred out ; that
thereafter, on 19.10.90 when he was on duty, Police Officers from the
Embilipitiya Police Station arrested him ; that at the Police Station Sgt.
Wimalasiri and other police officers assaulted him; that as a result he
sustained many injuries including a permanent disability of the middle finger
of his right hand ; that whilst so assaulting him they questioned him about
the damage caused to the Mill by the subversives ; and that he was detained at
the Embilipitiya Police Station until 17.11.90 on which date he was
transferred to the Pelawatte Detention Camp where he remained until his
transfer to Ratnavali Rehabilitation Camp, Anuradhapura, on 10.08.91.

The petitioner denies that he engaged in any unlawful activity or was in any
way associated with subversive activity at the Mill and asserts that he duly
carried out his duties as a Security Officer and

69

assisted in safeguarding the Mill against such activity. He alleges that the
motive for his illegal arrest, detention and torture was the fact that the
Police Officers concerned were displeased with the action taken by him for
safeguarding the property of the Corporation and its employees which led to a
complaint being made to the SP against various acts of misconduct by Police
Officers. On behalf of the respondent, affidavits have been filed by the
Secretary to the Minister of State for Defence, ASP Amaradasa Fernando, Sub
Inspector of Police Upali Minipura of the Counter Subversive Unit Embilipitiya
and Sergeant Wimalasiri Goonewardena. It is the case for the respondents that
the petitioner had links with the Janata Vimukti Peramuna and was involved in
the subversive attacks at the Mill. ASP Amaradasa Fernando states that the
petitioner's involvement with the subversives was confirmed by the fact that
he was absent from his place of work during both attacks and was absent for
two months thereafter ; that the petitioner was arrested on 30.05.90 and was
released the next day after recording his statement ; that after the
establishment of the police post at the Mill, the petitioner was kept under
observation and being displeased with such vigilance, he made complaints
against police officers ; and that on receipt of further information, the
petitioner was re-arrested on 19.10.90 and detained pending investigations.

As authority for the petitioner's detention, the respondents have produced two
detention orders namely, an order dated 20.10.90 under Regulation 19 (2) of
the Emergency Regulations for a period of 90 days (Z1) and an order dated
16.01.90 under Regulation 17 (1) for the period thereafter (Z2). The
petitioner was released on 31.10.91, during the pendency of these proceedings.
The Secretary to the Ministry of State for Defence states that in the meantime
he reviewed periodically the available material against the petitioner as to
the necessity for his continued detention.

It is well settled that the validity of arrest under Regulation 18 (1) has to
be determined by the application of the objective test upon adequate material
placed before this Court. The validity of an order under Regulation 17 (1) is
determined by the application of the test of reasonability, in the wide sense
; and the Secretary making such order may, in particular circumstances, become
obliged to place before this Court relevant grounds to justify his claim

70

that he was of the opinion that it was necessary to detain the petitioner in
the interest of national security or the maintenance of public order.
_Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herat_ (1). In the instant case, there is no material
to warrant the suspicion that the petitioner had JVP links or that he was
concerned in the subversive attacks at the Mill. The allegation that he was
absent from his place of work during the said attacks is contradicted by
documentary evidence and particularly by the statement of the General Manager
of the Corporation (1313) in which the General Manager also contradicts the
allegation that the petitioner absented himself from his place of work for two
months after the subversive attacks. The General Manager states that the
petitioner was absent for one month and 14 days on approved leave. In the
circumstances, the petitioner's arrest under Regulation 18 (1) was unlawful
and the consequent detention order Z1 was also unlawful. Further no material
was produced before us as to the basis on which the Secretary could have
formed the opinion that it was necessary to detain the petitioner under
Regulation 17 (1) ; consequently the detention order Z2 was unlawful. I hold
that the arrest and detention of the petitioner are violative of his rights
under Articles 13 (1) and (2) of the Constitution.

As regards the alleged violation of Article 11, Sergeant Wimalasiri
Goonewardena states that he is familiar with the facts and circumstances
relating to the arrest of the petitioner but denies the allegation that the
petitioner was assaulted whilst he remained in police custody. However, the
report of the JMO who examined the petitioner on 26.09.91, whilst the
petitioner was still under detention, supports the allegation of assault. The
petitioner told the JMO that the officers of the Embilipitiya Police took him
into custody on 19.10.90 and assaulted him with battons, wires, rubber pipes
and clubs. The JMO observed the following injuries on the petitioner.

(1)     oedematous right middle finger with limitation of movement and pain
over palpation.

(2)     √Ç 2 1/2" x 1 " scar on left buttock.

(3)     √Ç 4 1/2" x 0.2" scar on middle 1/3 of anterior aspect of right thigh.

(4)     1 1/2" x 0.2" scar 6" below the 3rd injury.

(5)     0.3" long scar 1/2" below the 3rd injury.

(6)     2" x 1/2" scar on medial aspect of left ankle.

(7)     0.5" in diameter scar on lateral aspect of the left lower leg.

71

(8)     0.5" long scar on lateral aspect of the left ankle.

(9)     1.0" long scar on dorsal aspect of right thumb.

(10)  √Ç 0.5" long scar on left side of the back of chest in 8th intercostal
aspect at midline.

(11)  √Ç 4' long linear shape scar on right shoulder joint.

(12)  √Ç 0.5" long scar on medial aspect of left wrist.

(13)  √Ç 1/4" long scar on dorsal aspect of the left hand.

(14)  √Ç 2" long scar on anterior aspect of the left lower thigh.

(15)  √Ç 1.0" long scar on left anterior chest wall.

(16)  √Ç 1/2" long scar on dorsal aspect between left thumb and index.

The J.M.O. states that he is unable to express an opinion on the above
injuries as they are old wounds. The respondents have not taken up the
position that the petitioner had any injuries on him at the time of his
arrest. Even during the subversive attacks it was one Gunasena who was
assaulted. The petitioner did not sustain any injuries at the hands of the
subversives. The history given by the petitioner to the J.M.O. is consistent
with the description of the assault given in the petitioner's affidavit to
this Court prior to his medical examination ; and even in the absence of a
clear medical opinion, there is no difficulty in taking the view that the said
injuries were probably caused by the use of blunt force. In all the
circumstances, I am satisfied that Sergeant Wimalasiri Goonewardena and other
Police Officers of the Embilipitiya Police Station assaulted the petitioner
whilst he was in police custody and caused multiple injuries to him. I hold
that such conduct is violative of the petitioner's rights under Article 11 of
the Constitution.

In deciding the question as to what relief may be granted to the petitioner, I
have taken the following matters into consideration

(i) No material has been placed before this Court to establish the existence
of a reasonable suspicion that the petitioner was concerned in any offence.
Assuming that there was such material, it is manifest that a detention order
under Regulation 19 (2) was competent to facilitate further investigation.
Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera (2). The petitioner was detained under the said
regulation for 90 days ; but there is no evidence of any investigations
conducted during that period. These facts show that the petitioner's arrest
and detention were mala fide and smack of malice.

72

(ii) The Secretary states that he made the order under Regulation 17 (1) on
the basis of material available against the petitioner " including the
material set out in the affidavits marked X1 and X2 ". The said affidavits
consist of bald statements (unsupported by any other material) that the
petitioner had JVP links and was involved in the subversive attacks at the
Mill. If the Secretary had any other material to support the detention, such
material has not been placed before this court. The irresistible inference
from these facts is that the Secretary signed the impugned order mechanically
and had not formed the requisite opinion. Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale (3) ;
Sasanasiritissa Thero v. P. A. de Silva (4).

(iii) The petitioner who had an exemplary record of service and had won the
confidence of his employer was arbitrarily arrested and incarcerated for a
period of one year. He was subjected to torture whilst in police custody and
was detained in a police cell for one month, which was itself cruel. On
27.05.91 the Attorney-General informed the SP Ratnapura and Mr. D. G. Jayalath
(the Chairman of the Committee For Processing, Rehabilitation and Release of
Suspects in the Ministry of Defence) that the available evidence was
insufficient to prefer criminal charges against the petitioner. Had the
Secretary reviewed the petitioner's case periodically (as he claimed to have
done), the petitioner might have been released at that stage ; instead, he was
continued in detention and was released only on 31.10.91 after 2 months
rehabilitation. It seems to me that the decision for rehabilitation itself had
been mechanically made, the effect of which would have been to further
humiliate the petitioner.

(iv) This court has condemned torture of persons in police custody in _Amal
Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ (5), _Geekiyanage Premalal Silva v. Rodrigo_ (6)
; _Jayaratne v. Tennakoon_ (7)and _Gamalath v. Neville Silva_ (8). In the last
case I observed that the previous decisions have had no effect on the police
and that violations of Article 11 by police officers (which symbolise man's
inhumanity to man) continue. The instant case shows that the situation is
still the same.  
  
Accordingly, I grant the petitioner -

73

(i) a declaration that his rights under Articles 13 (1) and (2) and 11 have
been infringed by executive or administrative action ; and

(ii) compensation in a sum of Rs. 15,000 for the infringment of Article 13 (1)
and (2) ; and compensation in a sum of Rs. 20,000 for the infringment of his
rights under Article 11, totalling a sum of Rs. 35,000 (Rupees thirty five
thousand).

I direct the State to pay the said sum to the petitioner.

As the offending police officers have not been made parties to these
proceedings, it is not possible to make any order against them personally. I
therefore direct the Registrar to forward to the Inspector-General of Police a
copy of this judgment to enable him to take appropriate action and to make a
report to this Court in that regard on or before 15.09.92. The impugned order
under Regulation 17 (i) was made by the Secretary to the Ministry of State for
Defence and not by the 2nd respondent (Secretary, Ministry of Defence). In the
days of _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ (3) there was only one officer (namely, the
Permanent Secretary) who was authorised to make such order ; and H. N. G.
Fernando, CJ said (p. 90) ;

" I cannot imagine that the Prime Minister would have recommended the
conferment of the power to make detention Orders on the Permanent Secretary,
without the confidence that he will exercise that power in good faith..."

The situation has since changed ; and the power to make detention orders is
now vested in the 2nd respondent as well as in the Secretary, Ministry of
State for Defence and any Additional Secretary of Defence. Whilst such
delegation may have been necessitated by the increase in the volume of work in
this sphere, it is hoped that the appropriate authority will ensure that such
orders are not mechanically made, on the recommendation of subordinate
officers.

**FERNANDO, J. -** I agree.

  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/24.html_  

