##  Ranjith Fonseka v. The Attorney General - SLR - 50, Vol 1 of 1990 [1989]
LKSC 24; (1990) 1 Sri LR 50 (4 July 1989)

**

50

RANJITH FONSEKA  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY- GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT.  
BANDARANAYAKE, J., JAMEEL, J. AND FERNANDO, J.  
S.C. No. 54/87 - CA. No. 123/84 -H.C. NEGOMBO 371/81.  
JUNE 8, 1989.

_

Criminal Law - July not direct on confessional item of evidence - is
conviction vitiated?

_

The Accused - appellant was convicted of murder. The: accused had gone to the,
Police Station and handed over knife-to the Police butane knife was not the
murder weapon. No direction was given to the jury on the effect of this item
of evidence and it was contended that the Jury may have inferred that this
amounted to a confessional statement

**

51

Held

**

(1) No evidence was led to the effect that the Appellant had made a statement,
let alone a statement which may have been a confession.

(2) A confession is an admission, and an admission is a statement oral or
documentory". The evidence complained of does not amount to evidence of
statement. A Statement may well include a gesture, such as a nod of assent to
a question, or a sign by a dumb person; it clearly does not include the
Appellant's act of handing over a knife. A confession in addition to being an
admission must also state or suggest the inference that the Accused committed
the offence. Even if the evidence that the Appellant handed over a knife is a
Statement yet it neither states or suggests any reference of a confession, nor
operates to inform the Court or create the impression that the Accused had
made a statement admitting that he was the doe of the act complained of. The
fact that such evidence may, have been prejudicial to the Appellant or may
have had the effect of strengthening the case for the prosecution does not
make it a confession. The evidence was not improperly admitted.

**

Cases referred to

**_

(1) Obiyas Appuhamy v. The Queen - 54 NLR 32, 34._  

_

(2) The King v. Kalu Bands 15 NLR 422._  

_

(3) The King v. Cooray 28 NLR 74._  

_

(4) Regina v. Batcho 57 NLR 100._  

_

(5) The Queen v. Victor Perera 59 NLR 185._  

_

(6) Regina v. Anandagoda 62 NLR 241 affirmed by Privy Council at 64 NLR 73._  

_

(7) De Soysa v. The Queen 75 NLR 534, 541.

_**

APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal,

_

Ranjit Abeysuriya, P.C. with P. Jayewardene and Miss Ayomi de Silva for the
Accused appellant._  

_

Upawansa Yapa, Deputy Solicitor- General, with Miss Jayasinghe B. Tilakaratne
SSC for Attorney General.

Cur. adv. vult_

July 4, 1989.

**FERNANDO, J.

**

The Appellant was found guilty of murder and was sentenced to death, his
appeal against the conviction and sentences was dismissed by the Court of
Appeal, and he has appealed to this Court; having obtained special leave to
appeal. The learned High Court Judge did not direct the jury not to treat a
certain item of evidence as a confession by the Accused - Appellant, and the
question of law urged for our determination in this appeal is whether the
conviction was thereby vitiated.

**52**

The facts relevant to this question may, be shortly stated. The widow of the
deceased testified that she saw the Appellant stab her husband with a knife at
about 12.15 p.m. within a few minutes she arrived at the Police Station and
made a complaint: The Prosecution elicited evidence, from an Inspector
attached to that Police Station that at about 12.30 p.m. the Appellant had
come to the Police Station and handed over a knife to him; that he had then
visited the scene taking the Appellant with him; and 'that on his return the
had handed over the Appellant to the Reserve. No evidence was elicited
suggesting that the Appellant had made a statement. The Inspector also stated
that-there was nothing smeared on the , knife, which he had shown both to the
widow and the J.M.O. According to the J.M.O. the knife shown to him was like a
table knife, and that the injuries inflicted on the deceased could not have
been caused with that knife. The widow stated that the knife, shown to her
resembled a knife which she had seen in the Appellant's house used for the
purpose of cutting ''mallun" leaves, and was quite different to the weapon
with which the deceased had be en stabbed vv as thus the Prosecution case
throughout that this knife was not the murder weapon indeed, the inspector
testified further that, in consequence of the widow having said that this was
n not the murder weapon, he had unsuccessfully searched the appellant's house
on three occasions in an endeavour to find the murder weapon. There is no
complaint as to the manner in which these facts were set out in the summing -
up.

Learned President's Counsel relied heavily on the following portion of the
judgment of the Court of Appeal

"In the present case evidence led may suggest that the statement volunteered
by the accused at the Police Station was a confession in view of the fact that
the accused accompanied the Police to the scene and on their return had been
handed to the Police Officer at the Police Station.

There has been a non-direction as the judge had not directed the jury not to
consider this item of evidence as a confession made by the accused to the
Police Officer and that it was only evidence that a knife had been handed over
to the Police:'

He submitted that for the purpose of this appeal we must proceed on the basis
that a statement had been made-by the Appellant to the Police,

**53**

and that the jury may well have inferred that this statement was confessional
in nature that in the absence of a suitable direction by the learned High
Court Judge, the conviction could not stand and that in the circumstances, the
Court of Appeal erred in applying the proviso to section 334 (i) of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act.

Upon, a scrutiny of the relevant evidence, which has been summarized above, it
is clear that no evidence was led to the effect that the Appellant had made a
statement, let alone a statement which may have been a confession. The Court
of Appeal was clearly in error in concluding that there was evidence that a
statement had been made by the Appellant. I cannot accept any contention that
our decision in this appeal must be on a basis which perpetuates that error.

It was the alternative submission of learned President's Counsel that from
this evidence it could be inferred that the Appellant had made a statement,
and also that such statement was of a confessional nature. He relied on Obiyas
Appuhamy v. The Queen (1) in which evidence was led that the accused
volunteered a statement to a police officer, who thereupon immediately
handcuffed the accused and took him to the scene of the offence

"Section 25 (i) of the Evidence Ordinance provides that no confession made to
a police officer shall be proved as against a person accused of any offence.
it is not solely evidence of the actual terms of a confession that can be
obnoxious to this provision, but any evidence which if accepted would lead to
the inference that the accused made a confession to a police officer and so
'prove' such a confession. "(per Gunasekara, J.) -

This decision is not applicable here for the reason that the Prosecution
scrupulously refrained from leading any evidence, or even suggesting, that the
Appellant made a statement. I respectfully agree that the mere fad that a
statement was made, without any reference to its contents, can be repugnant to
section 25 (i) in appropriate circumstances ; and that evidence of other acts
and events from which inferences can be drawn as to the confessional nature of
such a statement is also inadmissible. However, Gunasekara, J., neither held
nor suggested that section 25 (1) precludes evidence of such acts and events
in the absence of any evidence that the accused made a statement to a Police
Officer.. Further,

**54**

while a reasonable inference can be drawn by a jury from the act of
handcuffing the accused; that his statement in some way implicated him in the
offence, such an inference. can hardly be drawn from the act of - handing over
a knife which was not the murder weapon.

No decision was cited in which evidence of such acts and events was per se
held to amount to confession. Counsel cited the King v. Kalu Banda (2) the
King v. Cooray (3), Regina v. Batcho (4) and The Queen v. Victor Perera (5)
none of which involved this question. I am dispensed from the need to analyse
these decisions, as the entire series of decisions dealing-with the scope of
sections: 17. (2) and 25 of the Evidence Ordinance were exhaustively analysed
by H.N.G. Fernando, C.J., in Regina v. Anandagoda (6) affirmed 64 N.L.R. 73,
P.C. and I am in respectful agreement with his conclusion that the decisions
of our Courts pronouncing upon the inadmissibility of statements made to
Police Officers, and of evidence concerning such statements, fall into the
following categories:-

(1) A statement directly admitting that the accused was the doer of the act
charged. It makes no difference if, in addition to an admission of the act
charged, there- is also exculpatory or mitigatory matter, because the
admission would prove the Prosecution case and the burden of proving what is
exculpatory or mitigatory is on the accused.

(ii) A statement which, though not an admission that the accused, was the doer
of the act charged, contains admissions, the intrinsic terms of which suggest
the inference that he did the act, is inadmissible.

(iii) Evidence of Police Officers, or questions in cross - examination and /
or statements by: prosecuting counsel, which operate to inform the Court or
create the impression that the accused had made a statement admitting that: he
was the doer of the act charged is inadmissible.

(iv) In a case where the prosecution has the burden of proving possession by
the accused of a stolen article, a statement that the accused had in fact been
in possession thereof, is in admissible. Similar statements admitting
possession in cases where

**55**

possession is an essential ingredient of the offence charged may probably fall
into this category.

A confession is an admission, and an admission is "a statement, oral or
documentary". The evidence complained of does not amount to evidence of a
statement while I recognise that a " Statement" may well include a gesture,
such as a nod of assent to a question, or a sign by a dumb person, it clearly
does not include the Appellant's act of handing over a knife. In all the cases
failing under category (iii) above; there was evidence that a statement was
made, and I see no justification for extending the scope of category (iii) to
situations where there was no such evidence. A confession, in addition to
being an admission, must also state or suggest the inference that the accused
committed the offence. Even if, contrary to my view, the evidence that the
Appellant handed over a knife is a "statement" yet it neither states or
suggests any such inference, nor " operates to inform the Court or create the
impression that the accused had made a statement admitting that he was the
doer of the act charged". The fact that such evidence may have been
prejudicial to the Appellant - and the possibility that he was seeking to
mislead the investigators was adverted to - or may have had the effect of
strengthening the case for the Prosecution, does not make it a confession.
That evidence was not improperly admitted.

Learned President's Counsel finally contended that even though the impugned
evidence did not amount to a confession, and even if it could not reasonably
have been so considered by the jury, there was nevertheless a possibility that
the jury might have thought that the Appellant had made a confessional
statement, and that it was therefore the duty of the learned High Court Judge
to direct the jury that it was not a confession. Whether or not, as a counsel
of perfection, that might have been done, there was certainly no duty to do
so, and the failure to do so did not result in any illegality or prejudice to
the Appellant. Our system of criminal justice rightly imposes on the Judiciary
an onerous duty of fairness to the accused, but this duty cannot be exalted
into a barrier which would obstruct the administration of justice, to the
detriment of the victims of crime as well as the community at large.

It is thus hardly necessary to scrutinise the contention that the proviso to
section 334 (1) was wrongly applied. The Court of Appeal referred to de Zoysa
v. The Queen (7).

**56**

"...........if, as we confidently think, the jury" did accept-as true the
prosecution evidence on the material points, then the further wrong
instruction could have contributed little to the jury's ultimate verdict,"

and took the view; which t share, that there was strong and convincing
evidence as to the Appellant's guilt, and that any direction regarding the
impugned evidence would not have changed the verdict of the Jury.

The appeal is therefore dismissed.

**

BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  

**

JAMEEL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/24.html_  

