##  Somaratne and Another v. De Silva Padmini - SLR - 195, Vol 2 of 1988
[1988] LKSC 24; (1988) 2 Sri LR 195 (19 October 1988)

**

195

SOMARATNE AND ANOTHER  
v.  
PADMINI DE SILVA

**

SUPREME COURT  
RANASINGHE C. J., TAMBIAH J. AND BANDARANAIKE J.  
S. C. NO. 61/86; C. A. NO. 350/82;  
D: C. KALUTARA NO, 2552/L  
SEPTEMBER 15, 1988

_Rei vindicatory suit - Encroachment - Settlement - Mistake._

Where a settlement was entered whereby it was recorded that it was agreed that
if no foundation was found on the corpus by the Interpreter-Mudaliyar the
action would be dismissed when what the plaintiff meant was only the remnants
of an old house it was wrong to apply the test of the presence of a foundation
to dispose of the action.

**196**

**

Case referred to:

**

( _1) Thangarajasingham v. lyampillai 64 AR 569

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal

_

P. Somatillekam with Miss Nevanka Goonewardene for petitioner Harmon

J. C. Perera for respondent.

Cur. adv. vult.

_

October 19, 1988

**

RANASINGHE, C. J,

**

The Plaintiff-Respondent-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as Respondent)
has instituted this action against the Defendants Petitioners-Appellants
(hereinafter referred to as Appellants) for a declaration of title to a
portion of an allotment of land, called Gorakagahawatte and more fully
described in the schedule to the plaint and for ejectment of the Appellants
thereform.

The Respondents claim title upon the basis of two deeds bearing Nos. 6515
dated 8.3.72, dated 21.5.77

"Upon a commission taken out by the Respondents the land claimed by him was
depicted as lots A and B in Plan No.1243 which is

marked B. The portion, which the Respondent claims has been encroached. Upon
by the Appellants is said to be Lot B in the said plan, and the extent of such
portion is given as 3.4 perches

The Appellants who disputed the Respondents claim too have had the land, which
they stated is theirs surveyed and depicted in Plan No. 2650 which was marked
D. They claim not only lots 1 and 2 in the said plan, but also a strip of
land, 1 perch in extent, along the northern boundary of lot 3, which they
state constitutes the Respondents land.

The portion, which was in dispute between the parties and which the Respondent
claims has been encroached upon by the Appellants, is depicted in Plan B as
Lot B and in Plan D as Lot 2.

**

197

**

In Plan 'D' was also depicted as "item B" what the surveyor describes as the
"foundation" of an old house, and which is said to be claimed by the
Appellants. The area covered by such "item B"; according to the said surveyor,
falls within lots 1 and 2 of the said plan.

When the case was taken up, for trial on 17.12.81, a settlement was arrived at
between the parties. The terms of the said settlement were that the
interpreter-mudliyar of the court should inspect the land depicted in the plan
'D" referred to above: that if he were to find a "foundation" at the site
marked 'B' in Plan 'D'. The Respondent's action was to be dismissed with costs
that, on the other hand, if no such "foundation" was found to exist at the
said site 'B', then judgment was to be entered for the Respondent.

The interpreter-mudliyar had proceeded to the said land on the same day and
had inspected the portion in dispute in the presence of the two surveyors who
had prepared the aforementioned plans 'B' and 'D' respectively.

The Interpreter-mudliyar gave evidence before the learned District Judge on
18. 12. 81, as to the results of his inspection; and, on the basis of the
interpreter-mudliyar s evidence, the learned, District Judge entered judgment
for the Respondent, on the footing that there was no "foundation" at the site
marked 'B' in the said plan 'D'. Decree was entered accordingly, by the'
learned District Judge.

The Appellants then filed an application in the Court of Appeal for revision
of the said decree and/or restitutio- in -integrum. It was contended; that a
mistake had been made in entering the terms of settlement before the District
Court by the use of the word "foundation"; that what the Appellants had meant
was only the remnants of an old house; that, therefore, the Appellants should
be given relief on the basis of a mistake Made by them in agreeing to the said
settlement.

The Court of Appeal took the view that the Appellants had' made no mistake in
agreeing to the said terms of settlement recorded in the District' Court. The
Court of Appeal, having

**198**

expressed the view that the term "foundation" is usually used to express 'the
base or basis of a building', proceeded to hold that what was described by the
Interpreter-mudliyar as having been found by him at the said site could not
have supported "any building standing on it."

Learned Counsel appearing for the Appellants before this court has only
contended that the Orders; of both the District Court and the Court of Appeal,
be set aside and that the case be sent 'back for a continuation of the trial
on the basis of the pleadings filed. - -

The contention, that a mistake was made by the Appellants. in entering into`
the said settlement, seems to me to be untenable; and, having regard to the
view expressed by the Court of Appeal on this point, I see no reason to
interfere with that part of the Order of the Court of Appeal refusing relief
by way of restitutio-in-integrum.

A consideration of the evidence given by the interpreter mudliyar, of the
results of his inspection of the scene, in court on 18. 12\. 81, makes it
clear that he has set but three features he found at the site:

(i) that the said site, depicted as 'B', is, in comparison to the rest of the
land, slightly elevated:

(ii) that there were, here and there, layers of cement mixed with clay,
although he did not find any bricks;

(iii) that, when the mammoty was used, the layers of cement seemed to come off
in pieces. .  -

It was upon this evidence that  the learned trial Judge concluded that there
was no "foundation" as contemplated by the parties

Having regard to the view taken by the Court of Appeal in regard to the nature
and the purpose of a "foundation", I find it difficult to accept the
conclusion arrived at by the Court of

**199**

Appeal that the existence of such a 'base or basis of a building' is not borne
out by what the interpreter-mudliyar testified to as having been found by him
at the site.

It has, however, been contended by learned Counsel appearing for the
Respondent that this court should not give relief to the Appellants by way of
revision for the reasons, that no application had been -made to the learned
District Judge to lead evidence to contradict the evidence given by the
interpreter-mudliyar; that there has been delay in making the application for
relief to the court of Appeal: that: although there was a right of appeal from
the order of the District Judge, the Appellants failed to exercise that right.

Having regard to the terms of the said settlement I do not think that any
application to lead evidence to contradict that of the interpreter-mudliyar's
could have been entertained by the learned District Judge. In any event,
having regard to the view I have formed of the evidence so given by the
interpreter-mudliyar himself, the failure to move to lead evidence to the
contrary should not, in the circumstances of this case, be counted against -
the Appellants.

The period, between the date of the Order made by the District Court and the
making of the application to the Court of Appeal, the parties agreed, was only
three months. This period of time is not such as should, in the circumstances
of this case, be considered to amount to inordinate delay in moving the Court
of Appeal for the exercise of the discretionary powers vested in it.

Having regard to the nature and-the scope of the settlement that was arrived
at between the parties on 17.12.81 and communicated to the learned District
Judge, and the order made entering judgment .for the Respondent by the learned
District Judge in terms of the said settlement, it seems -to be clear., upon
the authority of the decision in the case of V. Thangarajasingham wife vs. M.
lyampillai & wife, (1) (and the several authorities referred to in the said
judgment) that the Appellants would have had no right of appeal from the said
decree of the District Court.

**200**

The appeal of the Appellants is allowed; and the judgment of the Court of
Appeal is set aside- The decree of the -District Court is also set aside, and
the District Court is directed to settle the issues, and proceed to hear the
trial upon the said issues.

The. Respondent is also directed to pay the Appellants a sum of Rs. 2100/- as
costs of the proceedings before the Court of Appeal and of the appeal to this
Court.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree

**

BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/24.html_  

