##  Hebtulabhoy & Co. Ltd. v. Fernando, A.L.M., High Court Judge & Others -
SLR - 191, Vol 1 of 1988 [1986] LKSC 24; (1988) 1 Sri LR 191 (11 September
1986)

**

191

HEBTULABHOY & Co. LTD.  
V.  
A. L. M. FERNANDO, HIGH COURT JUDGE & OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J. H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. AND G: P. S. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. REFERENCE No. 2/87;  
C.A. APPLICATION No. 875/87,  
D. C. COLOMBO No. 2316/Spl.  
JANUARY 12, 13, 14 AND 22, 1988.

_

     Constitution, Articles 111(2), 114, 125(1)-High Court Judge appointed by the Judicial Service Commission as Additional District Judge to hear specified cases-Validity of such appointment.

_

**192**

The 1st respondent as District Judge heard and reserved order in a case where
the petitioner was plaintiff. Before the order was delivered the 1st
respondent was appointed as a High Court Judge by His Excellency the
President. Subsequently, the Judicial Service Commission appointed the : 1st
respondent as an Additional District Judge to. deliver judgment in certain
cases heard by him as District Judge. The petitioners' case was that when
the.1st respondent was already functioning as a High Court Judge, the
Secretary to the Commission (5th respondent) communicated the decision to the
1st respondent stating, `"I hereby appoint you as Additional District Judge,
Colombo to deliver judgment in cases No...... in addition to your other duties
as pleased by the Judicial Service Commission." The 1st respondent
subsequently delivered judgment in the petitioner's case making an order
against him. He applied to the Court of Appeal to quash the order on the
ground that the appointment by the J.S.C. was invalid.

Since matters relating to the interpretation of the Constitution were
involved, the Court of Appeal referred the following questions to the Supreme
Court for determination under Article 125 (1) of the Constitution:

(i) "As the 1st respondent at the material time was holding the office of
Judge of the High Court having been so appointed previously by, His Excellency
the President under Article 111(2) of the Constitution, was the Judicial
Service Commission vested with, power under the Constitution to appoint the
1st respondent as an Additional- District Judge of Colombo as well in order to
deliver judgment in District Court Colombo case No. 2316/Spl or was the said
-Judicial- Service Commission precluded from doing so?

(ii) Could the 5th respondent by virtue of the provisions of Article .114(4)
of the Constitution have appointed the 1st respondent at that time holding the
post of a Judge of the High Court, also Additional District Judge of Colombo
he purports to have done by letter of appointment dated 11th September 1986?

(iii) Having regard to the provisions of the Constitution is it legally
competent for a holder of the office of High Court Judge duly appointed to
that office by His Excellency the President under the provisions of Article
111 (2) of the Constitution to function as a 'Judicial officer' as that
expression is used in Article 114 of the Constitution upon appointment to such
office by the Judicial Service Commission for the ad hoc purpose of continuing
and concluding any case commenced by him previously as such judicial officer?"

**

Held-

**

(1) The Judicial Service Commission was vested with power under Article
1:14(1) read with Article 114(6) of the Constitution to appoint the 1st
respondent, who at the time had been appointed and. was holding the office of
a Judge of the High Court, as - Additional District Judge. of Colombo in order
to deliver judgment in case No.. 2316/Spl. of the District Court of Colombo.

(2) The 5th respondent has no such power under-Article l 14(4) of the
Constitution. In the instant case, however, the appointment of the 1st
respondent was made not by him but by the Judicial Service Commission which
appointment was communicated by him to the 1st respondent by fetter XI.

**193**

(3) It is legally competent; for the holder: of the office of Judge of the
High Court to function as a 'judicial officer upon being appointed as such by
the Judicial Service Commission to enable him to deliver judgment and/or to
continue and conclude a case commenced by him previously as a ' judicial
officer .

**

Cases referred to :

**_

(1) Saravanamuttu v. Saravanamuttu (1960) 61 NLR 1.

(2) Bilimoria v: Commaraswamy C. A. Application No. L/A 89/79 - D. C. Colombo
No. 2579/RE - C.A.-Minutes of 16.01. 1980._ **

REFERENCE** to the Supreme Court. under Article 125 (1) of the Constitution.

_

Dr. H. .W. Jayewardene Q.C. With G, F. Sethukavaler P.C.-L. C Seneviratne
P.C., K. Kanag lswaran P. C., K. M. B. Ahamed A. A.

M. llliyas and Harsha Amerasekera for the Petitioner.

_

S. Marsoof, Senior State Counsel, as amicus curiae for A.G. Tony Fernando,
State Counsel, for the 5th Respondent.

_

H. L. de Silva P.C. with Nihal Fernando with Miss L. N. A. de Silva for the
6th Respondent.

_**

ATUKORALE, J.**

This is a reference made to this Court by the Court of Appeal in terms of
Article 125 of the Constitution seeking a determination of three questions
relating to the interpretation of the Constitution arising out of a proceeding
filed by the petitioner in the Court. of Appeal for an order in the nature of
a writ of Certiorari. Upon, the material placed before us the following facts
emerge: The petitioner on or about `21.7.1983 filed action No. 2316/Spl. in
the District Court of Colombo against the 6th- and 7th respondents alleging an
infringement by them of his rights in respect of the trade mark No. 31953
"RABEA" of which he was the registered owner. In his plaint he prayed .for,
inter alia, a permanent and an interim injunction restraining the two
respondents from applying or using the said word "RABEA" 'in any form of
packet or bag for sale, distribution and/or export of tea. The- District Court
issued, ex parte, an interim injunction as prayed for by the petitioner and
later on made order refusing the 6th respondent's application to suspend the
interim injunction for the limited purpose of enabling him to export a
specified quantity of tea to Egypt. The validity of this order of refusal was
challenged by the 6th respondent in the Court of Appeal by way of Revision -
C.A. No. 1052/83-as well as by way of Leave to Appeal C.A:/L.A. No. 86/83. The
Court of Appeal made, ex parte, order in the Revision

**194**

application to suspend the operation of the interim injunction to the 'extent
and purpose sought for by the 6th respondent. The petitioner then moved the
Court of Appeal to have this order revoked. Having failed in this attempt he
moved this, Court by way of Special Leave to Appeal-S.C. Spl. L/A No. 59/83-to
have the same revoked. On 5.12. 1983 at the hearing into this application this
Court directed the Court of Appeal to hear and determine the two applications`
which were pending before it i.e., the Revision and the Leave to Appeal
Applications: The Court of Appeal after hearing the parties made order on
23.1.1984 refusing both applications vide [1984], 1 Sri L.R. 129. The 6th
respondent then appealed from this order of the Court of Appeal to this Court
which, without proceeding to hear the appeal on the merits, made order
directing that the inquiry into the application to dissolve the interim
injunction and the trial of the action which were both then pending in the
District Court be proceeded with. The two orders made by this Court were, no
doubt, with a view to expeditiously terminating the proceedings that were,
then pending in the District Court. The inquiry and trial came up before the
1st respondent, who was the Additional District Judge of Colombo, having been
duly appointed thereto by the Judicial Service Commission in' terms of Article
114 of-the Constitution. After several dates of hearing the 1st respondent on
20-.6.1986 made order reserving his judgment and, order for 15.9.1986. On
26.6.1986: the 1st respondent was duly appointed a Judge of the High Court by
His Excellency the President in terms of Article 111 (2) of the Constitution.
Consequent on this appointment the 1st respondent was posted as High Court
Judge, Badulla. The 1st respondent on all relevant dates thereafter continued
to hold office of a Judge of the High Court. According to document 5 R 1 (an
extract of the minutes of the meeting of the Judicial Service 'Commission-
hereinafter called the Commission-held on 29.8. 1986 bearing the sub-heading
"Part-heard cases of Judicial Officers" the Commission decided on that date.
to appoint the 1st respondent as Additional District Judge of Colombo to
deliver order, amongst others, in the said: action No. 2316/Spl. of the
District Court of Colombo. On. 11.9.1986 the 5th respondent, the Secretary to
the Commission, addressed the following letter to the 1st respondent:

**Appointment**

I hereby appoint you as Additional District Judge Colombo to deliver judgment
in the cases No. 2316/Spl in addition to your other duties as pleased by the
Judicial Service Commission:"

**195**

On 15.6:1987 the 1st respondent delivered judgment and order in the said case.
He dismissed the petitioner's action and awarded the 6th respondent
compensation in a surfs of Rs. 8 'million by way of reconvention:

The petitioner appealed to the Court of Appeal from this judgment of the 1st
respondent (X4) and further applied to have the tame revised (X5). On
12.8.1987 he also filed in the Court of Appeal an application (No. 875/87)
praying for the issue of an order in the nature of a writ of Certiorari
quashing the judgment and decree and for art order directing that the action
be heard de novo before a duly appointed District Judge who is a judicial
officer within the meaning of. Article 114 of the Constitution. The ground
urged in the writ application for quashing the' judgment and, decree is that
the appointment of the 1st respondent as Additional` District: Judge of
Colombo by letter X1 was contrary to law and null and void and of no legal
effect; mainly for the reason that a Judge of the High Court cannot in law be
appointed at the same time to be or to function as a District or Additional
District Judge and/or be empowered to exercise two jurisdictions concurrently.
This has also been averred as one of the grounds for setting aside the
judgment of the 1st respondent both in the petition of appeal as well as in
the Revision application pending in the Court of Appeal. Mr. A. -L. M.
Fernando, Judge of the High Court; Badulla, is the 1st respondent to the writ
application; the Honourable members of the Commission are the 2nd, 3rd and 4th
respondents; the Secretary to the Commission is the 5th respondent; the party
in whose favour the award of compensation was made is the 6th respondent and
the 7th respondent is the then defendant in the said action who only blended
and packetted the tea of the 6th respondent and made no appearance and took no
part at the trial.

No notice of the writ application appears to have been ordered by the Court of
Appeal to issue on the 2nd, 3rd -and. the 4th respondents. Notice was-ordered
to-be issued on the other respondents and on the Attorney-General as amicus
curiae. On the notice returnable date learned State Counsel appeared for the
5th respondent and stated to court that he does not intend to file objections.
Learned: Senior State Counsel appeared as amicus on behalf of the Attorney-
General. Learned President's Counsel appeared for the. 6th respondent. On this
day learned President's Counsel for the petitioner' intimated to court that it
was necessary for both the petitioner as well as the 6th respondent to submit
to court the constitutional matters upon which a

**196**

determination by the Supreme Court would be required. On 24.11. 1987 learned
President's Counsel for the-: 6th respondent tendered in open court a written
statement containing 3 questions which he submitted should be referred to the
Supreme Court for determination. On 30.11. 1987 the Court of Appeal made the
following, reference to the Supreme Court in terms of Article 125(1) of the
Constitution

" **TO HIS LORDSHIP THE CHIEF JUSTICE AND THE OTHER. HONOURABLE JUDGES OF THE
SUPREME COURT

**

1\. This is an application for an order in the nature of a writ of certiorari
to quash a judgment and decree of the 1st respondent dated 15th June 1987
delivered by him as Additional District Judge of Colombo in District Court
Colombo Case No. 2316/Spl

2\. For the purposes of this reference we consider it useful to set down here
the facts enumerated below which are to be gathered from the papers filed by
the plaintiff petitioner in this court.

  1. ...............
  2. ...............
  3. ...............
  4. ...............
  5. ...............

3\. The petitioner upon a writing filed in these proceedings has suggested two
questions to be referred to the Honourable Supreme Court for determination
under Article 125(1') of the Constitution` and the 6th respondent likewise has
suggested three questions.

4\. Submissions have been made to us by Dr. H. W. Jayewardene O.C. Counsel for
the plaintiff-petitioner and Mr. H. L. de Silva P.C. Counsel for the 6th
respondent. We have also heard Mr. Marsoof, Senior State Counsel, appearing
for the Attorney-General as amicus curiae and Mr. Fernando, State Counsel,
appearing for the 5th respondent. The contention of Messrs Marsoof and
Fernando is to the effect that this 'application is untenable in-law and that,
therefore any questions relating to the interpretation of the Constitution
cannot be thought to arise in the course of proceedings in any such untenable
application.

**197**

5\. We are, however, of the considered view that there are questions here
relating to the interpretation of the Constitution and that they arise in the
course of proceedings in this Court within the meaning of Article 125(1) of
the Constitution. In terms of Article 125(1) of the Constitution the questions
set out below are respectfully referred for determination to Your Lordships'
Court and we respectfully request that upon a determination of such questions
Your Lordships' Court do make any consequential order as the circumstances of
the case may require in terms of Article 125(2) of the Constitution:

(i) As the 1st respondent at the material time was holding the office of Judge
of the High Court having been so appointed previously by His Excellency the
President under Article 111 (2) of the Constitution, was the Judicial Service
Commission vested with power under the Constitution to appoint the 1st
respondent as an Additional District Judge of Colombo as well in order to
deliver judgment in District Court Colombo case No. 2316/Spl. or was the said
Judicial Service Commission precluded from doing so?

(ii) Could the 5th respondent by virtue of the provisions of Article 114(4) of
the Constitution have appointed the 1st respondent at that time holding the
post of a Judge of the High Court, also Additional District Judge of Colombo
as he purports to have done by letter of appointment dated 11th September
1986?

(iii) Having regard to the provisions of the Constitution is it legally
competent for a holder of the office of High Court Judge duly appointed to
that office by His Excellency the President under the provisions of Article
111(2) of the Constitution to function as a 'judicial officer' as that
expression is used in Article 114 of the Constitution upon appointment to such
office by the Judicial Service Commission for the ad hoc purpose of continuing
and concluding any case commenced by him previously as such judicial officer?"

It would appear from the submissions made before us by learned Senior State
Counsel that his contention in the Court of Appeal was that the writ
application is untenable in law for the reason that it is not open to the
petitioner to challenge collaterally the validity of acts done by a de facto
judge under colour of office and that therefore the

**198**

reference to this Court of the constitutional questions would be premature and
unnecessary. It is also pertinent at this stage to note that although in the
statement of objections filed in the Court of Appeal on behalf of the 6th
respondent it was stated that the writ application did not constitute in law a
direct challenge to the 1st respondent's appointment by the Commission but
that it merely averred its invalidity as a ground for quashing the 1st
respondent's judgment which in law, in the absence of an application to
declare the appointment itself null and void or to quash the same or
challenging at the appropriate time the 1st respondent's authority to function
as Additional District Judge, was tantamount to not a direct but only a
collateral attack upon the appointment and jurisdiction of the 1st respondent
and that for this reason the writ application was not maintainable in law, yet
no objection was raised on behalf of the 6th respondent in the Court of Appeal
at any stage to a reference of constitutional matters arising out of the writ
application to the Supreme Court for its determination. On the contrary the
6th respondent in his statement of objections enumerated 3 matters as
requiring to be referred to -the Supreme Court for determination. I make
reference to this fact at this stage of my judgment in view of the suggestion
made by learned President's Counsel for the 6th respondent as well as learned
Senior State Counsel for the 5th respondent that we should, without proceeding
to make our determination upon the reference, direct the Court of Appeal, in
the first instance, to hear and determine the issue regarding the
maintainability of the writ application, a course which, it was urged on their
behalf, would obviate this Court from making constitutional pronouncements
unless they were absolutely necessary. Several decisions (American, Indian and
local) were cited iii support of this contention. Whilst appreciating the
force of this submission I do not, however, think it prudent, in the special
circumstances of this case, to agree to such a course of action. Bearing in
mind the voluminous nature of the evidence recorded in this action and the
multitude and diverse nature of the legal proceedings filed that have been
either disposed of or are still pending, the latter of which have been mainly
directed at showing that the judgment of the 1st respondent is devoid of any
legal effect because of his allegedly defective appointment, and taking into
account the delay and expense already incurred and are likely to be further
incurred in the event of this court, at this stage, refraining from making a
determination on the constitutional issues and also considering the fact that
the parties to the dispute regarding the alleged infringement of trade mark
had

**199**

agreed in the Court of Appeal that certain constitutional issues do arise for
determination by this Court, I think it eminently desirable and even necessary
that we should proceed to make our determination upon the 3 constitutional
questions referred to this Court by the Court of Appeal.

Adverting, firstly to the second formulation aforementioned by the Court of
Appeal it appears to me that whilst on the material placed before the Court of
Appeal, namely document X1, the question so formulated by it is correct, yet
in view of documents 5111 and 5112 which have for the first time been produced
before us it now transpires that there is a factual inaccuracy in this
formulation. 5111 which is an extract of the meeting of the Commission held on
29.8.1986 and the authenticity of which I have no reason to doubt establishes
quite clearly that it is the Commission that decided to appoint the 1st
respondent as Additional District Judge to deliver judgment in the said
District Court action. This is supported by 5112, the extract of the Gazette
notification dated 21.8.1987 in which the appointment was published. As the
genuiness of these two documents was not challenged I accept them as
constituting proof of the fact that the 1st respondent's appointment as
Additional District Judge, Colombo, to deliver judgment in the said action was
made by the Commission and not the 5th respondent. X1 communicating the
appointment to the 1st respondent has been worded very unhappily, the
appointment purporting to have been made by the 5th respondent, who as
Secretary of the Commission enjoyed no power of appointment other than a power
of appointment delegated to him by the Commission in terms of Article 114(4)
of the Constitution prior to its amendment by the 11th Amendment to the
Constitution of 6th May 1987. Under Article 114(4), whether before or after
the 11th Amendment, the 5th respondent had no power to appoint a person to the
substantive post of an Additional District Judge. The appropriate wording of
the Secretary's letter communicating an appointment duly made by the
Commission has been reproduced by Basnayake C.J. in his judgment in
Saravanamuttu v. Saravanamuttu (1) which, I think, could still be followed in
the case of such appointments. Properly worded X 1 should have read that the
Judicial Service, has been pleased to appoint the 1st respondent as Additional
District Judge, Colombo to enable judgment to be delivered in case No.
2316/Spl, of the District Court of Colombo. In the context of the foregoing
facts the 2nd question, as formulated by the Court of Appeal, would not arise
for our determination.

**200**

I shall now turn to the 1st question in the reference, namely, the
constitutional legality or otherwise of the 1st respondent's appointment by
the Commission, of which, in view of the Gazette notification 5R2, this Court
must take judicial notice. This is the substantial matter arising for our
determination. Article 114 (1) of the Constitution vests in the Commission the
power, inter alia, of appointment of 'judicial officers' which expression, for
the purposes of Article 114, is defined in sub-Article (6) as follows:

""judicial officer" does not include a judge of the Supreme Court or of the
Court of Appeal or of the High Court.

In contrast to the definition of the expression 'judicial officer' contained
in Article 170 which includes persons who hold office as Judge of the Supreme
Court, of the Court of Appeal and of the High Court, sub-Article (6) of
Article 114 gives a restrictive meaning to the same expression for the
purposes of that Article. It excludes from the purview of Article 114 the
Judges of the Supreme Court, of the Court of Appeal and of the High Court. The
contention of learned Queen's Counsel for the petitioner is that the power of
appointment conferred on the Commission under Article 114 does not extend to
the power of appointing as a 'judicial officer' a person holding the office of
a Judge of the Supreme Court or of the Court of Appeal or of the High Court
and that, therefore, the Commission had, in the circumstances of this case, no
power to appoint the 1st respondent, who at the time of such appointment on
11.9.1986 was a Judge of the High Court, as a 'judicial officer', namely, as
Additional District Judge. Placing very much reliance on the definition of
judicial officer in Article 114 (6) which seeks to exclude, inter alia, a
Judge of the High Court he maintained that the Commission is powerless to
appoint a Judge of the High Court as a judicial officer, and that, therefore,
the 1st respondent's appointment was bad. I am unable to accept this
contention. There can be no doubt that a District or Additional District Judge
is a judicial officer within the meaning or Article 114(6). Thus undoubtedly
the appointment of the 1st respondent as an Additional District Judge (prior
to his appointment as a Judge of the High Court) by the Commission was a valid
appointment. It is equally clear that the Commission has no power to appoint a
person (whether already a judicial officer within the meaning of Article 114
(6) or not) to the office of a Judge of the High Court or of the Court of
Appeal or of the Supreme Court. Such an appointment can only be made by His
Excellency the President under Article 111 (2) or Article 107 (1) as the

**201**

case may be. The question then is whether the Commission is empowered to
appoint or precluded from appointing the 1st respondent as an Additional
District Judge of Colombo in terms of Article 114(1) while he was holding the
office of Judge of the High Court having been appointed thereto by His
Excellency the President under Article 111 (2). In my view the definition of
judicial officer in Article 114(6) does not, expressly or impliedly, prohibit
the Commission from making the appointment. In the case of .a Judge of the
Supreme Court or of the Court of Appeal Article 110 (2) of the Constitution
expressly prohibits him from performing any other office (whether paid or not)
or accepting any place of profit or employment. -  But in the case of a Judge
of the High Court there is no similar prohibition in the Constitution. It is,
in my view, erroneous to construe the definition of 'judicial Officer' in
Article 114(6) as precluding the Commission from appointing a person already
holding the office of a Judge of the High Court as a judicial officer. The
definition does not purport to prescribe the categories or classes of persons
who are ineligible for appointment as judicial officers by the Commission but
only stipulates the categories of judicial office to which the Commission may
not make appointments. Whilst Article 107 (1) deals with the appointment of
Judges of the Supreme Court and of the Court of Appeal and Article 111 (2)
deals with the appointment of Judges of the High Court, Article 114 (1) deals
with the appointment of judicial officers other than those referred to in
Articles 107 (1) and 111 (2). This construction gains support from the
marginal note to Article 114 which reads 'appointment to other judicial
offices' which in the context of Articles 107 (1) and 111 (2) can only mean to
judicial offices other than those referred to in those two Articles. The
purpose and effect of the definition of judicial officer in Article 114(6) is
to circumscribe the classes of judicial office to which the Commission could
lawfully make appointments. This object has been achieved by excluding from
the definition the offices of Judges of the Supreme Court, of the Court of
Appeal and of the High Court, appointments to which could only be made by His
Excellency the President. Whilst the definition of 'judicial officer'
contained in Article 170 embraces every type of judicial office the
distinction sought to be drawn in the definition of this expression in Article
114(6) is between two categories of judicial office, namely, the offices in
respect of which His Excellency the President is the appointing authority and
those in respect of which the Commission is the appointing authority. There is
no constitutional impediment to His Excellency the President

**202**

appointing, for instance, a District or Additional District Judge as a Judge
of the Supreme Court or of the Court of Appeal or of the High Court. Equally
there seems to me to be no such impediment to the Commission appointing a
Judge of the High Court to be a District or Additional District Judge although
in the case of Judges of the Supreme Court and the Court of Appeal the
provisions of Article 110(2) would operate as a constitutional bar to the
Commission making such appointments. I am therefore of the view that the
contention of learned Queen's Counsel for the petitioner that the power of
appointment vested in the Commission by virtue of Article 114 (1) does not
extend to the power to appoint a Judge of the High Court as a judicial officer
is unsustainable. In my view the Commission was vested with the power under
the Constitution to appoint the 1st respondent as an Additional District Judge
and Article 114 (1) read with Article 114 (6) did not preclude the Commission
from making the appointment. I answer the 1st question referred for our
determination accordingly. I may add this identical question arose for
consideration by the Court of Appeal in Bilimoria v. Coomaraswamy (2). In that
case after the trial commenced in the District Court before the District Judge
he was appointed a Judge of the High Court by His Excellency the President.
Thereafter on 23.1 1.1978 the Judicial Service Commission appointed him as
Additional District Judge for the purpose of hearing and concluding that
particular case. Objection was taken before him on the ground that he had no
jurisdiction to hear and conclude the case. He overruled the objection. On an
application for leave to appeal from this order of the Additional District
Judge, it was urged on behalf of the petitioner by Mr. H. L. de Silva (learned
President's Counsel appearing for the 6th respondent in the present
proceedings before us) that a question relating to the interpretation of the
Constitution arose in relation to the validity or otherwise of the appointment
of the Additional District Judge by the Judicial Service Commission. The Court
of Appeal rejected this submission and held that the application of Article
114 would lead to the conclusion that the appointment was a valid one.
Accordingly leave to appeal was refused. Learned Queen's Counsel appearing for
the petitioner in the present proceedings before us appeared for the
respondent in that application before the Court of Appeal. Having myself
associated with that judgment in the Court of Appeal I am happy to be able to
state that a fuller consideration of the issue in this case has convinced me
that the view expressed by the Court of Appeal upholding the validity of the
appointment is correct.

**203**

I now turn to the last question in the reference. What is sought to be
ascertained there is the legal competence of the holder of the office of a
Judge of the High Court to function as a 'judicial officer' upon an
appointment made thereto by the Commission having regard to the provisions of
the Constitution. The specific constitutional provisions, if any, which relate
to this matter have not been specified in the reference. Nor has our attention
been invited at the hearing to any constitutional provision pertaining thereto
other than those which have already been considered by me in relation to the
1st question aforementioned. It seems to me that the ambit of the two
questions (the 1st and the 3rd) and the constitutional provisions applicable
thereto are the same. I would therefore, in accordance with my answer to the
1st question, answer the last question in the affirmative. It was urged upon
us by learned Queen's Counsel that the Commission had no power to limit
judicial power or its exercise when appointing a 'judicial officer' which, he
alleged, was what the Commission precisely did by appointing the 1st
respondent to deliver judgment in specified cases. Objection was taken by
learned President's Counsel to this question being raised for the first time
in this Court without it being referred by the Court of Appeal for a
determination. I think this objection is sound and must be upheld. However
upon a perusal of the appointment of the 1st respondent by the Commission I
can perceive no such limitation or curtailment of judicial power or any kind
of restriction in its exercise. I agree that the Commission can neither limit
nor extend, in the terms of the appointment or otherwise, powers which the law
confers on or vests in the office to which a 'judicial officer' is appointed.
The appointment carries with it all the powers and jurisdictions which the law
vests in the office to which the appointment is made. Any purported limitation
or extension of power in the appointment is thus bad and of no legal
consequence. The note in the remarks column of the 1st respondent's
appointment to the effect that the appointment is to enable him to deliver
judgment in certain cases is only explanatory of the appointment and does not,
in any way, constitute a limitation of the powers of or their exercise by the
1st respondent.

On the basis of the above reasoning this Court determines the questions
referred to it by the Court of Appeal in the following manner:

1\. The Judicial Service Commission was vested with power under Article 114(1)
read with Article 114(6) of the Constitution to appoint the 1st respondent,
who at the time had been

**204**

appointed and was holding the office of a Judge of the High Court, as
Additional District Judge of Colombo in order to deliver judgment in case No.
2316/Spl. of the District Court of Colombo.

2\. The 5th respondent has no such power under Article 114(4) of the
Constitution. In the instant case, however, the appointment of the 1st
respondent was made not by him but by the Judicial Service Commission which
appointment was communicated by him to the 1st respondent by letter X 1.

3\. It is legally competent for the holder of the office of Judge of the High
Court to function as a 'judicial officer' upon being appointed as such by the
Judicial Service Commission to enable him to deliver judgment and/or to
continue and conclude a case commenced by him previously as a 'judicial
officer'.

In the light of the aforesaid determination made by this Court, the Court of
Appeal is directed to make order dismissing the application of the petitioner
bearing No. C.A. Application No. 875/87 for a Writ of Certiorari with costs
therein payable by the petitioner to the 5th and 6th respondents. The
Registrar of this Court will forward this determination and the consequential
order to the Court of Appeal.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J**. -I agree.

**

G. P. S. DE SILVA, J**. -I agree.

_

Case sent back with answers to questions referred.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/24.html_  

