##  Kumarasinghe v. Ratnakumara and Others - SLR - 393, Vol 2 of 1983 [1983]
LKSC 24; (1983) 2 Sri LR 393 (17 November 1983)

**  393 **

**  KUMARASINGHE**

**v.**

**RATNAKUMARA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, A.C.J.

COLIN THOME J. and

ABDUL CADER J.

S.C. APPLICATION 57/83

NOVEMBER 17, 1983.



    Supreme Court Rules 1978, Rules 65(1)‑Affidavit ‑ Should petitioner himself file his own affidavit?



# Held ‑



Rule 65(1) (a) of the Supreme Court Rules, says that a petitioner complaining
of infringement of a fundamental right shall support his petition by an
affidavit. It does not predicate that the person swearing the affidavit must
be the petitioner himself.



Affidavit in support of the application serves the purpose of proof of facts
stated therein. It furnishes the evidence verifying the allegation of facts
contained in the petition. Affidavit evidence carries equal sanctity as oral
evidence. While a stranger cannot make an affidavit it need not be made by the
party individually but may be made by any person personally aware of the
facts. The Court is entitled to have the best evidence before it; where there
exist evidence which is firsthand it will be most unsatisfactory to place
before court evidence of any other description. Ordinarily a petitioner is the
best person who can speak to the facts and verify the facts averred in the
petition; then, it is he who should file affidavit in support of the said
facts; but if there are other witnesses too who can, to their personal
knowledge, depose to those facts there is no bar to their filing affidavits in
support of the petition, in addition to or in substitution for the
petitioner's affidavit. But if the petitioner does not file his own affidavit
verifying the facts, which he is personally conversant with, then the Court
would be extremely reluctant to grant relief. But the petitioner may be
excused from filing an affidavit if for some good reason or ground, he is
unable to do so.



Cases referred to:



1. _Samarawickrema v. The Attorney ‑ General_ 1983 Srikantha Law Reports 47



2. _Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali_ 1981 2 Sri L.R. 29, 32



3\. _Nicholas v. O. L. M. Macan Markar Ltd_ 1981 2 Sri LR 1



4\. _Re Cohen_ 1950 2 all ER 36, 37



#  394



5\. _Simeon Fernando v. Gunasekera_ 47 NLR 512, 514



6\. _In re Young Manufacturing Co. Ltd._ 1980 2 Ch. 753



**PRELIMINARY OBJECTION** to application complaining of infringement of
fundamental rights.



_N. Senanayake, S.A._ with _Faiz Mustapha, M. L. M. Samarasinghe_ and _Miss.
A. D Telespha,_ instructed by _A. G. Raamuni_ for petitioner



_G. D. C._ _Weerasinghe_ with _Danny de Silva_ for 1 to 4 respondents,



_S. W B. Wadugodapitiya,_ Additional Solicitor‑General with _T A.
Kaluaratchchi,_ S.C. for 5 to 7 respondents.



## Cur. adv. vult



29 November, 1983.

**  
SHARVANANDA, A.C.J.,**



At the commencement of the hearing of the application a preliminary objection
was raised by the Addl. Solicitor‑General that the petitioner's application
does not conform to the requirements of Rule 65(1) of the Supreme Court Rules
of 1978; in that, the petition of the petitioner has not been supported by the
affidavit of the petitioner. He pointed out that though there are appended to
the petition the affidavits of petitioner's brother Rajasinghe Bandara and his
mother Manoli Dharmadasa, the petitioner has failed to file his own affidavit
verifying the facts pleaded by him in his petition. He has contended that it
is an imperative requirement of the Rule 65(1) (a) and (c), that the
petitioner should support his petition with his own affidavit. He has referred
us to the judgment in _Samarawickrema v. The Attorney ‑ General _(1), _Rasheed
Ali v. Mohamed Ali_ (2) and _Nicholas v. C. L. M. Macan Markar Ltd.,_ (3)
which held that the Supreme Court rules are mandatory in nature and that
non­-compliance with same will result in the application being rejected.



Rule 65(1) of the Supreme Court Rules (1978) states‑



"(1) Where any person applies to the Supreme Court by petition in writing for
relief or redress in respect of infringement



#  395



......of a fundamental right .......... by executive or administrative action,
in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution he shall‑



(a) in his petition set out all relevant facts to show what fundamental right
he claims to have and all facts to show what infringement of such right has
been made and details of executive or administrative action, which he alleges
to have been taken in infringement of his fundamental rights.



(b) .........................



(c) _Support the petition by an affidavit and other documentary material
available to him. "_



The Addl  Solicitor‑General's preliminary objections involve the question
whether under the above rules the petitioner is required to file In support of
his petition, his own affidavit and it is not sufficient if the petition is
supported by the affidavit of some person who is personally aware of the facts
referred to in the petition.



"An affidavit is an oath in writing signed by the party deposing, sworn before
and attested by him who had authority to administer the same. " 1 Bacon's
Abridgement 124.



An affidavit is a declaration as to facts made in writing and sworn before a
person having authority to administer an oath.



Any particular fact may be proved by an affidavit. The law provides for the
admissibility, in certain circumstances, of evidence by affidavit. The
evidence given by way of an affidavit is a substitute for testimony given by
word of mouth. The affidavit can be used as evidence of facts stated therein.
Any person acquainted with the facts may give the affidavit. An affidavit is
only intended to satisfy the Court, prima facie, that the



#  396



allegations in the application are true so that the Court may take legal
action such as issuing notice on the opposite party on the basis of the
evidence, provided by the affidavit. If the allegation of fact made in an
affidavit in support of the application is not refuted by counter affidavit by
the opposite party, then the allegation in the application is treated as true.
Affidavit in support of the application thus serves the purpose of proof of
facts stated therein. It furnishes the evidence verifying the allegation of
facts contained in the petition. Affidavit evidence carries equal sanctity as
oral evidence.



As relevantly stated by Evershed M.R., in _Re. Cohen_ (4)‑



"Affidavit evidence can only be entitled to the same weight as oral evidence,
when those who swear the affidavit realise that the obligation of the oath is
as serious when making an affidavit as to when making statements in the
witness box. "



 Section 179 of the Civil Procedure Code provides:



" that the court may at any time for sufficient reasons order that any
particular fact or facts may be proved by affidavit, instead of by the
testimony of witnesses given _viva voce_ before it. "



Section 181 of the Civil Procedure Code further provides that



" affidavits shall be confined to the statement of such facts as the declarant
is able of his own knowledge and observation to testify to except on
interlocutory applications in which statement of his belief may be committed,
provided that reasonable grounds for such belief is set forth in the
affidavit. "



An affidavit which does not comply with the requirements of section 181 does
not furnish the necessary proof ‑ vide _Simeon Fernando v. Gunasekera,_ (5).
An affidavit of information



**  397**



and belief, not stating the source of the information or belief is irregular ‑
In _Re. Young Manufacturing Co. Ltd._ (6).



While a stranger cannot make an affidavit it need not be made by the party
individually, but may be made by any person who is personally aware of the
facts. The court is entitled to have the best evidence before it; where there
exists evidence which is first‑hand it will be most unsatisfactory to place
before court evidence of any other description. Ordinarily a petitioner is the
best person who can speak to the facts and verify the facts averred in the
petition; then, it is he who should file the affidavit in support of the said
facts; but if there are other witnesses too who can, to their personal
knowledge, depose to those facts there is no bar to their filing affidavits in
support of the petition, in addition to or in substitution for the
petitioner's affidavit. But if the petitioner does not file his own affidavit
verifying the facts, which he is personally conversant with, then the court
would be extremely reluctant to grant relief. But the petitioner may be
excused from filing an affidavit, if for some good reason or ground, he is
unable to do so.



The Addl. Solicitor‑General's objection postulates our reading into rule 65(1)
(a) words which are not there. The rule says that the petitioner shall support
his petition by an affidavit. It does not predicate that the person swearing
the affidavit must be the petitioner himself.



The petitioner in his petition refers to complaints of his having been
assaulted on the 21st August 1983 and on 26th August 1983. The petitioner's
brother and mother, in their affidavits, state they are eye‑witnesses to the
assault on the 21st August 1983. They do not claim to be witnesses to the
alleged assault on the petitioner at the Vavuniya Police Station on the 26th
August, 1983. But they state that they visited the petitioner at the Vavuniya
Hospital on the 27th August 1983, and saw the petitioner, who according to
them was "unconscious and in a critical condition, his face was swollen beyond
recognition and lip damaged." They speak to the tell‑tale marks on the



#  398



petitioner's body which they saw on that day. The petitioner in his petition
by his attorney‑at-law has stated in paragraph 24 that " a police guard
consisting of two armed policemen has been posted at his bed at the Vavuniya
hospital throughout the day and night and that he requested the said police
guard to permit and/or obtain permission for a Justice of the Peace to be
taken before the petitioner, for the purpose of signing an affidavit, but was
refused.



The submission of the Addl. Solicitor‑General that the application under
Article 126(2) of the Constitution should always be supported by the
petitioner's affidavit and failure to file such an affidavit entails the
consequence of the application being rejected cannot be sustained and hence we
overrule the preliminary objection.



**COLIN ‑THOME. J.** ‑ I agree



**ABDUL CADER, J.** ‑ I agree



_Preliminary objection overruled_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/24.html_  

