##  Wijetunge v. Insurance Corporation and Another - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 1982
[1982] LKSC 24; (1982) 1 Sri LR 1 (1 January 1982)

**1**  

**WIJETUNGA**

**v.**

**INSURANCE CORPORATION AND ANOTHER**



SUPREME COURT.

SHARVANANDA, A.C.J., COLIN‑THOME, J. AND SOZA, J.

S. C. APPLICATION No. 87/82.

NOVEMBER 11 AND 15, 1982.



Application to the Supreme Court under Article 126 and Article 17 of the
Constitution ‑Fundamental rights of freedom of speech and expression including
publication and freedom to join a Trade Union under Article 14 (1) (a) and 14
(1) (d) of the Constitution‑Does alleged violation of these rights by the
Insurance Corporation amount to Infringement by executive or administrative
action?



The petitioner was an employee of the Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka and
Organising Secretary of the Insurance Employees' Union, a trade union
registered under the Trade Union Ordinance. On a decision of the Committee of
the Union to launch a poster campaign in order to focus attention on the
grievances of the employees the members of the Union including the petitioner
had put up posters which the Insurance Corporation alleged were obnoxious and
calculated to incite disaffection and in discipline among its employees and to
bring its Chairman into disrepute. Charges were framed against the petitioner
for putting up such posters and he was found guilty at a domestic inquiry ; by
way of punishment his increments for two years were suspended and he was
warned and transferred from the Head Office at Colombo to the Regional Office
of the Corporation at Batticaloa. This punishment the petitioner alleged was
an infringement of his fundamental rights of freedom of speech and expression
including publication and of the freedom to join a trade union guaranteed to
him by Article 14 (1) ( _a_ ) and 14 (1) ( _d_ ) of the Constitution.



The Insurance Corporation (1st respondent) while justifying the punishment
imposed on the petitioner took the preliminary objection that his application
was misconceived on the ground that its action did not amount to " executive
or administrative action " in respect of which only the jurisdiction vested in
the Supreme Court by Article 126 of the Constitution could be invoked by an
aggrieved person.



# Held

(1) Article 126 read with Article 17 entitles a person to apply for relief to
the Supreme Court only where his fundamental rights guaranteed by Chapter 3 of
the Constitution have been infringed by executive or administrative action of
the State. Private conduct abridging fundamental rights does not attract the
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court vested in it by Article 126.

# 2

  
(2) In the context of fundamental rights the "State"  includes every
repository of state power. The expression  "executive or administrative
action"  embraces executive action of the State or its instrumentalities
exercising Government functions. When private individuals or groups are
endowed by the State with power or functions governmental in nature, they
become agencies or instrumentalities of the State subject to the
constitutional inhibitions imposed on the State. The decisive question is,
what is the involvement of the State in the activity of the party concerned ?



(3) Whether a Corporation should be accorded the status of a department of
Government or not depends on its constitution, its powers, duties and
activities and must be judged in the light of the following :



( _a_ )        First the incorporation of the Body though not determinative is
of some significance as an indication by Parliament of its intention to create
a legal entity with a personality of its own, distinct from the State.



( _b_ )        Secondly the degree of control exercised by the Minister on the
functioning of the Corporation is a very relevant factor. A complete
dependence on him marks it as really a Governmental body, while comparative
freedom to pursue its administration is an element negating the intention to
constitute it a government agency.



(c)        Third is the degree of dependence of the Corporation on the
Government for its financial needs.



The various sections of the Insurance Corporation Act, No. 2 of 1961
conspicuously contain no direct indication that the Corporation is a
Department of Government. It carries on a commercial activity. Its powers do
not identify it with the Government and in some respects preclude
identification with the Government. The object and purpose of the statute was
the creation of an autonomous public body carrying on its business activity,
free from ministerial control except as to broad lines of policy.



The question whether the Insurance Corporation is a servant of the State
ultimately depends on the degree of control which the State through its
Ministers can exercise over it in the performance of its duties. Even if the
Minister has the power to interfere with it, there is nothing in the statute
which makes the acts of administration his as distinct from those of the
Corporation ; it is true the Minister appoints its members and the Corporation
in the exercise of its powers and the performance of its duties, is subject to
the general or special directions of the Minister. But these even when taken
together do not outweigh the fact that the Act confers on the Corporation
powers which are given to it to be exercised at its own discretion and in its
own name.



Whether we apply the functional test or the Government control test, the
Insurance Corporation cannot be identified with the Government. It cannot be
regarded as its alter ego or organ of the State. Hence its action cannot be
designated " executive or administrative action " which alone attracts
Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution.

**3**  


**Cases referred to**



(1)        _Perera v. University Grants Commission S.C. No. 57/80 S.C. Minutes
of   4.8.1980._

(2) _         Narayanasamy v. Krishnamoorthy A. I. R. [1958] Madras 343._

(3) _         Tamlin v. Hannaford [1950] 1 K. B. 181, 1949 2 All E. R.
327,329._

(4) _         B. B. C. v. Johns [1964] 1 All E. R. 923._

(5) _         Mersey Docks & Harbour Board Trustees v. Gibbs [1966]. L. R. 1
H. L. 93._

(6) _         Metropolitan Meat Industry Board v. Sheedy [1927] A. C. 890,
905._

(7) _         Bank Voor Handel v. Administrator of Hungarian Properties [1954]
A. C. 584, [1954] 1 All E.R. 969._

(8) _         Ceylon Bank Employees' Union v. Yatawara [1962] 64 NLR 49 _

(9) _         Trendtex Trading Corporation v. Central Bank [19 77] 1 All E. R.
881_

(10) _       Dahanayake v. de Silva [1978/79] 1 S. L. R. 41._

(11) _       Kameshwar Prasad v. State of Bihar AIR [1962] S. C. 1167._

(12) _       The First National City Bank v. Commissioner of Income Tax,
Bombay City AIR [1961] S C. 812._

(13) _       Balakotaiah v. Union of India AIR [1958] S.C. 232._

_  _

**APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.



_Faiz Mustapha_ with _Chula Boange_ and _N. M. Saheed_ for petitioner.



_K. Kanag ‑Iswaran_ with _Miss Kalyani Silva_ for 1st respondent.



_Sun Ratnapala, Acting Senior State Counsel,_ for 2nd respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._



November 29, 1982.

**  **

**SHARVANANDA, A. C. J.**

_  _

This is an application made to this Court by the petitioner who is an employee
of the 1st respondent, the Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka, for relief
under Article 126 of the Constitution. He alleges that his fundamental rights
of freedom of speech and expression including publication and of his freedom
to join a trade union, assured to him by  Article 14(1) ( _a_ ) and 14 (1 ) (
_d_ ) of the Constitution have been infringed by the Insurance Corporation.



The petitioner complains that the Corporation has suspended his increments and
has warned him and transferred him to Batticaloa, in breach of his fundamental
rights guaranteed to him by Article 14 (1) ( _a_ ) and/or 14 (1) ( _d_ ) of
the Constitution on the allegations that

**4**

he had put up posters in violation of the rules of discipline and code of
conduct of the employees of the Corporation, and had also put up obnoxious
posters with the intention of bringing into disrepute the Chairman of the
Insurance Corporation. The petitioner is the Organising Secretary of the
Insurance Employees Union, a trade union registered under the Trade Union
Ordinance. He states that the Committee of the Union, in the exercise of their
right of trade union activity, had decided to launch a poster campaign in
order to focus attention on the grievances of the employees and in pursuance
of the said decision of the Trade Union, members of the Union had put up
posters.



The 1st respondent, the Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka, is a Corporation
established by the Insurance Corporation Act No.2 of 1961. It is a body
corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal and entitled to sue
and be sued in its name viz: " The Insurance Corporation of Ceylon ".



The 1st respondent by affidavit filed by its Personal Manager has averred that
large posters had been put in the premises of the 1st respondent, carrying
slogans which were obnoxious and calculated to incite fellow workers to
disaffection and in discipline and that the petitioner participated in putting
up the said posters. He further stated that charges were framed against the
petitioner for putting up such posters and the petitioner was found guilty as
charged at a domestic inquiry and that the Corporation had, by way of
punishment, suspended his increments for a period of two years and transferred
him out of the Head Office in Colombo to the Regional Office of the
Corporation at Batticaloa.



The 1st respondent has, while justifying the punishment imposed on the
petitioner, taken objection, in limine, that the petitioner's application
under Article 126 of the Constitution was misconceived, on the ground that its
action did not savor of " executive or administrative action " in respect of
which only the jurisdiction vested in the Supreme Court by Article 126 of the
Constitution could be invoked by an aggrieved person.



Since the objection goes to the root question of the jurisdiction of this
Court, it is necessary to examine its validity

# 5  


Article 126 read with Article 17 entitles a person to apply to the Supreme
Court only in respect of the infringement or imminent infringement by _ "
executive or administrative action " _of the fundamental rights to which such
person is entitled under the provisions of Chap.3 of the Constitution. The
jurisdiction of the Supreme Court to grant relief against any infringement or
imminent infringement of the fundamental rights recognised by Chap.3 of the
Constitution is limited to cases of such infringement by " executive or
administrative action ". Private conduct abridging individual rights does not
attract the jurisdiction of this Court vested in it under Article 126. In this
connection I would reiterate what I said in _Perera v. University Grants
Commission_ (1).



" Constitutional guarantees of fundamental rights are directed against the
State and its organs. Only infringement or imminent infringement by executive
or administrative action of any fundamental right or language right can form
the subject matter of a complaint under Article 126 of the Constitution. The
wrongful act of any individual, unsupported by State authority is simply a
private wrong. Only if it is sanctioned by the State or done by the State
authority, does it constitute a matter for complaint under Article 126.
Fundamental rights operate only between individuals and the State. In the
context of fundamental rights the " State " includes every repository of State
power. The expression " executive or administrative action " embraces
executive action of the State or its agencies or instrumentalities exercising
Governmental functions. It refers to exertion of State power in all its forms
".



Therefore individual invasion of individual rights does not come within the
remedial protection afforded by Article 126.



The Constitution protects fundamental rights by imposing restrictions or
obligations on the Government. Article 4 ( _d_ ) of the Constitution enjoins
that " the fundamental rights which are by the Constitution declared and
recognised, shall be respected, secured and advanced by all organs of
Government, and shall not be abridged, restricted or denied, save in the
manner and to the extent hereinafter provided ". All organs of Government are
mandated to respect the fundamental rights referred to in Chap.3 of the
Constitution and are prohibited from infringing same. Action by the

# 6  


 organs of the Government alone constitutes the executive or administrative
action that is a sine qua non or basic to proceedings under Article 126.



The term " executive action " comprehends official actions of all Government
Officers. Difficult problems arise when the label is sought to be affixed to
the conduct of private individuals with whom Government is somehow " involved
", who allegedly exercise Government authority. Delegation of a State function
to a party may make the party's action, the action of the Government and thus
make the State responsible for such action. The decisive question is what is
the involvement of the State, in the activity of the party concerned. When
private individuals or groups are endowed by the State with power or
functions, governmental in nature, they become agencies or instrumentalities
of the State subject to the constitutional inhibitions of the State. The
inquiry is whether there is a sufficiently close nexus between the State and
the action of the agencies that is challenged, so that the action of the
agencies may fairly be treated as that of the State itself. Thus the relevant
question is what is the relationship between the particular Corporation whose
acts are challenged and the State? Is it a Department of Government or servant
or instrumentality of the State? Whether the Corporation should be accorded
the status of a department of government or not must depend on its
Constitution, its powers, duties and activities. These are the basic factors
to be considered. One must see whether the Corporation is under government
control or exercises governmental functions. For determining the integral
relationship between the State and the Corporation we have to examine the
provisions of the statute by which the Corporation has been established. If
the statute in terms answers the question, there is no need for further
inquiries, but in the absence of such statutory declaration or provision the
intention of Parliament has to be gathered from the provisions of the statute
constituting the Corporation. These provisions have to be judged in the light
of the following:



( _a_ )        First the incorporation of the Body though not determinative is
of some significance as an indication of Parliament of its intention to create
a legal entity with a personality of its own, distinct from the State.

**  7 **



( _b_ )        Secondly the degree of control exercised by the Minister over
the functioning of the Corporation is a very relevant factor. A complete
dependence on him marks it, as really a Governmental body, while comparative
freedom to pursue its administration is treated as an element negativing
intention to constitute it a Government agency.



( _c_ )        Third is the degree of dependence of the Corporation on the
Government for its financial needs.



_Vide ‑Narayanasamy v. Krishnamoorthy_ (2).



The question whether the Insurance Corporation of Sri Lanka is or is not
virtually a department of the State or a servant of the Government would be
dependent on the provisions of the Insurance Corporation Act No. 2 of 1961.
Hence we have to analyse them to determine the nature of its functions, the
precise degree of control exercised by the Government over it and whether the
amount of control establishes the identity of the Corporation as part of the
Government.



The preamble to the Act states, inter alia, that it is an Act to provide for
the establishment of an Insurance Corporation, for carrying on exclusively the
business of life insurance  and carrying on in addition insurance business of
every other description. Section 2 of the Act provides that the Corporation
shall consist of five members appointed by the Minister, one of whom shall be
designated, Chairman of the Corporation. Any member of the Corporation may be
removed from office by the Minister, if the Minister considers that it is
expedient to remove such person from office.



Section 5 provides for the functions of the Corporation. It states that the
Corporation shall carry on Insurance business of every description, including
the business of insuring, inter alia‑



( _a_ )        any property of the Crown or of any Corporation the entirety of
whose capital is provided by the Government‑



( _b_ ) (i)   Head of any Government Department or any such Corporation as
aforesaid, against any loss caused to such Head in his official capacity or to
such Corporation by the fraud of any employee of the Corporation.

  **  8**

> > (ii) In respect of any liability which may be incurred by the Crown or
> such Corporation in consequence of the death of or bodily injury to, any
> employee of the Corporation.



( _c_ ) The Secretary to the Treasury or the Head of any Government Department
on      behalf of the Government against any loss which may be insured by the
Government as a result of failure of any Government Servant or any Public
Servant, employee in the department to repay any loan to him by the
Government.



Section 6 enumerates the powers of the Corporation‑



( _a_ )        The Corporation has power to acquire and dispose of any movable
and immovable property.



( _b_ )        Reinsure with any Insurer any liability arising out of any
policy of Insurance issued by the Corporation.



( _c_ )        To accept reinsurance of any liability arising out of any
policy of insurance issued by any other insurer.



( _d_ )        To transact such other business as may seem to the Corporation
to be capable of being conveniently carried on in connection with the
Insurance business carried on by the Corporation and to be conducive directly
or indirectly to render profitable the latter business.



( _e_ )        To invest the moneys of the Corporation in such manner as may
be determined by the Corporation with the approval of the Minister.



( _f_ )        To establish and maintain a Provident Fund for the persons
employed in the Corporation and to make contributions to such fund.



( _g_ )        To do all other things which in the opinion of the Corporation
are necessary to facilitate the proper carrying on of its business.



( _h_ )        To borrow money for the purposes of the Corporation in such
manner and upon such security as the Corporation may determine with the
approval of the Minister.



According to section 7, the Corporation has power to appoint such officers and
servants as may be necessary for the purpose of the Corporation, and to
exercise disciplinary control of and dismiss



##  9



any officer or servant of the Corporation, provided that the Corporation shall
not dismiss without the approval of the Minister any officer or servant who
has been appointed to the staff of the Corporation from the Public Service.



Section 8 provides that in the exercise of its powers and the performance of
its duties the Corporation shall be subject to and act in accordance with such
general or special directions as the Minister may issue from time to time.



Section 17 provides that the initial capital of the Corporation shall be
twenty million rupees and that the amount of the initial capital shall be paid
to the Corporation out of the Consolidated Fund of Ceylon, in such instalments
as the Minister of Finance may in consultation with the Minister determine. It
also provides that the Corporation could increase its capital with the
approval of the Minister.



Section 18 provides that the Corporation shall have its own Fund, into which
all the moneys of the Corporation shall be paid and out of which all sums of
money required for the discharge of the liabilities of the Corporation shall
be paid out.



Section 21 provides that the accounts shall be audited by an auditor appointed
by the Permanent Secretary to the Ministry. Section 23 requires the
Corporation to transmit the Auditor's Report with the profit and loss account
and the balance sheet to which the report relates and a statement of the
Corporation's activities, to the Minister, who shall cause copies thereof to
be laid before Parliament.



Section 26 provides that the net annual profit of the Corporation for each
financial year may be applied to such purpose s as may be determined by the
Corporation with the approval of the Minister.



Section 27 states that the profits of the Corporation shall be exempt from
income tax.



The Insurance Corporation being a Public Corporation within the meaning of
"Public Corporation" as defined by Article 170 of the Constitution, its
accounts are required by Article 154 to be audited by the Auditor‑General.

# 10  


 The totality of the legislation represents the intention and objectives of
those who created and moulded the Corporation for the performance of its
contemplated function of Insurance. The various sections of the Act
conspicuously contain no direct indication that the Corporation is a
Department of Government. On the other hand there are very many indications
which deny it that status. It carries on a commercial activity. Its very name,
has a commercial ring. Its powers do not identify it with the Government and
in some respect preclude identification with the Government.



Section 5 which provides for the Corporation insuring the property of the
State and of Heads of Government Departments against any loss caused to such
Heads in their official capacity or in respect of any liability which may be
incurred by the Crown etc., affords an instance of explicit differentiation
between the role and personality of the Corporation on the one hand and
government on the other. The Corporation carries on business on its own
account and not on behalf of the State, even though according to section 33A
of the Act, all liabilities of the Corporation, arising out of policies issued
by the Corporation are guaranteed by the Government.



it is a matter of significance that the Corporation employs its own servants
and officers and exercises disciplinary control over them. Its servants and
officers do not belong to the Public Service.



By this legislation Life Insurance became a nationalised business and private
enterprise was excluded from this field. Though the Government nationalised
the business, it did not desire to conduct the business itself and assume the
responsibility for its day‑to‑day administration. For this purpose Parliament
created an autonomous Corporation whilst reserving sufficient power to control
and guide its general policy in the Government. The object and purpose of the
statute was the creation of an autonomous public body carrying on its business
activity free from Ministerial control, except as to broad lines of policy. It
was this freedom that was sought to be achieved by the creation of a separate
legal entity in the form of a statutory Corporation. The consequence was to
remove the Corporation from its character as a Government Department. In these
circumstances it cannot be regarded as either a Government Department or a
servant or agent of the Government so as to be identified with the Government.



# 11



            Where the employer is a department of the Government no question of a separate legal entity arises. The question however becomes different when the business is carried on through a separate legal person e.g. Statutory Corporations, because in such a case the employee is a servant of a legal entity other than the Government.



During the 19th century the idea that the traditional functions of the State
consisted merely of the maintenance of law and order and administration of
justice within its boundaries gave way to what was designated as its secondary
non‑traditional functions undertaking of activities which are part of social
service, the provision to its citizens of economic security and well being.
Though at one time these beneficient activities were treated as though they
were unessential functions of the State, in post‑war times they have
over‑shadowed what might be termed purely police functions of the State with
the result that the State is now emerging as the potent instrument of national
welfare, a transformation from a police to a welfare state entailing a great
increase in the departments of government. Attempts to confine the services of
the Government to those provided in the 19th  century have become out of date.
This extension of governmental activity has resulted in the widening of the
province of government. Article 27 of the Constitution which embodies a
directive principle of State policy reflects this change quality wise in the
concept of State functions. It is in pursuance of this new ideology that
Governments have sponsored measures of nationalisation. The object of every
measure of nationalisation is to bring a particular undertaking under public
control. It would have been easy for the legislature to have brought the
ownership of the assets of the nationalised industries within the extended arm
of the State and to have created new Government Departments for their
administration. But, for good reasons, actual ownership in the nationalised
undertakings has not been vested in the State but been vested in public
corporations. Under the scheme of commercial nationalisation statutory
Corporations have been set up as separate legal entities to run the
nationalised industries on commercial basis on their own account and not on
behalf of the Government.



            The State Industrial Corporations Act No. 49 of 1957 enables the establishment of Corporations with capital provided by the Government for setting up and carrying on industrial undertakings



#  12



on a commercial footing. Each Corporation so founded is a legal person
separate from its members and from the Minister. Each of  the Corporations is
charged with the duty of running its undertaking in an efficient manner so as
to balance its income with the outgoing. In every case there is statutory
provision bringing each of them under the surveillance of the Government
through a responsible Minister who is empowered to give directions of a
general character to the Corporation (vide section 31 of the State Industrial
Corporations Act).



The keynote therefore of all the modern measures of nationalisation has been
indirect control of nationalised Corporations rather than direct control
through a government department. The reason for the choice of the national
Corporations rather than the Government Department as an instrument for
running the national industries may be traced to business expedience guided by
private‑enterprise motive. The Corporation so established is an independent
legal entity having independent legal existence. In that set up it cannot be
said to be a department of the State or its agent or organ.



Legislation is not required to empower government to carry on a business. It
can do so in the exercise of its executive power. If the Government carries on
such business or involves itself to a significant extent in the carrying on of
such business that activity can be designated State activity bearing the stamp
of executive action. For the purpose of constitutional constraints a
distinction however has to be borne in mind between the government itself
carrying on business through any of its departments and government delegating
the carrying on of such business to a separate independent legal entity. When
government carries on business by itself such business activity assumes the
nature of executive action but where such business is carried on by an
independent legal entity such as a Public Corporation on its own account, free
from the operative control of any Minister or State official, such activity
cannot be stamped 'executive action'. Article 15 (5) ( _a_ ) of the
Constitution provides that reasonable restrictions on the exercise and
operation of the fundamental right to engage in any lawful trade or business
could be prescribed in the interests of " _the carrying on by the State, a
State agency or a Public Corporation_  of any trade, business, industry,
service or enterprise whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of
citizens or



#  13



otherwise." When Government takes up a business or trade it does that in the
exercise of its executive power. But it does not follow that whatever be the
instrument or agency through which the government may carry on business or
trade, that should be identified with the government. The grouping together of
the entities‑ the State, State agency and Public Corporation, in Article 15
(5) ( _a_ ) is not by itself sufficient to treat a Public Corporation as an
arm of the State o r as a State agency. We have to examine the Constitution,
powers and attributes of such an establishment to see whether it is a
department or agency of the Government. The carrying on of a trade by a Public
Corporation does not ipso facto render the commercial function of the
Corporation a governmental action. When a business is carried on by a
department of the government as in the case of the Marketing Department or the
Railway the employees thereof hold under the government and not under any
separate juristic entity. The reason is obvious. When the employer is a
department of the Government, no question of a separate legal entity arises.
The question however becomes different, when the business is carried on
through a separate legal person, e.g., statutory corporation, or a company,
because in such a case the employee is a servant of a legal entity other than
the Government and is not a servant of the State.



Prof. Griffith and Street in their "Principles of Administrative Law" 4th
Edition, at page 259‑260, discussing the constitutional status of "Public
Corporations " observe‑" The Courts when called upon to decide whether any
public body set up by statute in the last hundred years are agencies of the
Crown, have found the statutes themselves singularly unhelpful and have
refused to lay down definite criteria. The Court of Appeal decided in _Tamlin
v. Hannaford_ (3) that the Transport Commission was not the agent of the
Crown, and therefore it may be assumed that none of the nationalised
industries is an agent of the Crown. (The British Broadcasting Corporation,
which is established by Royal Charter, is not entitled to Crown immunities
because it is not an agent of the executive government. _B.B.C. v. Johns_ ,
(4). It may be said that there are several criteria which from time to time
the Judges have thought relevant. These include :‑



Is the body performing a task formerly carried on by private enterprise? (
_Mercy Docks & Harbour Board Trustees v. Gibbs _ (5) ‑Per Blackburn, J.) To
what extent is it subject to Ministerial



#  14



            control for example, has it independent discretionary powers ? ( _Metropolitan Meat Industry Board v. Sheedy_ (6) ‑ per Viscount Haldane).



Must it consult a Minister before it acts? Can a Minister give directions ?



Is its function one which has historically been regarded as governmental?

Is it incorporated ?

Is it subject to government audit ?

Is its authority general or local ?

Is it a mere domestic body ?

Is execution against its property allowed ?



The main criterion now seems to be whether the body is performing a function
analogous to that performed by the Crown servants and under some degree of
control by a Minister of the Crown _‑ Bank Voor Handel v. Administrator of
Hungarian Properties_ (7).



In _Bank Voor Handel v. Administrator of Hungarian Properties (supra)_ the
question in issue was the status of the Custodian of Enemy Property, was he a
servant of the Crown entitled to tax exemption. Lord Reid in the course of his
judgment stated‑



"In my judgment the question whether the custodian is a servant of the Crown
depends on the degree of control which the Crown through its Ministers can
exercise over him in the performance of his duties. The fact that a statute
has authorised his appointment is, I think immaterial, but the definition in
the statute of his rights, duties and obligations is highly important."



And Lord Asquith at page 991 stated who could for the purpose of the
exemption, be considered to be a servant or agent of the Crown‑



"The Court will lean against including in any of the exempted categories an
aggregation of commercial undertakings brought under some degree of public
statutory control ; and they will (if the other requirements are satisfied)
lean in favour of exemption for persons or bodies who were merely Ministerial
instruments of the Crown's will, lacking in themselves any discretion or
initiative."



**  15**



In _Metropolitan Meat Industry Board v. Sheedy (supra)_ ‑ Viscount Haldane
said : "Their Lordships agree with the view taken by the learned Judge in the
Court below that no more are the appellant Board constituted under the Act of
1915, servants of the Crown to such an extent as to bring them within the
principle of the prerogative. They are a body with discretionary powers of
their own. Even if a Minister of the Crown has the power to interfere with
them, there is nothing in the statute which makes the acts of administration
his as distinguished from theirs. That they were incorporated does not matter.
It is also true that the Governor appoints their members and can veto certain
of their actions. But these provisions, even when taken together, do not
outweigh the fact that the Act of 1915 confers on the appellant body wide
powers, which are given to it to be exercised at its own discretion and
without consulting the direct representatives of the Crown."



Thus the question whether the Insurance Corporation is a servant of the State
ultimately depends on the degree of control which the State through its
Ministers can exercise over it in the performance of its duties. Even if the
Minister has the power to interfere with it, there is nothing in the statute
which makes the acts of administration his as distinct from that of the
Corporation, it is true that the Minister appoints its members and the
Corporation, in the exercise of its powers and the performance of it duties,
is subject to the general or special directions of the Minister. But these
even when taken together do not outweigh the fact that the Act confers on the
Corporation powers which are given to it to be exercised at its own discretion
and in its name.



In _Tamlin v. Hannaford (supra)_ Denning, L. J., delivering the judgment of
the Court of Appeal held that the British Transport Commission which was a
Corporation established under the Transport Act of 1947 was not a servant or
agent of the Crown.



The basis of his holding was: "When Parliament intends that a new Corporation
should act on behalf of the Crown, it as a rule says so expressly , as it did
in the case of the Central Land Board and the Town and Country Planning Act
1947 .... In the absence of such express provision the proper inference in the
case at any rate of a commercial corporation is that it acts on its own
behalf, even



# 16



though it is controlled by a Government Department." Describing the
Ministerial control of the Commission he pointed out : "The Minister is given
powers over this corporation which are as great as those possessed by a man
who holds all the shares in a private company ....... It is the Minister who
appoints the directors  the members of the Commission ‑ and fixes their
remuneration. They must give him any information he wants, and lest they
should not prove amenable to his suggestion as to the policy they should
adopt, he is given power to give directions of general nature on matters which
appear to him to affect national interest, as to which he is the sole judge
and they are then bound to obey. These are great powers, but still we cannot
regard the Corporation as being his agent .........  In the eye of the law the
Corporation is its own           master .......... It is not the Crown and has
none of the immunities or privileges of the Crown. Its servants are not civil
servants and its property is not Crown property. It is as much bound by acts
of Parliament as any other subject of the King. It is, of course, a public
authority and its purposes, no doubt, are public purposes, but it is not a
government department, nor do its powers fall within the province of
government."



In the _Ceylon Bank Employees Union v. Yatawara_ (8) Sansoni, J., following
Denning, L. j' s, above statement of the law, held that the Bank of Ceylon,
though all of its ordinary shares had been vested in the Government, by virtue
of section 2 of the Finance Act 65 of 1961, was not a government department.



In _Trendtex Trading Corporation v. Central Bank_ (9) Lord Denning states that
there is no satisfactory test to discover whether a body like the Central Bank
of Nigeria was an "alter ego or organ of the Government of Nigeria" except
that of looking into the functions and control of the organisation. "I would
look through to all the evidence to say _whether the organisation was under
Government control and exercised governmental functions_."



In _Dahanayake v. De Silva_ (10) Samarakoon, J., held that the Petroleum
Corporation which was established by Act No. 28 of 1961, was an agent of the
State. His process of reasoning was as follows : " It is a legal hybrid bred
by the Government to enable it to engage in a commercial business ‑
tailor‑made to suit its style of business. It is a Government creation clothed
with juristic personality so as to give it an aura of independence, but in
reality it is just a business house doing only the State's business for and on



# 17



behalf of the State. Such a legal entity carrying on monopolistic commercial
transactions for the State must necessarily be the Agent of the State ". While
observing that petroleum has ceased to be a mere consumer item of private
trade and was now the concern of government at both national and international
level, he said that the Petroleum Corporation was created for the purpose of
providing this essential service. Discussing the control exercised by the
Minister over the Corporation he said‑



" Most significant is the fact that the Minister has the power to fix prices
at which petroleum products shall be sold and also prescribe other conditions
of sale (section 66). In short the Corporation does not act like other
Corporations who engage in business. Its business is mainly, if not wholly,
controlled by the Minister and therefore the State. It does not have the
independence in matters of business which is enjoyed by the companies formed
under the Companies Ordinance. It is a well known fact that this is a monopoly
business acquired by the State which is also compelled to subsidise some part
of its business for the welfare of the community ".



Since the provision of petroleum was an essential service and the Minister's
control of the Corporation's activity was all pervasive, the Petroleum
Corporation was held to be an agent of the State. The character of the
Insurance Corporation differs in material respects from that of the Petroleum
Corporation. It was not created to perform and does not perform any such
essential service to the community as the Petroleum Corporation. It is a legal
entity created to carry on a commercial activity, namely, Insurance. It does
not purport to carry on this business on behalf of the State and the extent of
the control exercised by the Minister over its operation is not so far
reaching and is insufficient to make it the servant or agent of the State.





Whether we apply the functional test or the governmental ‑ control test, the
Insurance Corporation cannot be identified with the Government. It cannot be
regarded as its " alter ego" or organ of the State. Hence its action cannot be
designated " executive or administrative action ", which only attracts
Articles 17 and 126 of the Constitution.



Counsel for the petitioners referred to the judgment of this Court in _Perera
v. The University Grants Commission (supra)_ and stated that the University
Grants Commission established by the Universities Act No. 16 of 1978 had
rightly been held to be an



# 18



            organ or delegate of the Government for the purpose of treating its action in the matter of admission of students to the Universities, as " executive or administrative action " within the meaning of Article 126 of the Constitution. He submitted that by parity of reasoning the Insurance Corporation also should be considered an organ or delegate of the Government. I cannot agree with that submission. The concern and involvement of the State in the activity of the University Commission are far more extensive than in that of the Corporation. Further a very important governmental function, such as University education, had been delegated to the Commission, with the State bearing the financial burden of running the Universities. The Constitutional status of the University Commission cannot be approximated to that of the Insurance Corporation.



                        It was contended by counsel that "executive or administrative action" cannot be equated to an act of an organ of Government. In Support of the submission reference was made to certain judgments of the Indian Supreme Court reported in A.I.R. 1962, S.C. 1167 (11), A.I.R..1962, S.C. 812 (12), A.I.R. 1958, S.C. 232, (13). In considering the persuasiveness of these judgments the wide definition of  "State" contained in Article 12 of the Indian Constitution has to be borne in mind. The "State" is defined there to include "the Government, Parliament of India and the Government and legislature of each of the States and all local or other authorities within the territory or under the control of Government of India". In the perspective of such a wide definition it can be appreciated that "executive, administration action" will not be confined to actions of the organs of the government. On the basis of the Indian definition of the 'State', executive or administrative action" embraces actions of authorities besides the "State" in our Constitution. There is no warrant for importing the Indian concept of "State" action based as it is on their wide definition of "State" into our Constitutional Law.



I uphold the preliminary objection raised by counsel for the 1st respondent.
In view of the above conclusion it is not necessary to go into the factual
merits of petitioner's complaint.



The application is therefore refused . No order is made as to costs.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.** ‑ I agree.



**SOZA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_**Preliminary objection upheld and application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/24.html_  

