##  Jayasundera v. Dantanarayana and Another - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981]
LKSC 24; (1981) 1 Sri LR 1 (6 March 1981)

**1**

**JAYASUNDERA  
v.  
DANTANARAYANA AND ANOTHER**

  
SUPREME COURT.  
SAMERAWICKRAME, J., ISMAIL, J., AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C. No. 33/79-C.A. (S.C.) No. 26/77 (1)-D. C. KANDY MR/11766/A.  
OCTOBER 28,1980.  
  
_Civil Procedure Code, section 328-Claim by person dispossessed of property in
execution of decree- Objection under sub-section (3)-Transfer of property
after Institution of action-Meaning of expression-Does it include transfer of
possession -Claimant restored to possession.  
_  
D, the petitioner-respondent, who was lessee for a long period, of certain
premises, on a notarial lease, had himself let them on a monthly tenancy to E,
the 2nd respondent. The latter on 28th March, 1974 surrendered possession to
him and D then placed one N thereon as his tenant and agent. The appellant J
had filed action against E for the breach of two agreements entered into with
him on which E had undertaken to transfer to J the business owned and carried
on by E at these premises and to hand over possession. On a decree and writ of
possession issued in this action D and N were ejected, despite their protests,
on 29th October, 1974. Thereafter D instituted these proceedings stating that
he was not a party to that action and not bound by that decree. He prayed that
he be placed in possession of the premises.  
  
In answer to this J took up the position, inter alia, that by virtue of
section 328 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code D could not succeed in his
application as E who was the judgment-debtor in the action filed by J has
transferred the property to D after the institution of the action, within the
meaning of that sub-section. After trial, the learned District Judge directed
that D be restored to possession holding that he was in possession on his own
account on the relevant date and also-despite such a plea by J-that there was
no proof of collusion between D and E. He also held that the relevant
provisions of the law applicable were those of the Administration of Justice
Law. On an appeal by J, the Court of Appeal held that the Civil Procedure Code
applied as its provisions had been re-enacted with retrospective effect. It
held however that there had been no transfer of property within the meaning of
section 328 (3) and dismissed the appeal. J appealed to the Supreme Court.  
  
**Held**  
  
A landlord and tenant may both be considered to be in possession of the leased
property and, subject to the tenancy, the landlord has the full and complete
right to possession. If the tenancy is terminated by surrender of possession
by the tenant and acceptance thereof by the landlord, then the landlord's
possession is enlarged to full and complete possession. Although the words
"transferred the property" in section 328 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code have
been correctly interpreted to include transfer of possession of property, such
a surrender of possession by a tenant does not amount to a transfer within the
meaning of this section unless in a particular case there are facts or
circumstances tending to show the contrary. Accordingly, D the petitioner-
respondent was not disentitled to the remedy he sought under section 328 by
reason of the operation of the provisions of Sub-section 3 of that Section.

**2**

  
  **Cases referred to  
**  
(1) _Kanagasabhai Pather v. Poornathammal, A. l. R._ _(1947) Madras 458.  
  
(2) Umahirayo v. Ramsaran, A. l. R. (1954) Madhya B. 46._  
  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_H. L. de Silva, with S. Sivarasa, for the appellant.  
  
Nimal Senanayake, with L. A. T. Williams, K. Gunaratne, Miss S. M. Senaratne
and  
  
Mrs. A. B. Dissanayake, for the respondent.  
 _

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 6, 1981.  
  
**SAMERAWICKRAME, J.**  
  
Dantanarayana, the petitioner- respondent, alleged that he had been lessee of
the premises on notarial leases for a period of over 40 years. At the time
relevant to the proceedings, Eliyas, the 2nd respondent, had been his monthly
tenant. On 28.3.74 the 2nd respondent surrendered possession of the premises
to him and he had placed one Nadesapillai in possession as his tenant and
agent. On 29th October, 1974, the petitioner and Nadesapillai, despite their
protests, were ejected from the premises on a writ of possession issued in an
action filed by Jayasundera, the 1st respondent - appellant, against Eliyas,
the 2nd respondent. The petitioner- respondent stated that he was not a party
to that action and was not bound by the decree. He prayed that he be placed in
possession of the premises. The 1st respondent- appellant in answer stated
that persons unlawfully in occupation were lawfully ejected by the Fiscal. He
alleged collusion between Eliyas, the 2nd respondent, and Dantanarayana, the
petitioner- respondent. He also submitted that the application was badly
constituted, misconceived and not tenable in law. He relied on section 328 (3)
of the Civil Procedure Code alleging that the 2nd respondent Eliyas who was
the judgment-debtor had transferred the property after the institution of the
action to the petitioner -respondent, Dantanarayana.  
  
Learned Counsel who appeared in that action for the petitioner 足respondent
raised the following issues:  
  
"(1) Was the plaintiff in possession of premises No. 94, D. S. Senanayake
Veediya, Kandy, through one Nadesapillai, who was a tenant and agent on
29.10.1974.?  
  
(It is admitted that the plaintiff was not a party to Action No. D. C. Kandy
MR 11766).

**3**



(2) Was the plaintiff and the said Nadesapillai dispossessed upon a writ
issued in the District Court of Kandy in case No. MR 11766 on 29.10.1974?  
  
(3) Was the plaintiff bound by the Decree entered in D. C. Kandy Case N o. M R
11766 ?  
  
(4) If issues 1, 2 and 3 are answered in the affirmative, is the plaintiff
entitled to an Order restoring him to possession of the aforesaid premises?  
(The plaintiff and the 2nd defendant admit that the plaintiff had rented out
the said premises in suit to the 2nd defendant Eliyas and the 2nddefendant
surrendered possession of the said premises to the plaintiff on 28.3.1974).  
  
Learned Counsel who appeared in that action for the 1st respondent raised the
following issue:  
  
"(5) Is the plaint of the plaintiff badly constituted misconceived and not
maintainable in law in view of sub-section (iii) of section 328 of the Civil
Procedure Code?"  
  
The learned District Judge accepted the evidence of the petitioner- respondent
and a witness called by him to the effect that the petitioner- respondent was
in possession on his own account at the relevant date. He held that there was
no proof of collusion between the petitioner- respondent and the 2nd
respondent and held that the provisions of law which were applicable were the
relevant provisions of the Administration of Justice Law which had no
provision corresponding to section 328 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code. He
directed the petitioner足 respondent to be re stored to possession.  
  
On an appeal filed by Jayasundera, the 1strespondent- appellant, the Court of
Appeal held that as section 328 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code had been re-
enacted with retrospective effect, the matter had to be decided upon that
provision. The Court of Appeal further held that the tenant Eliyas was in
immediate possession and the landlord Dantanarayana in mediate possession, of
the premises, and that the surrender of possession by Eliyas to Dantanarayana
was not a transfer of the property within the meaning of section 328 (3) of
the Civil Procedure Code. The  


**4  
 **

Court of Appeal accordingly dismissed the appeal. The respondent appellant has
filed an appeal to this Court with leave granted by the Court of Appeal.  
  
It must be noted that at the commencement of proceedings in the action filed
by the 1st respondent -appellant against Eliyas, the 2nd respondent, an
admission was recorded that Eliyas was the owner of the premises and that the
action proceeded without any admission by the 1st respondent- appellant of any
right in Dantanarayana and the claim made by the 1st respondent足-appellant in
the action appeared to be adverse to Dantanarayana.  
  
Section 328 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code reads:  
  
" Nothing in this section or section 327 applies to a person to whom the
judgment-debtor has transferred the property after the institution of the
action in which the decree is made."  
  
It has been held on an interpretation of the corresponding provision in the
Indian Code of Civil Procedure that 'transfer of property' referred to in the
provision would include transfer of possession of property. Vide Kanagasabhai
Pather v. Poornathammal (1) and Umahirayo v. Ramsaran (2). Learned Counsel for
1st respondent足-appellant challenged the finding of the Court of Appeal that
there was no transfer of property within the meaning of the provision because
the transfer was by a person in immediate possession of the premises to one
who had mediate possession of it. Learned counsel for the 1st respondent-
appellant stressed that a tenant for the period of his tenancy has the sole
right to occupy the premises and that he may exclude even his landlord. He
further pointed out that Salmond alone of the text writers referred to a
landlord having mediate possession and a tenant immediate possession and
stated that even that writer was dealing only with a case of an occupation or
holding by a tenant at will. He pointed out that Keeton has taken the view
that a bailor, pledgor and a landlord whom Salmond regarded as having Mediate
possession had no possession at all, but a right to recover possession at a
future date.  
  
it would appear that the English Law places greater stress on the aspect of
the custody of property rather than the mental element. The Roman Dutch Law
appears to be different. Morice, "English and Roman Dutch Law" , p. 70, states
:

**5  
 **

"Although in English Law possession is said to consist of two elements-
physical contact and intention to possess-the latter element does not assume
the same prominence as in the shape of the animus domini (intention of an
owner) it has assumed in Roman and Roman Dutch Law. In English Law the
intention to possess is implied from the act which evidences physical control
' and even in circumstances where the intention to possess does not in fact
exist, as in the case of concealed treasure, legal possession is still
acquired. In general, it may be said in English Law physical control gives
legal possession, unless the apparent possessor holds only as agent or servant
of another."  
  
In Roman Dutch Law much more importance is given to the mental element. Voet
XLI -2-3 states:  
  
"Possession is divided according to the ruling given by me above into natural
and civil; and this in a twofold manner. In the first place indeed that form
of it is called "natural" which is composed of an act, as when a person
possesses with his body ....  
  
But that form is called "civil" which is made up of law, as when a person
possesses with his mind, and thus is feigned by law to possess what in actual
fact he does not hold. In this way, both an owner and a possessor in good or
in bad faith, and even a thief and a robber are understood to hold possession
through the body of a tenant, lodger, borrower for use, repository and the
like . . . "  
  
He further states that there are dicta that more persons than one cannot at
the same time possess the same thing in whole but states that this refers to
"such possession as is held with the body" i.e., physical control. It would
appear that two persons can be considered to be in possession of the same
thing in whole at the same time for different purposes and with different
legal effects, vide Voet 41-2-5.  
  
Even assuming that in modern law a tenant is regarded as having possession,
there is no reason why a landlord and tenant may not be regarded as both
possessing though with different rights and with different effects. In a short
terse dictum in a judgment which was not approved by the Privy Council on
another point , Lawrie, J.

**6**

has set out the facts which render a person who lets out premises a possessor.
He said:  
  
"he leased it and took the rents; he repaired it and paid the taxes."  
  
Further, a person who lets premises may in certain circumstances be entitled
to claim compensation for improvements effected by his lessee or tenant on the
basis that he is in bona fide possession of the premises. The fact that a
person who lets property is entitled to rent shows that he has in a sense
enjoyment or possession of property. This is not so clear when the rent is
paid in the form of money but where it takes the form of part of the produce
of the property it is more apparent. Dealing with a provision in the Indian
Code of Civil Procedure, corresponding to section 328, Venkatarama  Iyer, J.
said:  
  
"The decisions in which the landlord was held entitled to file an application
under Order 21 Rule 100 when the person actually dispossessed is the tenant
did not form an exception to this rule. There the receipt of rent by the
landlord is tantamount to actual possession by him. The position might be thus
stated: when lands are leased, both the landlord and tenant together share the
produce in such proportion as they agree both of them are thus equally in
possession and both of them are entitled to take action under Order 21 Rule
100"-Vide A. I .R. 1954 Madhya B. 46 at 48.  
  
I am, therefore, of the view that both the landlord and tenant may be
considered to be in possession of property.  
  
Where a tenant hands over possession of the premises to a third party,
possession passes from one who has it to one who does not have it, and there
is a transfer of possession. This appears to have been the position in the
case of Kanagasabhai Pather v. Poornathammal (1). The judgment-debtor who was
sued in that case appears to have handed over possession not to the landlord
from whom he held the property on payment of rent but to a third party. In the
present case, Dantanarayana the petitioner respondent was the landlord and was
in possession through his tenant Eliyas. He was a notarial lessee and had the
rights of owner for the period or his lease. Subject to the tenancy he had
given to Eliyas he had full and complete right of possession. If the tenancy



**7**



was terminated full possession of the premises accrued to him One mode of
termination of tenancy was the surrender of possession by the tenant and
acceptance of such surrender of possession by the landlord in which event the
tenant could be free of liability for payment of rent and the landlord's
possession would be enlarged to full and complete possession. In respect of
such surrender of possession by a tenant, it appears to me that all that the
tenant requires to do, and does, is no more than to relinquish possession:
whereupon full possession accrues to the landlord. Section 328(3) refers to
transfer of the property and though these words have correctly been
interpreted to include transfer of possession of property, nevertheless it is
important to bear in mind that what the section actually refers to is transfer
of the property. It appears to me that surrender of possession by the tenant
does not amount to transfer of property within the meaning of section 328 (3)
unless in a particular case there are facts or circumstances tending to show
the contrary. A surrender of possession by the tenant may in certain
circumstances cloak or, amount to, transfer of property. In the instant case,
the learned trial Judge gave his mind to the question whether there had been
collusion between the tenant and the landlord but he held that no collusion
had been proved.  
  
Jayasundera, the 1st respondent-appellant, filed the action against Eliyas the
2nd respondent in which the writ of possession ultimately issued for breach of
two agreements by which Eliyas undertook to transfer to him the business owned
and carried on by him at the premises and to hand over possession of the
premises. In the prayer to the plaint, he asked that the defendant be ordered
to hand over possession of the business carried on by him in the premises and
the said premises to the plaintiff or in the alternative, for the return of
the sum of Rs. 11,000 and for damages in a sum of Rs. 40,000. These were the
reliefs that were claimed in the action even on the 28th March, 1974, when
Eliyas surrendered possession to Dantanarayana.  
  
In August 1974, there were proceedings in the action. Before the framing of
issues, an admission was recorded that Eliyas was the owner of the premises.
Thereafter Jayasundera gave evidence and his counsel applied for a date before
the conclusion of his evidence on an objection being taken to a document being
produced on the ground that it was not listed. On the 16th September, 1974,
the plaint was amended and a prayer was added

**8**



asking that the defendant, his sub-tenants, agents, servants and those who are
claiming through or under him be ejected from the premises and the plaintiff
be quieted in possession thereof. Thereafter, on a consent motion filed
without any further proceedings, decree was entered on the 13th October, 1974,
under which writ of possession was issued.  
  
Jayasundera's position was that Eliyas had told him that the landlord was the
owner of the premises, viz., one Emil Perera. Jayasundera said in evidence
that he contacted Emil Perera and attempted to purchase the premises from him
but that before the matter was finalised, Emil Perera died. He also said that
he had purchased the undivided share of Carl Perera, who was the son of Emil
Perera. In cross-examination, he admitted that Dantanarayana came to the
premises and obtained the rent from Eliyas but that Eliyas told him that
Dantanarayana was taking the rent to be handed over to the owner, Emil Perera.
Dantanarayana, however, had a notarial lease of the premises from Emil Perera,
which has been produced. In these proceedings, we are not concerned with the
respective rights of the parties but only with such matters as are relevant to
the applicability of the remedy under section 328 of the Civil Procedure Code.
The mere entry upon the premises under writ of possession of a person who does
not acknowledge any rights in him and whose claim is apparently adverse to him
derogates from the possession of the owner who has let the premises as it
precludes such owner from possessing the premises through a tenant and
obtaining rent in respect of his occupation; but the displacement of a person
placed in occupation by the owner amounts, in my view, to dispossession of the
owner.  
  
The learned District Judge held that the petitioner-respondent was in
possession of the premises on his own account and was not bound by decree in
the action in which writ of possession issued. He accordingly made order for
the restoration of the petitioner 足respondent in possession. Upon appeal, the
only matter that appears to have been raised was the question whether the
petitioner-respondent was disentitled to the remedy under section 328 in view
of the provision in section 328(3). The Court of Appeal held that he was not
disentitled on the ground that surrender of possession by the tenant in the
circumstances of this case did not amount to a transfer of the property.

**9**

  
For the reasons given above, I am in agreement with the view of the Court of
Appeal. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed with costs.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. - I** agree.  
  
**WANASUNDERA, J. - I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/24.html_  

