##  Hemasiri Fernando v. Hon. Mangala Samaraweera, Minister of Posts,
Telecommunications and Media and Others - SLR - 415, Vol 1 of 1999 [1999] LKSC
24; (1999) 1 Sri LR 415 (29 July 1999)

**415**

**HEMASIRI FERNANDO  
v.  
HON. MANGALA SAMARAWEERA,  
MINISTER OF POSTS, TELECOMMUNICATIONS  
AND MEDIA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.,  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. (FR) APPLICATION NO. 14/99  
APRIL 29, 1999

_Fundamental Rights - State controlled commercial company - Removal of a
Government Director without adducing any reason -Aribitrary and capricious
action - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._

The 3rd respondent (Secretary to the Treasury) purporting to act on behalf of
the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) in the exercise of his power under Article
19.2 of the Articles of Association of the 4th respondent, Sri Lanka Telecom
Ltd., (SLT) removed the petitioner from the post of Director/Chairman of the
company. No reasons were given to the petitioner as to why he was removed.

After the incorporation of Sri Lanka Telecom Corporation as a public company
in terms of the conversion of public corporations or Government Owned Business
Undertakings Act, No. 25 of 1987, Nippon Telegraph and Telephone Corporation
(NTTC) of Japan purchased 35% of the shares of $LT and approximately 3.5%
Shares were given over to employees. Thus, the Government retained
approximately 61.5% shares. In terms of the share purchase agreement between
the GOSL and NTTC, 6 Directors including the Chairman were the nominees of
GOSL while 4 Directors were to be nominees of NTTC. This arrangement is also
reflected in the Articles of Association.

**416**

**Held:**

1\. Behind the veneer of the commercial company is the State. The power of the
State is conferred on the 3rd respondent to be held for the benefit of the
public.

_Per_ Dheeraratne, J.

'As observed by Wade and Forsyth (7th edition) at 391 **. . .** ' the truth is
that in a system based on the rule of law', 'unfettered Government discretion
is a contradiction in terms'."

2\. The action of the 3rd respondent was arbitrary and capricious and the
petitioner's fundamental right for equal protection of the law has been
violated.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Faisz Musthhapha, PC_ with _Sanjeewa Jayawardena, Ananda Kasturiarachchi_ and
_Ms. Chandrika Silva_ for the petitioner. __

_K. C. Kamalasabayson,_ PC SG with _Uditha Egalahewa,_ SC and _Mohan
Gopallawa,_ SC for 1st and 3rd respondents. __

_Shibly Aziz, PC_ with _Kalyani Jayawardene_ and _Ms. Thaheeda Barrie_ for the
4th respondent. __

_Romesh de Silva,_ PC with _Hiran de Alwis_ for the 5th respondent. __

_P. A. D. Samarasekera,_ PC with _Harsha Amarasekera_ and _Ms. Kumudini
Wijetunga_ for the 6th respondent. __

_Aritha Wickramanayake_ with _Aruna Samarajeewa_ for the 8th respondent. __

_Gomin Dayasiri_ with _Arawinda R. l. Atharupana_ and _Ms. Niranjalee
Wijesinghe_ for the 9th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._  
  
**417**

July 29, 1999.  
**  
DHEERARATNE, J.**

In 1990 a corporation known as the Sri Lanka Telecom was established in terms
of the State Industrial Corporations. Act, No. 49 1957, The corporation took
over the functions, inter alia pertaining to telecommunications which were
discharged by the Department of Telecommunications. By letter dated 15. 9. 94
the 1st respondent Minister, acting under sections 12 and 13 of the State
Industrial Corporations Act, appointed the petitioner as a Director and
Chairman of the Sri Lanka Telecom for a period of 3 years. On 14. 11. 94 the
petitioner was appointed Secretary to Hon. Prime Minister.

In September, 1996, Sri Lanka Telecom was incorporated as a public company
Ltd. (4th respondent) in pursuance of an order published in the government
Gazette made in terms of the Conversion of Public Corporations or Government
Owned Business Undertakings Act, No. 25 of 1987 and the shares of the company
vested with the Secretary to the Treasury for and on behalf of the Government
of Sri Lanka. The Articles of Association of the new company empowered the
Government of Sri Lanka to dispose of shares in the company provided that the
Government retained not less than 51% of the total number of shares. Nippon
Telegraph and Telephone Corporation (NTTC) of Japan purchased approximately
35% of the shares of Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd. and approximately 3.5% shares were
given over to employees thus the Government retaining approximately 61.5%
shares. In terms of the share purchase agreement signed between the Government
of Sri Lanka and NTTC, the Government of Sri Lanka remains the sole beneficial
owner of the shares purchased by NTTC. By the shareholders agreement entered
between the Government of Sri Lanka and NTTC out of the Board of Directors of
Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd. 6 Directors including the Chairman were to be nominees
of the Government of Sri Lanka while 4 Directors were to be nominees of NTTC;
this arrangement is also reflected in the Articles of Association.

418

The shareholders agreement also provided that the Government of Sri Lanka and
the investor (NTTC) "shall procure the appointment or continuation of "the
petitioner and 5 others as nominee directors of the Government of Sri Lanka
and the petitioner in addition as non-executive chairman of Sri Lanka Telecom
Ltd. By letter dated 27\. 09. 1996, the then Secretary to the Treasury
nominated the petitioner as a director of Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd. and the
letter further stated that the nomination had been made "in terms of Articles
of Association after consultation with Hon. Minister of Finance and Planning
and Hon. Minister of Posts and Telecommunications". The Secretary to the
Treasury wrote letter dated 6th August, 1997, addressed to the Secretary of
Board of Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd. stating that in terms of section 19.2 of the
Articles of Association the petitioner and 3 others were appointed to the
Board of Directors of Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd. with immediate effect. The letter
further stated: "I confirm that these appointments are made in consultation
with Hon. Minister of Finance and Planning and the Hon. Minister of Posts and
Telecommunications and Media".

Petitioner alleges that as Chairman of Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd., he had several
disagreements with the 1st respondent Minister over certain highly contentious
issues especially with the introduction of 2 private operators Suntel (Pvt.)
Ltd. the 8th respondent and Lanka Bell (Pvt.) Ltd. the 9th respondent who were
licensed to operate fixed radiotelephone systems in Sri Lanka about 1995. In
the 1st part of 1996 both the 8th and 9th respondents commenced their
commercial operations as Wireless Local Loop Telephone Operators (WLL) and the
petitioner alleges that they received favoured treatment from the 1st
respondent.

The petitioner states that his relationship with the 1st respondent suffered a
total breakdown as a result of the media publicity given to an incident
relating to the 1st respondent's obtaining a credit card from the 4th
respondent and using the same during his visits overseas. The petitioner
states that the 1st respondent suspected him of having supplied the
information. The petitioner further states that the 6th

419

respondent had issued a personal cheque in order to settle the 1st
respondent's credit card bills and the 1st respondent suspected that it was
done on his advice. The contention of the petitioner was that because of these
incidents the 1st respondent got the petitioner removed from the post of
Director/ Chairman of the Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd. This is denied by both the
1st and 3rd respondents.

On 28th December, 1998, the petitioner received a copy of a letter dated 24.
12. 1998 addressed to the 4th respondent. That reads:

**" HIGHLY CONFIDENTIAL**

24th December, 1998

Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd.,  
Telecommunications Headquarters,  
Lotus Road,  
Colombo 1.  
  
I, Dixon Nilaweera, Secretary to the Treasury, acting on behalf of the
Government of Sri Lanka, in view the powers vested with me in terms of
Articles (sic) 19.2 of the Articles of Association of Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd.,
hereby remove Mr. Hemasiri Fernando from the post of Director / Chairman of
Sri Lanka Telecom Ltd., with immediate effect.

Dixon Nilaweera,  
Secretary to the Treasury for and on behalf of the Government of Sri Lanka."

The petitioners position is that his removal is grossly arbitrary, capricious,
and unreasonable and has been influenced by collateral considerations and made
for accusations which do not bear any form of objective scrutiny. It was
contended on behalf of the 5th respondent, that the petitioner's removal was a
matter purely falling within the Company Law and therefore within the purview
of Private Law as opposed to Public Law, the former of which does not attract
the

420

fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court. The position of the 1st and 3rd
respondents was that in terms of Article 19.2 of Articles of Association, the
Government of Sri Lanka has a right to remove the petitioner from the office
of a director representing the Government and there is no requirement either
to give the petitioner notice or reasons for his removal; the petitioner could
be removed without any reason being given.

As observed earlier the Government of Sri Lanka owns 61.5% of the shares of
the company and it is the beneficial owner of 35% of the shares held by the
NTTC. Behind the veneer of the commercial company is the State. The power of
the State is conferred on the 3rd respondent to be held for the benefit of the
public. As observed by Wade and Forsyth (7th edition) at 391 " **. . .** the
truth is that, in a system based on the rule of law, unfettered Government
discretion is a contradiction in terms".

No reasons have been given to the petitioner as to why he was removed. We hold
that the action of the 3rd respondent is arbitrary and capricious and the
petitioner's fundamental right for equal protection of the law has been
violated. As regards the relief to be granted, when this matter was being
argued, we indicated to counsel, that in the event of the petitioner
succeeding in his application, we will not order reinstatement, as the
petitioner would then find himself in the position of a square peg in a round
hole. We order the State to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000 as compensation and Rs.
25,000 as costs.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/24.html_  

