##  Malegoda v. Joachin - SLR - 88, Vol 1 of 1997 [1996] LKSC 24; (1997) 1 Sri
LR 88 (16 December 1996)

88

MALEGODA

v.

JOACHIM





SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

PERERA, J. AND

WIJETUNGA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 110/95

H. C. COLOMBO NO. 33/91

M.C. COLOMBO NO. 65573

NOVEMBER 20, 1996.



Appeal - Jurisdiction of the High Court to entertain an appeal - Right of
Appeal - Urban Development Authority Law No. 41 of 1978 as amended, Sections
19D(1) and 19H(1) - Article 154P(3) (b) of the Constitution.



The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal against an order made by the
Magistrate in proceedings under Section 19D(1) of the Urban Development
Authority Law No. 41 of 1978, as amended by Act No. 41 of 1988. The Appeal
which was filed in the Magistrate's court was forwarded to the High court of
Colombo . The High Court Judge heard the appeal.

**89  
 **

**Held:**

** **

As at the date the appeal was filed, the appellant's statutory right of appeal
was to appeal to the Court of Appeal, hence the High Court had no jurisdiction
to hear and determine the appeal. Article 154P(3) (b) of the Constitution only
conferred forum jurisdiction to hear appeals but does not create a
corresponding right in any person to invoke the appellate jurisdiction. A
right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly created and granted
by statute.



**Cases referred to:**

**  
**1. _Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam_ (1993) 2 Sri LR 355, 360.  
  
2\. _Martin v Wijewardena_ (1989) 2 Sri L.R. 409.  
  
3\. _Perera v The Commissioner of National Housing_ 77 NLR 361 at 366.



**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court of Colombo.

_ _

_Faisz Musthapha, PC.,_ with _Amarasiri Panditharatne_ for appellant.



Romesh de Silva, PC., with Harsha Amerasekera for substituted respondent.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._

_ _

December 16, 1996  


**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,**

** **

The predecessor of the substituted petitioner-respondent instituted these
proceedings in the Magistrate's Court in terms of section 19D (1) of the Urban
Development Authority Law No. 41 of 1978 as amended by the Urban Development
Authority (Amendment) Act

No. 41 of 1988 to eject the appellant and two others from unit (F) 132 of the
1st floor of the condominium property named Liberty Plaza. The Magistrate by
his order dated 6.4.90 allowed the application and made absolute the order
nisi.



The appellant filed in the Magistrate's Court a petition of appeal against the
order of the Magistrate. It is to be noted that the petition of appeal was
addressed to the **Court of Appeal**. The journal entry dated 18.4.90 shows
that the Magistrate had made order (1) "accept appeal" (2) "enter in appeals
register", (3) "forward to the High Court, Colombo, for preparation of briefs
to be transmitted to the Court of Appeal" \- (vide J. E. 18.4.90). It is
Common ground that the appeal had been lodged in the Magistrate's Court on the
18th April 1990. However, the appeal was by an error, listed for argument
before the High Court of the Western Province (Colombo). Written submissions

**90**



were filed, oral submissions were made on 22.3.95 before the High Court and
the High Court on 24.5.95 dismissed the appeal.



The appellant filed an application for special leave to appeal to this court
against the order of the High Court and leave was granted on the following
matters:- (a) Did the High Court have jurisdiction to take cognizance of
and/or hear and determine the appeal from the order of the Magistrate's Court;
(b) if not, should this matter be referred to the Court of Appeal for decision
in respect of the appeal against the order of the Magistrate's Court?



It was the submissions of Mr. Musthapha for the appellant that the High Court
had no jurisdiction to hear and determine the appeal. With this submission I
agree. The right of appeal against an order made in proceedings under section
19D(1) is conferred by section 19H(1) of the amending Act No. 41 of 1988.
Section 19H(1) is in the following terms:- "Any person who is dissatisfied
with an order under section 19E(3) or 19F(1) by a Magistrate's Court may
before the expiry of a period of 14 days from the date of such order, **appeal
to the Court of Appeal** against such order." It is clear therefore that the
right of appeal was to the Court of Appeal and not to the High Court.



It is true that Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution enacts that a High
Court for each Province shall "notwithstanding anything in Article , 138 and
subject to any law, exercise, appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in
respect of convictions, sentences and orders entered or imposed by magistrates
Courts and Primary Courts within the provinces." But the point to be noted is
that while Article 154 P confers appellate jurisdiction on the High Court
(forum jurisdiction) yet it does not create a corresponding right in any
person to invoke the appellate jurisdiction. It is well settled law "that a
right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly created and granted
by Statute." Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam and Others(1). The right of appeal to
a High Court for each Province from orders made by Magistrates Courts was
expressly created and granted by section 4 of the High Court of the Provinces
(Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990. This Act came into operation only on
the 15th of May 1990. Therefore on the 18th of April 1990, which was the date
on which the petition of appeal was filed in the Magistrate's Cwt, there
existed no right of appeal to the High Court established by Article 154P of
the Constitution.

**91**



Mr. Musthapha cited the case of Martin v Wijewardena (2), which is of
relevance to the matters in issue in this appeal. That was a case where the
following preliminary question of law arose for consideration:- "Does Article
138 of the Constitution confer any rights on any aggrieved person to appeal to
the Court of Appeal from any order made by the Assistant Commissioner of
Agrarian Services in terms of section 18(1) of Act No. 58 of 1979 when such a
right has not been specifically conferred by Statute?".



Jameel J., having set out the provisions of Article 138 expressed himself in
the following terms:- "Article 138 is an enabling provision which creates and
grants jurisdiction to the Court of Appeal to hear appeals from courts of
first instance, tribunals and other institutions. It defines and delineates
the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. It does not, nor indeed does it seek
to create or grant rights to individuals viz-a-viz appeals. it only deals with
the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and its limits and its limitations and
nothing more. It does not expressly nor by implication create or grant any
rights in respect of individuals (at page 413)... Article 138 is only an
enabling Article and it confers the jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals
to the Court of Appeal. The right to avail of or to take advantage of that
jurisdiction is governed by the several statutory, provisions in various
Legislative Enactments." (at page 419). This reasoning would apply with equal
force to the conferment of jurisdiction on the High Court established by
Article 154P. As stated earlier, **the right of appeal to a High Court of the
Province** was conferred only by the High Court of the Provinces (Special
Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 which was brought into operation on a date
subsequent to the filing of the petition of appeal in this case.



Mr. Romesh de Silva for the respondent stressed the fact that no objection to
the jurisdiction of the High Court of the Western Province to hear and
determine this appeal was ever taken either in the written submissions or at
the hearing of the appeal. In my view the failure to take such objection is of
no avail to the respondent, as this is clearly a case where there was a patent
want of jurisdiction in the High Court of the Western Province to hear and
determine the appeal. (see Perera v The Commissioner or National Housing(3)).

**92**



I accordingly hold that the High Court of the Western Province had no
jurisdiction to hear and determine the appeal. The appeal is allowed, the
judgment of the High Court is set aside and the Court of Appeal is directed to
hear and determine this appeal. There will be no costs.



**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/24.html_  

