##  Thiruchelvam v. Attorney General - SLR - 135, Vol 2 of 1995 [1995] LKSC
24; (1995) 2 Sri LR 135 (6 March 1995)

**135**

**THIRUCHELVAM  
v.  
ATTORNEY GENERAL **

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J.

RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 144/94.

C.A. 106192\.  
H.C. COLOMBO 4996(9)  
MARCH 6, 1995, APRIL 27, 1995.

_Indictment - Charge of possession of Heroin - Poisons, Opium and Dangerous
Drugs Ordinance S. 54A (d) as amended by Act 13 of 1984 \- Part III of the
Third Schedule - Interpretation - Life Imprisonment - Whether Mandatory._

The Appellant was indicted on the charge of possession of 71.3 grammes of
Heroin. After trial in the High Court, the accused was sentenced to a term of
Life Imprisonment. The Court of Appeal affirmed the said Order. On appeal to
the Supreme Court it was submitted that the Court of Appeal erred in law in
holding that where an accused had been found guilty of having been in
possession of over 2 grammes of Heroin, a sentence of life imprisonment is
mandatory.

**Held:**

(i) In the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance, as amended by Act,
No. 13 of 1984 column II of Part III of the Third Schedule sets out the
quantity of Heroin; the Penalty is in the corresponding entry in column III.

(ii) On a plain reading of the wording in Part III it is clear that for the
possession of "2 grammes of Heroin and above" (column 11) the penalty as set
out in the corresponding entry in column III is "death or life imprisonment."

(iii) Part III of the schedule sets out three different forms of penalty in
respect of varying quantities of heroin. Where the legislature has specified
the maximum and minimum terms of imprisonment, the Court is vested with a
discretion within the specified limits.

(iv) In a case of possession of 2 grammes of heroin and above, the penalty set
out is "death or life imprisonment." It is manifest that in this category the
discretion of court is limited to the imposition of the death sentence or to a
sentence of life imprisonment; the punishment is one fixed by the legislature;
there is no discretion vested in the Court in regard to the period of
imprisonment.

136

(v) There is no warrant for inserting additional words where the sentence is
one which is fixed by law.

**Case referred to:**

_1\. Van der Hultes v A.G. 1989 - 1 SLR 204._  
  
_Overruled_

**APPEAL** from the Judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Somapala Gunadheera for Accused-Appellant._  
  

_C. R. de Silva, D.S.G. with Samaranayake, S.C. and Miss S. Jayawardene, S.C.
for Attorney-General._

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 12, 1995\.  
**G. R S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

The appellant was indicted on the charge of possession of 71.3 grammes of
heroin, an offence punishable under section 54A (d) of the Poisons, Opium and
Dangerous Drugs Ordinance, as amended by Act, No. 13 of 1984. After trial, he
was convicted by the High Court and sentenced to a term of life imprisonment.
On appeal, the Court of Appeal affirmed the conviction and sentence.

Special leave to appeal to this court was granted on two matters (1) Has the
Court of Appeal erred in law in holding that where an accused had been found
guilty of having been in possession of over 2 grammes of heroin, a sentence of
life imprisonment is mandatory?

(2) Does an appellate court have the power to order the deduction of the
period spent on remand prior to the date of conviction from the sentence
imposed on him?

The first question involves the interpretation of Part III of the third
Schedule to the Poisons, Opium and Dangerous Drugs Ordinance as amended by
Act, No. 13 of 1984. Column II of Part III of the third schedule sets out the
quantity of heroin and the penalty is set out in the **corresponding entry**
in Column III. On a plain reading of the

137

wording in Part III it is clear that for the possession of "2 grammes of
heroin and above" (Column Il) the penalty as set out in the **corresponding
entry** in Column III is "death or life imprisonment". Mr. Somapala Gunadheera
for the appellant strenuously contended that it was open to the High Court to
have imposed a sentence of imprisonment less than "life imprisonment". Counsel
cited the case of _Van der Hultes v A.G_.(1) in support of this submission. In
that case the Court of Appeal quoting the words "shall be liable to the
penalties in Column 3 ..." held that the High Court "had the discretion to
impose any sentence over 7 years rigorous imprisonment extending up to the
death penalty or life imprisonment...".

I am afraid I cannot agree with the submission of Counsel for the appellant,
and the view taken in Van der Hultes case (supra). Part III of the schedule
sets out three **different** forms of penalty in respect of varying quantities
of heroin. Where the quantity of heroin does not exceed 1 gramme, the penalty
( insofar as jail terms alone are considered) is "imprisonment of either
description for a period not less than 3 years and not exceeding seven years."
In a case where the quantity of heroin varies between 1 to 2 grammes the term
of imprisonment is "for a period not less than 7 years and not exceeding 20
years". Thus it is seen that in both these instances the legislature has
specified the maximum and minimum terms of imprisonment. The Court is vested
with a discretion within the specified limits.

In the appeal before us we are concerned with a case of possession of "2
grammes of heroin and above" (vide Column II which sets out the quantities).
The penalty set out in the corresponding entry in Column III is "death or life
imprisonment" It is manifest that **in this category** the discretion of the
court is limited to the imposition of the death sentence or to a sentence of
life imprisonment. In other words, the punishment is fixed by the legislature;
there is no discretion vested in the Court in regard to the period of
imprisonment. If the argument of counsel for the appellant is to be accepted,
additional words vesting a discretion in the court would have to be inserted,
a mode of interpretation which is impermissible save in exceptional
situations. There is no warrant for inserting additional words where the
sentence is one which is fixed by law. **In this context** the expression
"liable to the penalty" which

138

occurs in section 54A (d) cannot be given the meaning "exposed to" as
contended for by counsel for the appellant, for the sentence follows upon
conviction. As rightly submitted by Mr. C. R. de Silva, Deputy Solicitor-
General, on a reading of Part III of the schedule as a whole, it is clear that
the legislature intended a graded form or scale of punishment. Mr. de Silva
stressed that this is the scheme of the Schedule. Having regard to the
quantity of heroin found in the possession of an accused person, the
legislature enacted an ascending scale of punishment. Where the case is one of
possession of "2 grammes of heroin and above" the legislature appears to have
considered the offence to be of a serious nature and the discretion of the
Court is confined to imposing sentence of death or sentence of life
imprisonment and nothing less.

I accordingly hold that the sentence of life imprisonment was correctly
imposed on the appellant by the High Court.

The second question does not arise for consideration in the instant appeal,
since the sentence is one fixed by law.

For these reasons the judgment of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the
appeal is dismissed.

**KULATUNGA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**RAMANATHAN, J. â€"**



"I have had the benefit of a full argument and I am now of the opinion that
the view expressed in Van der Hultes v. A.G. (1989) 1 SLR 204 is incorrect. I
agree with the judgment of the Chief Justice".  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/24.html_  

