##  Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka Vs Messrs Jafferjee & Afferjee
(Pvt) Ltd - SLR - 89, Vol 1 of 2005 [2004] LKSC 24; (2005) 1 Sri LR 89 (31
August 2004)

  
**89**

**CREDIT INFORMATION BUREAU OF SRI LANKA  
vs  
 MESSRS JAFFERJEE & JAFFERJEE (PVT) LTD**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, CJ  
J.A. N. DE SILVA. J .AND  
WEERASURIYA, J  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 47A/ 2003  
C. A. NO. 1406/2001  
9th FEBRUARY AND 19th MARCH 2004

_Write of mandamus - Public or statutory duty - Non- availability of the
remedy where the statutory duty is not compellable - Sections 6 and 7 of Act,
No. 18 of 1990 amended by Act, No. 8 of 1995  
_  
The Credit Information Bureau of Sri Lanka was established by Act, No. 18 of
1990 as amended by Act, 8 of 1995 (the Act.) The object of the Bureau is to
assist its shareholders such as the Bank of Ceylon (vide Section 29) and
protect them being misled by the information given by borrowers such as the
respondent.  
  
The provisions relating, inter -alia, to the functions and powers of the
Bureau for providing credit information on borrowers and lending institutions
are contained in sections 6 and 7 of the Act, as amended. In terms of these
provisions, the Bureau is required to furnish information on request in
confidence to shareholders of the Bureau (i.e, to lending institutions.) The
duty to furnish such information is unqualified. However, the borrowers are
entitled  


**90**

to obtain such information only upon a request by shareholders subject to such
terms and conditions as may be determined by the Bureau. This means that the
provisions of any information to a borrower is conditional on a request by a
shareholder and is not compellable.  
  
However, the Court of Appeal granted a writ of mandamus directing the Bureau
(the appellant) to furnish credit information to the respondent (a borrower)
which information had been provided to lending institutions and the nature of
the information that has been so furnished.  
  
**Held:**  
1\. Although the appellant was a public body and could be compelled by
mandamus to provide information to shareholders, the court was in error in
using a writ of mandamus to compel the giving of information to the respondent  
(a borrower).  
  
2\. The respondent had no right to compel the giving of such information by
mandamus without a request by a shareholder.  
  
3\. In any event, the court was informed that the respondent had obtained the
information by other means. Hence the issue of the writ of mandamus was
futile. This was another ground to refuse the writ.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
_  
_**_1\. R. V. Barnstaple Justices (1937) 54 TLR 36  
  
2\. Napier ex parte 1852 18 QB, 692 at 695  
  
3\. R. V. Lewishan Union (1897) I QBD 498  
  
4\. P. K. Benarji V H. J. Simonds AIR (1947) Cal 347  
  
5\. Sanjeevayya V Election Tribunal AIR (1967) SC 1211  
_  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
Romesh de Silva, P.C. with Geethaka Gunawardene for appellant  
  
P. Nagendra, P. C. with C. W. Pannila for respondent.

_Cur.adv.vult_

 August 31, 2004  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA J.  
**  
This is an appeal against the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 19/02/
2003 wherein the Court of Appeal issued a writ of Mandamus directing the

**91**

Respondent Appellant (hereinafter referred to as the Appellant) to disclose-to
the Petitioner Respondent (hereinafter referred to as the Respondent) the
credit information that it had provided to lending institutions and the nature
of the information that been so furnished.  
  
When the application for Special Leave to Appeal was supported, Special Leave
was granted on the following questions:  
  
(a). Have their Lordships failed to analyse the provisions contained in
Section 7 (b) of Act, No. 18 of 1990 as amended by Act, No. 8 of 1995?  
  
(b) Have their Lordships erred in law in the interpretation of the provisions
contained in Section 6 (b) of Act, No. 18 of 1990 as amended read together
with Section 7 (b) of the Act?  
  
(c) Have their Lordships erred in law in interpreting the word
"simultaneously" found in Section 6 (b) and the preamble of the Act?  
  
(d) Have their Lordships erred in law in giving an interpretation to this word
"simultaneously" to mean that the Appellant was bound in law to provide such
information simultaneously to the borrower even without a request from it's
shareholders?  
  
(e) Have their Lordships failed to appreciate that the data base of the
Respondent is consistently changing and the information that it possessed in
respect of the year 2000 is not presently before it as such information is
updated by other information?  
  
(f) Have their Lordships failed to appreciate that a prospective borrower has
no right in law to demand, obtain and receive a loan and/ or a  functional
accommodation and/or facility from a financial institution, and the further
arguments that such loans and/or financial facilities would be disbursed only
at the absolute discretion of the said financial institutions?  
  
(g) The Respondent is not entitled to the Public Law Remedy namely writ of
Mandamus.  
  
(h) In any event the Respondent is not entitled to a writ of Mandamus in that
the Petitioner is guilty of laches.

**92**



The case of the Respondent in the Court of Appeal was that under and in terms
of Section 6 (b) of the Credit information Bureau of Sri Lanka Act, No. 18 of
1990 as amended by Act, No. 8 of 1995, the Appellant is bound to provide the
credit information to it's shareholders and simultaneously forward such
information to borrowers and prospective borrowers to whom such information
relates. The Respondent's grievance was that the Appellant had wrongfully,
unlawfully and / or illegally refused to forward such information to the
Respondent and thereby failed to perform its statutory duty and obligation.  
  
All the questions raised in this appeal could be resolved in my view by
considering the availability of the writ of Mandamus to the Respondent. The
learned counsel for the Appellant submitted that a writ of Mandamus being a
public law remedy is not available to the Respondent as the Credit Information
Bureau is not a State entity or instrument of the State. The answer to this is
found in the following passage in Halsbury's Laws of England, Vol (1), 4th
Edition (Administrative Law) paragraph 132, "An order of Mandamus will be
granted ordering that an act to be done which a statute requires to be done
and for this rule to apply it is not necessary that the party or corporation
on whom the statutory duty is imposed should be a public official or an
official body." The Credit Information Bureau is created by an Act of
Parliament. It is not akin to a private club, as contended by the counsel for
the Appellant, which is governed by its own constitution/ rules or
regulations. Every action has to be taken within the four corners of the
statute and according to the procedure set out in the Act.  
  
The Board Members of the Credit Information Bureau are appointed in the
following manner (vide Section 5);  
  
(a) A Deputy Governor of the Central Bank nominated by the Monetary Board who
shall be the Chairman-of the Board.  
  
(b) A Senior Officer of the Central Bank nominated by the Monetary Board.  
  
(c) A Senior Officer of the Bank of Ceylon nominated by the Board of Directors
of the Bank of Ceylon.  
  
(d) A Senior Officer of the People's Bank nominated by the Board of Directors
of the People's Bank.

**93**

(e) Person elected by the share holding Finance Companies  
  
(f) A person nominated by the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance
from the Board of Directors of the National Development Bank, Development
Finance Corporation and State Mortgage and Development Bank.  
  
When considering the composition of the Board of Directors of the Credit
Information Bureau one cannot get behind the fact that it is functioning under
the control of "Public Officers" and that they discharge public functions. In
these cirumstances it is not difficult to conclude that the Credit Information
Bureau is amenable to a writ of Mandamus if the other conditions are
satisfied.  
  
The judicial control over the fast expanding maze of bodies affecting rights
of the people should not be put into water tight compartments. It should
remain flexible to meet the requirements of variable circumstances.  
  
There is rich and profuse case law on Mandamus on the conditions to be
satisfied by the Applicant. Some of the conditions precedent to the issue of
Mandamus appear to be :  
  
(a) The Applicant must have a legal right to the performance of a legal duty
by the parties against whom the Mandamus is sought ( _R v Bamstaple
JusticesY(1)_ The foundation of Mandamus is the existence of a legal right
(Napier Ex parte(2)  
  
(b) The right to be enforced must be a "Public Right" and the duty sought to
be enforced must be of a public nature.  
  
(c) The legal right to compel must reside in the Applicant himself ( _R v
Lewisham Union(3)_  
  
(d) The application must be made in good faith and not for an indirect purpose  
  
(e) The application must be preceded by a distinct demand for the performance
of the duty  
  
(f) The person or body to whom the writ is directed must be subject to the
jurisdiction of the court issuing the writ.

**94**

(g) The Court will as a general rule and in the exercise of its discretion
refuse writ of Mandamus when there is another special remedy available which
is not less convenient, beneficial and effective.  
  
(h) The conduct of the Applicant may disentitle him to the remedy, (i) It
would not be issued if the writ would be futile in its result.  
  
(j) Writ will not be issued where the Respondent has no power to perform the
act sought to be mandated.  
  
The above principles governing the issue of a writ of Mandamus were also
discussed at length in P. K. Benarji Vs H. J. Simonds(4). Whether the facts
show the existence of any or all pre-requisites to the granting of the writ is
a question of law in each case to be decided not in any rigid or technical
view of the question, but according to a sound and reasonable interpretation.
The court will not grant a Mandamus to enforce a right not of a legal but of a
purely equitable nature however extreme the inconvenience to which the
applicant might be put.  
  
In the instant case we have to consider whether the Respondent has a legal
right to get any information from the Credit information Bureau. The Credit
Information Bureau of Sri Lanka (Applicant) was established by Act, No. 18 of
1990 specifically setting out  
  
(a) as functions of the Bureau, it inter alia :  
  
(i) To collect and collate, credit and financial information on borrowers and
of lending institutions.  
  
(ii) To provide credit information, on request to lending institutions who are
shareholders of the institutions who are shareholders of the bureau.  
  
(b) as powers and duties of the bureau inter alia:  
  
(1) to forward credit information on request and in confidence to share
holders of the bureau and to prescribe the forms in which such information is
to be furnished.  
  
Act, No. 18 of 1990 was subsequently amended by Act, No. 8 of 1995. By this
amendment the functions of the Bureau was amended as follows:

**95**  


(A) "to provide credit information, on request, to lending institutions who
are shareholders of the Bureau and simultaneously to borrowers and prospective
borrowers to whom such information relate".  
  
(B) The powers and duties of the Bureau were amended as follows:  
  
"in discharging its functions the Bureau may exercise and perform all or any
of the following"  
  
(i) to furnish information on request in confidence to shareholders of the
Bureau.  
  
(ii) to furnish information on request by a shareholder of the Bureau to a
borrower or to a prospective borrower to whom such information relates,
subject to such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Bureau.  
  
It is therefore clear that prior to the amendment it was imperative that all
credit information was furnished by the Appellant strictly in confidence to
its shareholders and no other. By the amendment the Credit Information Bureau
was granted powers to furnish credit information on request in only two give
situation, i. e.  
  
(a) When a request is made by a shareholder for such information, then the
Appellant can accede to such a request and furnish the relevant credit
information to such shareholder in confidence ; or  
  
(b) If there is a request from a shareholder to the Appellant then the
Appellant Bureau may furnish credit information to the borrower or prospective
borrower to whom such information relates.  
  
It is relevant to note that "on request" pre dictates both situations where
information is provided.  
  
In the first situation there is only a furnishing of information, exclusively
to the shareholders. The use of the words " in confidence" clarifies this
position. In the second situation, information can be furnished to a borrower
to whom such information relates, provided that there is a satisfaction of two
important pre conditions, namely,

**96**

(A) There must be a request from the shareholder. More specifically the
shareholder of the Bureau must request the Bureau to provide such credit
information to the borrower or the prospective borrower and  
  
(B) The Credit Information Bureau determines the terms and conditions and the
form on such information is to be furnished.  
  
From the above discussion it is clear that the Respondent has no clear legal
right to demand the information from the Credit Information Bureau which is
the basis or foundation to grant a Mandamus. Borrowers cannot as of right
request for information to be given to them. Their right, if any, came into
operation only when a lending institution makes a request to that effect.
Therefore there is no legal duty cast on the Credit Information Bureau to
furnish information on a request made by a borrower. It was the contention of
the Respondent that as the word "simultaneously" appears in the preamble of
the amended Act, there is a duty cast on the Credit Information Bureau to
convey the credit information regarding the borrower which is furnished to a
lending intitution to be given to the borrower also simultaneously. This was
the argument accepted by the Court of Appeal.  
  
The preamble is certainly a part of the Act. It is elementary to say that the
intention of the legislature must be gathered from the language of the Act
itself. It is only where there is ambiguity and when an expression used by the
legislature is capable of more than one meaning that it is permissible for the
Court to look at the Preamble. When there is a conflict between the Preamble
and the provisions of an Act the latter shall prevail. It is a well settled
rule of construction that the provisions of a statute should be so read as to
harmonize with one another and the provisions of one section cannot be used to
defeat those of another unless it is impossible to effect reconciliation
between them (vide _Sanjeevayya vs.   Election Tribunal(5)_  
  
I am mindful of the fact the Credit Information Bureau was established to
assist Financial Institutions and to protect them from being misled by the
information given by borrowers. The Credit Information Bureau is an autonomous
body created by. an Act of Parliament cast with the duty to furnish
information to Financial Institutions on credit standing of the borrowers.
Financial Institutions can be shareholders in this corporation. Due to this
fact Financial Institutions can claim that the information should be confined
only to them and that no borrower has a legal right to obtain

**97**

this information from the Credit Information Bureau. By the amending act of
1995 a concession has been granted to the borrowers in that if a lending
institution requests the information could be given to the borrowers too
simultaneously. Other than this there is no independent legal right for the
borrowers to call for this information as and when they want.  
  
At the stage of the argument it was brought to the notice of this court that
the information the Respondent requests has already been obtained by them
through other means. Therefore it would be futile in its result to issue a
writ of Mandamus. This is another ground to refuse the writ.  
  
In these circumstances I am of the view that all the questions raised in this
appeal are answered fully in the above discussion. I hold that the judgment of
the Court of Appeal is erroneous and set aside the same and allow the appeal
without costs.  
  
**SARATH N. SILVA, C. J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASURIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/24.html_  

