##  Soloman Dias v. Secretary, Ministry of Defence and Others - SLR - 134, Vol
3 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 25; (2002) 3 Sri LR 134 (5 September 2002)

**134**

**SOLOMAN DIAS  
v.  
SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J. AND  
WEERASURIYA, J.  
SC NO. 604/2001 (FR)  
JULY 01, 2002  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Travel to Vavuniya - Travel pass system - Article 14
(1)(h) of the Constitution.  
  
_The petitioner was an Attorney-at-Law employed under an organization in
Colombo and performing functions relating to human rights and legal aid in the
Vavuniya District for displaced persons. It was necessary for him to travel to
Vavuniya in connection with his duties.  
  
On 05. 09. 2001 the petitioner travelled to Vavuniya by bus. On the way it was
stopped at a checkpoint and upon producing his identity card he was allowed to
proceed without a pass. On his return the same day, the bus was stopped when
the 3rd respondent, the officer-in-charge of the checkpoint severely
admonished him for not obtaining a pass even though he said that he was a
lawyer. By reason of that delay the petitioner's bus proceeded without him;
and having found other means of travel he returned to Colombo only at 4 am the
next morning. That event was the petitioner's first complaint.  
  
His next complaint was that on 04. 10. 2001 he left for Vavuniya by train. At
the railway station next morning, police officers instructed passengers to
obtain passes. The petitioner was refused exemption. He had to go in a queue.
On his producing his identity card he was issued a pass for six days. He
returned by bus on 08. 10. 2001. The bus was stopped at a checkpoint and all
passengers were asked to produce their passes. The petitioner produced his Bar
Association identity card and was allowed to continue his journey although he
had not produced the pass.

**135**

**Held :  
**  
(1) Even assuming that the petitioner's first complaint was factually
accurate, the application was filed only on 08. 11. 2001. Hence, that
complaint was out of time.  
  
(2) As regard the second complaint, the treatment of the petitioner on 05. 10.
2001 constituted no more than minor irritations. His rights under Article 14
(1) {h) were not infringed.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_M. A. Sumanthiran with P. S. Bandaranayake, K. Prabakaran and Renuka
Senanayake_ for petitioner.  
  
_I. Demuni de Silva, Senior State Counsel_ for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 05, 2002  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
This application was argued together with Vadivelu v. Officer-in-Charge,
Sithambarapuram Refugee Camp Police Post, Vavuniya, SC Application No. 44/2002
(FR), as both cases involved a challenge to the pass system for travel to and
from Vavuniya.  
  
The petitioner is a citizen of Sri Lanka and an Attorney-at-Law employed as
the Executive Secretary of the Peace and Reconciliation Committee, National
Council of YMCA's of Sri Lanka, in which capacity he had functions relating to
human rights education and legal aid, inter alia, at a centre in the Vavuniya
District for internally displaced persons. It was necessary for him to travel
to Vavuniya in connection with his duties.

**136**

The petitioner pleaded that Principle 25 (3) of the Guiding Principles on
Internal Displacement formulated by the UN Special Representative on
Internally Displaced Persons imposed a duty on national authorities to grant
and facilitate persons engaged in the provision of humanitarian assistance
rapid and unimpeded access to the internally displaced. He further contended
that Article 12 (1) embodied the principle of equality before the law and that
Article 14 (1) (h) guaranteed freedom of movement within Sri Lanka, free from
arbitrary and unjustified restrictions; and that the "travel pass" system
constituted an arbitrary  and unreasonable restriction of those fundamental
rights, and was not authorized by or under law or regulations made under the
law relating to public security.  
  
The petitioner's account of the relevant facts is as follows. His first
allegation was that on 05. 09. 2001 when he was travelling to Vavuniya by bus
he was stopped at the Eratperiyakulam checkpoint. He was asked to submit his
identity card, which disclosed that he was an Attorney-at-Law, whereupon he
was allowed to proceed on his journey without obtaining a pass. On his return
from Vavuniya the same day, the bus was stopped at the same checkpoint, and he
was asked to produce his pass. Although he explained that he had not been
required to obtain a pass that morning, he was asked to get out of the bus,
and was then taken to the 3rd respondent, the officer-in-charge of the
checkpoint, who interrogated him. When he said that he was a lawyer the 3rd
respondent retorted : "you may know the law in the rest of the country but
here in Vavuniya you have to follow our law and we require you to obtain a
pass". All this resulted a delay of over 45 minutes, and by then the bus had
left. There were no more buses that evening, and the petitioner had to obtain
lifts to Medawachchiya, and from there to Anuradhapura, from where he  boarded
a bus which reached Colombo only at 4.00 a.m. the next morning. Even assuming
that the petitioner's account is accurate, this application was filed only on
08. 11. 2001, and accordingly this particular complaint is out of time.

**137**

The petitioner's second complaint was that on 04\. 10. 2001 he left for
Vavuniya by train. When he arrived at the railway station the next morning,
police officers instructed passengers to obtain passes, and for that purpose
to join either the queue for permanent residents of Vavuniya or the queue for
visitors; his request to leave the railway station without obtaining a pass
was refused. Upon submitting (but  nor surrendering) his identity card, he was
issued a six-day pass, and he was allowed to leave the station after his bags
were checked by the police. After finishing his work he returned by bus on 08.
10. 2001. The bus was stopped at the Eratperiyakulam checkpoint, and all
passengers were asked to submit their passes. The petitioner produced his Bar
Association identity card, and was allowed to continue his journey although he
had not produced the pass.  
  
The petitioner's third grievance was that the pass system applicable to travel
between Colombo and Vavuniya, and the manner in which it was being
implemented, constituted an imminent infringement of  Articles 12 (1) and 14
(1) (h), as in the future too persons having to travel in a sudden emergency
would be liable to arrest if they did not have travel passes. It is
unnecessary to consider this contention as the pass system is no longer in
operation. In any event, whether an infringement is "imminent" would depend on
the circumstances.  
  
As for the petitioner's second complaint, it is clear that the travel pass
system did not in any way hinder his return journey on 08\. 10. 2001 : he was
not even asked to produce the pass issued to him on 05. 10. 2001. As for the
journey to Vavuniya on 05. 10. 2001, the formalities to which he was subject -
queueing up, obtaining a pass, and having his baggage security-checked - were
in the circumstances no more than minor irritations.  
  
I, therefore, dismiss the application but without costs.  
  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WEERASURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/25.html_  

