##  Vanija Ha Karmika Sevaka Sangamaya v. Unilever Ceylon Limited. - SLR - 14,
Vol 1 of 1995 [1994] LKSC 25; (1995) 1 Sri LR 14 (13 December 1994)

**14**

**VANIJA HA KARMIKA SEVAKA SANGAMAYA**



**v.**



**UNILEVER CEYLON LIMITED**

SUPREME COURT.

M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.  
GOONEWARDENA, J. AND  
F. R. P PERERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 54/94  
H. C. A. NO. 495/92  
L.T. NO. 2/194/88  
DECEMBER 13, 1994.

_Industrial Dispute - Collective Agreement - Breach of clause re. absence
without reason - Was failure to terminate the workman's services a breach of
clause 31(c) a pardon ? - Medical leave._

A collective agreement of 30.5.85 between a workmen's union and the employer
had provisions dealing with absence without leave in clause 31. Clause 31(c)
provided for termination of services where an employee has been absent for 40
days more than his entitlement without adequate reasons. The Union agreed not
to support in any way a claim for reinstatement or other relief on behalf of
such a workman.

The workman had a record of serious absenteeism. In 1986 he was repeatedly
reminded of the consequences of continuous absenteeism. On 16.10.86 he was
asked to show cause why he should not be dismissed or otherwise disciplinarily
dealt with for absenting himself from work without authority for over 40 days
in the year. After inquiry the employer wrote on 26.11.86 as follows:

"... we would have been fully justified in terminating your services. However,
in order to give a you a final opportunity to improve in your attendance, we
will not take such a drastic step on this occasion instead (sic) warn you. In
future you are required to adhere to the following conditions regarding leave.

"1\. This year (1986) you will not take anymore unauthorised leave.

2\. In the years 1987 and 1988 you should not exceed 10 days unauthorised
absence for each year.

3\. If you are sick you are required to obtain sick leave from the Company
Medical Officer and no medical certificate issued by (an) outside Medical
Practitioner will be accepted, unless approved by the Company Medical Officer.

15

In the event of the breach of any of the above conditions, you are: finally
warned that your services will be terminated forthwith".

The workman acknowledged this letter without any protest about these
conditions.

By letter dated 20.11.87 the employer terminated the workman's services
because

(a) as at 10. 11.87 in addition to 26 days authorised leave and.18 days sick
leave, the workman had taken 12 1/2 days unauthorised leave, and

(b) having been absent on 7.11.87 and 9.11.87, the workman only brought a
medical certificate from an outside medical practitioner, and did not report
to the employer's medical officer despite being told to do so by his Manager.

**Held:**

(1) What the employer did, when it found the workman guilty of unauthorised
leave in breach of clause 31(c) of the Collective Agreement in 1986 was to
defer the punishment for a period of 2 years. The offence was neither forgiven
nor punished with immediate effect. Instead the punishment was suspended for
two years, conditional on improved performance in each of the next two years.
One year later when it was found that the workman had failed to comply with
the conditions, the punishment became effective and he was dismissed. It would
be wrong to view the final act in the series all by itself. Here the final act
in the series was unauthorised absence in 1987, but that was not the cause of
termination. The cause was absenteeism in 1986. By his defaults in 1987 the
workmen disentitled himself to the benefit of the deferment or suspension of
the punishment. The dismissal was sanctioned by clause 31(c).

(2) The annual leave entitlement of 31 days was in excess of the statutory
requirements. It was the employer's practice to deduct five days if in the
preceding year an employee had taken excessive unauthorised leave. Such
deduction was made known to the affected employees at the commencement of the
year. This evidence was not challenged in cross-examination.

The workman's evidence was led in a form which virtually confirmed the
employer's position.

(3) In regard to the medical certificate the usual procedure was irrelevant
because the workman was required to comply with a special procedure as an
obvious safeguard against the abuse of the sick leave facility.

**Case referred to:**

_1\. Colombo Apothecaries Co., Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers' Union (1972) 75
N.L.R. 182, 186-187._

**APPEAL** from judgment of the High Court.

_W. Dayaratne for appellant._

_S. L. Gunasekera for respondent._

_Cur adv vult._

January 31, 1995.  
**M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.**

The Applicant-Respondent-Appellant Union ("the Union") on behalf of its
member, the workman, contends that the Respondent-Appellant-Respondent ("the
Employer") had terminated the services of the workman in breach of clause 31
of the Collective Agreement dated 30.5.85 between the Union and the Employer.
Clause 31 provides:

**" 31\. Absence without Adequate Reason **

The following rules regarding absence without adequate reasons will continue
to apply:

(a) Where an employee has been absent for 20 days more than his entitlement
without adequate reasons, he will lose his annual increment.

(b) Where an employee has been absent for 30 days more than his entitlement
without adequate reasons, his job rate will be Withdrawn. . .

(c) Where an employee has been absent for 40 days more than his entitlement
without adequate reasons, his. services will be terminated, The Union agrees
not to support in anyway, a Claim by such persons for reinstatement or other
relief.

Where employees' services are to be terminated under this provision Management
will take a sympathetic view if such employee has not been disciplinarily
dealt with for bad attendance during the 5 years immediately preceding.

17

The plaintiff also prayed for an interim injunction/enjoining order, to stay
the sale.

On 20.02.92 the Court issued an enjoining order and notice of the application
for interim injunction together with summons returnable on 05.03.92. The
record shows that on 05.03.92 the registered Attorney for the 1st defendant
filed proxy and obtained a date for objections, which was 11.03.92. The
enjoining order was extended upto that date. No answer was filed on 05.03.92.
Nor is there any record of an application for an extension of the date for
filing answer, made on that day.

On 11.03.92 objections of the 1st Defendant were filed; and of consent. the
enjoining order which had been issued in respect of the entire land was
restricted to 1 A.OR.25P., which was the extent claimed by the plaintiff. At
that stage, an application was made on behalf of the plaintiff, to fix the
case for ex parte trial on the ground that the 1st defendant had failed to
file answer or to obtain or apply for a date to file answer. This was objected
to by Counsel for the 1st defendant; whereupon, the Court directed the parties
to file written submissions on 25.03.92. According to the record. no
application for further time to file the 1st defendant's answer had been made,
even on 11.03.92.

On 25.03.92 written submissions were filed. Theist Defendant's position was
that on 05.03.92 the registered Attorney for the 1st defendant moved for a
date for objections and answer, even though there is no record of the fact
that he asked for a date for answer. Secondly, no application had been on
05.03.92 on behalf of the plaintiff to fix the case for ex parte trial. Hence,
the Court should permit the 1st defendant to file answer. On behalf of the
plaintiff, it was contended that in view of the 1st defendant's default on
05.03.92, the plaintiff was entitled to move the Court to proceed to ex parte
trial even on a later day Rajapakse v. Senanayake. (4)

By his order dated 22.07.92, the District Judge fixed the case for ex parte
trial. He also granted an interim injunction on the same terms as were
contained in the enjoining order which was in force. The 1st defendant's
application to the Court of Appeal to set aside that order was dismissed on
the ground that in view of his default on 05.03.92, the District Court had no
option but to fix the case for ex parte trial, in view of the imperative
provisions of section.84 of the Civil Procedure Code.

18

[an] outside Medical Practitioner will be accepted, unless approved by the
Company Medical Officer.

In the event of the breach of any of the above conditions, you are finally
warned that your services will be terminated forthwith."

The workman acknowledged this letter, without any protest about these
conditions.

By letter dated 20.11.87 the Employer terminated the workman's services
because -

(a) as at 10. 11.87, in addition to 26 days authorised leave and 18 days sick
leave, the workman had taken 12 1[2 days unauthorised leave; and

(b) having been absent on 7.11.87 and 9.11.87 the workman only brought a
medical certificate from an outside medical practitioner, and did not report
to the Employer's medical officer despite being told to do so by his Manager.

After inquiry the President of the Labour Tribunal held that the workman's
absenteeism in 1986 would have justified the Employer in terminating his
services **in that year** , but not at its discretion thereafter; that the
Employer's letter dated 26.11.86 had imposed a condition which contravened the
Collective Agreement (i.e. by permitting dismissal for unauthorised leave
exceeding **ten** days); and that the Employer having pardoned the workman,
could not thereafter deny him the benefits to which he was entitled under the
Collective Agreement, or impose new conditions. On this basis, he held that
the termination was unjustified and ordered reinstatement with three years
back wages:

On appeal the High Court held that the attendance of the workman had been
woefully, unsatisfactory; that the Labour Tribunal had viewed the Employer's
merciful decision not to exercise, its right to dismiss the workman in 1986 in
an unreasonable and unfair light  namely that the Employer must either exact
the extreme penalty of dismissal or do nothing; that the Employer was entitled
to temper the

19

punishment with mercy; and that the decision not to dismiss the workman in
1986 did not mean that the default was completely wiped off the slate, echoing
the observations of Weeramantry, J., in Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v.
Ceylon Press Workers' Union (1). Learned Counsel for the Union conceded that
the Union had led no evidence that any punishment had been imposed on the
workman in 1986, as, for example, that he had been denied his annual
increment, or that his job rate had been withdrawn. He submitted that the
reasoning and conclusion of the Labour Tribunal was correct, and that the
termination was wrongful, because it was for 12 1/2 days unauthorised absence
in 1987, contrary to clause 31(c). This is untenable. What the Employer did,
when it found the workman guilty of 10 days unauthorised absence in 1986, was
to defer the punishment for a period of two years. The offence was neither
forgiven nor punished with immediate effect. Instead, the punishment was
suspended for two years, conditional on improved performance in each of the
next two years. One year later when it was found that the workman had failed
to comply with the conditions, the punishment became effective, and he was
dismissed.

I would respectfully adopt Weeramantry, J.'s observations which apply with
equal force today:

"... it would be wrong to view the final act in the series as though it
existed all by itself ... a proper assessment of a dispute can only be made
against a background of the conduct and relationship between the parties ...
Any other view would seem to be lacking in that broad and general approach to
labour disputes which it is the very aim and object of the labour laws to
foster."

Here the "final act in the series" was unauthorised absence in 1987, but that
was not the cause of termination. The cause was absenteeism in 1986; by his
defaults in 1987 the workman disentitled himself to the benefit of the
deferment or suspension of the punishment. Let me leave aside for the moment
legal niceties about defaults, conditions, and punishments. If one were to ask
"why was the workman dismissed", it would be quite unreal to answer "because
of absenteeism in 1987"; for that was not the effective cause of the

20

dismissal, but only a proximate cause. The only commonsense answer-is because
of, his absenteeism in 1986, the consequence of which he failed to avert by
failed as reform in 1987," The dismissal was therefore sanctioned by clause
31(c)

To take any other, view of clause31(c) would ,compel, (as the learned High
Court judge correctly observed), the Employer always to terminate ,suppressing
every human instinct of leniency or sympathy. That would be unreasonable, got
only from the Employer's point of view, but Especially from the employees
which Employee would wish that preference be given to an interpretation that
compels dismissal for even a first offence and necessarily a second Chance? in
the absence of plain words compelling an interpretation of such severity i
must decline to interpret a contract of employment in that way. The dismissal
was Justified sprit of the Collective Agreement

Learned Counsel for the Union I sought to rely on two matters, which are not
dealt with in the Labour Tribunal order and which related to findings of fact
and assessment of evidence but for the order granting special leave, these
could not have been raised on appeal Learned Council argued that the workman
was not in breach of the two conditions set out in the letter dated 26.11.86
With scant regard for the supreme Court Rules, this condition was stated in
the Union written Submission in two Obscure sentences

"The Workman's services were terminated for non compliance of the above new
grounds and furthermore adding into his leave entitlement the leave he has
obtained in the previous year."

Firstly he submitted that the workman had exceeded his 1987 1eave entitlement
by only 7 1/2 days, That the annual leave entitlement was 31 days but that the
Employer had reduced this by 5 days improperly and without the workman's
knowledge. He was faced With a serious difficulty. Evidence was led on behalf
of statutory requirements, that it was the Employer's practice to deduct five
days if in the preceding year an employee had taken excessive,

21

unauthorised leave; and that such deduction was made known to affected
employees at the commencement of the year. All this was not challenged in
cross-examination. Learned Counsel glossed over this default, and insisted
that this had been sufficiently contradicted by the workman's evidence-in-
chief. Even for this submission all he could point to was a statement that
five days had been cut from the workman's 1987 leave entitlement. Counsel
submitted, with greater persistence than logic, that this meant (a) that there
was no practice as claimed by the Employer, and (b) that in any event the
workman was not aware of any such deduction until after his dismissal in 1987.
He contended that this inference had to be drawn because the matter had not
been probed or clarified in cross-examination. The truth is that the default,
if any, was entirely on the part of the Union. Initially, it failed to
challenge the Employer's evidence through cross-examination, and then it led
the workman's evidence in a form which virtually confirmed the Employer's
position. Cross-examination could not have improved the Employer's case any
further, and cross-examining Counsel quite rightly left the matter strictly
alone. In these circumstances one must assume that Counsel who then appeared
for the Union acted as he did because he had received instructions that the
Employer's position was correct.

Secondly, it was contended that the workman's conduct in submitting the
medical certificate to the leave clerk of the Employer was in accordance with
the usual procedure, and hence he was not in default. Not surprisingly,
Counsel could give no answer to the question as to how this conduct complied
with the second condition in the letter dated 26.11.86, and the specific
instruction, given by the Manager to the workman, to present himself to the
Employer's Medical Officer. It was clear that the "usual procedure" was wholly
irrelevant in this case, because the workman was required to comply with a
special procedure, as an obvious safeguard against the abuse of the sick leave
facility. This contention is as untenable as the other.

The appeal must therefore be dismissed. The learned High Court Judge observed,
with justification, that, in supporting the claim of the workman to re-
instatement or other relief, the Union was doing what it had agreed not to do
by Clause 31(c) of the Collective Agreement.

21

Further the manner in which these proceedings have been pursued by the Union
does not afford me any ground to deprive the successful party of its costs. I
.accordingly order the Appellant-Union to pay the Employer costs in a sum of
Rs. 5,000/-.

**GOONEWARDENA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**P. R. P PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/25.html_  

