##  Ragunathan v. Jayawardene, Secretary, Ministry of Transport and Highways
and Others - SLR - 255, Vol 2 of 1994 [1992] LKSC 25; (1994) 2 Sri LR 255 (27
October 1992)

**  255**

### RAGUNATHAN

**v.**

**JAYAWARDENE, SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF TRANSPORT AND**

**HIGHWAYS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J.,

AMERASINGHE, J.,

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. APPLICATION N0. 90/91

OCTOBER 27, 1992.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Constitution, Article 12 ‑ Equality ‑ Promotion.



The petitioner and 3rd respondent were not equally circumstanced. The 3rd
respondent was qualified for promotion but the petitioner was not.



**Per Amerasinghe, J.**



"To treat the petitioner and 3rd respondent as equally entitled to promotion
would be improper for it would result in treating unequals equally. This would
be as unjust as treating equals unequally."



**  256**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_Colin Senerath ‑ Nandadewa _for petitioner.



_Douglas Premaratne, P.C. Additional Solicitor ‑General _with _Mrs. Bimba
Tilakaratne, S.C._ for 1st and 2nd respondents.



_Cur. adv vult._

 October 27, 1992.

**AMERASINGHE, J.**



We have heard learned Counsel for the petitioner in support of this petition.
This Court is, _inter alia,_ requested to make order declaring that the
petitioner is entitled to promotion to Class I of the Middle Level Technical
Service from 11.6.1984 and to promotion as Drawing Office Assistant from
22.8.1989. The petitioner also requested this Court to declare as invalid the
appointment of the third respondent to these posts.



The petitioner's case rests on the basis that there has been a violation of
his right of equality under Article 12 of the Constitution. The essence of his
complaint is that the 3rd respondent had been shown unwarranted preferential
treatment by the first and second respondents. The question is whether the 3rd
respondent and the petitioner were equally circumstanced. Were they in the
same position? They were not, for the reason that whereas the petitioner
failed to qualify at the prescribed examination and was therefore not eligible
for promotion, the 3rd respondent had passed the prescribed examination and
was therefore eligible for promotion. The third respondent was promoted
because he was qualified for promotion. The petitioner was not promoted
because he was not qualified. To treat the petitioner and 3rd respondent as
equally entitled to promotion would be improper, for it would result in
treating unequals equally. This would be as unjust as treating equals
unequally.



Admittedly there was discrimination between a qualified person and an
unqualified person. Those who were classified as eligible for promotion were
those who had passed the examination. The public services exist to supply an
efficient administration and Article 12 of



**  257**

the Constitution does not preclude the imposition of qualifying examinations,
selective tests and other criteria for selecting or promoting public officers
to assure efficiency. The distinction between those qualified for promotion
and those who were not was therefore founded upon an intelligible differentia.
It was rational. The scheme of promotion was not arbitrary or artificial or
evasive in its formulation or relation to its purpose or in its application.
In the circumstances, I am unable to hold that there has been a violation of
Article 12 of the Constitution in this matter by the appointment of the third
respondent in preference to the petitioner. For the reasons explained the
petitioner had no right in the circumstances of this case to be treated
equally in relation to the third respondent. The petition is therefore
dismissed.



An enormous volume of documentation has been filed in this matter evidencing
long‑standing and continuing dissatisfaction on the part of the petitioner
with a variety of matters but wholly irrelevant to these proceedings. The time
of this Court has been wasted by compelling us to consider them.



The petitioner is ordered to pay Rs. 1000 as costs.



**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



Petition dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/25.html_  

