##  Gamlath v. Neville De Silva and Others - SLR - 267, Vol 2 of 1991 [1991]
LKSC 25; (1991) 2 Sri LR 267 (27 August 1991)

### 267



**GAMLATH**

**v.**

**NEVILLE SILVA AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J. , KULATUNGE, J. & WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

S. C. APPLICATION NO. 78/90.

JULY 16, 1991.



_Fundamental Rights – Arrest -Torture ‑ Reasonable suspicion ‑ Articles 11 and
13 (1) of the Constitution ‑ Code of Criminal Procedure Act, section
32(1)(6)._



A suspicion is proved to be reasonable if the facts disclose that it was
founded on matters within the Police Officer's own knowledge or on statements
made by other persons in a way which justify him giving them credit. An arrest
under section 32(1) (b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act can be on
reasonable suspicion. The observance of the procedure for arrest with­out a
warrant is now a constitutional right under Article 13(1) of the Constitution
which guarantees freedom from arrest. The information on which the arrest is
based must be credible by the application of the objective test. An arrest
based purely on the subjective satisfaction of the Police Officer would be
arbitrary and in violation of Article 13(1). There was no credible
informa­tion giving rise to a reasonable suspicion that the petitioner was
concerned in the offence of dishonestly receiving stolen property. It was an
arbitrary arrest if regard is had to the background. The lost water pump
belonged to the wife of a senior Police Officer and the initial information
which led to the petitioner's arrest was given by a subordinate police
officer. The infor­mation itself did not touch the petitioner. The petitioner
had been severely assaulted when in Police custody and subjected to torture or
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment. This is confirmed by the medical report
and sup­ported by the affidavits of witnesses and the prompt statements of the
peti­tioner.



There was therefore violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights under
Articles 11 and 13 (1).



**Cases referred to:**



1\.         _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ 52 NLR 324, 327.  


2\.         _Chandradasa v. Lai Fernando_ S. C. Application 174‑5/87 ‑ S.C.
Min­utes of 30 September 1988.



### 268



3\.         _Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ [1987] 2 Sri L.R. 119, 127.  


4.         _Geekiyanage Premalal de Silva v. Rodrigo_ S.C Application No. 24/89 S.C. Minutes of 05.09.1990.



5.         _Jayaratne v. Tennakoon_ S. C. Application No. 18/89 & 10/89 ‑ S.C. Minutes of 04.07.1991. 

**  
APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed by Arti­cles
11 and 13(1) of the Constitution.



_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _Nimal Punchihewa_ and _C. Swarnadhipathi_ for
petitioner.



_S. Dheerasekera_ with _Merwn Samarajeewa_ for 1st and 2nd respondents.



_Upawansa Yapa D. S. G._ _for Attorney ‑General._



_Cur.adv. vult._



August 27, 1991.



**KULATUNGA, J.**

**  **

_             _The petitioner was arrested by the Padukka Police in the course
of investigations into the theft of a water‑pump with a motor. He complains
that his arrest is unlawful and that whilst he was in Police custody the 1st
respondent (a Sub ‑ Inspec­tor of Police) and the 2nd respondent (a Police
Sergeant) sub­jected him to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treat­ment.
He prays for a declaration that his fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles
11 and 13(1) of the Constitution have been infringed and for compensation. The
petitioner's version of the relevant events set out in the petition is as
follows:



On 01.12.90 at about 3.30 a.m. the 1st respondent accom­panied by four other
Police Officers came to his house in a jeep and arrested him. He saw one
Dharmadasa inside the jeep which was then driven to the house of one
Kirthipala. The police searched for Kirthipala but failed to find him at that
time. At about 4.30 a.m. the petitioner and Dharmadasa were



**269   **

** **

brought to the Padukka Police. Dharmadasa was put into a cell while the
petitioner was ordered to be seated on a bench outside the cell. At about 8.00
a.m. Kirthipala was also brought. Thereafter Dharmadasa was taken out of the
cell and removed to a place inside the Police Station. The petitioner ­then
heard Dharmadasa shouting. Likewise Kirthipala also removed in the same
direction and and the petitioner heard him shouting.



At about 8.30 a.m. the petitioner was taken to a room inside the Police
Station where he saw Dharmadasa and Kirthipala who appeared to have been
assaulted. The petitioner was taken near them and the 1st respondent
threateningly told them "" whereupon they said that they had given the
water‑pump to the petitioner. The petitioner denied it. There the 1st
respondent assaulted him with a "Kitul club". In the history of injuries given
to the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer, Colombo the petitioner described
the weapon as a (a piece of flat Kitul wood) which is more consistant with the
injuries found on him. The petitioner's hands were tied with a rope and the
1st and 2nd respondents hung him by passing the other end of the rope over a
beam. While he was in that position both respondents assaulted him with "Kitul
Clubs". He was then lowered to the ground and the two respondents threw chilli
powder dissolved in water on his face. He was then dragged into a cell. Owing
to the injuries received by him during the assault the police took him to the
Padukka Hospital for treatment at about 6.30 p.m. and he was warded.



The petitioner was discharged from hospital on 03.12.90. Dharmadasa and
Kirthipala had been produced before the Magistrate Homagama by the police and
they were remanded. In view of the hospitalisation of the petitioner the
Magistrate enlarged him on bail. On 03.12.90 he visited the Police
Head­quarters and reported the assault. The officers there arranged for him to
make his statement to Mr. Henry Perera, Senior



#### 270



Superintendent of Police, Nugegoda. His efforts to meet the S.S.P. on the same
day were unsuccessful. On 04.12.90 also the S.S.P. was not there but S.S.P.
Navaratne attended to him and had his statement recorded by Sergeant Gunadasa.
He was then given a letter to the Officer‑in‑Charge, Mirihana Police Station
on the strength of which Mirihana Police Station issued a police ticket to him
to enter the General Hospital, Colombo. As there was no time that day, he
entered the hospi­tal on 05.12.90. That day he was examined by the Asst.
J.M.O. whose report has been produced marked Pl. On 14.12.90 he appeared
before the Magistrate when his case was called and made a statement regarding
the assault on him which was recorded.



According to the report P1, the petitioner told the Assist­ant J.M.O. that he
had been assaulted on 01.12.90 while he was detained by Padukka Police with a
"Kitul Patiya" and another long object after tying his wrists and hanging him
from the roof. He had the following injuries:



1.                  Contusion on the medical aspect of the left elbow joint 7 c.m. X 5 c.m. in size.



2.                  Pressure abrasion on the back of the left upper arm 2, 1/2 c.m. X 2 c.ms. obliquely placed.



3\.         Two parallel contusions on the upper part of the left hip 8 c.m.
long and 1,1/2 c.m. apart from each of the transver­sely placed.

4\.         Two curved parallel contusions on the lower part of the left hip 3
c.m. apart from each other 20 cms. in length obliquely placed.



5\.         Two parallel pressure abrasions on the posterio‑lateral aspect of
the upper part of right hip 1.5 c.m apart from each other 23 cms. long
transversely placed.



6\.         Two parallel pressure abrasions on the posterio‑lateral aspect of
right hip below injury No. 5 obliquely placed 12 c.m. long and 1.5 cms. apart
from each other.



**271   **

** **

7\.         Two parallel pressure abrasions on the posterio‑lateral aspect of
lower part of right hip 2.5. cms. apart from each other 15 cms. long obliquely
placed.



8\.         Contusion on the lower part of the right hip with a scab in the
mid region. The contusion had pressure abrasions on the upper and lower
margins 23 cms. in length, 5 cms, broad on the medical 10 cms. and 2,1/2 cms.
broad on the lateral part.



9\.         Grazed abrasion 1 cm. X 1 cm. on the anterio‑lateral aspect of the
left wrist.



10.       Grazed abrasion 1 cm. X 2 cm, in size on the anterio­medical aspect of the left wrist.



11.       Grazed abrasion 1 cm. X 2 cm. on the lateral aspect of the right wrist.



12\.       Two parallel contusions on the front aspect of right thigh 5 cm.
long 3 cm. apart from each other transversely placed.



13\.       Two parallel contusions on the front aspect of right thigh 5 cm.
long transversely placed 2 cm. apart from each other.



14\.       Contusion 7 cm. X 2, 1/2 cm. in size on the front aspect of lower
part of the left thigh.



15\.       Contusion 5 cm. X 3 cm. on the back of the left thigh.



16\.       Tenderness in the lower part of left leg.



17\.       Tenderness on the right calf.



The Assistant J.M.O. is of the opinion that all injuries were consistent with
the history of assault with a blunt weapon; and injuries 9, 10 and 11 are
consistent with a history of having been tied at the wrist.



In support of his version the petitioner filed affidavits from his wife
Vinitha Jayasinghe and two other relations Har­ischandra Welikala and Rohan
Gamalath Attorney‑at‑Law.



##  272





 Gamalath speaks to having visited the Police Station at about 7.30 a.m. on
01.12.90 on being informed of the petitioner's arrest. At that time the
petitioner had not been harmed; but when he visited him again at about 10.00
a.m. on hearing that he had been assaulted he found the petitioner lying
inside the cell hardly able to move or speak. On being asked the peti­tioner
said that he had been assaulted by the 1st and 2nd respondents. His attempts
to pursuade the O.I.C. of the Police Station to send the petitioner to the
hospital at that time were unsuccessful but in the evening at about 6.00 p.m.
on his request the O.I.C. dispatched the petitioner to the Padukka Hospital.



The case for the respondents is that the petitioner along with two others,
Dharmadasa and Kirthipala were arrested in connection with the loss of a water
pump valued at Rs. 4,000/- ­from a land called Linawatte owned by Mrs. Delgoda
wife of Nalin Delgoda, Superintendent of Police. The theft was reported to the
Padukka Police on 20.11.90 by Punchimahat­taya watcher of the estate who said
that he could not name any suspect (Rl); nor did the immediate investigations
by the police disclose any suspect. On 01.12.90 at 2.00 p.m. Sergeant
Rupasinghe of the Homagama Police called over at the Padukka Police Station
and made a statement (R3) wherein he said that he knows this estate; that he
used to supply labourers and attend to other requirements thereon at the
request of the owner; that about a week before the loss of the water pump on a
day when coconuts were being plucked he supplied two labourers Sunil and Nimal
to gather nuts on the estate and that they had brought one Dharmadasa to
assist them. Ser­geant Rupasinghe added that he suspects Dharmadasa for the
theft of the water pump as he had been arrested by the police previously for
theft of similar articles.



The respondents further state that acting on the informa­tion given by
Sergeant Rupasinghe a police party consisting of 4 officers including the 1st
and 2nd respondents left the Sta‑



**273   **

** **

tion at about 3.40 p.m. is search of Dharmadasa and arrested him at 4.10 p.m.
at his house after informing him of the alle­gation against him. Thereafter,
his statement (R5) was recorded at 4.15 p.m. wherein he confessed to stealing
the water pump and selling it to the petitioner through Kirthipala for Rs.
2000/‑. Consequent upon Dharmadasa's statement they arrested Kirthipala close
to his house at 4.40 p.m. after informing him of the allegation against him.
His statement (R6) was recorded at 4.45 p.m. wherein he confirmed
Dhar­madasa's version and admitted having sold the water pump to the
petitioner after representing that it belonged to him. The police party next
arrested the petitioner at his house at 5.10 p.m. after explaining the
allegation of receiving stolen pro­perty.



Continuing their version the respondents state that while the suspects were
being taken in the jeep the petitioner said that he had hidden the water pump
behind a rock. So they proceeded in the direction shown by him but could not
find the water pump. At that stage the petitioner slipped and rolled down the
rock. He was lifted and examined for injuries but no injuries were observed.
Thereafter the suspects were brought to the Police Station and locked up,
pending the instructions of the O.I.C.. At 6.45 p.m. the petitioner complained
of being unwell and was dispatched to the Padukka Hospital at 6.50 p.m. On
02.12.90 the petitioner's statement was recorded by the police at the hospital
(R12); he denied any knowledge or receipt of the water pump. R8, the Medico
Legal Report of the District Medical Officer, Padukka on the petitioner states
that he had been admitted to the hospital at 7.20 p.m. on 01.12.90 with a
history of assault by police; and he had six injuries on his buttock and back
of the calf of leg.



Mr. R. K. W. Goonesekera, learned Counsel for the peti­tioner submitted that
the petitioner has established the infrin­gement of his fundamental rights
both as regards his arrest and the treatment which he has been subjected to
whilst in police custody. It is alleged that the petitioner was not



##  274



informed of the reason for his arrest; that in any event the impugned arrest
was effected under normal law namely S. 32 (1)(b) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979; and that the arrest is unjustifieded because on
the basis of the facts it cannot be said that there was a reasonable suspicion
of the petitioner having been concerned in any cognizable offence. The well
known test of reasonableness of a suspicion which has been often cited is that
"a suspicion is proved to be reasonable if the facts disclose that it was
founded on mat­ters within the police officer's own knowledge or on the
state­ments made by other persons in a way which justify him giving them
credit" per Gratiaen J. in _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ (1).



The decision in _Muttusamy v. Kannangara_ is also authority for the principle
relied upon by the petitioner's Counsel that the reasonableness of the
suspicicn is liabre to be tested by Court. On this basis, Counsel submitted
that the subjective satisfaction of the police officer is not sufficient; the
test is an objective one. He cited in support the decision in _Chandradasa v.
Lal Fernando_ (2).



The facts relating to the arrest of the petitioner are interest­ing. A water
pump is lost from an estate owned by the wife of a Superintendent of Police.
The watcher cannot name a sus­pect. Then a Police Sergeant who is known to the
owner comes in and names Dharmadasa as a suspect because he had been seen
working on this estate and had been arrested by the police previously for
theft of similar articles. It is not known whether he had even been charged
with theft. On this material Dharmadasa is arrested. Within 15 minutes from
his arrest he is said to have confessed to the offence and the disposal of the
water pump. He says that when he obtained Kirthipala's assistance to sell the
water pump he represented that it belonged to a person living far away and
that he did not tell Kirthipala how he came by it. On this statement
Kirthipala is arrested and within 10 minutes he is said to have admitted the
sale of the article to the petitioner. He, however says that on



##  275



being asked by the petitioner he claimed to be the owner of the article. It
was on this statement that the petitioner was arrested; however, the stolen
article was not recovered.



Whilst there is no objection to the police questioning pos­sible suspects in
the course of investigations into an offence, a lawful arrest can be made only
on reasonable suspicion based on credible information ‑ _Muttusamy v.
Kannangara (Supra)_. This is the procedure established by law for an arrest
without warrant. The observance of this procedure is now a constitu­tional
right under Article 13(1) of the Constitution which gua­rantees freedom from
arbitrary arrest. The information on which the arrest is based must be
credible by the application of the objective test. An arrest based purely on
the subjective satisfaction of the police officer would be arbitrary and
viola­tive of Article 13(1). These rules apply even in the case of an arrest
for an offence under Emergency Regulations and as Atukorale J. described in
_Chandradasa's_ case _(supra)_ they constitute "legal constraints" on the
powers of arrest without warrant conferred on a police officer under
Regulation 18(1). Having referred to the fact that police frequently invoke
this regulation, like S.32(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, under the
normal laws, Atukorale J. proceeded to state thus –



"It is therefore very essential that they should acquaint them­selves fully
with its preFise nature, scope and ambit. It is all the more so in the context
of the present Constitution which makes assurance to all persons the dignity
and freedom of the individual by guaranteeing to them, amongst others, the
free­dom from arbitrary arrest and detention. Every improper invocation of
this power by a police officer endangers the con­stitutional right and
assurance of personal freedom enjoyed and held out to the people of this
country".



##  276





            This exortation applies with even greater force to an arrest without a warrant under the normal laws invoked against the petitioner.



If as pointed out above the petitioner was arrested entirely on the basis of
Kirthipala's statement who said that he repre sented to the petitioner that
the water pump belonged to him after which the petitioner bought it, there is
no credible infor­mation giving rise to a reasonable suspicion that the
petitioner is concerned in the offence of dishonestly receiving stolen
property. It is an arbitrary arrest particularly having regard to the
background to the case viz. the water pump which was lost belongs to the wife
of a Senior Police Officer and the initial information which led to the
petitioner's arrest was given by a subordinate Police Officer. That
information, even if it has any value, does not touch the petitioner. The
petitioner complains that he was not informed of the reason for his arrest.
Even if, as stated by the respondents, he was informed of the reason, I
determine the arrest to be unlawful for non‑conformity with the requirements
of S.32(l)(b) of the Code of Criminal Proce­dure and hence violative of
Article 13(1) of the Constitution. The 1st and 2nd respondents are responsible
for this violation.



As regards the alleged violation of Article 11, I am satisfied that the
petitioner was whilst he remained in police custody subjected to severe
assault constituting torture or cruel, inhu­man or degrading treatment. This
is supported by the Medical Report P1 which is in turn confirmed by the
Medical Report R8 despite its brevity. The petitioner's version that he was
assaulted from about 8.30 a.m. on 01.12.90 is supported by the affidavit of
Gamalath Attorney‑at‑Law and the prompt state­ment of the petitioner to the
D.M.O., Padukka, the complaint to the Police Headquarters and the history of
injuries given to the D.M.O. Padukka and the Asst. J.M.O. Colombo. This was
followed up with a complaint to the Magistrate. I reject the respondents,
version that the petitioner and other suspects were arrested during the
afternoon of that day and their

** **

**277   **

** **

statements were recorded so fast and in quick succession between 4.10 p.m. and
5.10 p.m. and that by 6.45 p.m. the petitioner became so ill as to require
hospitalization by reason of a natural cause or by injuries caused by rolling
down a rock as the respondents attempt to make out. I accept the petition­er's
version that he was arrested during the early hours of the morning and was
later on tortured at the Police Station by the 1st and 2nd respondents.
Presumably, this was done for the purpose of extracting a confession from the
petitioner which they failed to get. Accordingly, I determine that the 1st and
2nd respondents have infringed the petitioner's rights under Article 11 of the
Constitution.



In determining the relief to be granted to the petitioner, I take into
consideration the fact that this is yet another case in which the police have
nonchalantly indulged in unlawful arrest of a citizen and torture despite so
many decisions of this Court in which the fundamental rights involved have
been dis­cussed over and over again. The strong condemnation of tor­ture in
_Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_ (3) to which refer­ence has been made in
recent judgments of this Court, in _Geekiyanage Ptemalal de Silva v. Rodrigo_
(4) and _Jayaratne v. Tennakoon_ (5) has had no effect on the police. In _Amal
Sudath Silva's_ case Atukorale J. describes torture by the police as
"barbaric, savage and inhuman" and "most revolting to one's sense of human
decency and dignity". He also said –



"Nothing shocks the conscience of a man so much as the cowardly act of a
delinquent police officer who subjects a helpless suspect in his charge to
depraved and barbarous methods of treatment within the confines of the very
premises in which he is held in custody........   The petitioner may be a
hard‑core criminal whose tribe deserves no sympathy. But if constitutional
guarantees are to have any meaning or value in our democratic set‑up, it is
essential that he be not denied the protection guaran­teed by our
Constitution".



_Amal Sudath Silva v. Kodituwakku_. (3)



##  278



I am in respectful agreement with the above quoted views which need no
improvement for emphasis except to state that despite subsequent reminders to
the police, violations of Article 11 of the Constitution which symbolises
man's inhumanity to man continue. Such infractions make the State primarily
lia­ble. In awarding just and equitable relief we are mindful of the fact that
the State has to pay compensation out of public funds; but this Court cannot
on that ground resile from mak­ing an appropriate order. The State has to pay
in view of the principle of State responsibility for executive and
administra­tive action. If payment of compensation in default is a burden on
public funds, it cannot be helped. In any event, compensa­tion ordered is
payable to the citizen whose rights are violated and constitutes a just levy
on public funds in favour of the citizen. In all the circumstances, I direct
the State to pay Rs. 1000/‑ (Rupees One Thousand) to the petitioner as
compensa­tion on account of the infringement of his rights under Article 13(1)
and Rs. 14,000/‑ (Rupees Fourteen Thousand) as com­pensation on account of the
infringement of his rights under Article 11. The 1st and 2nd respondents are
personally respon­sible for such infringements and are liable under Article
4(d) read with Article 126(4) to an order for relief. In the circum­stances of
this case, I direct the lst and 2nd respondents to pay Rs. 1750/‑ (Rupees One
Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty) to the Petitioner as costs in the proportion
of Rs. 875/- ­(Rupees Eight Hundred and Seventy Five) each but with a warning
that a recurrence of such conduct by police officers may attract heavier
sanctions against them including liability to pay compensation.



**Bandaranayake, J. __**    I agree.



**Wadugodapitiya, J. __**    I agree.



_**Application allowed. Compensation ordered.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/25.html_  

