##  Kiriwanthe and Another v. Navaratne and Another - SLR - 393, Vol 2 of 1990
[1990] LKSC 25; (1990) 2 Sri LR 393 (16 October 1990)

**

393

KIRIWANTHE AND ANOTHER  
v.  
NAVARATNE AND ANOTHER

**

SUPREME COURT,  
FERNANDO, J  
KULATUNGA, J. AND DHEERARATNE. J ,  
S.C. APPEAL No. 16/90,  
C.A. APPLICATION No.626/88,  
AGRARIAN SERVICES INQUIRY No BD/E/34/375,  
JULY 18, 1990

_

Supreme Court Rules - Compliance with Rule 46 - Uberrima fides - Lex non cogit
ad impossibilia

_

The requirements of Rule 46 must be complied with normally at the time of
filing the application but strict or absolute compliance is not essential. It
is sufficient if there is compliance which is substantial - this being judged
in the light of the object and purpose of the Rule. It is not to be
mechanically applied. The Court should first have determined whether the
default had been satisfactorily explained, or cured subsequently without
unreasonable delay, and then have exercised a judicial discretion either to
excuse the non-compliance, or to impose a sanction. Dismissal was not the only
sanction. That discretion should have been exercised primarily by reference to
the purpose of the Rules, and not as a means of punishing the defaulter. The
discretion should be exercised judicially.

A failure to comply with the rule is curable by subsequent compliance where
the court holds that initial compliance was impossible by reason of
circumstances which are beyond the control of the applicant. The court may
also permit the amendment of papers filed or the filing of additional papers
in terms of Rule 50

**

Per Kulatunga, J. -

**

"In exercising its discretion the Court will bear in mind the need to keep the
channel of procedure open for justice to flow freely and smooth y and the need
to maintain the discipline of the law. At the same time the court will not
permit mere technicalities to stand in the way of the Court doing Justice"

**

Per Fernando, J. -

**

"The weight of authority thus favours the view that while all these Rules
(Rules 46, 47, 49, 35) must be complied with the law does not require or
permit an automatic dismissal of the application or appeal of the party in
default. The consequence of noncompliance (by reason of impossibility or for
any other reason) is a matter falling within the

**394**

discretion of the Court, to be exercised after considering the nature of the
default, as well as the execuse or explanation therefor, in the context of the
object of the particular Rule''

The petitioners bung unaware of the existence of the determination there was
no want of uberrima fides and they were not guilty of wilful non-disclosure or
deception.

**

Cases referred to

**_

(1) Appuhamy v. Hettiaratchi (1973) 77 NLR 31_  

_

(2) Navaratnasingham v Arumugam (1980) 2 Sri LP 01_  

_

(3) Collettes v Weerakoon C A Application No 77/88. C A Minutes of 08.09 1989_  

_

(4) Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali (1981) 2 So LR 29 (CA._  

_

(5) Rasheed Ali v Mohamed All (1981) 1 Sri LR 262 (S C)_  

_

(6) Nicholas v Macao Markar (1981) 2 Sri LR 1 (C A)_  

_

(7) Koralage v. Mohamed (1988) 2 Sri LR 29.9_  

_

(8) Caldera v. John Keells Holdings (1986) 1 C A. L R 575_  

_

(9) Brown and Co. v Ratnayake (1990) 1 Sri LR 92, 95_  

_

(10) Mary Nona v. Fransina (1988) 2 Sri LR 250_  

_

(11) Karunawathie v. Kusumaseeli (1990) 1 Sri L R 127, 128_  

_

(12) Paramanathan v. kodituwakuarachchi (1988) 1 Sri LR 315_  

_

(13) Samarasekera v. Mudiyanse (1990) 1 Sri LR 137_  

_

(14) Woodward v. Sarsons (1875) LR 10 CP 733_  

_

(15) Liverpool Borought Bank v Turner (1860) 2 De G F J 502_  

_

(16) Howard v. Bodington (1877) 2 P D 203_  

_

(17) B v. 8 (1961) 2 Ail ER 396_  

_

(18) Gangodagedera v Mercantile Credit (1988) 2 Sri LR 253_  

_

(19) Leelananda v Mercantile Credit (1988) 2 Sri LR 417_  

_

(20) Samarawickrema v Attorney-General (1983) Sriskantha s LR 47_  

_

(21) Mylvaganam v. Reckitt & Colman S C 154/87 - S C. Minutes of 08 07 1987 _  

_

(22) Mendis v Rajapaksa S C 49/88 - S .C Minutes of 03 11 89_  

_

(23) Coomasaru v. Leechman and Co. S C 27/73 - SC Minutes of 26 05 76_  

_

(24) Folkestone Cpn v. Brockman (1914) A C. 338, 367_  

_

(25) Anisminic Ltd. v. Foreig Compensation Commission (1969) 2 A C 147, 195_  

_

(26) Udeshi et al v Mather CA Application No 622,186 - C A Minutes 24 10 86

_**

APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal

_

K.M.P. Rajaratne_ for the appellants  

1st respondent absent and unrepresented  

_

J.C. T. Kotalawala with D. Guruge_ for the 2nd respondent

_

Cur adv vult

_

**395**

October 16, 1990  
  
**FERNANDO, J.

**

This is an appeal against a judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing an
application in revision upon certain preliminary objections. It raises
important questions as to the tenability of those objections, as well as the
proper approach to the exercise of the discretion of the Court in regard to
such preliminary objections

The tenant-cultivator of a paddy field died in February 1986. It was the
position of the 2nd Respondent (the owner) that he became aware in July, 1987
that the field was being cultivated by the 1st Petitioner-Appellant (whose
wife, the 2nd Petitioner-Appellant, was the youngest daughter of the deceased
tenant-cultivator), contrary to Section 14 of the Agrarian Services Act, No 58
of 1979 ; he complained to the 1st Respondent, the Assistant Commissioner of
Agrarian Services, who inquired into that complaint. The 1st Petitioner
claimed that he had been recognised as tenant-cultivator by the 2nd Respondent
during the lifetime of the deceased ; the 2nd Petitioner, though not a party
to the proceedings, gave evidence to support her husband. Soon after the
conclusion of that inquiry, the 2nd Petitioner received a letter dated
15.6.88, conveying the 1st Respondent's decision that after the death of the
tenant-cultivator, the 1st Petitioner had been in possession of the field
without any legal right, and ordering him to vacate the field without delay.
That letter was copied to the 2nd Respondent, for the purpose of enabling him
to take possession of the field , it was also coped to two officials for the
purpose of a report by them to enable future legal action if the first
Petitioner failed to vacate without delay. It did not state or suggest that
any further order or communication would follow. In these circumstances, the
Petitioners naturally anticipated imminent eviction, from a field, the income
from which was their only source of income, and feared irreparable loss unless
that order was stayed. On 22.6.88 they applied to the Court of Appeal for
Certiorari to quash the 1 st Respondent's order dated 15.6.88, and Mandamus to
compel him to declare that the 1st Petitioner and/or the 2nd Petitioner were
entitled to the rights of the deceased tenant-cultivator, in terms of section
14(1) of the Act. They averred that two sisters of the 2nd Petitioner had, in
the course of their evidence at the inquiry, claimed that if the 1st
Petitioner was held not to be the tenant-cultivator of the field, they would
be

**396**

entitled to those rights, and consented to those rights being vested in or
transferred to the 2nd Petitioner. Among the grounds relied on by the
Petitioners were that "the 1st Respondent has not given any reasons for his
order [dated 15-6.881", that "the 1st Respondent has not given a specified
date as mentioned in Section 14 (2)", and that "the 1 St Respondent has erred
in not holding that the 2nd Petitioner is entitled to the right of her
father". On 24.6.88, notice was issued, and an ex parte stay order was issued.
The Court of Appeal judgment sets out the preliminary objections which were
upheld

" 1. That the Petitioners have not disclosed material facts in that they have
not adverted to the determination made by the 1st Respondent at the conclusion
of the inquiry upon which this said order dated 15.6.88 was based and have
thereby failed to show uberrima fides in placing the full facts before this
Court.

2\. That the Petitioners are relying on the failure to state the reasons for
the said order, in the said letter dated 15.6.88 as an error on the face of
the record to obtain a Writ of Certiorari, whereas the petitioners should have
disclosed that in fact the said order is based upon the reasons given in the
determination marked P10, made by the 1 st Respondent after the said inquiry.

3\. That the Petitioners have failed to comply with Rule 46 of the Supreme
Court Rules of 1978, in that the Petitioners have failed to file along with
the petition and affidavit, the reasons and determination made by the 1 st
Respondent, upon the conclusion of the said inquiry, which is a part of the
proceedings as contemplated under Rule 46, that would be necessary to
understand the said order sought to be quashed and place it in its proper
context.".

It is common ground that the only communication which the 2nd Petitioner had
received by 24.6.88, when the application was supported, was-the **letter**
dated 15.6-88. The " **determinations** marked P10" referred to in the
preliminary objections is an undated document appearing at the end of the
certified copy of the proceedings (P1 0) -this was certified on 11. 7-88, and
issued to the Petitioners sometime later that month. While no reasons are set
out in the letter, reasons are stated in the determination. Counsel for the
Petitioners stated from the Bar that he was not informed immediately of the
existence of this determination because of the conditions prevailing at that
time, but I will assume that it

**397**

is his clients' knowledge which is relevant. Counsel for the 2nd Respondent
did not inform the Court on the notice returnable date, or on subsequent
calling dates, that this material document had not been produced and that the
stay order should be vacated ; nor did the 2nd Respondent refer specifically
to the non-production of this document in his objections dated 17.8.88,
although he averred that documents annexed to the petition had not been served
on him, that documents produced and evidence given by him had been concealed,
and that relevant and material copies of the inquiry proceedings had not been
made available to the Court. The document P 10 was produced with the
Petitioners' counter-affidavit dated 6.10.88.

Referring to the Petitioners' failure to produce this "determination" with
their petition or to make

reference to it when the petition was supported, the Court of Appeal held:

"The said objections arose mainly from the fact that the Petitioners have
failed to file the determination and the reasons given by the 1st Respondent,
at the conclusion of the said inquiry, **along with the original petition and
affidavit in this Court**. However the Petitioners have filed the said
determination and the reasons along with their counter-affidavit later.
Counsel for the Petitioners stated that the Petitioners were unaware, that
there was a determination and that the reasons have been given for such
determination, **at the time this application was filed**. In my view this
explanation is unsatisfactory. The Petitioners have been represented by
Counsel even at the stage of the said inquiry. In any event, with the
production of the said document, the legal consequences that have flown has
given a different complexion to the whole case." (emphasis added)'

"..................In the circumstances, this Court is of the view that the
Petitioners should have disclosed that the order dated 15.6.88 is based upon
the reasons and the determination made by the 1st Respondent after the said
inquiry. In my view, the failure to do so justifies the denial of the remedy."

The application was thus dismissed solely on account of the failure (a) to
produce the determination with the petition, and (b) to disclose its contents
in the petition.

This decision was strongly criticized by Counsel for the Petitioners, who
submitted that the Petitioners ought not to have been penalised for the
failure to produce this "determination" with their petition or to make

**398**

reference to it when the petition was supported, since they were unaware of
its existence at that time ; even now it is not known whether the undated
determination was in existence on, 24.6.88. It is the Petitioners' case that
the 2nd Respondent failed to discharge the burden of satisfying the Court that
the document was in existence, and could have been produced by the Petitioners
; that Rule 46 must be applied subject to the principle that lex non cogit ad
impossibilia ; and finally that the element of wilful non-disclosure or
deception is of the essence of the uberrima fides principle, and was
mainfestly lacking here.

Uberrima Fides: The Court of Appeal relied on Appuhamy v Hettiaratchi (1)"'
certain English decisions cited in that case, Navaratnasingham v. Arumugam,
'(2)' and Collettes v. Weerakoon(3) However, these have no application for the
reason that the Petitioners were unaware of the existence of the
determination, and hence were not guilty of wilful non-disclosure or
deception.

Rule 46: The Court of Appeal purported to follow Rasheed Ali v Mohamed Ali,
(4) (5)' as well as Nicholas v. Macan Markar, (6) which dealt with Rule 47. It
is thus relevant to refer to decisions dealing with Rules 35 and 46 to 49,
which are similar in many respects.

In Navaratnasingham v. Arumugam, Soza, J. considered Rules 46 to be mandatory
or imperative, observing -

"..............the order canvassed before us cannot be reviewed in the absence
of the earlier proceedings, evidence and the original complaint. These were
procured only subsequently. This petition therefore should have been. rejected
for noncompliance with Rule 46."

Later, in Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali, Soza, J , modified this view

"................that judgment should be read subject to the principle that
the law does not expect a person to do the impossible. There may be occasions
when matters of great urgency arise where a party has to seek the revisionary
powers of this Court but is left with no time to obtain the documents as
required by Rule 46 On such an occasion the Court no doubt will take a
reasonable view of the matter and extend such indulgence as is necessary to
enable a petitioner to comply with the requirements, subsequent to the filing
of the

**399**

petition..... [He] is not exempted from complying with Rule 46. If
circumstances beyond his control prevent his complying with the rule at the
moment of filing the application he should yet comply with it as soon as
possible."

In that case the Petitioner's initial failure to comply was excused because of
the urgency of the application. However, he did not attempt to comply later,
but the Respondent filed "a number of documents so as to present an adequate
picture of the dispute between the parties". It was held that this did not
absolve the Petitioner from himself complying with Rule 46 by tendering the
necessary documents. On appeal to this Court, It was held that Rule 46 was
mandatory, even if non-compliance causes no prejudice to the opposite party ,
that the Petitioner could not be excused from complying with the rule, because
that would be virtually to invest the Petitioner with a discretion whether or
not to comply with the rule (Wanasundera, J., Weeraratne, J., agreeing).
Sharvananda, J., (as he then was) took a more liberal view:

"A party should ordinarily comply with the requirements of Rule 46, and if he
fails to do so, his petition is liable to be rejected, unless he had good
reason for such non-compliance. It is a matter falling within the discretion
of the Court whether, in the circumstances, the petitioner should be excused
or not for such non-compliance. In the instant case,. . . . . the respondent,
by furnishing. . . . . . . all the necessary exhibits, relieved the petitioner
of the requirement to file the material documents. The Court was in possession
of the necessary material and hence it was not obligatory on the part of the
petitioner to duplicate the exhibits....... **the purpose of the requirement
of the petitioner filing those documents is satisfied."**

Pertinently, he added

"The Rules are designed to facilitate justice and further its ends ; they are
not designed to trip the petitioner for justice.""

In Koralage v. Mohamed,(7) "' a revision application was dismissed both on the
merits, and for non-compliance with Rule 46 ; there was neither subsequent
compliance nor an explanation for non-compliance (cf. Caldera v. John Keells
Holdings(8)' In Brown & Co. v Ratnayake(9) the objection was upheld as the
non-compliance did not fall "within the limited exceptions judicially
recognised"".

**400**

The discretion to dismiss was exercised in the light of the object of the Rule
in Mary Nona v. Fransina(10) where there was continuing noncompliance, and
Ramanathan, J., found it "not possible to review the order complained of
without these documents" ; so also in Karunawathi v. Kusumaseeli(11) where it
was found impossible to review the order without the missing documents.

In Paramanathan v. Kodituwakuarachchi (12) Bandaranayake, J., observed that a
deficiency can be made good later "by tendering additional papers with
permission of Court as provided for in Rule 50".

I refrain from commenting on Samarasekera v. Mudiyanse (3)' where the
objection was upheld, as an appeal is pending to this Court.

Maxwell (Interpretation of Statutes, 12th ed. pp. 314-5), discusses the
principle governing statutory requirements of this kind

"When a statute requires that something shall be done, or done in a particular
manner or form, without expressly declaring what shall be the consequence of
non-compliance, is the requirement to be regarded as imperative (or mandatory)
or merely as directory (or permissive) ? In some cases, the conditions or
forms prescribed by the statute have been regarded as essential to the act or
thing regulated by it, and their omission has been held fatal to its validity.
In others, such prescriptions have been considered as merely directory, the
neglect of them involving nothing more than liability to a penalty, if any
were imposed, for breach of the enactment. 'An absolute enactment must be
obeyed or fulfilled exactly, but it is sufficient if a directory enactment be
obeyed or fulfiled substantially'. [Woodward v Sarsons(14) ]''

"'No universal rule' said Lord Campbell L.C. 'can be laid down for the
construction of statutes, as to whether mandatory enactments shall be
considered directory only or obligatory with an implied nullification for
disobedience. It is the duty of Courts of Justice to try to get at the real
intention of the Legislature by carefully attending to the whole scope of the
statute to be construed.' [Liverpool Borough Bank v. Turner (15)).And Lord
Penzance said : 'I believe, as far as any rule is concerned, you cannot safely
go further than that in each case you must look to the subject-matter ,
consider the importance of the provision that has been disregarded, and the
relation of that provision

**401**

to the general object intended to be secured by the Act ; and upon a review of
the case in that aspect decide whether the matter is what is called imperative
or only directory.' "[Howard v. Bodignton (16) see also B. v. B.(17) - to look
at....... the purposes that it was intended to serve] ".

While "mandatory" is generally used in the sense of "imperative" or
""absolute" or "obligatory'", as opposed to "directory" or "permissive", it Is
used by Lord Campbell as embracing both categories. Without becoming enmeshed
in semantics, I am content to hold that the requirements of Rule 46 must be
complied with, but that strict or absolute compliance is not essential ; it is
sufficient if there is compliance which is "substantial"" - this being judged
in the light of the object and purpose of the Rule. It is not to be
mechanically applied, as in the case now before us ; the Court should first
have determined whether the default had been satisfactorily explained, or
cured subsequently without unreasonable delay, and then have exercised a
judicial discretion either to execuse the non-compliance, or to impose a
sanction ; dismissal was not the only sanction. That discretion should have
been exercised primarily by reference to the purpose of the Rules, and not as
a means of punishing the defaulter.

Rule 47 : The Court of Appeal held in Nicholas v. Macan Markar that Rule 47
was mandatory, and that a petition which does not contain the averment
required by that Rule must be rejected. The petition had been accepted by the
Registrar, with a minute that the papers were in order, and the Court issued
notice. One averment in the Respondent's statement of objections was that the
petition and affidavit "do not conform to the Rules of the Supreme Court,
1978, which are imperative" but no particular rule was specified. The Court of
Appeal observed that the Respondent "has specifically taken up this objection,
but the Petitioner has not thought it fit to seek to amend his petition or to
explain the non-compliance by filing a counter affidavit". It would thus
appear that although the Court of Appeal seemed to favour an automatic
rejection of the application, it did not completely exclude the discretion of
the Court to excuse non-compliance in appropriate circumstances. This decision
was reversed on the facts by this Court (S.C. 30/81 , S.C.M. 22.3.82 , (1986)
B. A. L. J. Reports Vol. 1 Part VI page 245). Wimalaratne, J., (with whom
Soza, J., agreed) took the more liberal view (Wanasundera, J., dissenting) as
to the discretion of the Court

**402**

". . . . . . . it is open to the Court, after hearing the parties, either to
direct compliance with the Rules or to dismiss it. Dismissal is not the only
consequence of the breach, at least of Rule 47, **because the object of
ensuring that no second order would be made on a** second application
regarding the identical matter could be achieved without resorting to the
drastic step of dismissal.

As a result of his application having been accepted and registered, notice on
the Respondents being issued thereafter, and the absence of the listing of the
matter for an order of Court soon after the general objection was taken by the
Respondent, the Petitioner may well have been led to believe that his
application was in order. Under these circumstances. . . . . . . .the Court
ought to have called upon the Petitioner to perfect his application by
complying with Rule 47."

My view of Rule 46 is fortified by this decision.

Rule 49 : Two decisions of the Court of Appeal must be mentioned. In
Gangodagedera v. Mercantile Credit (18)' and Leelananda v. Mercantile
Credit,(19) it was held that the failure to tender the requisite notices
within two weeks is fatal to the application. However, both judgments make
passing references to the Petitioner's failure to submit an explanation, and
thus seem to recognise that there is no automatic dismissal, without the prior
exercise of a judicial discretion.

Rule 35 : This Rule requires the filing of written submissions. In
Samarawickrema v. Attorney-General(20) Wanasundera, J., observed that "these
provisions have been consistently held by this Court to be imperative" in
dismissing a criminal appeal in which written submissions had been filed, but
without a copy having been served on the Attorney-General in terms of Rule 35
(e)- I n Mylvaganam v. Reckitt & Colman,(21) the appeal was dismissed since
the submissions had been filed out of time, without any excuse having been
tendered for the delay. Both these decisions did not consider the effect of
Rule 35 (b) which prescribes the consequence of non-compliance. After a full
argument, a different view was taken in Mendis v. Rajapakse(22) having regard
to the object of the Rule, non-compliance does not automatically result in the
dismissal of an appeal, and the Court has a real discretion , that Rule 40
would permit dismissal only upon a failure to show due diligence. In Coomasaru
v. Leechman & Co.(23) the Supreme Court (in an appeal

**403**

transferred from the former Court of Appeal after the abolition of that Court)
interpreted the Court of Appeal, Appeal Procedure Rules, 1972\. It was
submitted that

"while the effect of these Rules is to deprive the appellant of a right of
being heard, there is nothing to prevent the Court from granting permission to
the appellant or his Counsel, who had made default in filing written
submissions, to make oral submissions at the hearing. As against this it was
submitted by Counsel for Leechmans that while he does not deny a right in the
Court to grant such permission in appropriate circumstances, the appellant
must place some material before Court sufficient to excuse his default, which
the appellant in his case has signally failed to do."

The appeal came up for hearing two years after it had been filed, and the
appellant had neither filed written submissions nor explained his default.
Tennekoon, CJ, (Vythialingam, J., Sharvananda, J., and Colin Theme, J.,
agreeing, Rajaratnam, J., dissenting), referred to Rule 26 -

"At the hearing of the appeal only such authorities or legislation as are
referred to in the submissions may be relied on at the argument before the
Court of Appeal, save and except those which were not in existence at the time
the submissions were lodged" and held that

"the effect of this Rule would be to deprive the Court itself of the benefit
of a full argument. This can only result in the Court having to carry out a
study of the appellant's case unaided by adversary argument by Counsel at the
grave risk of misdirecting itself in regard to authorities and legislation
which the parties had no opportunity of discussing before the Court. In the
result, I am of opinion that this is a case in which the appellant who, though
enjoying a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal, has not. 'properly asserted
that right'. He has further submitted no excuse for his failure to comply with
the Rule. In such a situation I think it is the duty of any Court to exercise
that power common to all Courts, which is usually referred to as its "inherent
power', and to strike out or dismiss the appeal."

With respect, that line of reasoning does not appeal to me. Even in a case
where submissions are fled, Rule 26 would deprive the Court of the benefit of
Counsel's assistance in regard to authorities not cited in

**404**

the Appellant's written submissions, but the Court would nevertheless have to
study that aspect of the Appellant's case to which the omitted authorities
relate, despite the same risk of misdirecting itself in regard to those
authorities ; Rule 26 would not permit a dismissal of the appeal for non-
compliance. It is also difficult to see how this principle could be applied to
cases where it was the respondent who failed to file submissions, and thus
deprived the Court of the benefit of assistance in regard to authorities in
support of his case. In any event, Tennekoon, CJ, does not indicate what the
position would have been had an excuse been submitted ; would relief have been
granted despite Rule 26 ? That decision is distinguishable for two reasons :
Rule 26 finds no counterpart in the present Rules, and it dealt with a case of
continuing non-compliance for over two years without excuse or explanation.

The weight of authority thus favours the view that while all these Rules must
be complied with the law does not require or permit an automatic dismissal of
the application or appeal of the party in default. The consequence of non-
compliance (by reason of impossibility or **for any other reason** ) is a
matter falling within the discretion of the Court, to be exercised after
considering the nature of the default, as well as the excuse or explanation
therefor, in the context of the object of the particular Rule. In the case
before us, the Court of Appeal was clearly wrong in upholding the preliminary
objection based on Rule 46.

Counsel for the 2nd Respondent then sought to support the judgment on a
different basis. Seizing upon a sentence in the judgment - that "the
Petitioners have been represented by Counsel even at the stage of the said
inquiry" - he submitted that the usual practice in these inquiries, with which
Petitioners' Counsel would have been familiar, was for an order to be
communicated by letter, and for the reasons to be set out in another document
which is retained in the inquiry file ; this, he submitted, is not sent to the
parties, but could be discovered by any interested party upon making inquiries
at the office of the 1st Respondent. Such an extraordinary procedure would
place an intolerable burden on an aggrieved party, and I cannot accept this
submission in the absence of any rules prescribing such a procedure or clear
evidence of such a practice. Section 14 (2) authorises a written order. It
does not contemplate more than one order ; while such an order may possibly
consist of more than one document, some suitable cross-reference is necessary.
Further, that section authorises an order requiring a person to vacate
immovable property on a specified date,

**405**

and such an order must necessarily be served on the person affected. It can
well be contended that where the order consists of two documents, both must be
served ; be that as it may, I cannot regard an order under Section 14 (2) as
including a document which is neither served, nor referred to in the document
which is actually served on the party concerned. The failure to search for the
determination does not establish a lack of uberrima fides or a breach of Rule
46.

Counsel for the 2nd Respondent next contended that the Petitioners were under
an obligation to tender the determination no sooner they obtained a copy
thereof, explaining why they failed to do so earlier. This is not the basis on
which the Court of Appeal upheld the preliminary objections. In this case, the
Petitioners have tendered the document about ten weeks after they obtained it,
and long before the first date of hearing ; no prejudice was occasioned by
this delay. Rule 50 contemplates that additional papers may be filed only upon
a motion with leave of Court ; on 20.9.88, the Petitioners obtained permission
to file their counter-affidavit, and tendered the determination with that
affidavit. In these circumstances, no violation of Rule 46 is involved. While
I agree that a Petitioner must cure his default as soon as possible, and with
an explanation, I am not prepared to regard a period of ten weeks delay,
without any prejudice having been proved, as justifying the dismissal of the
petition. Since the objection was not specifically taken in the 2nd
Respondent's statement of objections, I do not regard the absence of a
specific explanation in the counter-affidavit as fatal , when the matter was
first raised at the hearing, an explanation was tendered which appears, from
the documents, to be true and reasonable.

The Petitioners' application to the Court of Appeal involved substantial
questions of law. Even if the 1st Petitioner's claim to be recognised as the
tenant-cultivator was rejected, the further question arose as to the persons
entitled to be so recognised (under Section 8) ; whether possession by
potential successors under Section 8 was "unlawful" within the meaning of
Section 14 (1) , whether the 1st Respondent was obliged to determine the
lawful successor under Section 8, or to stay further proceedings pending the
determination of that question under Section 9 ; even if an order for the
ejectment of the 1st Petitioner was properly made, whether the 2nd Respondent
could be placed in possession by the ejectment of all others including
potential successors (under Section 8) the 2nd Petitioner and her sisters.
Even if non-compliance had not been explained, the discretion of the Court, to

**406**

make an order of dismissal, should have been exercised only after considering
the gravity of default in relation to the issues arising in the case.

For these reasons, I allow the appeal, and set aside the judgment and order of
the Court of Appeal, with costs in a sum of Rs. 2,500 payable by the 2nd
Respondent to the Petitioners-Appellants. The Court of Appeal is directed to
hear and determine the Petitioners" application on the merits.

**

DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree

**KULATUNGA, J.

**

I have had the advantage of reading in draft, the judgment of my brother
Fernando, J., allowing this appeal. I am in agreement with that order but my
approach and reasons therefor are in some respects different, hence this
judgment.

The petitioners-appellants (hereinafter referred to as the petitioners) sought
writs of certiorari and mandamus challenging an order dated 15.06.88 made by
the 1st respondent (Asst. Commissioner of Agrarian Services) under S.14 (2) of
the Agrarian Services Act, No. 58 of 1979 ordering the 1st petitioner to
vacate a paddy land called Galpattiyaarawa owned by the 2nd respondent on the
ground that the 1st petitioner was in occupation of the said paddy land in
breach of S.14 (1) of the Act after the death of one Suduhamy who was the
tenant cultivator thereof. The Court of Appeal by its judgment dated. 19.01.90
dismissed the application in limine upholding certain preliminary objections
taken by the 2nd respondent namely -

(a) that the petitioners have not disclosed material particulars, in that they
have not adverted to the determination made by the 1st respondent at the
conclusion of the inquiry upon which the said order dated 15.06.88 was based
and have thereby failed to show uberrima fides in placing the full facts
before the Court , and

(b) that the petitioners have failed to comply with Rule 46 of the Supreme
Court Rules of 1978, in that the petitioners have failed to file along with
the petition and affidavit, the reasons and

**407**

determination made by the 1st respondent, upon the conclusion of the inquiry,
which is a part of the proceedings as contemplated under Rule 46, that would
be necessary to understand the said order sought to be quashed and place it in
its proper context.

As it appears from the objections filed on behalf of the 2nd respondent, the
above stated preliminary objections are based on the following premise, namely
: "that the petitioners are relying on the failure to state the reasons for
the (impugned) order, in the letter dated 15.06.88, **as an error on the face
of the record** to obtain a writ of certiorari, whereas the petitioners should
have disclosed that in fact the said order is based upon reasons given in the
determination marked P 10, made by the 1st respondent after the said inquiry".
(emphasis added) ; and it seems to me that the Court of Appeal has itself
proceeded to determine the objections on an acceptance of the correctness of
the premise so set out. Thus, despite the subsequent production of the said
determination and reasons marked P 10 with the counter affidavit of the
petitioners and their Counsel's submission that they were unaware of the
existence of such determination the Court of Appeal upheld the preliminary
objections, having rejected the explanation for the delay in supplying the
said document. In so holding the Court accepted the submission of the Counsel
for the 2nd respondent that as a result of the failure to disclose the
document, the Court had been led to issue notice ; that if a true disclosure
was made the **error on the face of the record** complained of, upon which the
writ of certiorari is asked for would be non-existent ; and that the other
ground urged in the petition do not warrant the issue of a writ of certiorari.
The Court concluded that "if the petitioner had made a true disclosure, then
the Court may not have acted in this case'".

In view of the fact that the writ application is still to be argued on its
merits in the Court below, I do not wish to express any firm views as to the
grounds upon which relief has been sought. That must be left to the parties
and to that Court. However, the question whether the decision of that Court in
allowing the preliminary objections has been influenced by any
misunderstanding as regards the grounds or the scope of the grounds on which
the relief sought in the application is based is relevant to this appeal. I
therefore propose to briefly examine that question but without prejudice to
the rights of the parties to pursue the matter at the hearing of the
application. I shall first summarise the relevant facts and circumstances.

**408**

It is common ground that Suduhamy who died in 1986 was the tenant cultivator
of the paddy land in dispute and the 1st petitioner is his son-in-law married
to his youngest daughter, the 2nd respondent. In the absence of a nomination
of a member of Suduhamy's family as tenant cultivator under S. 7 (1) of the
Agrarian Services Act, his rights would have devolved on Angonona being his
oldest child (as his wife has predeceased him), in terms of S.8 of the Act.
However, Angonona does not appear to have exercised her right but allowed the
1st petitioner her brother-in-law to cultivate the land. Both at the inquiry
before the 1st respondent and in the Court below, the petitioners claimed that
with the concurrence of the 2nd respondent, Suduhamy permitted the petitioners
to cultivate the land especially after he became seriously ill ; and
consequently the 1st petitioner became the tenant cultivator in proof of which
the petitioners produced an extract from the Paddy Lands Register marked P 1,
acreage fees receipts marked P2, P3, P4, P8 and Agro Identity Card marked P5.
It is the 2nd respondent's position that he never consented to the 1st
petitioner becoming the tenant cultivator and that the alteration in the Paddy
Lands Register had been made without informing him.

Under S. 11 of the Act, Suduhamy could have transferred his rights only to his
wife or failing her to his oldest child Angonona. He could have ceded his
rights to the 2nd respondent, his landlord only with the written sanction of
the Commissioner. In view of these strict provisions, it seems difficult for
the 1st petitioner to have become the tenant cultivator of the land in dispute
except perhaps on proof of an abandonment of his rights by Suduhamy. It is in
the background of these provisions of the Act and the relevant facts that the
1st respondent's order against the 1st petitioner has to be viewed. However,
these are matters for decision by the Court of Appeal.

In their application, the petitioners averred to the facts and documents in
their favour ; they produced the order made against the 1st petitioner, marked
P6 and the day-to-day record of proceedings c the inquiry held by the 2nd
respondent, marked P 7 and alleged that the order P 6 is ex facie wrong and
invalid in the light of evidence led at the inquiry and that the 1st
respondent has not given reasons for the said order ; and that the list
respondent had failed to consider relevant evidence. The petition makes no
reference to error on the face of the record but states that in the premises
the petitioners are entitled to a writ of certiorari to quash the said order
as it is contrary to law and made in excess or abuse of jurisdiction.

**409**

It seems to me that the petitioners have based their application on the ground
of want or excess of jurisdiction in the narrow sense of there being no
acceptable evidence to support the impugned order. Such an order would be
arbitrary and in the absence of reasons, would also be irrational. The
averment that the 1st respondent has given no reasons for the order can be
understood in that context. **Wade Administrative** Law 5th Ed. p.293
discussing the "no evidence" rule as a basis of review concludes

"No evidence" seems destined to take its place as yet a further branch of the
principal of ultra vires, so that Acts giving powers of determination will be
taken to imply that the determination must be based upon some acceptable
evidence. If it is not, it will be treated as "arbitrary, capricious and
obviously unauthorised"".

At p. 289 Wade refers to many judicial decisions which held that lack of
evidence raises no question of jurisdiction and adds -

"But there is current opinion to the contrary which has recently been
gathering force. Lord Atkinson said in one case that "an order made without
any evidence to support it is in truth, in my view, made without
jurisdiction".

Folkestone Cpn v. Brockman(24) See also Anisminic Ltd., v. Foreign
Compensation Commission(25).

If as it seems, the writ was not sought on the ground of error on the face of
the record but on the ground of want or excess of jurisdiction in the narrow
sense supported by the record of evidence P 7 and exhibits P1, P2, P3, P4, P5
and P8, the failure to produce the determination and the reasons of the 1st
respondent would not necessarily raise the issue of uberrima fides or
compliance with Rule 46 ; but it would be open to the 2nd respondent to
produce such determination in rebuttal. In this view of the matter, I hold
that the Court of Appeal has misdirected itself in upholding the preliminary
objections of the assumption that the writ had been asked on the ground of
error on the face of the record and that the other grounds urged in the
petition do not warrant the issue of a writ.

In any event, I am in agreement with the view expressed by my brother
Fernando, J. , that on the facts of this case the allegation of lack of
uberrima fides on the part of the petitioners cannot be made out and the
judicial decisions relied upon by the Court of Appeal have no application to
this case as the petitioners are not guilty of wilful non-disclosure or

**410**

deception. The petitioners filed with their application the record of inquiry
upto 26.04.88 on which date the inquiry was concluded and the parties were
permitted to file written submissions on 26.05.88. The next intimation was the
vacation order dated 15.06.88 (P6). The determination which contained reasons
for that order is undated and was not made with notice to the petitioners :
nor were they furnished with a copy thereof. As such, they could not have
become aware of it on 22.06.88 when they filed their application They became
aware of it when they obtained a fresh copy of the proceedings on 11.07.88.
Thereafter, they tendered it to Court with their counter affidavit which was
filed with the leave of Court obtained on 20.09.88. The Court of Appeal has
rejected the explanation that the petitioners were not aware of the existence
of the determination because they were represented by Counsel even at the
stage of the inquiry. This in my view is not a valid ground for rejecting the
explanation submitted on behalf of the petitioners.

As regards the alleged non-compliance with Rule 46, I am of the view that even
assuming that the petitioners were obliged to supply the determination as an
exhibit accompanying the petition, the failure to do so is excusable in the
light of the available facts and authorities , and hence the application
cannot be thrown out for non-compliance with Rule 46. The defect, if any, is
curable by the application of the maxim lex non cogit ad impossibilia or by
recourse to Rule 50 which permits the tendering of additional papers. In
upholding the preliminary objection based on Rule 46 the Court of Appeal has
failed to apply the well settled principles of law and to judicially evaluate
the facts before it. In the result, the Court has applied Rule 46 most
rigorously and almost mechanically as though that rule carries with it a
penalty to be imposed on a litigant who fails to establish literal compliance
with its terms. This is evident from certain statements in the judgment. Thus,
after rejecting the explanation offered for the delay in tendering the
document under reference the learned Judge said -

"In any event, with the production of the said document, the legal
consequences that have flown has given a different complexion to the whole
case."

In another part of the judgment he says -

"If the petitioners followed the required procedure at the appropriate time
the situation that has arisen in this case would not have come to pass. Thus
in my view the observance of Rule 46 is

**411**

mandatory, and the failure on the part of the petitioners to comply the said
rule is a fatal irregularity which would disable the petitioners from
maintaining this application".

There is no support for this approach in law or judicial decisions.

Rule 46 requires, inter alia, that every application to the Court of Appeal
for the exercise of powers vested in the Court by Article 140 of the
Constitution "shall be byway of petition and affidavit in support of the
averments set out in the petition and shall be accompanied by originals of
documents material to the case or duly certified copies thereof, in the form
of exhibits" **Maxwell** Interpretation of Statues 12th Ed. p.320 states -

"Enactments regulating the procedure in Courts are usually construed as
imperative".

Besides, the language of this rule is plainly imperative (or mandatory) and it
has been so construed in the decisions of the Court of Appeal and this Court
during this decade. Therefore, as stated by my brother Fernando, J., Rule 46
"must be complied with-. However, it is either implicit or conceded in every
one of the previous decisions that noncompliance is curable, on the ground of
impossibility or by recourse of Rule 50. The denial of the remedy is not
automatic. In the previous decisions, the remedy has been denied for good
reasons upon a judicial evaluation of the case.

In Navaratnasingham v. Arumugam(2) an application to the Court-of Appeal to
revise an order made by a Magistrate under S. 62 of the Administration of
Justice Law 1973 was not accompanied by a complete copy of the relevant
proceedings in the absence of which the Court was unable to review the order
canvassed before it These were procured subsequently. Soza, J. (Atukorale,J
agreeing) observed that the petition should have been rejected for non-
compliance with Rule 46. The Court also found that the petitioner had made
averments which do not accurately reflect the state of true facts and hence
failed to show uberrima fides. The application was dismissed. Such dismissal
can be justified on the basis of the second ground alone As regards the first
ground, the judgment does not indicate whether the petitioner gave any
explanation for his delay in supplying the relevant proceedings. Presumably,
he gave no explanation, if so the dismissal can be justified on that ground
also.

**412**

Rasheed Ali v. Mohammed Ali (4) - An application was made to the Court of
Appeal to revise an order of a District Judge against the petitioner rejecting
his claim to remain in possession of certain premises in opposition to the
claim of the judgement-creditor in whose favour the Court had ordered writ to
issue. Soza, J. (L H. de Alwis, J. agreeing) confirmed that Rule 46 is
imperative but added that any default resulting by reason of circumstances
beyond the petitioner's control and great urgency in seeking the revisionary
powers of the Court may be excused. However, the petitioner should comply with
the Rule as soon as possible. He had made no effort to so comply. The 1st
respondent filed a statement annexing a number of document so as to present an
adequate picture of the dispute. Yet this did not absolve the petitioner from
his duty to comply with the rule by moving for amendment of the petition or
tender of additional documents. The Court upheld the preliminary objections.
It was also held that the petitioner had failed to make a full disclosure of
all material facts and as such was not entitled to relief by way of revision ;
and the Court affirmed the judgment of the District Judge that the
petitioner's claim was vexatious and frivolous and not made bona fide. An
appeal to this Court was dismissed (see (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 262)'5' Sharvananda,
J. (as he then was) dissenting. Wanasundera, J. said (p.267-268).

"While I am against mere technicalities standing in the way of this Court
doing justice, it must be admitted that there are rules and rules. Sometimes
Courts--are expressly vested with powers to mitigate hardships, but more often
we are called upon to decide which rules are merely directory and which
mandatory carrying certain adverse consequences, for non-compliance. Many
procedural rules have been enacted in the interest of the due administration
of justice, irrespective of whether or not a non-compliance causes prejudice
to the opposite party. It is in this context that Judges have stressed the
mandatory nature of some rules and the need to keep the channels of procedure
open for justice to flow freely and smoothly. The position of course would be
worse if such non-compliance also causes prejudice to the opposite party.

If we are to accede to the appellant's plea that he should be excused from
complying with the rule, because the respondent has filed some of these
documents, we should be virtually investing an appellant with a discretion
whether or nor to comply with the rule,

**413**

because the required material has already been filed by the opposite party or
it is anticipated that they would be filed by that party. Such I think is not
the law. The material filed by a respondent is in support of his own case and
is in no way intended to supplement the appellant's case or to make good any
ommission on the part of the appellant. I am having in mind here not mere
formal documents, but material that have a direct bearing on the issues in a
case.

Even assuming that the appellant's excuse is acceptable, it would still cover
only these documents which have been produced by the respondent. Mr.
Jayawardena pointed out that there are yet other documents which are material
to the case and are not before the Court. These are the two documents referred
to in judgment of the Court of Appeal. It may be mentioned that an attempt was
made at the last moment when the matter was before us to have these documents
filed in this Court. This has not been allowed".

This Court also upheld the conclusion of the Court below that the appellant
had no valid and bona fide claim to remain in possession of the premises. In
so holding the Court took the view that the appellant was a person who had
entered into a sham transaction and found himself in a precarious position
where he can neither achieve the desired result nor fall back on the purported
transaction.

In Caldera v. John Keel Holdings Ltd.,(8) the Court of Appeal refused an
application to revise an order of a District Judge for non-compliance with
Rule 46. Jameel J., said (p. 585) -

"In M. H. Rasheed Ali v. Khan Mohamed Ali et al CA 997/80, DC Colombo 3290/ZL
SC 6/81, the Supreme Court has ;held that compliance with Rule 46 is mandatory
and any omission must be made good even at a later stage. Total non-compliance
will render the application liable to dismissal Their Lordships have gone on
to state that no discretion can be allowed to either party to decide what and
what are the necessary documents that should be tendered with the petition. If
a material document is not furnished even at a later stage, than at the time
of filing the application, the application for revision could be refused".

In Paramanathan v. Kodituwakkuarachchi(12) an application was made to the
Court of Appeal to revise an order of a District Judge issuing a writ of
execution in an ejectment action pending appeal, alleging inter alia that the
District Judge has not delivered his reasons for the said

**414**

order. With his objections the plaintiff-respondent annexed a copy of the
Judge's order dated 24.03.87 to show that the defendant-petitioners were not
correct in the statements made in their petition, and showing that written
reasons have in fact been delivered by the District Judge. Petitioners'
Counsel in the course of submissions accepted that there were reasons and
sought to attack it.

Bandaranayake J. said (p. 333) -

"Rule 46 has been held to be a mandatory provision in Rasheed Ali's case and
Caldera v. John Keels. Nor has the petitioner moved to make good the
deficiency later by tendering additional papers with permission of Court as
provided for in Rule 50. No attempt to obtain permission has been made. This
provision too has been construed as an imperative provision - Vide Udeshi et
al v. Mather(26) Thus a breach of mandatory rules is observed as regards the
revision application. In the circumstances, this application too should be
rejected in limine and the stage of going into the merits cannot arise. The
argument of the petitioners that the Court should consider the order as it is
among the papers is a strained submission' which is unacceptable. Likewise the
argument that Rasheed Ali's case can be distinguished in that case the
required document was never available to the Court of Appeal but in this case
it is among the papers is also unacceptable ; strained as it is against the
discipline of the law".

Mary Nona v. Fransina(10) ' - This was an application to revise an order of a
Magistrate made under S.66 of the Primary Courts Procedure Act, No. 44 of
1979. The petitioner had failed to file some of the documents which were
material to his case. Ramanathan, J., dismissed the application for non-
compliance with Rule 46, following the majority view of the Supreme Court in
Rasheed Ali's case that Rule 46 is mandatory.

Koralage v. Marikkar Mohamed(7) - An application for revision of the judgment
of the District Judge of Colombo in a partition action was refused on merits
and non-compliance with Rule 46. At p. 313 Viknarajah, J., citing
Navaratnesingham v. Arumugam and Rasheed Ali's cases observed that "compliance
with this rule is a mandatory requirement.

Brown & Co. Ltd. v. Ratnayake(9) - This was an application for a writ of
certiorari to quash an award of an arbitrator of an industrial dispute. The
petitioner failed to file the relevant proceedings with the petition,

**415**

pleaded no reason for such failure nor undertook to tender them later. They
were not tendered even after objection was taken specifically pleading non-
compliance with Rule 46. The preliminary objection was upheld by the Court of
Appeal following the ruling in Rasheed Ali's case that Rule 46 is mandatory.
Ananda Coomaraswamy, J., said (p. 95) -

"The petitioner has not adduced any reason as to why there has been non-
compliance with Rule 46 which would fall within the limited exceptions
judicially recognized."

Karunawathie v. Kusumaseeli (11) - A Magistrate refused a postponement of the
trial, acquitted the accused and ordered costs against the petitioner, the
complainant in the case. The petitioner sought to revise the said orders

Ananda Coomaraswamy, J., said (p.128) -

"To revise the order of the learned Magistrate, the material before this Court
is insufficient as the petitioner has only filed the order of the learned
Magistrate and not the proceedings in that case..... "

"There is also non-compliance of Rule 46 of the Rules of the Supreme Court. I
therefore, dismiss the petitioner's application". The principles deducible
from the foregoing decisions may be summarised as follows

1 . Rule 46 is mandatory and must be complied with normally at the time of
filing of an application

2\. A failure to so comply with the rule is curable by subsequent compliance
where the Court holds that initial compliance was impossible by reason of
circumstances which are beyond the control of the applicant. The Court may
also permit the amendment of papers filed or the filing of additional papers
in terms of Rule 50.

3\. The question whether prompt compliance was impossible would depend on the
facts and circumstances of each case and will be determined by the Court
exercising its discretion. Such discretion should be exercised judicially and
not mechanically. Whether the petitioner may be permitted to have recourse to
Rule 50 is also a matter of discretion to be exercised on similar
considerations.

**416**

4\. The Court will not condone non-compliance with the Rule or a failure to
show uberrima fides referable to such non-compliance In exercising its
discretion the Court will bear in mind the need to keep the channels of
procedure open for justice to flow freely and smoothly and the need to
maintain the discipline of the law. At the same time the Court will not permit
mere technicalities to stand in the way of the Court doing justice.

5\. No discretion can be allowed to either party to decide what and what are
the necessary documents that should be tendered with the petition or even
later, where an objection is taken on the ground of non-compliance.

6\. A total non-compliance will render the application liable to dismissal.
Such dismissal is not a punishment but a consequence of non-compliance with
the mandatory requirements of the rule

In the light of these principles and the reasons set out earlier in this
judgment, I am of the view that the Court of Appeal was wrong in upholding
preliminary objections based on the alleged failure on the part of the
petitioner to show uberrima fides and non-compliance with Rule 46.
Accordingly, I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. I also concur with the order for costs made by my brother Fernando J.,
and, the direction to the Court of Appeal to hear and determine the
petitioner's application on the merits.

**_Appeal allowed._ **

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1990/25.html_  

