##  Mrs. W. M. K. De Silva v. Chairman, Ceylon Fertilizer Orporation - SLR -
393, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 25; (1989) 2 Sri LR 393 (31 March 1989)

**

393

MRS. W. M. K. DE SILVA  
v.  
CHAIRMAN, CEYLON FERTILIZER CORPORATION

**

SUPREME COURT  
JAMEEL. J.  
FERNANDO, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION No.7/88  
NOVEMBER 9.11.22 AND 24, 1988 & DECEMBER 12, 1988

_

Fundamental Rights - duel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment Mental
torture Freedom to engage in any lawful

occupation of one's choice _\- _Articles 11 and 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.

_

The first respondent was the Chairman of the Fertilizer Corporation and the
petitioner was the Secretary The Fertilizer Corporation had contracted with a
foreign supplier for the supply of urea in three deliveries. In September 1985
the supplier requested that he be permitted to do the supply in two
deliveries. The Purchase Review Committee of the Corporation recommended the
request subject to a reduction of one dollar per metric ton Later a rebate of
50 US cents per metric ton was accepted on a purported decision of the Board
of-29.11.1985 of which the petitioner had no record in the minutes. The
petitioner's position was that no such decision had been made. However at the
meeting of 29 4.86 the 1st respondent wanted the 'omission' rectified The
petitioner agreed to make an amending minute but refused to authenticate it
with her signature. From here began the eventual souring of relations between
the petitioner and the first respondent. The petitioner made a statement to
the C.I.D. Unit of the Presidential Commission about this and put the first
respondent under investigation. Subsequently the petitioner was is sent on
compulsory leave Later she was recalled with

**394**

effect from 01.01-1988 but she was not allowed the use of her old cubicle or
allocated any work. The treatment meted out to her gradually deteriorated. She
was made to sit in the verandah at a broken table on a broken chair and even
totally locked out and life in the office was made humiliating for her and
conditions became intolerable in respect of the treatment meted out to her
between 01.01.1988 to 19.01.1988 she complained to the Supreme Court that she
had been subjected to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment to
violation of her fundamental rights under Article 11 and that she had been
denied continuity of employment and the freedom to be engaged in a lawful
occupation of her choice in violation of her fundamental rights under Article
14(1)(g).

**

Held:

**

1\. While the treatment meted out lo the petitioner would undoubtedly amount
to a grossly unfair labour practice, I does not constitute torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

**Per Amerasinghe, J.** "In my view Article 11 of the Constitution prohibits
any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is,
without lawful sanction in accordance with a procedure established by law,
intentionally inflicted on a person (whom I shall refer to as the 'victim ) by
a public official acting in the discharge of his executive or administrative
duties or under colour of office, for such purposes as obtaining from the
victim or a third person a confession or information, such information being
actually or supposedly required for official purposes, imposing a penalty upon
the victim for an offence or breach of a rule he or a third person has
committed or is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing the
victim or a third person to do or refrain from doing something which the
official concerned believes the victim or the third per son ought to do or
refrain from doing, as the case may be."

"Article 11 is a species belonging lo n certain genera. It belongs to that
class which protects life and persona! freedom. It belongs to the same family
as the fundamental rights of freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and
punishment and retroactive penal legislation"

"Article 11 is not concerned with the conduct of public officials in relation
to such matters as one's contractual rights in a place of work."

2\. Article 14(1)(g) ensures the freedom to engage in any lawful occupation of
one's choice, but this provision does not extend lo a right to be employed by
a particular master or in a particular place of work.

Article 14 confers the right to certain freedoms upon citizens of Sri Lanka
There is no doubt that the petitioner is a Sri Lankan. However, in an
application for relief under Article 14(1 )(g), the Petitioner must also show
that her right :o engage in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business
or enterprise was unreasonably obstructed The Petitioner must go further still
and establish that the right claimed was (a) a legal right and that (b) it is
a fundamental right.

Per Amerasinghe, J: "That Article (Article 14(1)(g), recognizes the right of
every citizen to use his powers of body and mind in any lawful calling, to
pursue any livelihood and avocation It confers no obligation to give any
particular kind of work or indeed any right lo be continued in employment al
all

**

395

Cases referred to:

**

_1_. _Elmore Perera_ v _Major Montague Jayawickrema_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 285, 300,
301,323

_2_. _Wijeratne_ v _People's Bank_ [1984] 1 Sri LR 1

_

3\. Roberts and another _v _Ratnayake and others_ [1986] 2 Sri LR 36, 45

_

4\. Thadchanamoorthi _v _Attorney-General and others_ (1980) 1 FRD 129, 140

_

5\. Velmurugu _v _Attorney-General and another_ (1981) 1 FRD 180, 215, 241

_

6\. Jeganathan _v _The Attorney-General_ (1982) 2 FRD 257

_

7\. Mariadas Raj _v _The Attorney-General_ (1983) 2 FRD 397

_

8\. Vivienne Goonewardene _v _Perera_ (1983) _2_ FRD 426

_

9\. Kapugeekiyana _v _Hettiarachchi and two others_ [1984] 2 Sri LR 153

_

10\. Amal Sudath Silva_ v _Kodituwakku_ [1987] 2 Sri LR 119

_

11\. Saman _v _Leeladasa et al_ \- S.C. Application 4/88 - S.C. Minutes of
12.12.1988.

_12._ _Revis_ v Smith (1856) 18 CB 126, 141  

_13._ _Marrinan_ v _Vibart_ [1963] 1 QB 234, 239

_

14\. Eshugbayi _v Government of Nigeria 3 AIR 1931 PC 248, 252

_

15\. The State of Jammur and Kashmir _v _Ghulam Rasool_ AIR 1961 SC 1301

_

16\. Wijesinghe _v _Attorney-General_ (1984) 2 FRD 40

_

17\. Wijetunga _v Aluwatuvala _and others_ \- S.C. Application 89/84 - S.C.
Minutes of 30.10.84

18 . _Collier_ v _Sunday Referee Publishing Co Ltd_ [1940] 2 KB 647

_

19\. Marbe _v George _Edward, Daily Theatre Ltd_ [1928] 1 KB 269

_

20\. Herbert Clayton & Jack Waller Ltd _v _Oliver_ |1930] AC 209

_21._ Hall v _British Essence Co Ltd_ (1946) 62 "TLR 542  

_22_. _Titmus & Titmus _v _Rose & Watts _[1940] 1 All ER 599

_

23\. Dunk _v George _Walter & Sons Ltd _[1970[ 2 All ER 630 CA

_

24\. Langston _v _Amalgamated Union of Engineering Workers_ (1947] 1 All ER
980

_

25\. Breach _v _Epsylon Industries Ltd_ [1976| 1 CR 316

_

26\. Turner v. Lawdon (1901) K B 153

27\. Bosworth v. Angus Jowett & Co. Ltd. (1977) 1 RLR 374 EAT

_

28\. R.P. _Jayasena and others v K R S. Soysn and another_ (1980) 1 FRD 97.
102

**

396

APPLICATION** against infringement of fundamental rights  

_

M. A. Mansoor_ with _K S. Tillekeratne_ for petitioner.

_

K. N. Choksy, PC _with _Rohitha Bogoliagama_ and _Nihal Fernando_ for 1st and
2nd respondents.

_

Shibly Aziz, PC, Additional Solicitor-General _3rd respondent

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_March 31, 1989.

**

JAMEEL, J.

**

The Petitioner joined the Ceylon Fertilizer Corporation (the 2nd Respondent)
in 1969, as a clerk. In April 1981, when Noel Fernando, the Secretary to the
Board, went on overseas leave, the Petitioner was appointed Secretary to the
Board and Personal Assistant to the Chairman. The Secretary to the relevant
Ministry and the Attorney-General have been made parties to this application
for the purpose of giving them notice.

The Petitioner's grievance relates to the treatment meted out to her in
consequence of statements made by her in February 1987 to the C.I.D. Unit of
the Special Presidential Commission of Inquiry concerning a rebate obtained by
the Corporation in late 1985 in respect of a contract for the supply of 35,000
m.t. of urea by Petrochemical Industries Ltd of Kuwait ("the supplier").

In January 1985, soon after the 1st Respondent assumed office as Chairman, the
Petitioner informed him of her grievance relating to a decision of the former
Chairman that she had to account to another officer in respect of payments for
telex bills. The 1st Respondent took prompt action to redress this grievance.
In October 1986, the Board acceded to her request that her post be upgraded,
as "she shoulders high responsibility". I mention these two matters as they
indicate that, upto October 1986, the Chairman and the Board had no
reservations about the Petitioner's work, and did not have any animus against
her.

In September 1985, the supplier requested that it be permitted to advance the
deliveries under the contract, and in two shipments instead of three as
stipulated. The Purchase Review Committee of the Corporation considered, and
favourably recommended this request, subject to a price reduction of US $ 1
per m.t. It appears that this figure was intended to cover the estimated
additional costs

**397**

of warehousing and storage. The Board approved, the Ministry was informed, and
a letter was written to the supplier on this basis. Advance delivery was made,
but there was no reply to that letter, until the local agents of the supplier
wrote on 21.11.85. That letter "confirmed" the discussion between the
principal and Corporation officials, including the 1st Respondent, and while
acknowledging that it was the supplier's problems that rendered it necessary
to advance the deliveries, asserted that the arrangement was even more
beneficial to the Corporation; and suggested a price reduction of US $ 10000.

That letter bears the date stamp of the Purchasing Division of the
Corporation, indicating that it was received in that Division on 3.12.85;
Counsel for the Petitioner has expressly stated that this is not challenged.
It bears an endorsement, dated 2.12.85, admittedly made by the 1st Respondent
to the Purchasing Manager, "Board approved 50% recovery. PI. get this
expedited". It is thus clear that the 1st Respondent had received this letter
not later than 3.12.85. There is nothing to indicate how and when the supplier
agreed to advance his offer from US $ 10,000 to US $ 17,500, and there must
have been some communication between the parties of which we are unaware. In
fact, the refund ultimately received by the Corporation was the rupee
equivalent of US $ 17,500 (or US $ 0.50 per m.t.). The existence of this
letter came to the knowledge of the Petitioner, she says, only in or about
April 1986 when the Auditors queried the quantum of the price reduction, for
which they could find no Board authority. Having made a search, she failed to
find any Board decision, whereupon the Auditors had given her the date
29.11.85 and informed her of the existence of this letter in the Purchasing
Division. The Board meeting immediately prior to 2.12.85 was that held on
29.11.85, and neither the agenda nor the minutes of that meeting made any
reference to this letter or that subject-matter; nor has any reference been
made thereto when the minutes of that meeting were confirmed at the subsequent
meeting. She says that the 1st Respondent then dictated a statement for
submission by her at the Board meeting of 29.4,86, which she refused to sign;
that document was typed, but not signed, by her, and was treated as a Board
paper; this was discussed, and the Board recorded that by inadvertence the
decision in regard to this letter had not been minuted, and proceeded to make
a full record of that decision. This constitutes the casus belli in this case:
was that decision in fact taken

**398**

on 29.11.85, and an inadvertent omission in the minutes rectified on 29.4.86,
or was such a decision not taken, and were the proceedings of 29.4.86 no more
than a cover-up, with the Petitioner as the unfortunate scapegoat?

However, the relationship between the Petitioner and the 1st Respondent
apparently continued to be cordial until about October 1986 when her post was
upgraded. Learned President's Counsel for the 1st and 2nd Respondents relied
heavily on this circumstance as justifying the inference that what occurred on
29.4.86 was merely the rectification of an omission. However, this is not
conclusive, for it is equally possible that the Petitioner was an unwilling
participant - or perhaps, spectator - insofar as the events of 29.4.86 were
concerned, having only discharged the stenographic function of recording the
minute without involving herself in an admission as to its truth; and through
concern for her livelihood, refrained from stirring up controversy. On that
view, upgrading her post could be the reward for acquiescence.

A Commission had been appointed, by the Minister in charge of the Corporation,
to inquire into various irregularities alleged against the 1st Respondent, and
in October 1986 the Petitioner testified _inter alia_ about this price
reduction. She also made a statement to the C.I.D. Unit of the Special
Presidential Commission of Inquiry on 18.2.87. At a Board meeting held on
19.2.87, the Petitioner's omission (in April 1986) to sign the statement
acknowledging her responsibility for the Incorrect" minute was again referred
to, and upon her continued refusal to take responsibility, she was asked to
leave the Board room, and recalled about two hours later to take down the
minutes. At the next Board meeting held on 25.2.87, the Board took the view
that she had become a tool in the hands of persons conspiring to make
allegations against the 1st Respondent and the Board, and decided that they
lacked confidence in her, and placed her on compulsory leave pending inquiry.
Thereafter, charges were leveled against the 1st Respondent by the Special
Presidential Commission these were not inquired into, as the proceedings of
that Commission terminated in December that year. (However, the Shipping
Manager of the Corporation had been dealt with, by this Court, for contempt of
that Commission, by reason of his having attempted to dissuade the Petitioner
from giving evidence before that Commission.)

**399**

On 23.12.87, the Board of the Corporation resolved to recall her to work on
1.1.88, and to take disciplinary action in respect of the matters which vet to
her being placed on compulsory leave. A letter recalling her was served on her
at 8 p.m. on 31.12.87. However, upon her reporting for work on 1.1.88, she
found that she was not assigned the work previously carried out by her.
Further, even her former cubicle was not available, and she was requested to
occupy another; on the next few working days, even that cubicle was not
available, and she had to sit on a Visitor's chair in a verandah outside the
Secretarial Unit. On 8.1.88, she was directed to use a broken chair and a
broken desk just outside the 1st Respondent's office. On the next day, the 1st
Respondent's office was locked, and she could not even reach her broken chair
and table. Throughout this period she was not assigned any work. Although in
the 1st Respondent's affidavit it is claimed that the Board decided "also to
relieve her of her duties as Secretary to the Board of Directors", and that
the Corporation "has accordingly assigned her the duties of Assistant
Administration Manager", there is nothing to that effect either in the
relevant Board minute or in the letter recalling her to work.

The 1st Respondent's conduct in relation to the price reduction and the letter
of 21.11.85 would properly have been a matter for inquiry by the aforesaid
Commission. However, extensive oral and written submissions have been made on
that topic, as the 1st Respondent's conduct towards the Petitioner is alleged
to have been influenced thereby. There appear to be two possibilities:

(1)  That letter was in fact tabled at the Board meeting, and a decision was
taken:

(2) That letter was not tabled, a price reduction not discussed, and the
smaller price reduction was only duly approved in April 1986; the 1st
Respondent, decided upon the smaller price reduction prior to 3.12 85, without
formal Board approval;

If the letter was formally tabled at the Board meeting, it should have been
handed to the Petitioner for the purpose of her secretarial duties instead, it
appears to have been retained by the 1st

**400**

Respondent over the intervening weekend, and sent to the Purchasing Manager on
Monday (2.12.85). The Petitioner's version that this letter did not then come
to her notice thus seems more plausible, despite the affidavits of other
Directors that the 1st Respondent "submitted" this letter. It may well be that
the 1st Respondent made a passing reference to the contents of the letter, and
without discussion obtained approval for the smaller price reduction. On the
material available to us, it does not seem probable that the letter was tabled
and that a full discussion took place. While no finding on that matter is
necessary, it is important to stress that the omission in the minutes is not
the lapse of the Petitioner: since admittedly the letter was not handed to her
at any stage. The subsequent events have thus to be viewed on the basis that
there was a lapse or irregularity on the part of the 1st Respondent, and not
the Petitioner; and that there appear to have been some matters fit for
inquiry by the aforesaid Commission.

In that background, thereafter the Petitioner refused to accept responsibility
for the omission; this was not fatal, because the Board minute of 29.4.86 was
sufficient for the audit query. Her subsequent conduct between October and
February 1987 would inevitably have caused alarm to the 1st Respondent; her
insistence that there had been no Board decision on 29.11.85 could have had
serious consequences.

While a host of minor irritants have been dealt with by learned Counsel for
the Petitioner, the real issue in this case is whether the treatment meted out
to her between 1.1.88 and 19.1.88 (when this petition was filed) constitutes a
violation of her fundamental rights. AH ' the other matters relate to quite
different periods, and are relevant only to support Counsel's submission that
the 1st Respondent entertained a persona! animus against the Petitioner;
arising from the 1st Respondent's lapse, or irregular conduct, in regard to
the price reduction, and the Petitioner's refusal to accept responsibility
therefor.

It is clear that the Petitioner has been degraded and humiliated, by being
made to mope in front of her colleagues and subordinates, isolated on a
verandah, and at times locked out, even without her broken chair. She would
naturally view this as the culmination of a course of conduct commencing in
February 1987, after her statement to the C.I.D While this treatment would
undoubtedly amount to a

**401**

grossly unfair labour practice, it does not constitute "torture, or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment"; the acts complained of are
clearly not 'torture" or "punishment": they fall far short of the degree of
mental or physical coercisiveness or viciousness required to constitute
"cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment". This Court when considering the
Essential Public Services Bill (Decisions of the Supreme Court on
Parliamentary Bills, 1978-1983, page 65) rejected the contention that Article
11 is confined to "some wrongful and wicked application of physical force"; a
mandatory forfeiture of all property and removal from the register of any
profession, regardless of the nature of the offence and the degree of
blameworthiness, was held to be a cruel and inhuman punishment and thus
unconstitutional, but permissible if left to the discretion of a Court- Thus
ill-treatment per se, whether physical or mental, is not enough; a very high
degree of mal-treatment is required.

It was further contended that, insofar as it was linked to her occupation,
this treatment was in violation of her fundamental right under Article
14(1)(g); that she had a right to continuity of employment, and that the 1st
Respondent was attempting to coerce her to leave the Corporation. Article 14(1
)(g) ensures the freedom to engage in any lawful occupation of ones choice,
but this provision does not extend to a right to be employed by a particular
master or in a particular place of work. In _Elmore Perera's_ case(1)
Sharvananda, C.J., expressed the opinion _(semble)_ -

"Article 14(1)(g) recognises a general right in every citizen to do work of a
particular kind and of his choice. It does not confer the right to hold a
particular job or to occupy a particular post of one's choice. The compulsory
retirement complained of, may, at the highest affect his particular
employment, but it does not affect his right to work as a Surveyor."

Hence there is no infringement of the fundamental right under Article

Learned President's Counsel has submitted that the Corporation is a trading
Corporation which imports, mixes and sells fertilizer, in competition with
several other public and private organisations; and that the acts of the
Corporation do not constitute executive or administrative action. In Wijeratne
v People's Bank (2), a security officer was placed in a lower grade, after a
re-organisation; he was

**402**

employed in connection with the commercial activities of the Bank, and not in
connection with any State activity. It was held that the application was not
maintainable as there was no infringement by "executive or administrative
action". Here, too, the Petitioner has failed to establish that the conduct
complained of falls within that description.

All the grievances of the Petitioner, including non-payment of increments and
other dues, if established, would constitute violations of her contract of
employment; as was observed in _Roberts' case_ (3)

"where the rights and obligations of the parties to such contract fall to be
determined by the ordinary law of contract, then the provisions of Article 12
(1) of the Constitution have no application, and cannot be invoked."

I would accordingly dismiss this application, but having regard to all the
circumstances, without costs.

**

FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree with the judgments of my brothers Jameel, J., and
Amerasinghe, J.

**

AMERASINGHE, J.

**

The delay in arriving at a decision in this case was due to the unfortunate
fact that learned Counsel for the Petitioner, troubled as he was by illness,
was constrained to request a postponement of the oral hearing from 24 November
to 12 December. Although he undertook to complete his submissions in writing
by 26 December 1988, he was able to do so only on 22 February 1989. Thereafter
Counsel for the Respondents placed his further written submissions before us
on 2 March 1989.

I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of my brother Jameel, J. and
! entirely agree with his comprehensive statement of the facts. I am also in
agreement with his conclusion that the Petitioner's application should be
dismissed on account of her failure to establish that her fundamental rights
under Articles 11,12 and 14 have been violated, but that, in the special
circumstances of this case, this Application should be dismissed without
costs.

Article 11 of the Constitution guarantees freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment. The words of

**403**

the Constitution are in terms identical to those in Article 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights which was adopted by to General Assembly of the
United Nations on 10 December 1948. Article 5(2) of the American Convention on
Human Rights and Peoples' Rights, Article 3 of the European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and Article 7 of the
International Convention on Civil and Political Rights (Cf. also Article XXV
of the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man) are also in
similar terms.

There are several decisions of this Court arising out of applications for
relief based upon the violation or alleged violation of the fundamental right
to be free from torture, or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment. (E.g. see _Thadchanamoorthi v. Attorney-General and Others_ (4);
_Velmurugu v, Attorney-General and another_ (5); _Jeganathan v. The Attorney-
Genera!_ (6); _Mariadas Raj v. The Attorney-Genera!_ (7); _Vivienne
Goonewardene v. Perera_ (8); _Kapugeekiyana v. Hettiarachchi and two others_
(9); _Amal Sudath Silva v, Kodituwakku_ (10) and _A.S.Saman v. Leeladasa et_
al .(11).

The acts in question in those cases were all done by law enforcement officers
of the State including members of the defence services who, in the special
circumstances of the times, were engaged in law enforcement in addition to the
task of the defence of the Republic. They were all cases in which physical
violence formed the basis of the complaint. In the application before us,
however, the alleged cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
complained of is psychical in nature. It is, therefore, a novel claim for
relief and it may raise a presumption against its validity. We may remark that
the world has gone on very well without applications such as this and we doubt
whether it would continue to do so if such things were allowed. (Cf. per
Creswell , J. in _Revis v. Smith_ (12), followed with approval in _Marrinan v.
Vibart_ (13). Yet, this Court undoubtedly has power to recognize a novel claim
if justice so requires. We shall not shrink from doing our duty to advance
fundamental rights as we are required to do by Article 4(d) of the
Constitution. (Cf. _Eshugbayi vs. Government of Nigeria_ (14).

I am of the opinion that the torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment contemplated in Article 11 of our

**404**

Constitution is not confined to the realm of physical violence. It would
.embrace the sphere of the soul or mind as well. Lord Denning in Freedom Under
the Law. The Hamlyn Lectures, 1949 at p. 26, after stating that torture is
"usually for the sake of getting people to confess their guilt or to implicate
others", goes on to say as follows:

"Brutality is not used today but some other means not known to us is used.
Take the cases of Cardinal Mindzenty and Mr. Rajk. Those men actually made
full confessions in open court with all appearance of telling the truth. Yet
most people outside the concerned countries think that they have been induced
by some means or other to say what is untrue. The most credible theory', says
_The Times,_ is that Soviet Psychologists have perfected methods of mental
aggression which can be applied with success to a great variety of
victims....' The same method, with suitable variation in approach might be
applied to a Communist Cabinet Minister and a Catholic Cardinal."

The fact that mental aggression should be looked upon in the same manner as we
contemplate physical attack is supported by Resolution 3452 (XXX) which was
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations at its 30th session in
1975. The-Resolution states as follows in Article 1 :

"1. For the purpose of this Declaration, torture means any act by which severe
pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted by
or at the instigation of a public official on a person for such purposes as
obtaining from him or a third person information or confession, punishing him
for an act he has committed, or intimidating him or other persons. It does not
include pain or suffering arising only from, inherent or incidental to, lawful
sanctions to the extent consistent with the Standard Minimum Rules for the
Treatment of Prisoners.

2\. Torture constitutes an aggravated and deliberate form of cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment."

Ralph Beddard in his book, _Human Rights and Europe,_ Second Edition, 1980 at
p. 102 says that 'inhuman treatment" was defined by the European Commission of
Human Rights in, what is popularly known in this country - see
_Thadchanamoorthi v. Attorney-General

_

**405**

(4), _Velmurugu v. A.G. & Others _(5), as well as elsewhere as. 'the Greek
case",

as an aggravated form of inhuman treatment which treatment or punishment may
be said to be degrading if it grossly humiliates the individual before others
or drives him to act against his will or conscience."

In my view Article 11 of the Constitution prohibits any act by which severe
pain or suffering, whether physical or mental is, without lawful sanction in
accordance with a procedure established by law, intentionally inflicted on a
person (whom shall refer to as 'the victim') by a public official acting in
the discharge of his executive or administrative duties or under colour of
office, for such purposes as obtaining from the victim or a third person a
confession or information, such information being actually or supposedly
required for official purposes, imposing a penalty upon the victim for an
offence or breach or a rule he or a third person has committed or is suspected
of having committed, or intimidating or coercing the victim or a third person
to do or refrain from doing something which the official concerned believes
the victim or the third person ought to do or refrain from doing, as the case
may be.

I do not think that the facts of this case fall within the terms of the
prohibitions contained in Article 11 of the Constitution. Mr. Mansoor's
impassioned and eloquent description in terms of the cause and consequence as
far as the facts of this case were concerned, appears to me to have been
designed to excite and gratify our softer emotions. However he failed to
pursuade me by way of logical argument or by reference to a single precedent
laid down by this Court or any other tribunal or by reference to any
international convention or document or any other guide whatsoever that the
Petitioner had, in the relevant sense, been subjected to torture or cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Sentiment is an inadequate guide
to decision. The Petitioner may have suffered a great deal of anguish as a
result of the acts of the First Respondent, but it has not been established
that his conduct was motivated by the sort of reason that would bring the case
within the ambit of Article 11 of the Constitution. Learned Counsel for the
Petitioner claimed that the acts complained of were inflicted by way of a
"punishment" for the reason that the Petitioner gave such information and
assistance

**406**

to certain investigators which might have implicated the First Respondent in a
charge of improper behaviour before the Special Presidential Commission. There
was no punishment in the sense relevant to Article 11, namely, the imposition
of a penalty for an offence or breach of a rule or supposed offence or breach
of a rule. He may have been taking vengeance on account of the feelings of
pain, distress and intense disappointment caused to him by the conduct of the
Petitioner whose personal loyalty he seemed to have expected to even transcend
the higher obligations she owed the State. However, these expressions of
resentment did not constitute punishment in the sense in which the word is
used in Article 11 of the Constitution.

Article 11 is a species belonging to a certain genera. It belongs to that
class which protects life and personal freedom. It belongs to the same family
as the fundamental rights of freedom from arbitrary arrest, detention and
punishment and retroactive penal legislation. (See Article 13 of the
Constitution. Cf. _The International Bill of Rights. Normative and
Institutional Developments,_ 1948-1985, UNESCO, 1986, Chapter 5. cf. also Lord
Denning, _Freedom Under the Law, supra,_ Chapter I).

Article 11 is not concerned with the conduct of public officials in relation
to such matters as one's contractual rights in a place of work. There may well
have been, as submitted by learned Counsel for the Petitioner, such
intolerable conduct by the First Respondent which made her contract of
employment so difficult that a repudiation of her contract might have been
justified. He laid a mass of evidence before us to support his contention that
there was enough to sustain his claim that the Petitioner was compelled to go
and that she was constructively dismissed. However, such evidence is not
sufficient to establish a violation of the Petitioner's fundamental rights
under Article 11. In my view the Petitioner formed a wrong idea that redress,
if any, due to her for the constructive dismissal she supposed, should be
obtained from this Court by an application for relief under Article 126 of the
Constitution for the violation of a fundamental right.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner claimed that the Petitioner's fundamental
right to equality before the law and equal protection of the law pledged by
Article 12(1) of the Constitution had been violated because the First
Respondent had acted in breach of the law relating

**407**

to the Petitioners contract of employment resulting in the constructive
termination of her employment. It is well-established law that it is not every
breach of a legal right that amounts to a violation of the constitutional
pledge of equal protection. (E.g. see The State of Jammu and Kashmir v. Ghulam
Rasool (15); Wijesinghe v. Attorney-General (16); Wijetunge v. Aluwatuvala and
Others (17); Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrerne (1). The first
Respondent, he argued, had violated the provisions of Article 12(1) by
preferring One Fernando to the Petitioner in the matter of the appointment of
a Secretary to the Board of Directors. The Petitioner was appointed to the
post of Secretary when Noel Fernando went overseas on long leave. The Board
had decided to create a Post of Secretary/Legal Officer. Neither the
Petitioner nor Noel Fernando possessed Legal qualifications and Noel Fernando
was appointed during the Petitioner's absence on compulsory leave to perform
the duties of Secretary which he had done prior to his departure. When the
Petitioner returned after her period of compulsory leave was terminated, Noel
Fernando continued to act as Secretary to the Board. This, learned Counsel for
the Petitioner maintained, was unjust and unfair as far as his client was
concerned. The Petitioner failed to discharge the burden that was upon her of
showing how she had been discriminated against in the sense that she was
subjected to unequal and selective treatment and I am of the opinion that the
Petitioner has therefore failed to establish any violation of her fundamental
right to equality of treatment. (See Elmore Perera v. Major Montague
Jayawickrema (1) supra, at pages 300-301).

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner, repeatedly referred to the fact that the
Petitioner, although recalled to employment from interdiction, had not been
assigned any work whatsoever. This he claimed, was a violation of the
Petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed by Article 14(1) (g) which
recognizes that every citizen is entitled to "the freedom to engage by himself
or in association with others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade,
business or enterprise."

Article 14 confers the right to certain freedoms upon citizens of Sri Lanka.
There is no dispute that the Petitioner is a Sri Lankan. However, in an
application for relief under Article 14(1 )(g), the Petitioner must also show
that her right to engage in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business
or enterprise was unreasonably obstructed. The Petitioner must go further
still and

**408**

establish that the right claimed was (a) a legal right and that (b) it is a
fundamental right, (cf. H.M. Seervai, _Constitutional Law of India_ 2nd Edn.,
1975, Vol. 1, at p. 450).

There is no evidence in the matter before us that the Petitioner was prevented
in any way from engaging in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business
or enterprise. The complaint was that the Petitioner was frustrated because
she had not been assigned any work at all although she was paid her due wages.

Perhaps there is a moral right to earn one's living and to enjoy the warm glow
of satisfaction that visits a conscientious soul at the end of a day of honest
endeavour. "Never one of you have eaten better food than that which he has
earned with his own hands," says the Holy Prophet Mohamed. (See AN Abdul Wahid
Wafi in _The Problems of Human Flights in the Islamic Tradition,_ Round-Table
Meeting on Human Rights, Oxford, 11-19 November, 1965, UNESCO Human Rights
Teaching, Vol.IV, 1985 at p. 39). Whether an employer's legal duty is to
provide wages as well as work is an uncertain matter. (E.g. see _Collier v.
Sunday Referee Puhlishing_ Co. _Ltd_ (18); _Marbe v. George Edwardes, Daily
Theatre Ltd_ (19); _Herbert Clayton & Jack Waller Ltd. v. Oliver _ (20); _Hall
v. British Essence Co. Ltd._ (21); _Titmus and Titmus v. Rose and Watts_ (22);
_Dunk v. George Watter & Sons Ltd _(23); _Langston v Amalgamated Union of
Engineering Workers_ (24); _Breach v. Epsylon Industries Ltd._ (25); _Turner
v. Lawdon_ (26) and _Bosworth_ i/. _Angus Jowett & Co. Ltd. _(27). If there is
no legal duty on an employer to provide work, there can be no corresponding
legal right to work.

Even if I were prepared to go so far as to hold that the Petitioner was, by
reason of an implication in her contract of employment, entitled to claim a
legal right to work, in the sense that she has a right to have the opportunity
of doing work when it is there to be done, I am unable to agree with learned
Counsel for the Petitioner that the failure to provide the Petitioner with
work violates any right guaranteed by Article 14(1)(g) of the Constitution.
That Article recognizes the right of every citizen to use his powers of body
and mind in any lawful calling; to pursue any lawful livelihood and avocation.
It confers no obligation to give any particular kind of work or indeed any
right to be continued in employment at all. (cf. per Ismail, Weeraratne and
Wanasundera. JJ in _R.P.Jayasena_

**409**

_v. K.R.S. Soysa and Another_ (28). There may have been a breach of a
contractual right in regard to which a complaint may have been successfully
made to another forum - it is a matter on which I do not wish to make any
observations in this case - but there has been no breach of a fundamental
right conferred by Article 14(1)(g), namely the right to pursue any lawful
livelihood or avocation, and, consequently, I hold that the Petitioner is not
entitled to any relief for a violation of Article 14(1)(g) of the
Constitution,

The Petitioner has, with remarkable courage in pain and adversity, remained in
her employment and endeavoured to restore a desired or desirable state of
circumstances relating to her employment by lawful means. With some
reluctance, therefore, but with no doubt that she has misconceived the
remedies available to her under the law, I declare that the Petitioner's
rights under Article 11,12(1) and 14(1)(g) have not been violated and
consequently I make order dismissing the application of the Petitioner but
without costs.

_

_

_**Application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/25.html_  

