##  The Public Services United Nurses Union v. Minister of Public
Administration and Others - SLR - 229, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 25; (1988) 1
Sri LR 229 (29 April 1988)

**229**

**

THE PUBLIC SERVICES UNITED NURSES UNION  
v.  
MONTAGUE JAYEWICKREMA, MINISTER OF PUBLIC  
ADMINISTRATION AND OTHERS

**

S.C. APPLICATION No. 4/87.  
WANASUNDERA, J.  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J. AND  
SENEVIRATNE, J.  
FEBRUARY 12 AND MARCH 22, 1988.

_

     Fundamental Rights-Articles 12, 55 and 126 of the Constitution-Trade Union-Strike-Essential Services Order under Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions and Powers) Regulations No. 3 of 1986 - Settlement-Salary Increments-to non-strikers-Equality-Discrimination-Classification-Government and Article 55.

_

The Public Services United Nurses Union to which the majority of the nurses in
Government Hospitals belong struck work between 18th March and 16th April 1986
demanding increase in salaries. The strike became an illegal one because the
service was declared an essential service by His Excellency the President's
Essential Services Order made under the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions
and Powers) Regulations No. 3 of 1986. Notices of vacation of post were served
on the strikers and those of them who occupied government quarters became
liable to be evicted. The strike however was settled. The notices of vacation
of post were withdrawn and the striking nurses were allowed to resume work
without loss of back pay. However about 2,600 nurses who were members of the
7th respondent a rival Union to the petitioner were given the special ad hoc
benefit by the Government to pay two increments to the nurses who worked
during the entirety of the strike period and one increment to the nurses who
reported for duty at various stages before 16.4.86.

The petitioner's Union complained to the Supreme Court of discrimination and
violation of the fundamental right of equality guaranteed under Article 12 of
the Constitution.

**

Held-

**

(1) Although the origin of government service is contractual, once the
appointment is made, the legal position of a government servant is one of
status and his powers and duties are exclusively determined by law and not by
agreement. Under Article 55 of the Constitution, the government can make
unilateral alterations that may affect the contractual relationship of a
public officer with the Government, yet there must be observance of form and
procedure.

(2) The Establishment Code has been issued by Government in the exercise of
the legislative power vested in the Cabinet of Ministers under Article 55(4)
and has statutory force. Though ad hoc determinations may be made by the
Cabinet in a few matters it is essential that provisions relating to salary
increments, leave, gratuity,

**230**

pension, superannuity, promotion and every termination of employment and
removal from service should be in the form of rules which are general in
operation though they may be applied to a particular class of public officers.
Further when existing general rules are sought to be altered this too must be
done in the same manner and following the identical procedure for their
formulation, namely, by enacting an amending rule.

A classification to pass muster must be based both on intelligible differentia
and such differentia must have a rational relation to the object sought to be
achieved.

Per Wanasundera, J.

By the impugned proposal "the authorities have as it were by a stroke of the
pen, instantly rewarded particular public officers with one or two increments
and have placed others at a disadvantage in relation to them. This appears to
go against the grain of the existing administrative provisions and the
legitimate expectations which public servants entertain based on these
provisions ...."

"The position is infinitely worse when apart from the cumulative benefits, it
also entails the accelerated grant of increments and places such an officer in
a superior position over his colleagues in so many other significant matters."

(3) The Cabinet proposal granting this ad hoc incremental benefit to a very
limited class of officers violates the equality provisions contained in
Article 12 of the Constitution. The decision is therefore null and void.

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1)  _Roshan Lal v. Union of India AIR 1967 SC 1894.

_

(2)  _Abeywickrema v. Pathirana [1986] I Sri LR 120._

(3)  _R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department (1985) 1 All ER 40.

_ **

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution for violation of the
fundamental right of equality guaranteed by Article 12.

_

Nimal Senanayake, P.C._ with _Miss. S. M. Senaratne, Mrs. A. N. Dissanayake,
Miss. Shiranthie de Saram_ and _Jayantha Wewelwela_ for petitioners.

_

A. S. M. Perera, Senior State counsel_ for 1st to 5th respondent. _Ranjith de
Silva_ with _George Rajapakse_ for the 6th and 7th respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

April 29, 1988. **  
  
WANASUNDERA, J.

**

This is an application under Article 126 of the Constitution, seeking redress
for a violation of fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution. The 1st
petitioner is a trade union called the Public Services United Nurses Union, to
which a majority of nurses working in

**231**

government hospitals belong. The 2nd petitioner is a nurse and is also the
Secretary of the 1st petitioner union.

The petitioners struck work between 18th March and 16th April 1986, demanding
increases in salaries. On the eve of the strike, the President, acting by
virtue of the powers vested in him under the Emergency Regulations, by Order
declared nursing, care, treatment of patients, and hospital services to be an
"essential service" within the meaning of the Emergency (Miscellaneous
Provisions and Powers) Regulations, No. 3 of 1986. The effect of this order
was to make the strike illegal. Apart from the criminal liabilities incurred
by those violating these regulations, it also entailed the termination of the
services of the officers who went on strike and their liability to be ejected
from government quarters. The authorities proceeded to enforce these
liabilities when these nurses defied the Order.

The strike however was settled with the notices of vacation of office being
withdrawn and the striking nurses being allowed to resume their duties and to
continue in office without loss of back pay. In fact these striking nurses
were taken back unconditionally. Further, the Government had agreed to enter
into negotiations regarding the demand for salary increase. Mr. Ranjith de
Silva who appeared for the 6th respondent was constrained to admit that the
strike was at the least a partial success.

The petition which runs to seventy-seven paragraphs deals in the main with the
allegation that the 7th respondent, the Jathika Saukya Seva Heda Sangamaya, is
a branch of the 6th respondent, the Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya, and that these
two respondents, by reason of their close links with the ruling government
party (the Secretary of the J.S.S. is in fact a member of the Working
Committee of the ruling party), were in a position to wield and had in fact
wielded enormous influence with the government to obtain favours and benefits
for their own unions and had enlisted the help of the government to go against
rival unions.

While admittedly there appears to be a close link between the 6th and 7th
respondents _inter se_ and both of them with the government, it is only fair
to state, as explained by Mr. Ranjith de Silva, that the 7th respondent is not
a branch in fact of the 6th respondent which is

**232**

legally permitted to operate only in the non-governmental sector. He however
admitted that the 7th respondent union is affiliated to the P.S.N.T.U.F.,
which like the 6th respondent is part of the trade union structure of the
ruling party. There is no doubt that these unions work in close association
and have leverage with the Government.

Though Mr. Ranjith de Silva was only prepared to admit that his union like any
active union was concerned with the rights of its own members, one cannot rule
out the possibility that some of its activities may have been directed against
rival unions like the 1st petitioner. It is well-known that in the trade union
field there is usually strong competition between rival unions.

Both counsel agreed that it may be unnecessary for the Court to go into the
voluminous material relating to allegation and counter allegation between the
rival unions and it is possible to decide this matter only on the main issue
in the case, namely the constitutional question involving the interpretation
of Article 55 of the Constitution.

After the dust of the strike had settled down and the strikers had resumed
work, the 7th respondent union made a proposal on 15th May 1986 to the
Government that some compensation should be paid to those persons who worked
during the strike. The proposal was that the Government should pay the non-
strikers:

( _a_ )  two increments to all nursing personnel who worked during the full
period of the strike,

( _b_ )  one increment to those nursing personnel who reported for duty at
various stages before 16.04.86.

This proposal was approved by the Minister of Health and submitted to the
Cabinet of Ministers. The Cabinet accepted that proposal and embodied it in a
Cabinet decision. The Cabinet decision was implemented, with the result that a
number of nurses were granted the above increments. The Cabinet decision did
not single out the 7th respondent union as such for this benefit and in fact a
few nurses who did not belong to the 7th respondent union also fell within the
ambit of the proposal. The proposal however had emanated from the 7th
respondent union and was clearly intended to benefit primarily its own members
and it is they who actually got the benefit of it.

**233**

In paragraph 17, 18 and 19 of the petition the petitioners complain that about
2,600 nurses have scored an advantage over their colleagues by the Cabinet
decision. They have been placed at an advantageous point in their salary
scales, which is two steps higher than where they should be and they would
consequently reach their maximum salary in that scale two years before they
would normally have reached it. The petitioners further alleged that the
financial benefit accruing to them would involve cumulative increases in
allowances and computation of pension. It would also give these officers a
decided advantage over others, who up to then were equals in respect of
promotion and qualification for higher grades and posts. Mr. Senanayake in his
submissions also referred to the fact that the definition of "staff grade" and
"subordinate officer" in the Establishment Code and Administrative Rules is
pegged to the amount of salary and since disciplinary procedures also vary,
based on such distinction, the implementation of the proposal has conferred
further benefit on this class of officers.

Mr. Senanayake's main submission was based on the interpretation of Article 55
of the Constitution. As a background to this and to understand Article 55 in
its proper setting, Mr. Senanayake stated that the sole and only provisions
relating to the fair and proper administration of the public service is now to
be found in Article 55. Today a public servant is shut out from the courts of
Labour Tribunals and has to look to only this provision for relief. The
provisions of Article 55, he submitted, are intended to be _operated bona
fide_ and uniformly to ensure fait play and justice. They should not be used
for the victimization of public officers or in an arbitrary fashion.

Article 55 of the Constitution reads as follows:-

"(1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers is hereby vested in the
cabinet of Ministers, and all public officers shall hold office at pleasure.

(2) The Cabinet of Ministers shall hot delegate its powers of appointment,
transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control in respect of Heads of
Departments.

(3) the Cabinet of Ministers may from time to time delegate its powers of
appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of other public
officers to the Public Service Commission:

**234**

Provided that the Cabinet of Ministers may, from time to time and
notwithstanding any delegation under this Article, delegate to any Minister
its power of transfer in respect of such categories of officers as may be
specified, and upon such delegation, the Public Service Commission or any
Committee thereof shall not exercise such power in respect of such categories
of officers.

For the purposes of this proviso, "transfer" means the moving of a public
officer from one post to another post in the same service or in the same grade
of the same Ministry or Department with no change in salary.

(4) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Cabinet of Ministers
shall provide for and determine all matters relating to public officers,
including the formulation of schemes of recruitment and codes of conduct for
public officers, the principles to be followed in making promotions and
transfers, and the procedure for the exercise and the delegation of the powers
of appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public
officers.

(5) Subject to the jurisdiction conferred on the Supreme Court under paragraph
(1) of Article 126 no court or tribunal shall have power or jurisdiction to
inquire into, pronounce upon or in any manner call in question, any order or
decision of the Cabinet of Ministers, a Minister, the Public Service
Commission or of a public officer, in regard to any matter concerning the
appointment, transfer, dismissal or disciplinary control of a public officer.

(6) For the purposes of this Article 56 to 59 (both. inclusive) "public
officer" does not include a member of the Army, Navy or Air Force."

In _Roshan Lal v. Union of India_ (1) the Supreme Court of India, commenting
on the position of a public officer, said :

"It is true that the origin of Government service is contractual. There is an
offer and acceptance in every case. But once appointed to his post or office
the Government servant acquires a status and his rights and obligations are no
longer determined by consent of both parties, but by statute or statutory
rules which may be framed and altered unilaterally by the Government. In other
words, the legal position of a Government servant is more one of status than
of contract. The hallmark of status is the attachment to a legal relationship
of rights and duties imposed by the public law and not by

**235**

mere agreement of the parties. The emoluments of the Government servant and
his terms of service are governed by statute or statutory rules which may be
unilaterally altered by the Government without the consent of the employee. It
is true that Article 311 imposes constitutional restrictions upon the power of
removal granted to the President and the Governor under Article 310. But it is
obvious that the relationship between the Government and its servant is not
like an ordinary contract of service between a master and servant. The legal
relationship is something entirely different, something in the nature of
status. It is much more than a purely contractual relationship voluntarily
entered into between the parties. The duties of status are fixed by the law
and in the enforcement of these duties society has an interest. In the
language of jurisprudence status is a condition of membership of a group of
which powers and duties are exclusively determined by law and not by agreement
between the parties concerned."

An examination of Article 55 of our Constitution shows that the Government in
this country is also enabled to make such unilateral alterations that may
affect the contractual relationship of a public officer with the Government.
While there is no doubt about the authority and power to make such provisions,
there still remains a question of form and procedure as to how it should be
done.

In _Abeywickrema v. Pathirana,_ (2) Chief Justice Sharvananda, in giving the
majority judgment which is binding on us, said:

Article 55(4) empowers the Cabinet of Ministers to make rules for all matters
relating to public officers, without impinging upon the overriding powers of
pleasure recognised under Article 55(1). Matters relating to 'public officer'
comprehends all matters relating to employment, which are incidental to
employment and form part of the terms and conditions of such employment, such
as provisions as to salary, increments, leave, gratuity, pension, and of
superannuity, promotion and every termination of employment and removal from
service. The power conferred on the Cabinet of Ministers is a power to make
rules which are general in their operation though they may be applied to a
particular class of public officers. This power is a legislative power and
this rule making function is for the purpose identified in Article 55(4) of
the Constitution as legislative not executive or judicial in character.

**236**

A rule made in exercise of this power by the Cabinet has all the binding force
of a statute, or regulation. The relevant Establishments Code of the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka (P6) has been issued by the
Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration under the authority and
with the approval of the Cabinet of Ministers. It is in the exercise of the
legislative power vested in the Cabinet of Ministers under Article 55(4), that
this Code has been issued. Though the position might have been otherwise prior
to the Constitution, the code relating to Public Officers acquires by virtue
of its Constitutional origin, statutory force, provided of course it is not
inconsistent with any provisions of the Constitution, including the articles
relating to fundamental rights and Article 55(1), which enshrines the doctrine
of pleasure or the provision of any statute. In a case of breach of any of the
mandatory rules in the code, the aggrieved public officer has, subject to the
provision of Article 55(5) of the Constitution, a remedy in a court of law.
The enforceability of a service rule is a question different from that of its
character as to whether it as statutory or otherwise. All statutory rules are
not necessarily enforceable in a court of law. It is only the breach of a
mandatory rule which is justiciable. Once a rule is held to be mandatory and
not inconsistent with the Constitution, there is no reason why it should not
be enforced, like any other statutory rule but should be considered to be mere
administrative instructions, simply because it relates to matters relating to
government service."

Although one cannot altogether rule out a few matters in which, _ad hoc_
determinations may be made by the Cabinet, it is however essential, as
Sharvananda, C. J., states, that "provisions as to salary increments, leave,
gratuity; pension and of superannuity, promotion and every termination of
employment and removal from service" should be in the form of rules "which are
general in operation though they may be applied to a particular class of
public officers." Further, when existing general rules are sought to be
altered, this too must be done in the same manner and following the identical
procedure as for their formulation, namely, by enacting an amending rule.
Could one say that this procedure has been followed in the present case?

When the proposal for the payment of the increments came up for consideration,
two Ministers - the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Public
Administration (the two Ministers most connected with this subject)-were
against it. Their views are informative. The Minister of Public Administration
observed

**237**

"(i)  While some recognition may be called for, for reporting for duty and
doing their normal quota of work, it would not be justifiable to pay extra
increments with its continuing cumulative benefit.

(ii) An ex gratis payment of an extra day's wage to each, in respect of each
such day could be more appropriate."

The Minister of Finance was of the view that the proposal was wrong in
principle. He stated:

"The payment of additional increments, as proposed would set a precedent which
would have to be followed in future by all Government Departments and
Corporations. The payment of increments would also involve additional
remuneration to the officers concerned for many years until they reach the
maxima of their salary scales. I would suggest that instead of paying
additional increments, these nurses should be paid a once-and-for-all
honorarium. The quantum of the honorarium should be determined in consultation
with the Ministry of Public Administration, and the honorarium should be paid
from savings in the votes of the Ministry of Health."

These perceptive comments point to the basic objections that lie in the way of
such a proposal. When Article 55 of the Constitution vests authority over
public affairs in the Cabinet and make it mandatory for the Cabinet to
formulate schemes of recruitment, and codes of conduct for public officers,
the principles to be followed in making promotions and transfers etc., the
Constitution contemplated fair, and uniform provisions in the nature of
general rules and regulations and not action that is arbitrary or _ad hoc_ or
savouring of bias or discrimination.

We were informed that these non-striking nurses were adequately compensated
financially for any extra work they may have performed during the period of
the strike. If ex gratis lump sums and overtime were paid to them, there were
other categories of workers in hospital staff not belonging to the nursing
grades, who also did extra work duping that period, but they were excluded and
did not benefit from this proposal. Public officers in the Ministries of
Health and the Teaching Hospitals who are closely connected with the running
of

**238**

hospitals were also not granted this benefit. Further, other public officers
who constitute the great majority of public servants in the country who also
functioned during this period have been left out. Though their devotion to
duty was no different from that of the non-striking nurses, none of them
however were regarded as deserving of these benefits. It is restricted to a
chosen few.

Counsel for the respondents submitted that the reasons for the proposal was to
reward devotion to duty and to discourage future strikes. But the reward has
not been spread to all public officers similarly situated. This appears to
have been done on an earlier occasion. The proposal also lacks any generality,
in that it is not intended for recurrent application. It is in respect of one
particular event, namely, only the nurses' strike of April 1986. Like a bus
ticket valid for one day and one journey only, this proposal can be said to be
in every respect _ad hoc_ and arbitrary. A classification to pass muster must
be based both on intelligible differentia and such differentia must have a
rational relation to the object sought to be achieved.

Even in regard to the particular event with reference to which it was made,
there is no dispute that the strike was settled unconditionally and the
striking nurses were allowed to resume work without loss of any back pay. The
differences were composed at that point of time without pre-conditions,
without punishment and without rewards. There is much force in Mr.
Senanayake's submission that if the question of reward and punishment had been
brought up at that stage, the strike would have continued or there would have
been another strike because the strikers would never have consented to a
proposal of this nature. In these circumstances there is no valid basis for
granting these far-reaching benefits to a very limited and narrow segment of
public officers of the public service of this country, or for imposing a
disability or disadvantage on the rest. The matter becomes all the more
suspect when we find that the benefits of this proposal accrue primarily to
officers of a particular union having affiliations with the ruling party. If
the strike led to any re-thinking by the administrators in regard to the
future running of hospitals, then they ought to have thought the problem out
in relation to the whole public service and formulated rules of general and
permanent nature which alone could have been of benefit to the service and
country.

**239**

Mr. Senanayake submitted further that the effect of this proposal is to cut
across the principles and policies now existing in the Establishments Code and
the Administrative Regulations by the introduction of a new element which is
both arbitrary and _ad hoc_ and inconsistent with those provisions. An
increment in the public service according to the existing rules and
regulations is earned by a public officer by satisfactory work and conduct
during a specified period of time, namely, one year. Again the stoppage,
postponement or deprivation of an increment is in the nature of a penalty
consequent on disciplinary action against a public officer. By this proposal
the authorities have, as it were by a stroke of the pen, instantly rewarded
particular public officers with one or two increments and have placed others
at a disadvantage in relation to them. This appears to go against the grain of
the existing administrative provisions and the legitimate expectations which
public servants entertain based on these provisions, _R. v. Secretary of State
for the Home Department_ (3).

The position is infinitely worse when, apart from the cumulative benefits, it
also entails the accelerated grant of increments and places such an officer in
a superior position over his colleagues in so many other significant matters.
The wage structure of the public service is of utmost interest both to the
officers concerned and the general public and its importance is seen by the
fact that revisions and alterations are made only after the most careful
consideration and after a thorough hearing of the views of all categories of
public officers. The usual machinery for this purpose is the setting up of a
Salaries Commission.

I am therefore of the view that this Cabinet proposal granting this _ad hoc_
incremental benefit to a very limited class of offices violates the equality
provisions contained in Article 12 of the Constitution. This decision is
therefore declared null and void. Article 55(5) vests the Supreme Court with a
constitutional jurisdiction to make such a declaration even in respect of a
Cabinet decision when there is a violation of a fundamental right. The
application is therefore allowed with costs in a sum of Rs. 5,000 which should
be paid by the State to the petitioners.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

**

O. S. M. SENEVIRATNE, J.** \- I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/25.html_  

