##  Gunapala v. Babynona - SLR - 374, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986] LKSC 25; (1986) 2
Sri LR 374 (8 July 1986)

**

374

GUNAPALA  
v.  
BABYNONA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, CJ, WANASUNDERA, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. 28/85, C.A. 418/78 (F), D.C. MT. LAVINIA 409/RE.

MAY 6, 1986. _Rei Vindicatio action-Suit for ejectment-Landlord gifting
premises reserving life interest and thereafter renting them-Death of land
ford-Suit filed by donor on basis of tenancy-issues framed on basis of rei
vindicatory suit-Does contract of tenancy end by death of life interest
holder?

_

One Simon gifted the premises in suit to G and S reserving his life interest.
Thereafter Simon rented the premises to B. Subsequently Simon died and G
called upon B to

**375**

attorn to him (G) but B did not pay any rents to G who then instituted a suit
for ejectment on the basis of a tenancy. Issues however were framed without
objection on the basis that the suit was by a co-owner suing in a rei
vindicatio action.

**

Held-

**

(1) Where the lessor granting a lease has only a usufructuary interest the
lease is dissolved by the death of the usufructuary although the new co-owner
requested the tenant B to attorn to him but B failed to do so. The case must
be decided on the issues-i.e. as a rei vindicatory suit. B was in wrongful
possession against the co-owner G and liable to be ejected.

**

Cases referred to

** _

(1) Fernando v. Silva-(1966) 69 NLR 164.

(2) Mohamed v. Public Trustee-(1978-79) 1 Sri L. R. 1.

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

F. C. Perera for plaintiff-appellant

N. J. de Seneviratne with Rushan D' Alwis for defendant-respondent.

l. A. N. J. de Seneviratne with Rushan D' Alwis for defendant-respondent.

_

July 8, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

By this action filed on the 29. 4. 1977 the plaintiff sued for the ejectment
of the defendant from the premises in suit. The defendant was the tenant of
the premises from March 1969, under one Simon. Prior to the defendant becoming
the tenant, Simon had by Deed No. 4958 dated 3.10.1967, donated these premises
to his grand nephews, the plaintiff and his brother Siripala, after reserving
to himself his life interest, Simon died on 26. 10. 1975. It is admitted that
all rents in respect of the premises had been paid and/or settled up to 30th
November 1974 and that no rents were paid thereafter. The plaintiff pleaded in
his plaint that after the death of Simon, the defendant attorned to him and
that by letter dated 9. 8. 1976 he had asked the defendant to pay him all
arrears of rent failing which he terminated the defendant's tenancy as from
31. 12. 1976. The defendant in her answer denied that there was a tenancy
between herself and the plaintiff and pleaded that plaintiff had never called
on her to attorn to him.

The case proceeded to trial on the following issues:

1\. By Deed No. 4938 dated 3.10.1967 is the plaintiff the owner of the
premises in suit?

**376**

2\. From 1.1.1977 is the defendant in wrongful possession causing loss to the
plaintiff at Rs. 59.72 per mensem?

3\. As the dispute could not be settled has the Conciliation Board Certificate
been filed of record?

4\. If issues 1, 2 and 3 are answered in favour of the plaintiff is he
entitled to relief as prayed for?

5\. Is the defendant a tenant of the plaintiff?

6\. If not can the plaintiff maintain the action?

The trial judge answered the issues as follows and dismissed the plaintiff's
action with costs

  1. Not sole owner.   


  2. No.  


  3. Yes.   


  4. No.  


  5. No and  


  6. No.

The plaintiff's appeal to the Court of Appeal was dismissed with costs. The
plaintiff has now preferred this appeal to this court.

The plaintiff's brother Siripala has stated in his evidence that he had no
objection to the entire rent/damages being paid to the plaintiff. Both the
District Court and the Court of Appeal have dismissed the plaintiff's action
on the ground that the defendant was not made aware of the existence of the
deed on which the plaintiff claims the premises and hence she was not bound to
attorn to the plaintiff.

It is true that the plaintiff had framed this action on the basis that the
defendant attorned to him and had thereby become his tenant. But significantly
the issues framed by him in this case departed from his pleadings and
converted the action into a rei vindicatio action. The issues were raised by
the plaintiff on the basis that he claimed to be a co-owner of the premises
and on the cessation of Simon's life-interest, the defendant's possession was
wrongful possession of the premises. The defendant did not object to the
issues framed by the plaintiff. The case must be decided on the issues raised
in the action.

**377**

Counsel for the plaintiff contended as a matter of law, that the death of the
landlord Simon operated to terminate the defendant's tenancy and that the
plaintiff being a co-owner entitled on the death of the usufructuary, to
possess the property and maintain this action for the ejectment of the
defendant. He submitted that Simon who was the landlord of the defendant had,
when he took the defendant as his tenant, only a life interest in the premises
in suit and that in law a tenancy is dissolved by the death of the landlord
who had only life interest over the premises. He conceded that position might
have been different if Simon had been the owner of the premises. He cited in
support of his proposition Fernando v. Silva (1). In that case it was held
that as a general rule a contract of tenancy is not terminated by the death of
the landlord, but that this rule will not apply where the lessor's title was
one for life only, such as fiduciary interest or life interest, in which case
the death of the lessor terminated the lease.

He also referred to the judgment of the Divisional Bench of this Court in
Mohamed v. Public Trustee (2) where Samarakoon, C.J., referred to the general
rule applicable to all leases-

"a lease is not dissolved by the death of one of the parties; but, in
accordance with a rule common to all contracts, the rights and obligations
arising from the lease pass to the person of his heirs, or to that of his
vacua successio" and added that "This rule is subjected to an exception where
the lessor made the lease in his capacity as usufructuary, for in that case
the lease is dissolved by the lessor's death."

I agree with the legal submissions of Counsel for plaintiff and hold that as
defendant's landlord Simon had only a usufructuary interest in the property
when he granted the tenancy to the defendant, the tenancy stood dissolved by
the death of the landlord Simon and that the defendant was, after the death of
Simon in wrongful possession of the premises in suit as against the co-owners.
Though by letter dated 9.8.1976, the plaintiff had requested the defendant to
attorn to him, yet the defendant had failed to attorn to the plaintiff. The
defendant's possession of the premises is therefore wrongful. Both the lower
courts had erred in dismissing the plaintiff's action. In fairness to those
courts, it must be said that the legal submission set out above, was not
addressed to them.

**378**

I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and of the District Court and
enter judgment for plaintiff as prayed for. The plaintiff will however be
entitled to the costs of this court only.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/25.html_  

