##  Fernando v. Sarath - SLR - 200, Vol 1 of 1984 [1984] LKSC 25; (1984) 1 Sri
LR 200 (6 February 1984)

**  200**

**  **

#### FERNANDO

**v.**

#### SARATH

**  **

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J. AND ABDUL CADER, J.  
S.C. No. 8/83 ‑ C.A. No. 321/77(F) ‑ D.C. COLOMBO No. 1691/RE  
FEBRUARY 6, 1984.



Nature of rights of tenant of premises after entry of decree in ejectment
subject conditions against him ‑ Partnership agreement by tenant with partner
to business using a portion of the tenanted premises and tenant's building and
to and equipment ‑ Right of action of tenant against purchaser from vendee of
partner.



The appellant, the tenant of certain premises was sued by his landlady for
rent and ejectment. At the trial a settlement was entered into on 11.6.1974
whereby the appellant agreed to pay the arrears of rent in monthly instalments
along with current monthly damages. If these payments were made without three
defaults writs were not to issue till 31.5.80 and satisfaction of decree was
to be entered with the right to the appellant to continue the tenancy on a
fresh contract from 1.6.1980 paying the authorised rent in accordance with the
order made by the Rent Board in August 1972 or any other lawful order.



#  201



In August 1972 while the suit against the appellant was still pending he
entered into a partnership agreement with one M. J. de S. to run a motor
repair business under the name of " Auto Care " in a portion of the tenanted
premises. By this agreement the appellant was to have title to the buildings
of the business and the tools and equipment. M. J. de S. undertook not to
allow any person other‑than the employees to occupy the building and premises
set apart for the business. Contrary to the agreement M. J. de S. by a deed of
30.5.1975 sold the portion of the premises where the motor repair business was
run along with the buildings and tools and equipment to one R.R. Of the
business itself he gave a usufructuary mortgage to R.R Thereafter R.R. on two
deeds of 10.11.1975 conveyed the right, title and interest he had purchased
from M. J. de S. to the respondent.



The appellant then sued the respondent alleging that the respondent was in
unlawful occupation of the premises and conducting the business as a
trespasser. The respondent claimed that M. J. de S. was the sole proprietor
and owner of Auto Care " and these rights had devolved on him. No plea that
the appellant's partnership agreement with M. J. de S. was a cover for what
was in reality a subletting was pleaded or raised in issue at the trial.



The District Judge held with the appellant and gave judgment for him but this
judgment was set aside by the Court of Appeal and the appellant's action was
dismissed. The Court of Appeal granted leave to appeal to the Supreme Court on
two points:



(1)        Whether the right to occupy the premises granted to the appellant
by the decree in the ejectment case enabled him to maintain the present
action.



(2)        Whether the respondent can enter the premises by virtue of the
right he claims on the purchase from R.R. and whether he can be said to be in
unlawful occupation of them and a trespasser.



# Held‑



(1)        The appellant was in lawful possession of the premises in terms of
the decree of the District Court. The Decree vests a sufficient legal interest
in the appellant enabling him to occupy the premises. The law will protect
this interest. Incidentally considering the fact that the appellant was a
partner and the nature of his rights to the property on the basis of his
agreement, he must be treated as having a sufficient Occupancy of the premises
so as to maintain the action.



(2)        On the terms of the partnership agreement M. J. de S. would have
had to hand over possession of the portion of the premises where the motor
repair business was run to the appellant in the event of the partnership
coming to an end ‑ so also the tools and equipment. The position of the
respondent cannot be better.



(3)        No contention that the partnership agreement of the appellant with
M. J. de S. was a deception to cover what was in fact a subletting was pleaded
or raised at the trial and therefore cannot be raised for the first time in
appeal.



(4)        The right the respondent has in respect of the partnership
properties arises only after a dissolution of the partnership and upon
conversion of the partnership assets into money. He has therefore no present
right to occupy the premises or to the use of the equipment and tools. There
is no valid legal basis for him to remain in Occupation or to use the tools
and equipment.



#####  202



**Cases referred to**



(1)        _Pocock v. Carter,_ (1912) 1 Ch. 665. _  
 _

(2) _        Benham v. Gray_, (1847) 5 C. B. 138; 136 E. R. 827

_ _

**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_H. L. de Silva, S. A.,_ with _Neville Jacolyn Seneviratne_ for
plaintiff‑appellant.  


_A. C. Gooneratne, O. C.,_ with _R. Manickavasagar_ for defendant‑respondent

_  _

_Cur. adv. vult._



February 23, 1984  


**WANASUNDERA, J.**



This appeal is in respect of an action instituted by the plaintiff‑appellant
(hereinafter referred to as the appellant) again the defendant‑respondent
(hereinafter referred to as the respondent) for ejectment from a portion of
premises No. 816/5 Maradana Road, Colombo, for damages in a sum of Rs.200 per
mensum and for the delivery of some equipment and tools on the ground that the
respondent was in occupation of the said portion o the premises as a
trespasser and was making use of the equipment and tools in the premises.



Premises No. 816/5, Maradana Road, is owned by Mrs. Angel Madappuli. The
appellant was her tenant. In action D.C. Colombo No. 1 734/RE, Mrs. Madappuli
sued the appellant for ejectment. This action was settled by the parties on
the 11th June, 1974 judgment being entered for Mrs. Madappuli in a sum of
Rs.25,470 as damages and further damages at the rate of Rs.522/80 per mensum.



The Decree provided that‑



"if the defendant pays the current month's damages of Rs.522/80 together with
a sum of Rs.500 in liquidation of the aforesaid sum of Rs.25,470 totalling to
a sum of Rs.1,024/50 on or before the end of each and every month commencing
from 30.6.75 without making any three defaults, writs not to issue till
31.5.80. In default of any three payments both writs to issue without notice.
If writs issued after 1 year, writs to issue without notice. If there is an
increase in the rates, the defendant agrees to pay the amounts that will
become payable as a result of an increase in rates in accordance with the
determination made by the Rent Board, after a month's notice being given to
the defendant by the plaintiff."



#  203

** **

"if the defendant makes the above payments without making any three defaults,
satisfaction of Decree to be entered and the defendant to continue occupation
of the said premises on a fresh contract of tenancy as from 1.6.80, by paying
the authorised rental in accordance with the terms of the order made by the
Rent Board in August 1972 or any other lawful order: ‑



The appellant however pending this action entered into an agreement P4 in
August 1972 with M. J. de Silva for running a business in partnership with him
in a portion of these premises under the name and style of " Auto Care " for
the repair of motor vehicles. By this agreement the appellant undertook to
make available to M. J. de Silva, the portion coloured pink depicted in sketch
P1 of the premises No. 816/5, Maradana Road. He also agreed to supply bath and
toilet facilities in consideration of which M. J. de Silva was to pay him a
fee of Rs.200 per mensum. The business was to be run and managed by M. J. de
Silva and it was agreed that the appellant would be exonerated from all
liabilities. The appellant handed over to M. J. de Silva tools and equipment
belonging to him valued at Rs.4,100 as his share of the capital. Accounting
was to take place every 3 years and the appellant was entitled to 1/5 share,
while M. J. de Silva would get the balance 4/5 share both amounts to be free
of income tax. It was also agreed that no change in the partnership was to be
effected without the written consent of both parties and if consent is refused
the partnership was to be wound up.



Contrary to the terms of this agreement, M. J. de Silva, purporting to be the
owner and proprietor of the business, by Deed D1 of 30th May, 1975, sold to
Rienzie Rodrigo for a sum of Rs.7,900 the premises where the business of "
Auto Care " was conducted together with the tools and equipment mentioned
earlier. On the same date by mortgage bond D2, M. J. de Silva mortgaged the
business of " Auto Care " to Rienzie Rodrigo and handed over the management of
the business to him. The business however was carried on till 9th November,
1975, by Sydney Claude Pereira, a cousin of Rienzie Rodrigo on behalf of
Rienzie Rodrigo. This Sydney Claude Pereira happened also to be a nephew of
the appellant. Thereafter Rienzie Rodrigo by Deed D4 dated 10.11.1975 sold the
building and structures on premises No. 816/5, to the respondent and on the
same date on D5 sold the



# 204



business and goodwill also of " Auto Care " to the respond Again on the same
day, the Attorney of M. J. de Silva, had se the Registrar of Business Names,
the form relating to notice of change of partners stating that M. J. de Silva
has ceased to be a partner and that his right ,title and interest in the
business devolved on the respondent.



When the appellant found that the premises were in the unlawful occupation of
the respondent and discovered on further pro, the dealings with this property
by M. J. de Silva and Rienzie Rodrigo, he filed this action. He came to court
on the basis that he continues to be a tenant of the premises by virtue of the
Decree in the District Court, Colombo, Case No. 1,734 and that from 31 .8.1972
he had used a portion of the premises for running business " Auto Care " in
partnership with M. J. de Silva averred that the building and structure, tools
and equipment belong to the appellant and that the respondent was in unlawful
occupation of the premises and conducting the business a trespasser.



In his answer the respondent state de Silva was the sole proprietor and owner
of the business of Auto Care ". The terms of the devolution of title referred
to earlier the respond had succeeded to M. J. de Silva's rights. He claimed
that he therefore in lawful occupation of the premises and has a rig carry on
the business as in succession to M. J. de Silva.



After trial the learned District Judge; gave judgment f    or appellant.



The respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal
reversed the judgment of the learned District Judge and dismissed the
plaintiff's action with costs.



            The Court of Appeal while agreeing with the appellant that Deeds D1, D2, D4, and D5 relied on by the respondent " were insufficient to compel the respondent to accept the appellant as a partner to confer upon him a right to interfere with the business " nevertheless held that the sales were " operative to convey such right, title and interest as M. J. de Silva had in the concern. The nature o interest is M. J. de Silva's proportion of partnership assets after they have been all realised and converted into money, after a partnership debts and liabilities had been paid and discharged".

#  205



The Court of Appeal also held that it was not disposed to grant the appellant
relief for an additional reason. The Court of Appeal held that the tenancy
claimed by the appellant could not be regarded as lawful possession for the
appellant was really in the position of a trespasser, because he was paying
damages under a Decree of Court although the appellant had the prospect of
converting the occupancy into that of a tenancy upon fulfilling the conditions
stipulated in the Decree. Further the partnership business installed in the
premises by the appellant was in effect a subletting of the premises, and
hence the appellant could not be said to be in actual occupation of the said
portion of the premises to enable him to institute and maintain this action.



In regard to the ground of subletting it may be mentioned that the genuineness
of the transaction set out in P4, namely, whether this was a partnership or a
deception to cover a subletting does not appear to have been put in issue by
the respondent in the proceedings in the lower court. Such a defence is also
not put forward in his pleadings. We cannot also agree with Mr. Gooneratne
that issues 4 and 9 pointed out by him in this connection could be stretched
to cover this situation. These issues have not been understood in that way
either by the learned District Judge or by the parties. In the result we are
of the view that this finding is unwarranted and has not been the subject of
contention between the parties in the lower court.



The Court of Appeal has granted Leave to Appeal only on the following grounds:



(1)        whether the right to occupy the premises in question granted to the
plaintiff‑petitioner by virtue of the Decree in D.C. Colombo 1734/RE enables
him to maintain the present action, and



(2)        whether the defendant‑respondent can enter the premises by virtue
of the right which he claims on D5 and can be said to be in unlawful
occupation thereof and therefore a trespasser.



Mr. Gooneratne's main submission was that since the partnership had not been
dissolved, the matters in issue in this ease, namely the right to occupy the
portion of the premises No. 816/5, and the right to the use of the equipment
and tools continue

# 206



to belong to the partnership and any right the appellant has must, subordinate
to the rights of the partnership. If so, Mr. Gooneratne submits the appellant
has no right or title to maintain this action except in his capacity as a
partner. Further he adds that appellant's rights or interests under the Decree
do not amount of possession ut dominus.



I am of the view that the appellant was in. lawful possession of premises in
terms of the Decree of the District Court. The vests a sufficient legal
interest in the appellant enabling occupy the premises. This is undoubtedly an
interest which the law will protect. Incidentally since the appellant was a
partner having regard to the nature of his rights to the property in terms of
the partnership agreement it cannot be said that the appellant not have a
sufficient occupancy of the premises so as to maintain this action.



Further the submission of Mr. Gooneratne on the second ground on which the
Court of Appeal declined to grant relief, does appear to be referable to a
matter that has been specifically put issue between the parties in the trial
court. It is true that the Court of Appeal said "The present action is
constituted on the footing that the defendant appellant is a person without
any right whatsoever. The suit should have been oriented in the partnership
and as it, not it is misconceived."



I do not understand this statement as showing that the ground contended for by
Mr. Gooneratne was in issue between the parties. It would appear that the
Court of Appeal made this statement in context of the respondent's rights and
not in regard to the position of the appellant with which Mr. Gooneratne is
now concerned the result this ground too which was not specifically put in
issue cannot be entertained at this stage.



Mr. Gooneratne's second submission which is based on the finding of the Court
of Appeal is that the respondent has succeeded to certain rights and interests
of the partner M. J. de Silva sufficient to give him a proprietory interest.
Mr. H. L. de Silva, however submitted that having regard to the terms of the
partners agreement relating to the disposition of partnership property

**  207**

** **

neither the right to occupy the portion of the premises nor the right to the
use of the tools and equipment can constitute assets of the partnership, so as
to vest such a right or interest in the respondent.



The following citation from _Lindley on Partnership_ and the two authorities
cited below throw some light on the legal position in situations such as the
present.



Lindley 12th    Ed. (page 663)‑



"Again it by no means follows that property used by all the partners for
partnership purposes is partnership property, for example the house and land
in and upon which the partnership business is carried on, often belong to one
of the partners only, either subject to a lease to the firm or without any
lease at all. So, it sometimes happens, though less frequently, that office
furniture and even utensils in trade are the separate property of one of the
partners subject to the right of the other to use them as long as the
partnership continues"



In _Pocock v. Carter_ (1), it was held that where the premises upon which a
partnership business is carried on are and are declared by the partnership
deed to be the property of one partner and the partnership deed contains no
provisions as to the tenancy of the partnership but only a general direction
that all rents are to be paid out of profits, the court will infer that the
partnership was intended to hold the premises on tenancy only during the
continuance of the partnership and not on a tenancy from year to year or at
will.



In _Benham v. Gray,_ (2) the plaintiff and defendant entered into a
partnership, the terms of which were not definitely arranged Business was
carried on in their names in a shop and counting‑house, which formed a part of
a house of which the plaintiff was a lessee. Due to disputes the plaintiff
caused the defendant to be served with a notice of dissolution of partnership
A few days later the defendant broke into and entered the shop and counting
house. The court held that the defendant was liable in trespass, his right to
occupation of the premises having ceased with the determination of the
partnership.

# 208



            In the present case there is however no need to resort to general principles since the matter is governed by the express provisions of the partnership agreement P4. They are the following:



_Clause 1-_ "The party of the first part (the appellant) agrees an undertakes
to make available to the said business a portion out of the building and
premises bearing assessment No.816/5 . .......



_Clause 3 ‑_"The party of the second part (M. J. de Silva) shall be entitled
to spend in the first instance a sum of Rupees Five Thousand (Rs.5,000),
repairing certain parts of the roof n supports of that portion of the
building, including the wiring for electricity and other incidental expenses,
so that the said business could be run efficiently. The said sum so expended
shall be recovered by the party of the second part from the party of the first
part in monthly instalments of Rupees One hundred and forty (Rs.140) per
month.



_Clause 15 ‑_ " The party of the second part agrees and undertakes not to
allow any person other than the employees of the said business to occupy any
section of that portion of the building and premises set apart specifically
for that purpose.



_Clause 16 ‑_"The party of the second part agrees and undertakes to  hand over
peaceful and vacant possession of that portion of the building and premises
described in Para I hereof, if and when the business is wound up or on any
cessation of the partnership and if at any time the dissolution or cessation
of business takes place before the aforementioned sum of Rupees Five Thousand
(Rs.5,000) is fully recovered, art account of any sum due to the party of the
second part shall be taken and the party of the first part shall pay the same
forthwith, making any adjustments if any, for the tools and equipment not
returned or value paid as provided in paragraph 14 hereof."



It is clear from these provisions that M. J. de Silva himself would have been
obliged to hand over possession of the portion of the premises in the event of
the partnership coming to an end. The respondent is in no better position and
can claim no greater rights than M .J de Silva

# 209

** **

The position seems to be no different in the case of the tools and equipment
claimed by the appellant. Even if the appellant had handed over those items to
M. J. de Silva, as his share of the capital, clauses 14 and 16 contain express
provision regarding their disposal upon a cessation of the partnership.



_Clause 14_ is worded as follows:



"The party of the second part accepts the said valuation of Rupees Four
Thousand One Hundred (Rs.4,100) for the said equipment and tools as capital
from the party of the first part for the said business, and upon the
dissolution of the said business or any change of the partnership duly
effected as above, the party of the second part undertakes to return the said
tools and equipment in good condition or their full value thereof."



It is not a matter of surprise to find M. J. de Silva had agreed to those
terms since the rights to those properties had been with the appellant from
the inception and it was he who made them available to the partnership for the
purpose of its business.



Even if we were to go by the finding of the Court of Appeal that the Deeds D
1, D2, D3, D4 and D5 were adequate to convey the right or interest which the
law recognises as being vested in a partner upon a dissolution of partnership
namely the right to a proportion of partnership assets after they have been
all realised and converted into money and all the partnership debts and
liabilities have been paid and discharged, this would not help the respondent.
This statement of the law makes it abundantly clear that the right the
respondent has in respect of the properties referred to could arise only after
a dissolution of the partnership and upon the conversion of the partnership
assets into money. How then can the respondent claim a present right to occupy
these premises or a present right to use those equipment and tools? Those
rights are necessarily restricted to the partners and only in respect of an
existing partnership. Both these requirements are absent in this case.
Accordingly the respondent cannot show a valid legal basis to remain in
occupation of the premises or for the use of the tools and equipment.

# 210



            For these reasons I would set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and restore the judgment of the District Court. The respondent will pay to the appellant the costs of appeal both here and in the Court of Appeal.



**SAMARAKOON, C.J.** ‑I agree.

** **

**ABDUL CADER, J.** ‑I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/25.html_  

