##  Lakmini Printers (Private) Limited. v. Dharmaratne and Others - SLR - 10,
Vol 1 of 2003 [2001] LKSC 25; (2003) 1 Sri LR 10 (25 October 2001)

## 10

## LAKMINI PRINTERS (PRIVATE) LIMITED

**v.** ****

**    DHARMARATNE AND OTHERS** ****

  

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

ISMAIL, J., AND

YAPA, J.

SC (FR) 129/2002

18TH NOVEMBER 2002



_Fundamental Rights - Article 12(1) of the Constitution_ \- _Tenders for
supply of stamped envelopes to the Postal Department-Arrangement to supply
envelopes printed in India by an Indian Printer for the successful tenderer
-Validity of the tender._

The petitioner tendered for the supply of stamped envelopes to the Postal
Department. The 1st and 2nd respondents carrying on business in partnership as
"Spot International" also tendered for the same service. The petitioner's
ten­der was around Rs. 2000/- above that of "Spot International". The
petitioner's product was out of local paper and to be printed locally whilst
"Spot International" had arranged to have the envelopes printed in India by
Madras Security Printers. The tender was awarded to "Spot International".

**Held :**



The failure to award the tender to the petitioner was arbitrary, unreasonable
and unlawful in violation of Article 12(1) of the Constitution in that:



(i) The arrangement by "Spot International" amounted to a sub-letting in
breach of condition 18 of the tender conditions in the absence of a suggestion
that the prior written consent of the Post Master General had been sought and
obtained.



(ii) Condition 11 prohibits printing in India, and



(iii) Under Financial Regulation 697(3) locally manufactured articles are
entitled to a preference of 20 percent over the lowest rate quoted for the
supply of the imported articles. No reason was given for the denial of that
preference to the petitioner, despite specific requests.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights

11

**Case referred to :** ****

(1) _Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd v JEDB_ SC 220/92A SCM 2.7.93

_M.A. Sumanthiran_ with _Buddike Illnagatillake_ for petitioner.

_A.H.H. Perera_ for 1st and 2nd respondents.

_Harsha Fernando,_ State Counsel for 3rd to 8th respondents.

Cur. adv. vult

December 9, 2002 **  
  
FERNANDO, J.**

The Petitioner Company ("the Petitioner") complains that its fundamental right
under Article 12(1) was infringed by reason of the failure to award to the
Petitioner a tender for the "supply and deliv­ery" of 18 million stamped
envelopes for the Postal Department. That tender was instead awarded on
25.10.2001 to the 1st and 2nd Respondents carrying on business in partnership
as "Spot International", and the stamped envelopes were printed by an Indian
firm and supplied by Spot International to the Postal Department.

The "General Conditions" for that tender specified:

"11 (a) The plate **for** printing the stamp-head shall be supplied by the
Department of Posts and will always remain in the **custody** of the
Department.



(b) The printing machine with the stamp-head shall always be used under the
supervision of an officer of the Department....  
  

18\. The contractor shall not assign or sub-let the contract or any part
thereof or any benefit or interest therein without the prior written con­sent
of the Post-Master General...."



The 7th Respondent, who assumed office as Secretary to the Ministry concerned
on 20.12.2001, submitted an affidavit which he stated was based on the files
and documents available. He stated that along with the Spot International bid
dated 10.10.2001 there was submitted a letter dated 10.10.2001 from Madras
Security

12

Printers undertaking to print and deliver 18 million stamped envelopes "on
behalf of Spot International if they are successful in getting the above
tender, and confirming that all specifications as per the tender documents
would be met by them; that the 1st and 2nd Respondents at the point of
submitting their tender had stated that performance of the contract would be
jointly with Madras Security Printers; and that the Spot International tender
was the lower of the two as the following comparison shows:

**_Petitioner's Prices_                _Spot International Prices_**



With ads Without ads With ads Without ads

14,800,000 14,059,980 12,829,500 12,330,000

It was clear from the outset that Spot International had no intention of
printing the stamped envelopes in Sri Lanka, and was throughout intending to
have them printed outside Sri Lanka by Madras Security Printers.



If the contract was treated as one for the _printing_ of envelopes, then it
was necessary that the successful tenderer should itself have printed the
envelopes: getting Madras Security Printers to print them amounted to
assignment or sub-letting in breach of condition 18 (there being no suggestion
that the prior written consent of the Postmaster-General had been sought and
obtained). Besides, the envelopes could not have been printed out­side Sri
Lanka in view of condition 11, and there was no power to waive that condition.
If the Postal Department was willing to waive that condition, that should have
been made known to the Petitioner so that the Petitioner too would have had
the opportunity of sub­mitting (possibly lower) tenders on the basis that the
work would be done abroad.



Alternatively, the contract could reasonably have been treat­ed as permitting
the import and supply of envelopes, in which even import from Madras Security
Printers was permissible. But even then condition 11 would have precluded
printing in India.



Whether the contract was treated as one for printing or for import, quite
apart from the breach of tender conditions 11 and 18, an important question of
evaluation arose. The Petitioner averred that its product was manufactured
locally, entirely with locally man

13

ufactured paper, whereas Spot International was supplying an imported product.
According to Financial Regulation No. 697(3):



"When locally manufactured articles are offered in competition with imported
articles, the former should be given a preference of 20 percent over the
lowest rate quoted for the supply of the imported articles. In the evaluation
of tenders, this preference should be given by deducting 20 percent from the
rates quoted for locally manufactured articles."



That was reiterated in guideline No. 126 of the Guidelines on Government
Tender Procedure. This preference is dictated not by sentiment but by sound
economic considerations. As I noted in _Ceylon Paper Sacks Ltd v J.E.D.B.,_
such preference results in benefits to the national economy in respect of
employment, tax rev­enues, a lower outflow of foreign exchange, etc, as well
as long-term benefits in regard to industrialization. Had the stipulated
pref­erence been given the Petitioner's bids would have had to be reduced, for
the purpose of comparison, by Rs. 2,960,000 and Rs. 2,811,996 respectively, to
Rs. 11,840,000 and Rs. 11,247,984 -making them substantially lower than the
bids of Spot International. No reason has been given for denying the
Petitioner this prefer­ence, despite specific requests.



For all these reasons, I hold that the failure to award the ten­der to the
Petitioner was arbitrary, unreasonable and unlawful in violation of Article
12(1).



The Petitioner has submitted some particulars as to the prof­its made from
previous tenders, and I am of the opinion that a ten­derer could reasonably
have expected to make a profit of not less than 10% on a contract like this. I
therefore award the Petitioner a sum of Rs. 1,500,000 as compensation payable
by the State, and a sum of Rs. 75,000 as costs payable by Spot International,
on or before 31.1.2003.

**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.

**YAPA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/25.html_  

