##  Wijewickrema v. Attorney General - SLR - 775, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC
25; (1982) 2 Sri LR 775 (1 December 1982)

#  775

**  WIJEWICKREMA**

**v.**

**ATTORNEY ‑GENERAL**

#### SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., WANASUNDERA, J., WIMALARATNE, J.,

RATWATTE, J., VICTOR PERERA, J., COLIN‑THOME J., AND SOZA J.

S.C. REFERENCE 7/82 ‑ D.C. COLOMBO 2235/SPL.

DECEMBER 01, 1982.



    Constitution ‑ Article 124 ‑ Constitutionality of Bill to amend Constitution ‑Jurisdiction.



The plaintiff alleged that 144 members of Parliament had signed and delivered
undated letters of resignation and thus they were incapable of voting,
according to law and the Constitution, for the Fourth Amendment to the
Constitution. Therefore the Fourth Amendment is not a Bill that has been duly
passed by Parliament and cannot be submitted to the People at a Referendum.



# Held ‑



That in terms of Article 124 the Court has no power or jurisdiction to inquire
into or pronounce upon the Constitutionality of such a Bill or its due
compliance with the legislative process on any ground whatsoever.



**Case referred to:**



(1) _Billimoria's Case 1978 ‑79, 2 Sri L.R. Vol. 1, Part 1, 10._



**REFERENCE** to the Supreme Court under Article 125 of the Constitution.



_Felix R. D. Bandaranaike_ with _P. Somaratne_ for plaintiff.



_K. M. M. B. Kulatunga, Solicitor ‑General,_ with _S. Ratnapala, Acting Senior
State Counsel,_ for Attorney‑General.



# 776



December 1st, 1982.

**  **

**SHARVANANDA, J**. read the following unanimous order of the Court:



On the alleged ground that 144 members of Parliament had signed and delivered
undated letters resigning their office to His Excellency the President, the
plaintiff contends that "the said 144 members of Parliament were incapable of
voting according to the law and the Constitution for the Fourth Amendment to
the Constitution on 4th November, 1982, and that notwithstanding the purported
certification of the Speaker of the Parliament that the Fourth Amendment to
the Constitution has been duly passed by a two‑thirds majority of Parliament,
the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution is not a Bill that has been duly
passed by the Parliament at all and cannot therefore be submitted to the
People at a Referendum" ‑ vide paragraph 10 of the plaint.



###### The plaintiff therefore prays:‑



(a) for a declaration that the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution has not
been validly passed by the Parliament as a Bill for the amendment of the
Constitution;



(b) for a declaration that the Fourth Amendment to the Constitution should not
be submitted to the People at a Referendum;



(c) for a reference of the constitutional questions arising in this action to
the Supreme Court for determination under Article 125 of the Constitution.



The fundamental question involved in this action is whether Article 124 of the
Constitution bars the jurisdiction of any Court to decide the constitutional
issue raised by the plaintiff.



In our view the plaintiff's action involves basically the question whether the
Fourth Amendment to the Constitution has been validly voted upon as a Bill for
the amendment of the Constitution. Our unanimous decision it this basic
question is that the Court is barred by the provisions of Article 124 of the
Constitution which provides:



"Save as otherwise provided in Articles 120, 121 and 122, no Court.....  shall
in relation to any Bill, have power or jurisdiction to inquire into, or
pronounce upon, the _constitutionality of such Bill or its due compliance with
the legislative process_ , on any ground whatsoever."



# 777



from inquiring into or pronouncing upon the validity of the Bill for the
amendment of the Constitution referred to in the plaint.



We are also of the view that the plaintiff cannot therefore maintain this
action. Consequently, in the exercise of our power under Article 125(2), we
dismiss the plaintiff's action.



Before parting with this matter, we wish to draw the attention of the District
Judge to the requirements of Rule 64 of the Supreme Court Rules 1978 and to
the observations of this Court in _Billimoria's_ case (1) whenever a reference
is made under Article 125(1).



Determination sent to District Court.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/25.html_  

