##  Jinadasa v. Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. - SLR - 197, Vol 1 of
1999 [1999] LKSC 25; (1999) 1 Sri LR 197 (3 February 1999)

**197**

**JINADASA  
v.  
ASSOCIATED NEWSPAPERS OF  
CEYLON LTD.**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
PERERA, J.,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. FR NO. 296/98  
OCTOBER 27, 1998.  
NOVEMBER 12, 1998.

_Fundamental rights - Article 12 (1) - Services terminated - Lost trust and
confidence - no rational explanation._

The petitioner was appointed Additional Secretary with effect from 03. 05.
1988 and upon the retirement of the Secretary he was appointed Acting
Secretary and Secretary in 1989. On 18. 08\. 1995 he was appointed as 'General
Manager'. On 31. 03. 97 he was placed in the Special Grade, and his salary had
been increased with effect from 01. 01. 1998\. However, on 06. 04. 1998, his
services - as the secretary \- were terminated on the alleged ground that the
Board had lost trust and confidence in the petitioner.

**Held:**

1\. Evidence does not show any reason to conclude that the decision by the
Board on 06. 04. 1998 was warranted. On the other hand there were letters
produced in evidence that his work was commended by the present Chairman and
the former Chairman.

2\. The grounds for the action of the respondents cannot be regarded as the
justification for the respondents decision for they took place before the
increase of the petitioner's salary on 01. 01. 1998. Past charges were either
mistaken or lapses forgiven and therefore they were irrelevant when the
respondent decided to terminate the petitioner's services.

_Per_ Amerasinghe, J.

''The decision to terminate the petitioner's services was in my view therefore
purely dependent on the will and pleasure of the 1st respondent and capricious
and not restrained by considerations of impartial even-handed dealing.'

**APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.

198

_Romesh de Silva, PC,_ with _Palitha Kumarasinghe_ and _Sugath Caldera_ for
petitioner.  
_  
__E. D. Wickremanayake_ with _R. A. L Kumarawickrema_ for 1st-7th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 3, 1999.  
**  
AMERASINGHE, J.**

The first respondent is the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. Although in
their statement of objections the respondents submitted that the first
respondent was "not a 'State instrument' whose actions constitute executive or
administrative action within the meaning of Article 126 of the Constitution",
learned counsel for the respondents stated that he was not taking up that
objection and would rest his case on the facts relating to the alleged
discrimination which were claimed by the petitioner to have violated his
fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 12 and 14 (1) (g) of the
Constitution.

The secretary of the first respondent, was on extended service and on his way
out. His post had to be filled, and when it was advertised, the petitioner was
appointed Additional Secretary with effect from 03 May, 1988. Upon the
retirement of the Secretary, the petitioner was appointed Acting Secretary and
Secretary in 1989. In their statement of objections, the respondents stated:
"the petitioner was selected for employment by the 1st respondent because he
was the only candidate who turned up for the interview. He was recruited not
on his merits but because the 1st respondent had no other choice".

The petitioner had a Bachelor's Degree in Economics (Special) from the
University of Ceylon; he was an Attorney-at-law; a registered company
secretary under the Companies Act; the holder of a Master's Degree in
International Relations from the University of Colombo and a Certificate in
Diplomatic Training from the Bandaranaike Institute of Diplomatic Training;
and he had been an external consultant in Management for the National
Institute of Business Management, Manager/Legal at the State Trading
Corporation, Company Secretary/

199

Legal Advisor, St. Anthony's Group of Companies. His work as Assistant
Secretary of the Sri Lanka National Salt Corporation had been highly commended
by the Chairman of that Corporation. Documents FR1 and FR2 produced by the
respondents establish that only one of five candidates summoned for the
interview "turned up". According to those documents some person wished to see
the petitioner, which he presumably did and satisfied himself about the
petitioner's suitability. There is a comment that "His spelling is not very
good", but in another minute it is stated: "He seems good material, and will
surely improve on his spelling".

The choice of the petitioner for appointment was, it seems, appropriate. On
the 18th of August, 1995, the petitioner was, in terms of a "notice" issued
under the hand of the Director/(Operations and Legal) appointed General
Manager. (see also the letter of the Director/Operations and Legal dated the
18th of August, 1995).

On the 31st of March, 1997, the Chairman of the first respondent informed the
petitioner that the "Management" had decided to place him in the "Special
Grade" at a specified salary point "with effect from 01st January, 1997".

On the 5th of January, 1998, the Chief Executive Officer of the first
respondent informed the petitioner, identifying him as "General
Manager/Secretary", (vide P9) that the petitioner's salary had been increased
with effect from the 01st of January, 1998.

I believe one's salary is ordinarily increased and a person is upgraded if an
employee's work and conduct are, upon a proper evaluation based upon laid down
procedures, proved to be satisfactory.

According to the respondents, the Board of Directors of the 1st respondent
decided at its Board meeting held on the 6th of April, 1998, to terminate the
services of the petitioner as the secretary of the 1st respondent (vide P97),
because, it was alleged, that the Board had lost trust and confidence in the
petitioner and were wary about allowing such an important post to be held by
the petitioner. It was said that "the 1st respondent is a commercial
establishment which

200

cannot function with the petitioner as the company secretary who has failed to
secure the trust and confidence of the Board of Directors.

It would appear that the only grounds for the alleged lack of trust and
confidence were based on the following matters:

1\. It is alleged that the petitioner was warned on the 2nd of August, 1990,
by the then General Manager for leaving the office without informing anyone of
his whereabouts. (7R9). There was an end to that matter, for subsequently on
the 16th of August, 1995, the petitioner was appointed General Manager and on
the 1st of January, 1997, he was promoted to the Special Grade in Executive
Group A and in January, 1998, he was given an increased salary. The 1990
episode could in the circumstances hardly be regarded a ground for a lack of
trust and confidence in April, 1998, considering the intervening events.

2\. It is alleged that on the 19th of April, 1991, the Director/Financial
Consultant alleged negligence and irresponsibility on the part of the
petitioner. On the 26th of April, 1991, the petitioner explained the
circumstances of the matters on which the allegations of negligence and
irresponsibility were based. It would appear that the Director/Financial
Consultant was not satisfied with the petitioner's explanation and felt it
necessary to refer the matter to the Board for disciplinary action. On the
23rd of May, 1991, the petitioner discussed the matter with the Director/
Financial Consultant, offered him his apologies, requested him to explain
matters to the Chairman and there was an end to that matter for, as we have
seen, the petitioner was subsequently made General Manager, promoted to the
Special Grade and given salary increases.

3\. The next matter relates to delay in taking action on a letter from the
Labour Secretariat. The letter had been received at 1400 hours on the 26th of
August, 1991, by the General Administration Department and minuted to the
petitioner who, however, did not recollect seeing the letter before he went on
leave the next day. The letter related to a matter that was not

201

within his purview. Nevertheless it was found that: "he should have cleared
his tray of all correspondence before leaving office on the 26th **. . .** "
It was recommended that the petitioner "be reprimanded for his lack of
responsibility". That was the end of that matter for, as we have seen the
petitioner was subsequently made General Manager, promoted to the special
grade and given salary increases.

4\. There was the Abeyratne case. It is alleged that on the 11th of July,
1996, the petitioner had been warned for misconduct. The matter arose from the
interdiction of Mr. Anura Abeyratne. The petitioner's fault, it seems, was
that he had instructed the Manager/Personnel & Administration to fix a formal
inquiry on the 28th of June, 1996, without reference to the Director/
Operations & Legal and that the Inquiring Officer selected had been from the
Panel appointed by the previous management". It is said that: "the Board
directed that the General Manager/ Secretary, Mr. B. A. Jinadasa should be
warned that he should refrain from repeating such actions in the future".
There is nothing to show why the petitioner was in any way guilty of
misconduct by fixing an inquiry without reference to the Director/ Operations
and Legal or by referring the matter to the Panel approved by the previous
management. It might also be mentioned that although the case in the Labour
Tribunal instituted by Mr. Abeyratne was settled and he was reinstated at the
instance of the Chairman, yet there was nothing to show misconduct on the part
of the petitioner. It is pertinent to reproduce the observations of Mr. Percy
Wickremasekera, Director/Legal Consultant of the first respondent to its
Chairman at that time, on his decision to settle Abeyratne's case: "I
understand that you have called the Legal Officer and given her orders
regarding the Labour Tribunal case filed by Mr. Anura Abeyratne. Since you are
not the Director Legal nor even a person with any knowledge or understanding
of law or legal matters your action is all the more damaging to the company's
interests. Regarding this case there is a decision of the Board and all you
have to do is to abide by the decision and not act in an indecent haste. You
must also know and understand that professionals

202

such as lawyers cannot be ordered to act against their conscience. Therefore
this is to request you not to interfere with the work of the Legal Division as
you are neither competent nor knowledgeable to do so". In any event, the
Abeyratne matter was at an end and the petitioner was subsequently promoted to
the special grade and given salary increases.

5\. The next matter related to a complaint in February, 1997, by Mr. Anthony
M. E. Fernando who had alleged that at an interview for the selection of a
freelance advertising canvasser the petitioner had asked Fernando whether he
was trying to intimidate the panel by forwarding his application through the
Deputy Minister of Media and Information and whether he hoped to obtain the
support of the Deputy Minister's people to sustain his canvassing programme
(7R34).

6\. It was also alleged that: "without the prior knowledge and authority of
the company and although he is not a journalist, Mr. Jinadasa had been a
member of the Sri Lanka delegation to the Indian Journalists Association
Congress held in India recently" (7R15)..

Although the Board had decided on the 22nd of January, 1997, to place the
petitioner on the special grade and to increase his salary, on the 19th of
March, 1997, the Board decided not to implement the decision in view of the
matters referred to at (5) and (6) above. It was recorded in the Board minutes
that: "The Directors agreed that greater integrity is expected from a person
holding the position of General Manager such as Mr. Jinadasa". In their
statement of objections, the respondents stated that the petitioner's
promotion and salary increment were withheld for misconduct. In fact the
halting of the promotion and the withholding of the salary increment were only
temporary, for the Board, noting that the issue regarding the complaint by
Fernando had been "settled" and that the newspaper which carried an article
alleging that the petitioner had been a member of the delegation to India had
been corrected by the newspaper, implemented the decision of the Board dated
the 22nd of January, 1997 (P138A).

203

What was it that had happened since the petitioner's salary as General
Manager/Secretary had been increased on the 1st of January, 1998, that
warranted a conclusion that the petitioner's conduct lead to any loss of faith
or confidence in the petitioner or want of reliance on what he said or did?
What was there to doubt the credence of what the petitioner had stated in his
advice on various matters? In my view, the evidence does not show any reason
to conclude that the decision of the Board on the 6th of April, 1998, was
warranted. On the other hand, there were letters produced in evidence from
former Chairman of the first respondent as well as from the present Chairman,
commending the work of the petitioner.

The grounds for the action of the respondents as set out in paragraph 13 of
the respondents' statement of objections cannot be regarded as the
justification for the respondents' decision, for they among other things, took
place before the increase of the petitioner's salary as General
Manager/Secretary on 1st of January, 1998. Past charges were either mistaken
or lapses forgiven and they were therefore irrelevant when the respondents
decided to terminate the petitioner's services.

I can find no rational explanation for the conduct of the respondents in
terminating the petitioner's services as secretary of the Associated
Newspapers of Ceylon Limited. Nor are there any reasonable grounds for
reversing its earlier decision to designate the petitioner as General
Manager/Secretary. The decision to terminate the petitioner's services was in
my view therefore purely dependent on the will and pleasure of the 1st
respondent and capricious and not restrained by considerations of impartial,
even-handed dealing. I therefore declare that the petitioner's rights
guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution have been violated by the
termination of his services.

However, there is in my view no evidence to support the allegation that
Article 12 (2) of the Constitution has been violated. As pointed out by the
respondents, the petitioner's appointment as General Manager/Secretary on the
16th of August, 1995, his promotion to a higher grade on the 1st of January,
1997, and his salary increment

204

on the 1st of January, 1998, took place under the present government.
Moreover, the present Chairman had given him a letter of commendation on the
27th of November, 1997.

The decision of the Board of Directors of the first respondent dated the 6th
of April, 1998, terminating the appointment of the petitioner as secretary of
the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. is set aside.

I make order that the petitioner shall continue to be designated as General
Manager/Secretary although it was a matter within the competence of the Board
of the first respondent for the sake of good management to decide whether
there should additionally be a Chief Executive Officer and to allocate such
duties to the Chief Executive Officer and to the General Manager/Secretary as
the Board deemed fit.

The first respondent is ordered to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 75,000 as
compensation and Rs. 25,000 as costs.

Before I part with this judgment, I should like to refer to the fact that the
Brief in this case, as in many others, ran into many hundreds of pages. There
was no orderly arrangement of the documents, and, therefore, it was necessary
for much time to be taken to locate documents cited by counsel during the
hearing.. In such a situation, the adverse effect on the efforts of counsel in
presenting his or her case and the difficulty for judges in following
submissions are obvious. I would respectfully recommend that due consideration
be given to the making of appropriate rules with regard to the preparation of
judges' briefs prior to argument.

**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/25.html_  

