##  Almeida v. Ceylon Fisheries Corporation and Others - SLR - 361, Vol 3 of
1998 [1998] LKSC 25; (1998) 3 Sri LR 361 (8 June 1998)

**361**

**ALMEIDA  
v.  
CEYLON FISHERIES CORPORATION  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

DHEERARATNE, J.,

ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. AND

GUNASEKERA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 310/97 (FR)

MAY 13, 1998.

_Fundamental rights - Refusal to grant an extension of service - Discretion of
the appointing authority - Art. 12 (1) of the Constitution._

The petitioner was the Marketing; Manager of the 1st respondent corporation.
On reaching the age of 55 years which was the age of optional retirement, he
applied for an extension of service for one year. The petitioner's application
was rejected by the Board of Directors of the 1st respondent corporation
having regard to the fact that there was a criminal prosecution pending
against the petitioner and that his service was not indispensable.

**Held:**

There was a discretion vested in the Board of the 1st respondent corporation
to grant or refuse an extension of service after an officer reached the
optional age of retirement. The decision of the Board to refuse an extension
of service to the petitioner could not be said to be arbitrary or capricious
and violative of Article 12 of the Constitution.

362

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Upul Jayasuriya with P. Radhakrishnan_ for petitioner.

_Shavindra Fernando_ SSC for Attorney-General.

Cur. adv. vult.

June 8, 1998.

**GUNASEKERA, J.**

The petitioner who was the Marketing Manager of the 1st respondent Corporation
complains of the violation of his fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles
12 (1) and 12 (2) of the Constitution by the Corporation's refusal to grant
him an extension of service for one year from 1.1.97 on his reaching the age
of 55 years.

The petitioner had been appointed to the post of Marketing Officer in Grade IX
of the Fisheries Corporation with effect from 26.7.1965 by a letter of
appointment marked 'P1'. Over the years he had been promoted to higher grades
and had been appointed to the post of Marketing Manager, Grade I, with effect
from 1.11.1986 by a letter of appointment 'P3' dated 11.11.1986 and thereafter
had been promoted to a special grade executive post with effect from 1.1.1996
by letter 'P41.

It is to be noted that none of the letters 'P1', 'P3' & 'P4' specify an age of
retirement but however, 'P4' & 'P3' refer to the terms and conditions
specified in the original letter of appointment 'P1'. Clause 2 of 'PV issued
to the petitioner inter alia states: you will be subjected to the
administrative, financial and disciplinary Orders of the Corporation and any
other Orders issued from time to time by or on behalf of the Board and Clause
16 states: after you are confirmed in your appointment your employment is
terminable on the giving of three months' written notice or on the appointment
of three months' salary in lieu thereof on either side.

By a notice dated 19.3.1996 marked 'P5' the 4th respondent had notified all
Staff Officers who intended to continue in service in the 1st respondent
Corporation after attaining 55 years of age to forward a request indicating
their desire to continue in service 6 months prior to reaching 55 years. Since
the petitioner would have reached 55 years

**363**

of age on 1.1.97 he had by letter 'P6' dated 2.6.96 requested that he be
granted an extension of service for one year from 1.1.97. The petitioner had
been informed by the 4th respondent by 'P7' dated 14.11.96 that his
application for an extension of service after 55 years was rejected consequent
upon a policy decision taken by the Board of Directors of the 1st respondent
Corporation and that steps would be taken to treat him as being retired from
1.1.97. The petitioner states that subsequently by an internal circular No.
97-01 dated 15.1.97 marked 'P9' that the Common Policy Decision of the Board
of Directors of the 1st respondent Corporation not to engage employees
whomsoever beyond the age of 55 years was amended to fall in line with a
Secretarial Division Circular No. SEC 131/1 dated 26.10.65 marked 'P8'
according to which the Board had decided that the age of retirement of
employees of the 1st respondent Corporation should be (1) 55 years for
optional retirement and (2) 60 years for compulsory retirement.

It was contended for and on behalf of the petitioner that Circular 'P9'
further provided that those employees who had been retired on reaching the age
of 55 years between December, 1996 and January, 1997 could make an application
for an extension of service for the consideration by the Board, and in
consequence of that provision that the petitioner applied for an extension of
service for one year by his letter dated 16.1.1997 marked 'P10' and that his
request for an extension of service was rejected by the 2nd respondent by
letter dated 24.2.97 marked 'P21.

It was urged by learned counsel for the petitioner that the rejection of the
application of the petitioner for an extension of service by one year from
1.1.97 was violative of the provisions of Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2) of the
Constitution since the rejection was capricious and discriminatory. It was
submitted on behalf of the petitioner that during his long period of service
of over 30 years that he had not been found wanting in respect of any aspect
of his work and had a reasonable expectation of securing an extension of
service after reaching the age of 55. Further it was contended that the
petitioner had been exonerated by the Inquiring Officer who had held a
disciplinary inquiry in 1991 and notwithstanding the fact that the petitioner
had a case No. B 274/94 in the Magistrate's Court of Anuradhapura which never
got off the ground that he was promoted to a special grade executive post with
effect from 1.1.96.

Learned Senior State Counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that the
Board at its 725th Board Meeting held on 2.9.96 considered the question of
granting extension of service to its

**364**

employees who had reached the optional age of retirement (55 years) and
decided that extension of service beyond the optional age of retirement would
be considered only in the case of employees who had a satisfactory past record
of service and whose services were indispensable. A copy of the said Board
decision had been filed along with the affidavit of the 4th respondent marked
'4R1. In the case Of the petitioner it was submitted that the Board had
considered his application for an extension of service after 55 years and
refused to accede to his request since a criminal prosecution relating to
forgery was pending in the Magistrate's Court and that his services were not
indispensable. A copy of the said Board decision dated 18.2.97 had been
produced marked 'X' along with a further affidavit of the 4th respondent dated
28.10.97.

Although the petitioner has referred to several persons whose services have
been extended after reaching the optional age of retirement in paragraph 25 of
the petition the respondent's position is that two of them, namely Titus and
Weeraratne, had been granted extensions of service prior to the Board decision
'4R1' and Nandasiri Gunaratne and Podi Appuhamy had not been granted
extensions as averred by the petitioner. That the others have been granted
extensions of service on the basis that their services were indispensable in
accordance with the circular '4R1'.

On a consideration of the documents filed it appears that there is a
discretion vested in the Board of the 1st respondent Corporation to grant or
to refuse an extension of service after an officer reaches the optional age of
retirement. The discretion is to be exercised within the framework of the
principles laid down in the Board decision marked ;4R1'. In the instant case
after a consideration of the application for the extension of the services of
the petitioner the Board having had regard to the fact that there was a
criminal prosecution pending against the petitioner and on account of the fact
that his services were not indispensable has refused to exercise the
discretion in his favour and intimated the said decision by letter marked 'P2'
dated 24.2.97. The said decision, in my view, cannot be said to be arbitrary
or capricious. Accordingly, the petitioner's application is dismissed without
costs.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY,** \- I agree.

Application dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/25.html_  

