##  In Re Local Authorities Housing Statute No. 2 of 1995 of the Provincial
Council North Central Province - SLR - 344, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 25;
(1997) 3 Sri LR 344 (26 September 1997)

344

IN RE LOCAL AUTHORITIES HOUSING STATUTE

NO. 2 OF 1995 OF THE PROVINCIAL COUNCIL

NORTH CENTRAL PROVINCE



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, ACJ.,

WIJETUNGA, J AND

ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.

S.C. NO. 16/97 (S.D.)

SEPTEMBER 24, 1997.



# Constitutional Law - Provincial Council Statute - Constitutionality - Item
4.3 List I (Provincial Council List) Ninth Schedule to the Constitution -
Local Government - Local Authorities Housing Act-Article 154G (8) of the
Constitution.



Section 4(1) of the Local Authorities Housing Statute No. 2 of 1995 made by
the Provincial Council of the North Central Province compelled a Local
Authority to gift to a tenant of a house which had been let in terms of
section 3(1) of the Local Authorities Housing Act No. 14 of 1964 as amended by
Act No. 63 of 1979 where the rental of such house prior to such letting did
not exceed one hundred and fifty rupees as on 01.01.1991. Section 4(2) of the
Statute compelled gift of similar houses let otherwise than under the
Provisions of section 3(1) of Act No. 14 of 1964.



**Held:**



Sections 4(1) and 4(2) and the long title of the Local Authorities Housing
Statute No.2 of 1995 are inconsistent with the Constitution in that:



(a) The provisions of sections 4(1) and 4(2) compelling gifts of houses
diminished the power of a local authority in derogation of the constitutional
prohibition against taking away the powers of a local authority, imposed on a
Provincial Council by section4.3. of List I (Provincial Council List) in the
Ninth Schedule to the Constitution.



(b) Although the statute was inconsistent with the Local Authorities Housing
Act, it failed, contrary to Article 154G(8) of the Constitution, to describe
the Statute in its long title as being inconsistent with that law.



Reference under Article 154 H(4) of the Constitution.



_K. C. Kamalasabaysan, P. C. A.S.G._ with _N. Pulle, S. C._ for the Attorney-
General.

_ _

_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C._ with _D. H. N. Jayamaha_ and _H. V. Situge_ for the
Chairman and the Chief Minister of the Provincial Council of the North Central
Province.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._  



**345**



September 26, 1997.  


**FERNANDO, ACJ:**



This is a Reference under Article 154H(4) of the Constitution.



The Reference states that the Provincial Council of the North Central Province
made a Statute entitled the "Local Authorities Housing Statute, No 2 of 1995";
that upon being presented to the Governor, for his assent in terms of Article
154H(2), the Governor returned that. Statute to the Provincial Council for
reconsideration, on the basis that it was not within the legislative
competence of the Provincial Council; that the Provincial Council having
reconsidered the Statute passed it a second time without amendment; and that
when presented to the Governor for a second time for his assent, the Governor
reserved the Statute for reference by the President to this Court for a
determination that it is not inconsistent with the provisions of the
Constitution.



Notice was issued by this Court on the Attorney-General, and thereafter on the
Governor, the Chief Minister and the Chairman of the Provincial Council.
Written submissions were tendered on behalf of the Attorney-General, the Chief
Minister and the Chairman.



Mr. Kamalasabayson, PC, ASG, submitted that the Governor had withheld assent
because the Statute was inconsistent with the Constitution for two reasons
only.



First, sections 4(1) and 4(2) of the Statute are inconsistent with item 4.3 of
List I (the Provincial Council List) in the Ninth Schedule to the
Constitution, because they took away a power which local authorities has under
the Local Authorities Housing Act, No 14 of 1964, as amended by Act No 63 of
1979, despite the express. prohibition in item 4.3:



**"4. Local Government** ..........................................

............................................................................

4.3 Local authorities will have the powers vested in them under existing law
............................................ It will be open to a Provincial
Council to confer additional powers on local authorities **but not to take
away their powers. "**

**346**



Second, although the Statute is inconsistent with the Local Authorities
Housing Act, it fails - contrary to Article 154G(8) of the Constitution - to
describe the Statute "in its long title as being inconsistent with that law".



Section 3(1) of the Local Authorities Housing Act ("the Act") provides:



' ... a local authority may, either upon a resolution passed in that behalf at
a duly constituted meeting of that local authority or upon the direction of
the Minister, let to any person any house.



(a) which has vested in that local authority under section 2; or



(b) which has been, or **may** be, constructed by that local authority within
the administrative limits of that local authority for the purpose of
residence,  
  
on such terms as will enable that person to become the owner of that house and
the land appertaining thereto after making certain number of monthly payments
as rent."



Section 4 of the Statute provides:



"(1) Where prior to the coming into force of this Statute a house to which the
Local Authorities Housing Act applies has been let to any person under the
provisions of section 3(1) of that Act and the monthly rental of such house
prior to such letting did not exceed one hundred and fifty rupees as at
01.01.1991, the local authority within the administrative limits of which that
house is situated shall, by an instrument of disposition, transfer, free of
charge, that house to that person.



(2) Where prior to the coming into force of this statute a house to which the
Local Authorities Housing Act applies has been let to any person otherwise
than under the. provisions of section 3(1) of that Act and the monthly rental
of that house did not exceed one hundred and fifty (rupees), the local
authority within the administrative limits of which that house is situated
shall, by an instrument of disposition (transfer that house?)

**347**



(a) to the tenant of that house who is in occupation thereof on the date of
coming into force of this Statute; or



(b) to the person in occupation of that house on the date of coming into force
of this Statute, where the tenant of that house is not in occupation thereof
on that date,



if, and only if, the Advisory Board constituted for that local authority is
satisfied that ...



1\. It is clear that section 3(1) of the Act conferred a power on a local
authority - in its discretion - to let to any person a house (either vested in
it or constructed by it) on rent-purchase terms. By providing that the local
authority "may" let any such house, it was made clear that it had the power to
let, but was under no obligation to let, any such house. If it exercised that
power to let, it had the power to stipulate monthly rent-purchase payments;
and it also had the right to receive the stipulated payments and the power to
enforce that right. If section 4(1) of the Statute came into operation, while
it is true that it would not affect **future** lettings by a local authority
under section 3(1) of the Act, yet in respect of all **past** lettings, a
local authority would be compelled to gift to the tenant every such house,
whose monthly rental was less than Rs. 150. The imposition of that obligation
to gift every such house would immediately extinguish the rights and powers
which the local authority had previously enjoyed in respect of future monthly
payments receivable in respect of such houses. Its powers would thus be taken
away, and that a Provincial Council cannot do, because of the constitutional
prohibition contained in item 4.3 of List 1.



Section 4(2) of the Statute is open to a like objection. Where a local
authority let a house owned by it, otherwise than under section 3(1) of the
Act, it had the power to stipulate the rental, and thereupon the right and
power to receive the agreed rentals. It was under no obligation to forego such
rentals. By imposing an obligation to gift such houses to the tenants, section
4(2) of the Statute would take away those rights and powers.



Mr Kamalasabayson, PC, ASG, submitted that there would have been no
inconsistency with the Constitution if the Statute had

**348**



recognised and left unimpaired the existing powers of local authorities, and
had proceeded to grant them an additional power, in their discretion, of
gifting such houses to the tenants.



Mr. Seneviratne, PC, Contended, however, that the effect of section 4(1) of
the Statute would be to confer a "power" on a local authority to transfer a
house to a tenant, in the same way as section 5A(1), introduced by the
amending Act No 63 of 1979:



"5A(1) Where prior to the 15th day of October, 1979, a house to which this Act
applies has been let to any person under the provisions of section 3(1) and
the monthly rental of such house immediately prior to such letting did not
exceed twenty-five rupees, the local authority ... shall, by an instrument of
disposition, transfer, free of charge, that house to that person."



That provision undoubtedly curtailed a local authority's rights and powers,
because it compelled it to gift any such house, whether it wished to or not.
It imposed an obligation, which diminished or extinguished its rights and
powers under section 3(1) of the Act. The fact that, in order to give effect
to that obligation, a local authority was also "empowered" to' execute an
instrument of disposition does not mean that its power under section 3(1) was
not diminished.



2.  Mr. Kamalasabayson submitted that an amendment to the long title was necessary. As section 4(1) and (2) of the Statute would be inconsistent with section 3(1) of the Act, I hold that the Statute should have been described in its long title "as being inconsistent with that law" as required by Article 154G(8). Mr. Seneviratne did not dispute this.



For these reasons, I determine that the long title and sections 4(1) and (2)
of the Statute are inconsistent with the Constitution.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.** \- I agree.



_Statute determined to be unconstitutional._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/25.html_  

