##  Manage v. Kotakadeniya - SLR - 204, Vol 1 of 1997 [1996] LKSC 25; (1997) 1
Sri LR 204 (20 December 1996)

204

MANAGE

v.

KOTAKADENIYA



SUPREME COURT

DR. AMERASINGHE, J.,

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

AND DHEERARATNE, J.

S.C. 439/95

SEPTEMBER 19 AND 30, 1996.



Fundamental Rights - Constitution, Article 12(1) - Unequal treatment -
Discriminatory conduct - Extension of service - Retirement, Section 12 Pension
Minute - Public Administration Circular, 218 - Disciplinary Proceedings.



The petitioner was first interdicted and thereafter retired from Service; his
application far an extension of service upon reaching 55 was refused.



The respondents position was for three specific offences stated it was
considered undesirable to allow the petitioner an extension of service.



**Held:**

** **

(i)   No reasons were given for the findings in respect of the first two
offences, in any event the appeal in one of them has not been concluded; with
regard to the 3rd charge it was withdrawn.



In the circumstances, the refusal to extend the services was not based on
adequate grounds:



"Although the petitioner had not been reinstated and continued in service
after retirement by the 1st respondent, others who were similarly
circumstanced had been treated differently".



**Held Further:**

** **

(ii) Order of retirement is bad in law as much as an order can be made only by
the Secretary to the Ministry (Public Administration Circular 218), moreover
such an order envisages formal disciplinary proceedings prior to such a
decision.



**APPLICATION** under Article 126 complaining of the infringement of the
Fundamental Right of Equality.

_ _

L. C. Seneviratne P.C. with Ronald Perera and N. D. S. Jayasinghe for
petitioner.

_ _

_K. Siripavan D.S.G._ for 1, 2, 5, 6, respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult._



**205**



December 20, 1996.  


**AMERASINGHE. J.**



The petitioner was a Class I Post Master attached to the Nugegoda Post Office.
He was interdicted from service by letter P10 and retired from service by
letter P12. His application for an extension of service upon reaching the age
of 55 years was refused. The petitioner was granted leave to proceed for the
alleged infringement of his Fundamental Rights. guaranteed by Article 12(1) of
the Constitution.



The following facts are not in dispute:



(1) On the 1st of March 1995 the 1st respondent by her letter dated 1.3.95
imposed a fine of Rs. 10/- on the petitioner under Chapter 48 of the
Establishments Code.



(2) On or about 2nd February 1995 the 2nd respondent served a Charge Sheet on
the petitioner alleging that a false estimate relating to repairs to official
quarters had been submitted by the petitioner. The 2nd respondent had by his
letter dated 9.6.1995 (P2) imposed a fine of Rs. 4/- on the petitioner, having
found that the petitioner's reply was unsatisfactory.



(3) The petitioner was on 13th June 1995 alleged to have kept 74 Air Mail
letters at the Nugegoda Post Office in the safe without informing the Chief
Post Master and without entering the relevant information in the register.



For these reasons, it was considered undesirable to allow the petitioner an
extension of service. The petitioner however, maintains that these were
insufficient grounds for concluding that his conduct was unsatisfactory.



With regard to the 1st charge, the petitioner pointed out that a Charge Sheet
had been served on him on 30th May 1991 (P3) to which the petitioner had
replied by his letter of 2.8.91 (P4). However, four years afterwards the
petitioner received a letter from the 1st respondent dated 1.4.95 (P5) wherein
it was stated that the explanation was unsatisfactory, although no reasons
were given for coming to that conclusion. The petitioner was informed that a
record of the imposition of the fine would be made in his personal file. The
petitioner appealed from the order and the appeal is pending.

**206**



With regard to the 2nd charge too, the petitioner received only a Iaconic
intimation that his explanation was unsatisfactory without any reasons being
given for the conclusion.



With regard to the 3rd charge relating to the Air Mail letters, the petitioner
states that he took the Air Mail letters that had been left on the racks by
the delivery men and kept them in the safe to prevent them being stolen. He
states this was in accordance with the usual procedure. The fact that this was
the normal procedure is corroborated by the affidavits of the Sorting Officer
(P8), the Assistant Post Master of the Nugegoda Post Office (P9) and the Chief
Post Master of the Nugegoda Post Office (P9A). The 1st respondent however,
seems to have preferred to act on statements made by two Porters (1 R5) and
(1R6).



Although the petitioner had been charged in respect of the matter relating to
Air Mail letters on 14.8.95, the charges were withdrawn by the Secretary to
the Ministry at a hearing by the Committee on Public Petitions.



The sole ground for refusing to grant the extension of service which the
petitioner had sought was the 2nd respondent's opinion that it was undesirable
to extend the services of the petitioner in view of the several offences he
had committed. As we have seen, no reasons were given for the findings in
respect of the first two offences and in any event, the appeal in one of them
has not been concluded.



With regard to the 3rd charge, it was withdrawn and therefore cannot be taken
into account. The learned Deputy Solicitor-General explained that the charge
was withdrawn by the Secretary to the Ministry as a part of settlement under
which the petitioner was required to retire immediately after the charge was
withdrawn. This was denied by the petitioner who maintains that the charge was
withdrawn because it was "spurious". There is no affidavit from the Secretary
supporting the averment that the withdrawal of the charges was a part of a
settlement.



In the circumstances, I am of the view that the refusal to extend the services
of the petitioner was not based on adequate grounds. On the other hand, the
petitioner pointed out that his problems began after a journal of his trade
union, of which he was the editor, had been

**207**



critical of the 1st respondent. The relevant comments were made in January
1995. It is significant that with regard to the 1st charge which had been made
in 1991, the explanation of the petitioner had been rejected and the fine
imposed in March 1995.

  
It is to be noted that the Chief Post Master, Nugegoda and the Divisional
Superintendent of Post, Colombo had recommended the extension of the
petitioner's service (1 R4) and 1 R4b).



Although the petitioner had not been re-instated and continued in service
after retirement by the Post - General, others who were similarly
circumstanced had been treated differently. The petitioner has given the
instances of K. G. Albert, Grade I, Post Master, D. Wanni Arachchi, Class II,
Post Master and P. Kodisinghe, Class II Post Master who had been re-instated
and given extensions of service after they had been retired.



For the reasons set out above, I am of the view that the petitioner has been
the victim of unequal treatment and discriminatory conduct and this entitles
him to declaration that his Fundamental Rights under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution had been violated.



The 1st respondent by letter dated 5.7.95 (P12) retired the petitioner from
service under Section 12 of the Pensions Minute (P13). I hold that the order
of retirement is bad in law as such an order can be made only by the Secretary
to the Ministry. (See Public Administration Circular 218 (1R7). Moreover, such
an order envisages formal disciplinary proceedings prior to such a decision. I
therefore quash the order of retirement made by the 1st respondent as being no
force or avail in the law.



The petitioner shall be paid a sum of Rs. 25,000/- as compensation and Rs.
5,000/- as costs.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.



_Application allowed  
  
Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/25.html_  

