##  Brown & Co. Ltd. v. Samarasekera - SLR - 334, Vol 1 of 1996 [1995] LKSC
25; (1996) 1 Sri LR 334 (19 May 1995)

**334**

**BROWN & CO. LTD  
****v** **.  
SAMARASEKERA**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 20/95.  
L.T.  COLOMBO NO. 13/11634/89.  
H.C. N0.590/92,  
23 JANUARY, 02 MARCH, 03 APRIL, 8 &16 MAY, 1995.

_Industrial Dispute ‑ Termination of services ‑ Compensation ‑ Probationer's
services ‑ Extension of probation._

The principles relating to the service of a probationer are‑

1\.        (i) Unless the letter of appointment otherwise provides, a
probationer is not entitled to automatic confirmation on completion of the
period of probation. If then he is allowed to continue his service, he
continues as a probationer.

(ii) Even in the absence of any additional terms and conditions, a simple
probation clause confers on the employer the right to extend the probation.

(iii) The employer is not bound to show good cause for terminating a
probationer's service. The Labour Tribunal may examine the grounds of the
decision only for the purpose of finding out whether the termination was
_mala_ _fide_ or amounted to victimization or an unfair labour practice.

(iv) The question whether the probationer's services were satisfactory is a
matter for the employer. If cannot be objectively tested. If the employer
decided that the probationer's services were not satisfactory, it would be
inequitable and unfair, in the absence of _mala_ _fides_ , to foist the view
of the tribunal on the management.

(v) A suggestion of _mala_ _fides_ is not sufficient. The Tribunal must make a
finding that the termination of a probationer's service was actuated by _mala_
_fides_ or ulterior motive.

2\.         At the time of the impugned termination of services, the
Respondent

**335**

was a probationer. His services were terminated after giving him two
extensions of his period of probation. The fact that such an opportunity was
given would negative the existence of _mala_ _fides_. In the circumstances the
impugned termination of services was justified and the Respondent is not
entitled to compensation.

**Cases referred to:**

1\. _Hettiarchchi_ _v._ _Vidyalankara_ ___University_ 76 NLR 47.

2\. _Ceylon Ceramics Corporation v. Premadasa_ (1986) 1 Sri LR 287 (C.A.)

3\. Elsteel Ltd. v. Jayasena S.C. Appeal No. 20/88 ‑ S. C. Minutes of 06.4.90.

4\. _Moosajees_ _Ltd. v. Rasaiah_ (1968) 1 Sri LR. 365 (C.A.)

5\. _Utkal_ _Machinery Ltd. v. Santi Patnaik_ A1R 1966 S.C. 1051, 1052 (1966)
1 LLJ 398, 400.

6\. Liyanagamage v. Road Construction & Development (Pvt.) Ltd. S.C. Appeal
No. 3/95 S.C. Minutes of 23.08.93.

7\. _Shafeeudeen_ _v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation_ ‑ S.C. Appeal
No. 18/93 S.C. Minutes of 18.01.94.

8\. Caltex _India Ltd. v. Second Industrial Tribunal, High Court of Calcutta
(1963) LLJ 156._

9\. _Ceylon_ _Trading Co. Ltd. v. The United Tea, Rubber and Local_ _Produce
Workers Union (1986) CALR Vol. 1162 (_ C.A.)

10. _Ceylon Cement Corporation v. Fernando_ (1990) 1 Sri LR 361 (C.A.)

11.Swarnalatha Ginige v.  University of  Sri Lanka S.C. Appeal No. 66/93 S.C.
Minutes of 23.05.95.

**APPEAL** from judgment of the High Court.

_S. Sivarasa P.C_. with _Gihan_ _Ranawaka_ for Appellant.

_Gamini_ _Senanayake_ with _C. L. Wickremanayake_ for Respondent.

_Cur. adv_ _. vult._

May 19, 1995.

**KULATUNGA, J.**

The Labour Tribunal, by its order dated 25.08.1992 held that the services of
the Respondent workman had been unjustifiably terminated and awarded him
compensation in a sum of Rs. 396,000/‑ being three years salary. An appeal to
the High Court by the employer was dismissed. The employer now appeals to this
Court.

**336**

The workman in his application to the tribunal said that he had been appointed
a senior executive under the Appellant on 01.03.88; that his period of
probation was twice extended on the ground that his services were not
satisfactory; and that upon the expiration of the extended period of
probation, his services were terminated, with effect from 31.05.89. He
complained that his services were terminated for alleged failure to increase
the turn over in the Electrical Department; but such termination was
unjustified in that firstly, an increase in the turn over was not a condition
of his employment; secondly, there was in fact an increase in the turn over
during the period of his employment.

The Appellant pleaded that the workman was by his letter of ap­pointment (R1),
appointed subject to a period of nine months probation which was twice
extended as his performance was not upto expectations. Thereafter, his
services were terminated, in the best interest of the management. The
Appellant claimed that the workman was a probationer and was hence not
entitled to relief in law or equity, on termi­nation of his probationary
services.

At the inquiry, Clive de Silva, Director Engineering gave evidence on behalf
of the management and also produced documents R1‑R13. He reiterated the
defence that the Petitioner was a probationer. He maintained that his services
were terminated as his performance was not satisfactory. The workman did not
give evidence but produced docu­ments A1‑A27.

According to the evidence led at the inquiry, the nine months probation under
the workman's letter of appointment was due to expire on 30.11.1988. Prior to
that the Director Personnel, by his report dated 28.10.1988 (R13), informed
the Director Engineering that as the work­man had not performed
satisfactorily, he was unable to recommend his confirmation. However, the
management did not terminate his serv­ices but by letter dated 28.11.88,
extended his probation until 15.02.89 with a warning that if there was no
improvement in his performance his probationary services will have to be
terminated (R3). There followed a correspondence between the workman and the
management in the course of which the workman maintained that whilst it was
not a condi­tion of his service that he should increase the turn over of his
division,

**337**

he had in fact achieved such increase. The management by its letter dated
24.02.89 (R7) informed the workman that his explanations were not acceptable.
R7 added ‑

"We are however granting a final extension of three months ending on 15th May,
1989 of your probationary period, at the end of which we would decide on your
confirmation"

Thereafter, on 12.05.89 the management terminated the workman's services, with
effect from 31.05.89.

The learned President of the Labour Tribunal held that whilst the workman's
services could have been validly terminated upon the expiry of the initial
period of probation, the impugned termination after extensions of probation,
was unjustified in that there was no provision in the contract of employment
for extending probation; and that the second extension of probation was made
nine days after the expiry of the period of the first extension. Therefore,
the question of probation in the termination of the workman's services did not
arise. Hence, the management had to rely on its position that the Appellant
had failed to increase the turn over. On an analysis of the evidence, the
President held that there was an increase in the turn over and on that basis
made order in favour of the workman. The President also surmised that the
failure to confirm the workman was due to a policy in the company for reducing
staff.

The principles relating to the service of a probationer may be summarised
thus:

(i) Unless the letter of appointment otherwise provides, a proba­tioner is not
entitled to automatic confirmation on completion of the period of probation.
If then he is allowed to continue his service, he continues as a probationer.
_Hettiarachchi_ _v. Vidyalankara University_(1) _Ceylon Ceramics Corporation
v. Premadasa._ (2) __

(2) Even in the absence of any additional terms and conditions, a simple
probation clause confers on the employer the right to extend the probationary
period; _Elsteel_ _Ltd. v. Jayasena_ (3)

**338**

(3) The employer is not bound to show good cause for terminating a
probationer's service. The Labour Tribunal may examine the grounds of the
decision only for the purpose of finding out whether the termination was
_mala_ _fide_ or amounted to victimization or an unfair labour practice.

_Moosajees_ _Ltd. v. Rasaiah_ (4) _, Utkal Machinery Ltd. v. Santi Patnaik_
(5) _, Liyanagamage v. Road Construction and Development (Pvt) Ltd._(6) _,
Shafeeudeen v. Sri Lanka State Plantations Corporation._(7) __

(4) The question whether the probationer's services were satisfactory is a
matter for the employer. It cannot be objectively tested. If the employer
decided that the probationer's services were not satisfactory, it would be
inequitable and unfair, in the absence of _mala_ _fides,_ to foist the view of
the tribunal on that of the management.

_Caltex_ _India Ltd, v. Second Industrial Tribunal High Court of Calcutta._
(8) _Ceylon Trading Co. Ltd. v. The United Tea, Rubber and Local Produce
Workers Union,_ (9) _Ceylon Cement Corporation v. Fernando._ (10) __

(5) A suggestion of _mala_ _fides is_ not sufficient. The tribunal must make a
finding that the termination of a probationer's service was actuated by _mala_
_fides_ or ulterior motive. _Swarnalatha_ _Ginige v. University of Sri Lanka._
(11) __

In _Shafeeudeen's_ __ case _(supra)_ it was urged that _Moosajees_ __ case
has, by its failure to consider the existence of wide power in the Labour
Tribunal under sections 31B(4) and 31C(1) of the Industrial Dis­putes Act,
denuded the rights of a probationer as against a confirmed workman when in the
light of the definition of "workman" in section.48 there was no justification
for doing so. This Court held that there is no error in the decision in
Moosajees case and that the said decision is within the law as stated in
_Liyanagamage's_ __ case _(supra)_ which adopted the decision in _Utkal_
_Machinary Ltd._ case _(supra)._ The Court also ob­served that even though a
decision has to be just and equitable whether or not the workman is a
probationer, the common law rights of the employer in respect of a probationer
cannot be totally disregarded. A similar argument as was advanced in
_Shafeeudeen's_ __ case appears in the written submissions for the Respondent.
Learned Counsel appears to submit: ****

**339**

(a) that the prevailing law is more favourable to a probationer than the law
as set out in the decisions cited at 4 above; and

(b) that in terms of the law; justifiability of the termination of a
probationer's service should be decided on the same principles of equity
applicable to a permanent employee.

I am unable to agree with these propositions.

The workman in the instant case was subject to simple probation clause which
_inter alia,_ provided that "confirmation of employment at the end of the
probationary period shall be in writing and at the discretion of the company".
Applying the above principles to the facts, I hold that the Labour Tribunal
misdirected itself when it held that the Appellant could not validly extend
the workman's period of probation and that the question of probation did not
arise. That question was in the forefront of the case. But the tribunal failed
to decide it. Thereafter, the tribunal proceeded to judge the issue as to
whether the workman's services were satisfactory, in derogation of the
principle that, in the absence of _mala_ _fides,_ the tribunal cannot foist
its own view on that of the management.

I hold that at the time of the impugned termination of services, the
Respondent was a probationer. His services were terminated after giving him
two extentions of his period of probation. The fact that such an opportunity
was given would negative the existence of _mala_ _fides._ In the
circumstances, the impugned termination of services was justified and the
Respondent is not entitled to any compensation.

Counsel for the Respondent submits that as in _Liyanagamage's_ __ case
_(supra),_ here too there is evidence of an unfair labour practice and the
termination was so capricious or unreasonable as to lead to the inference that
it had been passed for ulterior motives and not in the _bona fide_ exercise of
the power arising out of the contract of employment. In support, he submits
that the employer was "motivated by the objective of reducing staff". However,
in Liyanagamage case, the workman was admittedly an able technical officer
with over 15 years experience in his field and the Labour Tribunal held that
he had been subjected to unfair labour practice. There were also numerous
facts which

**340**

indicated that the termination of his probationary service was _mala_ _fide._
Here there is no such evidence, no finding, but only a surmise by the tribunal
that the impugned termination was due to a policy in the company for reducing
staff. Therefore, _Liyanagamage's_ __ decision is of no assistance in deciding
this case.

The learned High Court Judge has held that by failing to raise a preliminary
issue that the applicant could not proceed for failure to aver malice and by
contesting the case on the issue as to whether the applicant's work was
satisfactory, the Appellant had submitted to the jurisdiction of the tribunal
concerning the ground on which the termination has been justified. Hence the
question of malice was irrelevant; and there was no ground to interfere with
the order of the tribunal.

The High Court has misdirected itself on the law in approaching the case as it
did. In a case such as this, there is no need for the employer to raise the
matter as a preliminary issue; and no question of submitting to the tribunal's
jurisdiction arises if the employer were to reagitate the grounds on which he
terminated the services of a probationer. Nor does it relieve the tribunal of
its duty to decide the matter according to law on the basis of the evidence
before it.

For the foregoing reasons, I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the
High Court and the order of the Labour Tribunal. The Respondent's application
made to the tribunal is dismissed. No costs.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J. **‑ I agree.

**RAMANATHAN,** J. ‑ I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/25.html_  

