##  Rashid v. Rajitha Senaratne, Minister of Lands and Others - SLR - 312, Vol
1 of 2004 [2004] LKSC 25; (2004) 1 Sri LR 312 (20 January 2004)

**312**

**RASHID  
v  
RAJITHA SENARATNE, MINISTER OF LANDS  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
YAPA, J. AND  
WEERASURIYA, J.  
S.C.' APPEAL NO. 25/2003  
C.A.NO. 1032/2001  
OCTOBER 7, 2003  
  
_Writs of mandamus and certiorari - Order under section 38 Proviso (a) of the
Land Acquisition Act to acquire a land urgently for a public purpose -
Identity of the land - 17 years delay in using the land - Application for
mandamus to direct a divesting of the land - Section 39A of the Act.  
_  
The petitioner was the owner of 1/16 share of a land and building, No. 2 New
Bazaar Street, Nuwara Eliya. Proceedings for acquiring the said land commenced
in 1983. A section 2 notice was published in respect of the land. This was
followed by an order for the acquisition of the land under section 38 pro­viso
(a) of the Land Acquisition Act. The notice of the order did not specify the
purpose of the acquisition; and the acquiring proceedings continued for 17

**313**

years. The land was not used for any purpose although possession of the land
was given to the Urban Development Authority.  
  
A notice under section 7 of the Act was published calling for claims to the
land. The appellant claimed title and compensation to the land. As different
deci­sions were being made by the acquiring officer, the appellant applied for
a writ of mandamus to compel finality to the proceedings. That case was
settled when the Surveyor-General made a plan NU/1839 dated 15.12.97 showing
the premises acquired as 25:25 purchase viz., premises No. 2 aforesaid.  
  
In view of the continuing delay of proceedings the appellant applied inter
alia, for a writ of mandamus to direct the Minister to make an order divesting
the property under section 39A of the Act.  
  
The application satisfied the pre-conditions in section 39Afor divesting, but
the Court of Appeal dismissed it stating that it could not be shown that the
acqui­sition was ultra vires.  
  
**Held:  
  
**1\. The Minister never claimed that the land was required for a particular
public purpose.  
  
2\. For the issue of mandamus to compel a divesting of the land under section
39A of the Act, it is unnecessary to establish that the acquisition was ultra
vires.  
  
3\. The appellant was entitled to a writ of mandamus for a divesting of No. 2
New Bazaar Street depicted in the Surveyor-General's plan UN/1839 dated
15.12.97 and a writ of certiorari quashing the initial order of acquisition.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
  
**1\. _De Silva v Dissanayake -_ (2003) 1 SRI LR 52  
  
2\. _De Silva v Atukorale -_ (1993) 1 SRI LR 203 at 293  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal  
  
_M.A. Sumanthiran_ for appellant  
  
_M. Gopallawa , State Counsel_ for 1st and 3rd respondents.

_Cur.adv.vult_

JANUARY 20, 2004 **  
  
FERNANDO, J.  
**  
This is an appeal against the order of the Court of Appeal dismissing the
application of the petitioner-appellant ("the Appellant")

**314**

for Mandamus directing the 1st respondent, the Minister in charge of the
subject of land, to divest land acquired by the State under the Land
Acquisition Act ("the Act").  
  
In November 1974 the appellant became the owner of an undi­vided 1/6th share
of a land and building (2 acres 3 roods 28 perches in extent), which included
the land and building bearing assess­ment No. 2 New Bazaar Street, Nuwara
Eliya. Thereafter, accord­ing to him, with the full consent of the other co-
owners he went into exclusive possession of No.2 New Bazaar Street, which was
approximately 29.25 perches in extent. In July 1975 the building was
requisitioned by the Minister of Internal and External Trade, but in 1977,
after litigation, the appellant was restored to possession. In July 1983 the
building was extensively damage in the ethnic riots.  
  
Thereafter a notice dated 28.9.83 under section 2 of the Act was published in
respect of a land (2 acres 2 roods 21 perches in extent), which admittedly
included No. 2 New Bazaar Street. That was followed by an order under the
proviso (a) to section 38 which was published in the Gazette of 6.3.84.
Neither the notice nor the order specified the public purpose for which the
land was required. Possession was taken of several premises including No. 2
New Bazaar Street, and on 31.5.88 possession was handed over to the Urban
Development Authority, the 2nd respondent. I will consider later in this
judgment the question whether No. 2 New Bazaar Street thereafter vested in the
2nd respondent.  
  
The acquisition proceedings dragged on. In response to a notice under section
7, the appellant claimed title and compensa­tion in a sum of Rs. 4.6 million.
On 3.4.90 the Acquiring Officer made his determination under section 10(1
)(a), declaring the appel­lant entitled to 29.25 perches out of the land
acquired. The appel­lant accepted that determination in regard to title to
29.25 perches but requested clarification as to whether the building on No. 2
New Bazaar Street was included. By letter dated 17.4.90 the Acquiring Officer
confirmed that the determination referred to No. 2 New Bazaar Street. While
press.-, his claim to compensation, the appellant requested that the land
acquired from him be demarcat­ed so that it could be valued correctly.

**315**

There was no objection to that determination, nor any application  for a
reference, and as stated in the determination it therefore became final.
However, by letter dated 12.9.91, another officer pur­ported to cancel that
determination and to order a fresh inquiry. After a fruitless exchange of
correspondence, the appellant applied to the Court of Appeal (CA Application
No. 399/96) for Mandamus directing the acquiring officer to expedite the
finalisation of the mat­ter and the payment of compensation. It was
specifically averred that the purported cancellation of the determination made
on 3.4.90 was illegal and had no force in law. That application was settled on
10.12.96. Senior State Counsel who then appeared did not take up  the position
that the determination had been cancelled or was not in force, but on the
contrary acknowledged that the appellant was entitled to a 1 /6th share.
However, she maintained that he was enti­tled to less than 29.25 perches, and
consented to the relevant land being identified. The land was thereafter
surveyed by the Surveyor-General, and was identified and depicted in Plan No.
NU/1839 dated 15.12.97, its extent being stated to be **O**.0634 hectares in
extent: i.e. 25.25 perches. Although the appellant now disputes that extent,
he took no action either in the same or in another applica­tion to challenge
that finding. For the purpose of this appeal, therefore, the land and its
extent must be taken to be as shown in Plan No. NU/1839, and the appellant's
title to that land, its identity and its extent cannot now be disputed. The
determination dated 3.4.90 is also final, subject only to the variation in
extent.  
  
Not having received compensation for 17 long years, by letter dated 1.3.2001
the appellant requested the then Minister of Lands to divest the land under
section 39A of the Act, pointing out that although it was purportedly acquired
for an urgent public purpose it remained idle and neglected, and that the
requisite conditions had been satisfied, namely:  
  
(a) No compensation had been paid;  
  
(b) The land had not been used for a public purpose;  
  
(c) No improvements had been effected; and  
  
(d) The person interested in the land consented in writing to take possession
upon divesting.

**316**

The Minister did not deny or dispute the appellant's contentions, either in a
reply or by an affidavit in the subsequent writ application. In particular, he
did not claim that the land had been vested in the 2nd respondent, or had been
used for a public purpose, or was needed for a public purpose. Instead, after
four months, by a letter dated 4.7.2000 the Director/Lands of the Minister
acknowledged the appellant's letter dated 1.3.2000 - both references should
have been to the year 2001 - stating that "action _**will be taken**_ to
acquire the land and to pay compensation to you under the of the Land
Acquisition Act". One can only lament such a grievous lack of care and
consideration in acquiring a citizen's land and disposing of his claims to
compensation or divesting.  
  
The appellant then applied to the Court of Appeal for Mandamus to divest the
land, certiorari to quash the Acquiring Officer's deci­sion of 12.9.91 to
cancel the determination dated 3.4.90, and Mandamus to direct the Acquiring
Officer to declare the appellant entitled to a 1/6th share equivalent to 29.25
perches.  
  
The matter was argued on 24.9.2002, and on 14.11.2002 the Court of Appeal held
that:  
  
"The [Appellants] application is based on the ground that he had obtained
prescriptive right against the other co-owners and therefore this Court should
make a declaration that he is entitled to 1/6th share of the land......
Clearly this application is misconceived in law, as this relief can only be
granted by a Civil Court of competent jurisdiction.  
  
....the relief sought which was to divest the corpus under section 39A [of the
Act] was on the basis that the land was not used for any purpose for the last
18 years nor any compensation was paid in relation to the same. However [the
notice under section 2 had been sent and the order under the proviso (a) to
section 38]..... could be challenged only....... on the ground that there was
no urgent public requirement, or on the basis of failure to comply with the
rules of natural justice...  
  
....it seems that the [appellant has] indirectly acceded to this vesting and
the inquiry that was held in terms of

**317**

section 9 and 10(1)(a)...  
  
...this Court cannot on the basis of the prayers of the [appellant] come to a
finding that the aforesaid order... was ultra vires even though no steps have
been taken with regard to the public purpose for which the land was acquired,
even after the lapse of 18 years. Therefore it must remain as a valid order.  
  
Further the prayer of the [appellant] to quash the order of the Acquiring
Officer cancelling the decision made under section 10(1)(a)... is belated and
laches would operate against the invocation of the writ jurisdiction."  
  
I will deal first with the Acquiring Officer's determination dated 3.4.90. The
effect of that determination read with the subsequent settlement in the Court
of Appeal (CA Application No. 399/96) was that the determination was valid and
operative (subject only to the variation in extent), that the cancellation of
that determination was void and inoperative, and that the appellant had title
(howsoever acquired) to the land 25.25 perches in extent depicted in Plan No.
NU/1839. In those circumstances, the appellant's prayer for Certiorari to
quash the cancellation of that determination was superfluous, and the Court of
Appeal should have proceeded on the basis that the determination was valid and
operative. No ques­tion of laches arose.  
  
Likewise, whatever the basis on which the appellant claimed title, that
determination was final and conclusive as to the appel­lant's 1/16th share,
and Mandamus directing the Acquiring Officer to declare the Appellant's right
was superfluous. The Court of Appeal should have proceeded on the basis that
the appellant's share had been conclusively established.  
  
There remained only the prayer for Mandamus to divest the land. The Court of
Appeal erred in holding that the appellant was not entitled to a divesting
order because the notice under section 2 and the order under proviso (a) to
section 38 were valid and/or had not been challenged, and because he had
acquiesced in the vest­ing. There is nothing in section 39A of the Act which
excludes the right to a divesting order where the original vesting is valid:
the enti­tlement to a divesting order springs primarily from the fact that -

**318**

_**after**_ vesting - the land had not been used for the public purpose for
which it had been acquired. Thus a claim under section 39A does not depend on
the validity or invalidity of the original vesting, although a divesting order
may perhaps be more readily granted where the original vesting was wrongful
(see de Silva v Dissanayake(1).  
  
I turn no to the question whether No. 2 New Bazaar Street did vest in the
State and thereafter in the 2nd respondent.  
  
Although the documents produced did not unambiguously show that No. 2 New
Bazaar Street was covered by the section 38 order, the appellant (as well as
the other parties) proceeded throughout on the basis that the premises had
vested in the State, and in the circumstances I will proceed on the same
basis.  
  
In the course of the hearing in this Court, we raised the question whether
this Court would be precluded from directing the divesting of the premises if
in the meantime title to the premises had passed to the 2nd respondent.
However, up to that point of time there was no evidence that title had passed,
and the 2nd respondent had made no such claim. When judgment was reserved the
parties were given time to file written submissions. The respondents were also
asked to ascertain whether there was documentary proof that title had passed.
Although the 2nd respondent had not been repre­sented at the hearing, its
attorney-at-Law tendered an affidavit from its Director-General, together with
a copy of a vesting certificate (dated 20.12.2000) under section 44 of the Act
in favour of the 2nd respondent, which was subject to the condition _**that
the land should be used only for the purpose for which it had been
acquired**_. At no stage previously had it been pleaded that No. 2 Bazaar
Street had vested in the 2nd respondent. It appears from the vesting
certificate (read with relevant plan) that the certificate did cover No. 2 New
Bazaar Street, but restricted the purposes for which the 2nd respondent could
use the land.  
  
In order to determine the appellant's claim to a divesting order, I have now
to consider whether the land had been used for a public purpose and/or whether
any improvements had been effected.  
  
The only relevant material produced in the Court of Appeal was a brochure
issued by the 2nd respondent advertising "an uniquely

**319**

designed complex to accommodate both commercial and residential units",
consisting of a three-storey building, with 35 shops (120  
to 525 square feet in area, at prices running from Rs. 0.7 to Rs. 2.3 million)
and 16 residential units (200 to 575 square feet in area, at prices ranging
from Rs.1.0 to 2.7 million). A senior assistant secretary of the Ministry of
Urban Development submitted an affidavit, dated 2.11.2001, in which he claimed
that the 2nd respondent "has implemented a commercial complex within Lawson
Street on the land acquired for constituting the subject-matter of this
application [s/c] has also been utilized as a public car park, as part of the
commercial development of the site". The Court of Appeal itself observed that
"no steps have been taken with regard to the public purpose for which the land
was acquired, even after the lapse of 18 years".  
  
In the written submissions filed in this Court (before the oral hearing) by
the 1 st and 3rd respondents, it was contended that the land had been used for
a public car park, as part of the commercial development of the site and that
"the mere fact that the shopping and residential complex has not been
constructed does not in any manner indicate that the land has not been used
for a public purpose". It is thus clear that nothing had been done in respect
of the commercial complex.  
  
As for the "public car park", it was only their written submissions filed in
this Court that those respondents tendered the 2nd respondent's "construction
plan" and the builder's final bill dated 18.12.2001 (for nearly 5 million
rupees). That bill disclosed that the contract for the "construction of car
park and public square at Lawson triangle" was awarded on 16.3.2001 - after
the appellant had sought divesting on 1.3,2001. No explanation was forthcoming
for the failure to produce these documents in the Court of Appeal. The
construction plans do not show any shopping or residential units, or any
buildings, but only an open area consisting of a raised stage, paved areas for
pedestrians, and some parking areas. According to those plans, the appellant's
land was intended to be  used for the stage, and not for a car park. A "car
park and public square" is a purpose very far removed from a multi-storey
shopping-cum-residential complex. Even if the vesting certificate did vest the
land in the 2nd respondent, that was not a permissible use

**320**

of the land taken from the appellant. Construction activities con­nected with
a wrongful use of the land cannot be regarded as an "improvement" within the
meaning of section 39A.  
  
In support of the contention that the land was required for a pub­lic purpose,
albeit different to the original, the respondents referred to my observations
in de Silva v Atukorale (2) [1993] 1 Sri LR 283 at 293:  
  
"....even [if the requisite conditions are satisfied] it would be legitimate
for the Minister to decline to divest if there is some good reason - for
instance, that there is now a new public purpose for which the land is
required. In such a case, it would be unreasonable to divest the land, and
then to proceed to acquire it again for such new supervening public purpose.
Such a public purpose must be a real and present purpose, not a fancied
purpose or one which may become a reality only in the distant future."  
  
Not only did the vesting certificate excluded the "new" purpose, but the
Minister never claimed - either in the course of the court proceedings or
before \- that he (or any of his predecessors) had ever formed the opinion
that No. 2 New Bazaar Street was required for a car park and/or public square.  
  
I therefore hold that the acquisition was only for the purpose of the
particular shopping-cum-residential complex proposed by the 2nd respondent;
that no steps whatsoever had been taken to implement that project; that the
mere use of the land as a car park in the meantime cannot in the circumstances
be regarded as "use" for that public purpose; that the use of the land by the
2nd respondent for a "car park and public square" was not a purpose
contemplated or autho­rised by the State; that even if the vesting certificate
did pass title to the 2nd respondent, a "car park and public square" was
nevertheless an unauthorised and unlawful purpose, and not for a public
purpose within the meaning of section 39A of the Act; that construction
activities for the purpose were not "improvement" within the meaning of
section 39A; and that in any event construction activities commenced after
divesting had been demanded should not, save in very exceptional
circumstances, be treated as improvements.

**321**

I therefore grant and issue an order in the nature of a writ of Mandamus
directing the 1st respondent to divest No. 2 Bazaar Street (depicted in Plan
No. NU/1839 dated 15.12.97, 0.0634 . hectares in extent) to the appellant
under and in terms of section 39A of the Act, and in order to make such order
effective and to remove any doubt as to title, I also grant and issue an order
in the nature of a writ of Certiorari quashing the vesting certificate dated
20.12.2000 in favour of the 2nd respondent, in so far as it relates to the
aforesaid land and premises. This order will not preclude any future bona fide
acquisition of the aforesaid land and premises. The appellant will be entitled
to costs in a sum of Rs. 50,000 payable by the 2nd respondent.  
  
**YAPA, J. - I agree  
  
WEERASURIYA, J. - I agree  
  
_Appeal allowed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2004/25.html_  

