##  Anderson v. Husny - SLR - 168, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 26; (2001) 1 Sri
LR 168 (12 February 2001)

**168**

**ANDERSON  
v.  
HUSNY**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 24/2000  
HC CASE NO. HCRA 1387/99  
LT CASE NO. 13/1937/97  
1ST DECEMBER, 2000  
  
_Industrial dispute - Employment on annual contract - Termination of service
without extention - Imposition of probation after some time - Employer's claim
that the employment was probationary at termination - Failure of the workman
to admit or deny probationary employment - Burden to begin adducing evidence
to establish unjustifiable termination.  
  
_The applicant workman (the applicant) was employed by the appellant -
employer (the employer) from 1993 to 1997 on annual contracts renewable
entirely at the discretion of the employer. In 1997 the employer informed the
applicant in writing that he was placed on probation for a period of 3 months
for evaluation of his performance of the specific duties assigned to him,
scheduled to end on 30.9.1997. That period was extended until 31.10.1997 as
the applicant was alleged to have delayed in completing the work assigned to
him. By letter dated 6.10.1997 the employer terminated the applicant's
services on the ground that he had failed to show progress in his performance.  
  
Before the Labour Tribunal, the employer filed answer inter alia, stating that
the applicant had failed to comply with instructions given while he was on
probation and since no improvement was shown his services were terminated.  
  
The applicant in his replication neither admitted nor denied the employer's
averments that he had been placed on probation, which he had accepted, nor did
he dispute the receipt, authenticity or contents of the supporting documents
produced.

**169**

**Held :  
**  
1\. Upon proof that termination took place during probation, the burden is on
the employee to establish unjustifiable termination, and the employee must
establish at least a prima facie case of mala fide before the employer is
called upon to adduce evidence as to his reasons for dismissal; and the
employer does not have to show that the dismissal was, objectively, justified.  
  
2\. The question before the Labour Tribunal at the commencement of proceedings
was not whether the employer could impose probation after four successive
annual contracts but. a limited question, viz., who should begin on the
available material, subject to a decision at the end of the case, whether or
not the imposition of probation was justified. The applicant would have failed
if neither party adduced evidence. Therefore, the burden was on the applicant
to begin.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"While it is true that the Tribunal is not bound by the Evidence Ordinance,
that enactment contains certain basic principles of justice and fairness
relevant to adjudication by any tribunal. One common principle is found in
section 102, that the burden of proof lies on that person who would fail if no
evidence at all were given on either side. There is no good reason for
departing from that principle."  
  
**Case referred to :  
  
**1\. _State Distilleries Corporation v. Rupasinghe_ (1994)2 SRI LR 395

**APPEAL** from the judgement of the High Court  
  
_G.T. Alagaratnam_ with _M. Adamally_ and _R. Anthony_ for the employer -
appellant  
  
_S.N. Vijithsingh_ for the applicant-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 12, 2001  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
  
**The question of law which I have to decide in this appeal is whether in the
Labour Tribunal the burden lies on an applicant

**170**

to begin and lead evidence where he has failed to deny the employer's plea (in
the answer) that he was dismissed while on probation.  
  
The Applicant-Respondent-Respondent "(the Applicant)" applied to the Labour
Tribunal on 22.10.97, averring that he had been employed by the Employer-
Petitioner-Appellant "(the Employer)" as a "Grants Programme Accounts
Specialist" from 1.7.93. and that his services had been wrongfully terminated
by letter dated 6.10.97.  
  
By his answer dated 21.11.97 the Employer pleaded that the Applicant had been
employed on successive yearly contracts. Seven documents were annexed to the
answer.  
  
(a) The first was a detailed contract dated 26.6.93 signed by both parties,
effective 1.7.93, which stated:  
  
"The post will be on a yearly renewable contract basis and such renewal will
solely depend on the satisfactory performance of the duties entrusted to you."  
  
(b) This was followed by another (undated) detailed contract, also signed by
parties, which provided:  
  
"your appointment is for a period of one year from 1.7.94 and' shall
automatically terminate on 30.6.95 unless sooner determined **. . .** or
renewed for a further period **. . .** Such renewal is entirely at the
discretion of the (Employer) and unless so renewed **. . .** your employment
**. . .** will terminate on 30.6.95."  
  
(c) After that the Employer issued two renewal letters dated 1.7.95 and
1.7.96. each extending the contract for a further period of one year, "all
other terms and conditions mentioned in the said contract (remaining)
unchanged."  
  
(d) Thereafter the Employer informed the Applicant by letter dated 17.7.97:

**171**

" **. . .** you will be placed on a probation period of 3 months effective
1.7.97 - 30. 9.97 to enable the Management to evaluate the improvement in the
performance of the specific duties assigned to you in your capacity as Grants
Programme Accounts Specialist.  
  
Depending on your performance during the probation period, it would be decided
whether your employment contract should be extended for a further period of
one year.  
  
This, it was averred, was "due to poor performance and refusal to perform
duties assigned" to him.  
  
(e) Finally, on 30.9.97 the Employer wrote:  
  
"Your probation period is scheduled to end on 30.9.97. However, I must extend
your probation period one more month until 31.10.97. The reason for this
extension is that you have not yet completed the reconciliation of the grant
disbursement data. Part of the delay is due to illness and your computer
breakdown. However, we must have the grant disbursement data reconciled and
completely reviewed before we can review your probationary status. One more
month should be sufficient for this."  
  
Less than a week later, by letter dated 6.10.97 the Employer terminated the
Applicant's services, with one month's salary in lieu of notice, giving as the
reason that:  
  
" **. . .** you have failed to show progress in your performance during the
probation period and have also refused to adhere to instructions and requests
made by the Management pertaining to your work performance."  
  
On 11.2.98 the Employer filed a further answer, averring that:  
  
"Since the Applicant's performance and attitude to work was unsatisfactory, he
was issued another contact but was offered work on probationary basis on
1.7.97 which he

**172**

accepted, and his initial period of three months probation was extended by a
further month as his performance during probation had not improved and because
he had failed on numerous occasions to carry out instructions given to him."  
  
While the Applicant was on probation, and since no improvement was seen in his
performance and/or conduct, his services at the project were terminated by
letter dated 6.10.97"  
  
The Applicant filed a replication dated 12.2.98. He referred to one matter
extraneous to the present dispute, but failed either to deny the Employer's
averments that he had been placed on probation (and the reasons therefor)
which he had accepted, and that he had been terminated during probation, or to
dispute the receipt, the authenticity or the contents of any of the documents
produced. No application was made to amend that replication.  
  
When the application was taken up for inquiry the Tribunal had to decide which
party should begin. The President observed that the Employer's plea that the
Applicant was a probationer "goes to the root of jurisdiction of the Labour
Tribunal" and "challenges the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal;" that "this
question of probation (was) a mixed question of fact and law;" that the
factual position could be determined only after the witnesses gave evidence;
and that therefore he was not inclined to accept the position of either party
as to the status of the Applicant. Having regard to section 31 C(1) of the
industrial Disputes Act - which provides that "it shall be the duty of the
Tribunal to make all such inquiries into (an) application and hear all such
evidence as the Tribunal may consider necessary" he held that the Employer
must begin and lead evidence.  
  
The Employer filed an appeal as well as an application in revision in the High
Court of the Western Province. The parties agreed that the order made in the
revision application would apply to both proceedings.

**173**

The High Court held that what was averred by the Employer .are facts that
should be considered after an inquiry on whatsoever the material that is
placed before the Tribunal. The real question that arises **. . .** is as to
who should begin." That was a matter of procedure, and was therefore governed
by section 31C(2), which empowered a Labour Tribunal to lay down the procedure
to be observed by it in the conduct of an inquiry. Citing section 31 C(1) too,
the High Court affirmed the order of the Labour Tribunal.  
  
In the course of the proceedings in the High Court, the Applicant produced
certain documents which could have been, but were not, produced in the Labour
Tribunal. I have not taken those into consideration in deciding this appeal
because the correctness of the Labour Tribunal order must be determined in the
light of the material which was available to it.  
  
This Court granted special leave to appeal on the question "whether the
learned judge of the High Court was in error in over looking the fact that the
(Applicant) was a probationer in deciding whether the procedure adopted by the
President of the Labour Tribunal was appropriate in the circumstances."  
  
Although in the past the view has sometimes been expressed that an employer
had an unfettered right to dismiss a probationer, almost at will, the better
view is that even a probationer can challenge his dismissal, albeit on limited
grounds. Many of the previous decisions were reviewed by me in _State
Distilleries Corporation v. Rupasinghe_ ,(1) where I observed:  
  
"What then is the principal difference between confirmed and probationary
employment? In the former, the burden lies on the employer to justify
termination; and he must do so by reference to objective standards. In the
latter, upon proof that termination took place during probation, the burden is
on the employee to establish unjustifiable termination, and the employee must
establish at least a

**174**

_prima-facie_ case of _mala facie_ before the employer is called upon to
adduce evidence as to his reasons for dismissal; and the employer does not
have to show that the dismissal was, objectively, justified."  
  
Both Counsel agreed with those observations. Learned Counsel for the Applicant
conceded that if an Employee admitted that he was dismissed while on
probation, then the burden would be on him to begin. Learned Counsel for the
Employer conceded that if an Applicant denied probation, the Employer would
have to begin. However, in this case there was no express admission or denial
of probation.  
  
It was contended for the Employer that since the Applicant had failed (in his
replication) to deny probation, he must be deemed to have admitted probation.
Accordingly, the burden was on him to begin and lead evidence.  
  
That position was strenuously disputed by Counsel for the Applicant. He made
two distinct submissions. Firstly, he cited two decisions (in actions filed
under the Civil Procedure Code) where it was held that the failure to file a
replication could not be construed as an admission of averments in the answer.
Secondly, he argued that a probationary clause could not have been introduced
(a) after the Applicant had worked for four years, and (b) because by
permitting the Applicant to work for seventeen days after the expiration of
the fourth contract, his contract had already been impliedly renewed for
another year without a probationary clause.  
  
The Industrial Disputes Regulations provide for an applicant to file a
response to the Employer's answer. While I agree that, in general, the failure
to file a replication in the Labour Tribunal, ought not to be treated as an
admission of averments in the answer, the position would be different where a
replication was filed without denying relevant averments. Although strict
rules of pleading do not apply In Labour Tribunal proceedings, pleadings are
necessary, and do serve an important purpose - to identify the matters really
in issue between the parties, thus

**175**

enabling, on the one hand, each party to know with a reasonable degree of
certainty the case which he has to meet, and, on the other hand, the Tribunal
to inquire into the real dispute without unnecessary delay, inconvenience and
expense.  
  
As for the Applicant's second submission, it is true that the imposition of a
probationary period after four successive annual contracts was most unusual.
However, it is not inconceivable that the factual situation might have
justified probation as an alternative to non-renewal or dismissal. While it is
possible that, at the end of the case, after hearing all the evidence, the
Tribunal may uphold that submission, it is not proper to rule on it at the
outset.  
  
The question which I have to decide is not whether the Applicant was indeed a
probationer - because of a binding admission as to probation, or upon an
interpretation of the documents produced, or for some other reason - but a
much more limited one: who should begin? (And, I must add, that is a question
which does not affect the jurisdiction of the Tribunal).  
  
Undoubtedly, sections 31(C)(1) and (2) do give the Tribunal some discretion as
to procedure. However, that discretion must be exercised not arbitrarily, but
reasonably, with some degree of uniformity, and in a principled manner: with
the overriding objective of ensuring a fair and expeditious inquiry. While it
is true that the Tribunal is not bound by the Evidence Ordinance, that
enactment contains certain basic principles of justice and fairness relevant
to adjudication by any tribunal. One common sense principle is found in
section 102: that the burden of proof lies on that person who would fail if no
evidence at all were given on either side. There was no good reason for
departing from that principle.  
  
Let me add that that principle is the foundation of the cursus curiae in the
Labour Tribunal where termination (of confirmed employment) is not admitted.
In such cases the applicant must begin. Why? Because if no evidence at all
were given on either

**176**

side, on the material available to the Tribunal, it is the applicant who would
fail.  
  
When the Tribunal was called upon to give its ruling in this case, it was
faced with the Employer's uncontradicted averments as to dismissal during
probation, as well as documents to the same effect, whose authenticity and
contents had not been questioned. If neither party had then adduced evidence,
the Tribunal could not have held - on the then available material - that the
Applicant was not on probation when dismissed, or that prima facie the
dismissal was males fide. Accordingly, the Applicant would have failed.
Therefore, the burden was on him to begin, and the Labour Tribunal and the
High Court should have so ruled.  
  
I therefore allow the appeal, and set aside the orders of the Labour Tribunal
and the High Court. The Applicant will begin and lead evidence. The parties
will bear their own costs.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J. -** I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/26.html_  

