##  Livinis Silva and Another v. William Fernando and Another - SLR - 97, Vol
1 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 26; (1993) 1 Sri LR 97 (28 April 1993)

**97**

**LIVINIS SILVA AND ANOTHER** **  
v.** **  
WILLIAM FERNANDO AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J., KULATUNGA, J.

AND RAMANATHAN, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 44/90. CA NO. 500/82F.  
DC MOUNT LAVINIA NO. 229/ZL  
MARCH 01, 18 AND 19, 1993.

_     Vindicatory suit - Prescription between co-owners - Ouster - Adverse and
exclusive possession._

The corpus sued upon by the plaintiffs had been claimed as a divided portion
in partition action No. 3381/P in 1944 by Thegis, the predecessor in title of
the plaintiffs on the basis of exclusive possession. From his statement of
claim in the partition action the co-owners became aware of the adverse claim.
It was not a secret intention but an outright assertion of exclusive
possession and the commencement of ouster.

**Held**

The facts established adverse and exclusive possession of the land in suit
against the rights of the other co-owners sufficient to justify the
plaintiff's claim of title to the land by Prescription.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Tillekeratne v. Bastian 21 NLR 12 (FB), 24, 26, 27.  
_  
_2\. Corea v. Appuhamy 15 NLR 65.  
 _  
_3\. Abdul Majeed v. Ummu Zaneera 61 NLR 361, 371-372._

98

**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C., with N. Singaravel and Jayantha Almeida de
Gunaratne_ for defendant-appellants.  
  
_N. R. M. Daluwatta, P.C., with Manohara de Silva and P. Keerthisinghe_ for
the plaintiffs-respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 28, 1993.  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.**

The plaintiffs instituted these proceedings for a declaration of title to a
separate portion of the land called Maragahawatta referred to as Lot B in Plan
No. 16 of 1933 which was marked at the trial as P6. The plaintiffs also sought
the ejectment of the 1st and 2nd defendants and claimed damages.

The plaintiffs averred that Thegis Fernando was the original owner of the
corpus by virtue of purchase and prescriptive possession and that he by deed
of gift No. 1041 of 1951 (P10) donated the same to the 1st plaintiff and to
Simon Fernando. The latter by deed No. 193 of 1956 (P11) sold his rights to
the 2nd plaintiff and thus the plaintiffs became the sole owners of the
property and possessed it until 19.2.77 when the 1st and 2nd defendants
wrongfully entered their land.

The defendants in their answer averred that Thegis Fernando referred to in the
plaintiff's pedigree was only a co-owner of the corpus and had no exclusive
and adverse possession of any divided portion of the land as pleaded in the
plaint. The 1st defendant claimed that he had purchased an undivided 1/8th
share of the corpus on deed No. 2590 of 03.01.75 (V7) from Laisa, a sister of
Thegis Fernando. It was therefore the position of the defendants that the
plaintiffs are only co-owners of the land along with the 1st defendant and
others.

The District Judge held that Thegis Fernando prescribed to the land in suit
and entered judgment for the plaintiffs. The defendants appealed to the Court
of Appeal and the Court of Appeal too held with the plaintiffs. The 1st
defendant and his son the 2nd defendant have now preferred an appeal to this
Court.

99

Mr. Manohara de Silva, for the plaintiffs-respondents contended at the outset
that the deed V7 (transfer from Laisa to the 1st defendant-appellant) does not
apply to the corpus and therefore the plea of the 1st defendant that he is a
co-owner of the corpus along with the plaintiffs fails. As rightly submitted
by Mr. Samarasekera for the defendants-appellants, this contention cannot
succeed for the reason that the plaintiffs did not at the trial raise any
issue as to whether V7 dealt with a different land although the defendants had
specifically pleaded V7 which is a transfer by Laisa, the sister of Thegis
Fernando. The matter does not rest there. The 1st defendant gave evidence and
also called Laisa. However, it was not suggested to either of them that V7 did
not apply to the land in suit. It would appear that the case for the
plaintiffs at the trial was that V7 did not convey rights because Laisa's
brother Thegis Fernando had prescribed to lot B in plan P6. Therefore it was
not the case for the plaintiffs as presented at the trial that V7 did not
apply to the corpus.

The evidence establishes that the land in suit was a co-owned property and
among the co-owners was Thegis Fernando, the predecessor in title of the
plaintiffs and Laisa, the predecessor in title of the 1st defendant. The
principal submission of Mr. Samarasekera for the defendants-appellants was
that there is no evidence of the separation and the division of lot B in P6 as
claimed by the plaintiffs and there is no proof of ouster. At the trial the
plaintiffs relied largely on P6 for proof of the separation and the division
of lot B. However, as rightly submitted by Mr. Samarasekera, P6 has not been
signed by the parties who are alleged to have taken part in the division of
the land. There is no deed of partition nor cross conveyances following upon
P6. The line of division between lots A and B is by a dotted line which
indicates that it is an indefinite boundary ; there is no physical feature
which corresponds to that line. The plaintiffs failed to take out a commission
to show that the alleged division is physically on the ground. Therefore the
Court of Appeal has rightly reached the finding that " the so called amicable
division in P6 had not been acted upon or recognised by the co-owners".

Although there was no actual division and separate possession following upon
P6, yet, as pointed out by the Court of Appeal, there wad the earlier
partition action No. 3381/P of the District Court of Colombo, which was filed
in 1944. The 1st defendant in that case was Laisa, and the 2nd defendant was
Thegis Fernando. The plaint

100

(P3), the final partition plan P7, the superimposition of plan P6 on P7
(marked 138) were produced at the trial. And more importantly, the answer
filed by Thegis Fernando, was produced as P4. What is of relevance for present
purposes are the averments in paragraphs 4, 5 and 7 of P4 which read as
follows :

"(4) Further answering this defendant says that the original land was an
extent of soil sufficient to plant 100 coconut plants and the same was
possessed in two equally divided portions, the division having taken place
according to plan No. 16 dated 23.04.1933 made by J. W. de Silva, Licensed
Surveyor, at the request of all the co-owners.

(5) In the said plan No. 16 Lot B which is the eastern portion, was possessed
by this defendant and he is living in the said Lot B. A portion of the said
Lot B has been included in the preliminary plan filed of record together with
his residing house No. 5 in the said plan. The said portion containing the
said house No. 5 built by him 15 years ago is an encroachment on the said Lot
B and should be excluded from the partition.

(7) This defendant and his predecessors in title have been in the undisturbed
and uninterrupted possession of the portion encroached upon for over 10 years
by a title adverse to and independent of that of everybody else and claims the
benefit of section 3 of the Ordinance No. 22 of 1871 ".

On a consideration of the aforesaid averments in the answer filed on
21.03.1945, it is clear that there is here an explicit and categorical
assertion by Thegis Fernando of separate and exclusive possession of Lot B in
plan P6. The Court of Appeal in its judgment has addressed its mind to this
important aspect of the case and, in my view, rightly concluded, "The
statement of claim was that he possessed exclusively. Therefore the co-owners
became aware of his adverse claim. This was not a secret intention but an
outright assertion of exclusive possession and the commencement of ouster".
(The emphasis is mine).

Mr. Samerasekera, however, urged that despite this assertion in the answer,
the proceedings in the partition action show that Thegis Fernando has in fact
abandoned his claim of exclusive possession.

101

I find myself unable to agree with this contention. It was only a very small
portion of Lot B in P6 that was included in the corpus sought to be
partitioned (see plan 8). House No. 5 which was the house in which Thegis
Fernando was living together with share of the land was allotted to him at the
trial. In the plan (P7) Lot 8 and house No. 5 were allotted to Thegis Fernando
and this was very nearly the portion of Lot B in P6 which was included in the
corpus. It cannot be fairly said that Thegis Fernando abandoned his claim to
Lot B at the trial.

It was in 1948 that the partition action was concluded. There is strong
evidence to establish that since 1948 Thegis Fernando alone had adverse and
exclusive possession of the land in suit against the rights of the other co-
owners. This was the finding reached by the Court of Appeal, a finding which
is amply supported by the documentary and oral evidence on record. I
accordingly dismiss the appeal with costs fixed at Rs. 1500.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

I am in agreement with the judgment of my Lord the Chief Justice and wish to
add that the claim of the plaintiffs-respondents is supported by the evidence
in the case and the principle stated in the Full Bench decision in
Tillekeratne v. Bastian (1) (cited by Mr. Manohara de Silva, Counsel for the
plaintiffs-respondents) where it was held that it is open to the Court, from
the lapse of time in conjunction with the circumstances of the case, to
presume that a possession originally that of a co-owner has since become
adverse.

Bertram, C. J. said (p. 24) -

"It is a question of fact, whenever long continued exclusive possession by one
co-owner is proved to have existed, whether it is not just and reasonable in
all the circumstances of the case that the parties should be treated as though
it had been proved that separate and exclusive possession had become adverse
at some date more than ten years before action was brought."

102

Shaw, J. (p. 26) referred to the presumption as : "the presumption of ouster"
and added that this has been recognised by the Privy Council in _Corea v.
Appuhamy_ (2)

De Sampayo, J. said (p. 27)

"A presumption of adverse possession may, I think, be drawn from the fact of
exclusive possession by one co-owner extending over such a long period as to
render non-possession by the other co-owner inexplicable, except upon the
theory of acquiescence in an adverse claim."

Mr. Samarasekera, P.C. for the defendants-appellants in his written
submissions, in reply to the written submissions for the plaintiffs-
respondents, states that Tillekeratne's case has no application to the facts
of this case ; and that in any event, the presumption referred to in that case
must be understood in the light of "the explanation" of that case by K. D. de
Silva, J. in Abdul Majeed v. Ummu Zaneera (3).

The plaintiffs claimed exclusive rights to a separate portion of the land
called Maragahawatte depicted as Lot 'B' in plan No. 16 of 1933 (P6). The
balance portion of the said land is depicted as Lot 'A' in the said plan. The
evidence of the 1st plaintiff and his witness Rodrigo (Grama Sevaka) and
Barabos, defendants' witness clearly support the finding that since 1948 it
was Thegis (the father of the plaintiffs) and thereafter the plaintiffs who
had the exclusive possession of the land in dispute until 1977 when the
defendants entered the land and forcibly constructed a house overnight, on the
strength of a purchase of an undivided 1/8 share thereof from Laisa, the
sister of Thegis on deed No. 2590 of 03.01.75 (V7).

The other co-owners were no parties to the division of the land shown in the
said plan P6 ; and hence the exclusive possession of Lot 'B' in that plan by
itself would not constitute an ouster against them. However, the partition
action 3381 filed in 1944 (P3) in which Laisa was the 1st defendant, the
answer of Thegis, the 2nd defendant (P4), the final plan (P7) and the final
decree (P12) together with the plan P8 which is the superimposition of P6 on
P7, are relevant. Thus whilst the total extent of Maragahawatte as per plan P6
was OA. 3R. 15.62-P., the corpus of the partition action as per plan P7

103

was OA. 1 R. 34.06-P. which constitutes the entirety of lot 'A' in the said
plan P6 plus about 6-7 P. out of Lot 'B' in extent OA. 1 R. 27.81 P, claimed
by Thegis. This led to the complaint by Thegis that a part of the land
exclusively claimed by him had been included in the corpus. This dispute was
not pursued as the case was concluded without a contest and an extent of 6.75
P. was allotted to Thegis.

It seems to me that by excluding almost the entirety of Lot 'B' from the
corpus of the partition, the co-owners, including Laisa, acquiesced in the
claim of Thegis to Lot 'B' which continued to be possessed exclusively by
Thegis and his successors from 1948 and without any disturbance, until 1977 ;
and the circumstances of the instant case appear to amount to something more
than presumption of ouster in that the conduct of the other co-owners in the
partition action and thereafter for so long a period warrants the inference
that the possession of Thegis and his successors constitutes "ouster or
something equivalent to an ouster" referred to in Corea's case (supra).

I do not agree that the dicta of K. D. de Silva, J. in Abdul Majeed's case
(supra) have any application to the case before us. That was a case in which
the land in dispute consisted of 12.61 P. in extent and a building covering
practically the whole land. It was held that proof that one of the co-heirs
let out the premises and appropriated to himself the entire rent (which was
not much) for 37 years was insufficient, by itself, to bring the case within
s. 3 of the Prescription Ordinance. The criteria specified by K. D. de Silva,
J. for considering whether the presumption of ouster may be drawn must be
understood in the context of that case. At the same time certain comments of
de Silva, J. to the effect that in drawing the presumption (which was adopted
from English law) regard must be had to the fact that common ownership of
lands is rampant here whereas it is comparatively rare in England, etc. were
not intended to place any general constraint in the matter; for as His
Lordship himself said : "whether the presumption of ouster is to be drawn or
not depends on the circumstances of each case" supra.

I therefore agree that the appeal should be dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.
1,500.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/26.html_  

