##  Abeyratne v. Gunatilake and Others - SLR - 294, Vol 2 of 1994 [1992] LKSC
26; (1994) 2 Sri LR 294 (26 October 1992)

**  294**

### ABEYRATNE

**v.**

**GUNATILAKE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.

DHEERARATNE, J.

RAMANATHAN, J. AND

WIJETUNGE, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 270/92.

SEPTEMBER 18 AND 24 , 1992.



Fundamental Rights ‑ Freedom of speech ‑ Loudspeaker permit ‑ Constitution,
Article 14(1) (a) and (b).



By denying the petitioner a permit for loudspeakers to enable him to hold a __
public __ meeting the petitioner's fundamental right of the freedom of speech
enshrined in Article 14(1) (a) and (b) of the Constitution is violated.



**APPLICATION** for relief for violation of the fundamental right of freedom
of speech and expression.



_Lalith Athulathmudali P.C._ with _Ranjan Gunaratne, Dr. Ranjith Fernando,
Mahen Amarasekera, Ranjani Morawaka, T. M. .S. Nanayakkara, Gamini Peiris_ and
_J. Fernando_ for petitioner.



_D.P. Kumarasinghe, Deputy Solicitor ‑General _for respondent.  

_Cur. adv vult._  

October 26, 1992.

DHEERARATNE. J.

  

Petitioner H. B. Abeyratne complained to this court that his fundamental right
of the freedom of speech was violated by the

**  295**

actions of the 1st respondent, Superintendent of Police Mahawa, and the 2nd
respondnet O.I.C. Police Station Polpithigama, on account of their failure to
issue him a loudspeaker permit to hold a public meeting in support of the
DUNF, a recognised political party of which he claimed to be the secretary and
organizer for the Kurunegala District.



I need hardly underscore the importance of the use of amplifying mechanical
devices both in advertising a public meeting and at a public meeting itself.
The guarantee of freedom of speech and expression and freedom of peaceful
assembly contained in Article 14(1) (a) and (b) of the Constitution could be
rendered meaningless if permission for the use of amplifying mechanical
devices in furtherance of free speech is unreasonably withheld. It is not
disputed that the freedoms contained in Article 14(1) (a) and (b) may be
lawfully restricted in the interests of public order.



The petitioner applied for a permit (obviously in terms of section 80 of the
Police Ordinance) by letter dated 10.4.92 a copy of which was produced marked
P1, to use loudspeakers between 1 p.m. and 8 p.m. on 9th  May 1992 at the
venue of the meeting and between 6th May and 9th May 1992 on vehicles to be
engaged for the purpose of advertising the meeting. P1 was written on a
letterhead of the Democratic United National Employees' Union which union is
apparently the industrial relations organ of the DUNF This letter P1 was
addressed to the 1st respondent through the 2nd. Since the petitioner received
no response to his application, he sent a written reminder P3 dated 24.4.92
under registered cover to the 1st respondent. This was followed by another
written reminder P4 dated 27.4.92. The petitioner thereafter received letter
P5 dated 6.5.92 by ordinary post from the 1st respondent to say that since an
application had been received by him for a permit in connection with another
political meeting to be held on the same day viz., 9.5.92, the petitioner's
request for a permit was refused as there was likely to be a breach of the
peace. The petitioner states that he received this letter on 8.5.92.
Thereafter by letter P6 dated 12.5.92 the petitioner made a complaint to the
Deputy Inspector‑General of Police North Western Province against the 1st
respondent alleging abuse of power. The petitioner in this letter mentioned
about his application P1 for the loudspeaker permit and the reminders P3 and
P4 sent to the 1st respondent. The petitioner specifically mentioned the fact
that he received P5 by ordinary post on 8.5.92, the day before the scheduled
meeting and that had he been informed by the 1st respondent in time

**  296**

that there were moves afoot by some other party to hold another political
meeting on the same day and in close proximity to the venue of his meeting, he
would have sought permission to hold the meeting of the DUNF at some other
venue in the same electorate.



The 1st respondent in his affidavit stated that the petitioner's application
was received at the police station Polpithigama on 14.4.92 and on the same day
a similar application was received from D. M. Thilakaratne, Provincial Council
member North Western Province in connection with a meeting to be held on the
same day the petitioner had planned to hold his. A photo copy of
Thilakaratne's application and the envelope in which that application was said
to have arrived (in one document) was produced marked X. It was further
averred by the 1st respondent that he directed the 2nd respondent to summon
the petitioner and explain matters to him; that the petitioner had come to the
police station and insisted on holding the meeting on 9.5.92 at the
pre‑arranged venue; that Thilakaratne too refused to change the venue or the
date of his meeting; that he telephoned the petitioner's residence which is
situated almost opposite his office and left a message to the petitioner to
see him but the petitioner never responded; and that subsequently he wrote to
Thilakaratne letter X2 and to the petitioner letter P5 both dated 6.5.92
refusing permission for loudspeaker permits. The petitioner denies that he was
either summoned to the police station or informed in any manner until he
received P5. There was an application made by Thilakaratne for a loudspeaker
permit to hold a meeting on the same day.



It does not appear to have commended to the police sense of the 1st respondent
to inquire from his subordinate the 2nd respondent as to which of the
applications X or P1, allegedly received on the same day, was first opened or
read by the 2nd respondent, for, one cannot imagine any person performing the
feat of opening or reading two letters simultaneously. Perhaps to the mind of
the 1st respondent a solution founded on such a commonsense approach sounded
too simplistic for the grave problem he was faced with.



The 2nd respondent in his affidavit sought to corroborate what was stated by
the 1st respondent. He stated "I summoned both parties and explained matters
to them and requested them to change either the date or the venue of the
meeting". When and how were they summoned? Did they appear at the police
station at the same time or separately? We are starved of those details
necessary for us to test the veracity of the respondent's version.

**  297**

On the reverse of X (Thilakaratne's application) the 2nd respondent had made a
minute purported to be dated 4.5.92, a literal translation of which reads as
follows:‑



**S. P Mahawa**



_(1)        For the same day, permission has been sought for the use of
loudspeakers for a propaganda rally of the Democratic United National
Employees Union (sic)._

_(2)        Having informed both parties regarding this matter, they were
advised to change the day of the meeting to a subsequent day. Both parties
expressed their reluctance._

_(3)        If two meetings of these parties are held on the same place there
is likely to be a grave breach of the peace._



_Therefore I am forwarding the applications without giving my approval._



Below this minute appears a seal of the office of the Superintendent of Police
Mahawa bearing the date 6.5.92. There is no reference in the minute as to when
the petitioner met the 2nd respondent to express his refusal to change the day
of the meeting.



After the matter was argued before us by learned counsel for the petitioner on
19.9.92 and the pith of the case was felt, a further affidavit of the 2nd
respondent with several additional documents was filed on 22.9.92 before the
2nd day of hearing. We decided to accept that affidavit and the documents. One
such document was an affidavit dated 19.9.92 from one obliging Thilakaratne to
say that on 10.4.92 he did apply for a permit for the use of loudspeakers for
a meeting which he proposed to hold on 9.5.92. This affidavit is significantly
silent on the question of his being summoned to the police by the 2nd
respondent to persuade him to change the venue or the date of the proposed
meeting. Probably had he deposed to that fact he would have to say further
when that was and whether the petitioner too was present at the police station
at the same time or not. Thilakaratne does not appear to have been peeved over
the action of the 1st and 2nd respondents in refusing his application. Another
document filed on 22.9.92 was a letter X22 from one J. M. Dhanapala dated
11.4.92 giving permission to Thilakaratne to hold a meeting on his land on
9.5.92. This was the first time that the name of J. M. Dhanapala transpired in
the course of the proceedings. X22 contains no official seal, a
contemporaneous memorandum or a folio

**  298**

number so as to indicate that it has come from an official file. One wonders
why if Thilakaratne forwarded his application to the 1st respondent through
the 2nd on 10.4.92 along with Dhanapala's letter as stated in his affidavit,
why Dhanapala's letter should carry the date 11.4.92. Application X does
mention that the proposed meeting "will be held at the premises mentioned in
the annexed letter", but it is significant that it makes no reference to
either the name of the land or its owner. If application X had been posted on
10.4.92 as alleged on behalf of the respondents along with Dhanapala's letter,
it is strange that Dhanapala's letter was dated 11.4.92.



In our anxiety to ascertain whether an application was received at the
Polpithigama police station from Thilakaratne, as stated, we called for the
original envelope in which the letter X was supposed to have arrived. The post
mark of the Polpithigama post office on the envelope had the figures 10 and 92
representing the date and the year respectively with absolute clarity. The
Arabic figure 4 representing the month between figures 10 and 92, to our naked
eye seemed shadowy, giving us the impression that it was performing some sort
of an Egyptian belly dance. We informed learned counsel that we did not wish
to probe deeper into the distorted form the Arabic 4 had taken, purely to
avoid procrastination of these proceedings and that we would consider that
matter as a neutral factor, proving or disproving nothing.



I find it difficult to understand the conduct of the 1st respondent if his
position is true, in not replying the petitioner's earnest and eager reminders
regarding his application. The 1st respondent should have known that the
petitioner as an organizer of a public meeting had several functions to
perform towards its success; getting posters printed, having them displayed,
engaging vehicles for advertising through loudspeakers, organizing public
speakers and the like. To do all these the petitioner was no doubt anxiously
waiting for the green light to come from the 1st respondent giving him
reasonable time well before the day of the meeting. Why did the 1st respondent
not have the courtesy to write to the petitioner promptly to say that there
was a problem created by a rival application? Or if the petitioner was in fact
summoned to the police station and matters explained to him, why did he not
write to say that the petitioner was taking an unreasonable stand? In reply to
our query on this unusual conduct on the part of the 1st respondent from the
learned Deputy Solicitor‑General, we

**  299**

were informed that the 1st respondent being a busy officer would have
forgotten to reply those letters and that he would have least expected this
matter to end up in a court of law. I may mention here that in deciding the
existence of any fact which a court thinks likely to have happened having
regard to human conduct, it has necessarily to take the standard of a
reasonable prudent man and not that of an absent minded professor.



Along with the petition, the petitioner submitted affidavit P10 from a trader
of Polpithigama called Dassanayake to say that on 4.5.92 a police officer from
the Polpithigama police station came to his shop and having inquired whether a
proposed meeting to be held by the DUNF on 9.5.92 would cause any obstruction
to his business, took down a statement from him. He further added in that
affidavit that nothing was asked from him regarding any other political
meeting. Along with the affidavit of the 1st respondent, affidavit X10 from
the selfsame Dassanayake was produced. In that affidavit Dassanayake states
that the police came to inquire from him on 25.4.92 about a political meeting
to be held on the land of D. M. Gunaratne Banda. It may be noted that
Gunaratne Banda is the person who had given a letter of consent to the
petitioner to hold the meeting on his land. In X10 Dassanayake further stated
that he told the police that he thought holding such a meeting would cause
inconvenience to his business. The 1st respondent filed another affidavit X11
from one Jayatillake Banda also a trader from Polpithigama. According to
Jayatillake Banda the 2nd respondent met him on 25.4.92 and inquired from him
whether a political meeting to be held on the land belonging to Gunaratne
Banda would cause any obstruction to his business to which he answered in the
affirmative. Notes of the 2nd  respondent made on 25.4.92 pasted in the MOIB
was produced marked X19. Those notes are prefaced as follows:‑



_25.4.92, 1315 hours at Polpithigama. Having inspected the venue of the
proposed propaganda meeting of the Democratic United Front (sic) to be held at
Polpithigama on 9.5.92, I came here to inquire from the persons in the
neighbourhood about this matter._



Thereafter the 2nd respondent had proceeded to record the statements of
Jayatillake Banda and Dassanayake both of whom have stated that the holding of
such a meeting would cause obstruction to their businesses.



Two significant facts emerge from what is immediately related above. Firstly,
if as the 1st and 2nd respondents state, two

**  300 **

applications for loudspeaker permits were received on the same day and the
problem of choosing one did not arise, it was hardly necessary for the 1st
respondent to embark on an inquiry on 25.4.92 as to whether the proposed
meeting of the DUNF would cause inconvenience to the neighbourhood. Secondly,
no similar inquiries have been made regarding the proposed meeting organized
by Thilakaratne. Both these facts demonstrate the probability of
Thilakaratne's application not being there with the police as at 25.4.92.



After the arguments were concluded, I informed the learned Deputy
Solicitor‑General that we would like to look at the original application made
by the petitioner. This was to enable us to examine entries and other official
minutes or seals which may appear on that application and if they did so
appear, to compare them with what appears on the application of Thilakaratne.
I have been informed that this all important document which is the foundation
of the petitioner's complaint "cannot be traced, as the same has been lost or
misplaced" according to the 1st respondent's letter dated 4.10.92 addressed to
the Deputy Solicitor‑General. In contrast, it strikes me to observe, how
letter X22 written by Dhanapala found its easy passage to our hands safely
from Mahawa, escaping all such official misfortunes; it has even been spared
of the burden of carrying an official seal of the police.



Far from respecting, securing and advancing fundamental rights as mandated by
the Constitution, it appears to me that the 1st and 2nd respondents have
conducted themselves in callous disregard of those sacred rights. Having taken
the totality of the evidence coming from the affidavits and the documents I am
inclined to the view that the alleged application of Thilakaratne was a red
herring drawn jointly by the 1st and 2nd respondents across the path of
justice.



By denying the petitioner a permit for loudspeakers to enable him to hold a
public meeting, I am of the view that the 1st and 2nd respondents have
violated the petitioner's fundamental right of the freedom of speech enshrined
in Article 14(1) (a) and (b) of the Constitution. I direct the 1st and 2nd
respondents to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 2500 each as compensation and a
further sum of Rs. 1000 each as costs of the case.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** ‑ I agree.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/26.html_  

