##  The Cementation Company (Overseas) Ltd. v. Hotel International Ltd. - SLR
- 262, Vol 1 of 1986 [1986] LKSC 26; (1986) 1 Sri LR 262 (13 February 1986)

**

262

THE CEMENTATION COMPANY (OVERSEAS) LTD.  
v.  
HOTEL INTERNATIONAL LTD.

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHAWANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 42/84.  
C.A. 343/74(F)-D.C. COLOMBO CASE No. 71234/M.  
NOVEMBER 26, 28 AND 29, 1985.

_

Building Contract-Agreement to design, construct and equip hotel- Construction
contract - Failure to fulfil terms by defendant- Construction contract ceasing
to have legal effect- Reimbursement of plaintiff's expenses in sterling
-Fundamental term -Unjust enrichment - Quantum meruit.

_

**263**

Where the agreement between the contractor (plaintiff) and owner (defendant)
the designing of a hotel project and the construction and equipping of the
hotel and required the contractor to deliver to the owner within a fixed
period the construction documents which included the form of tender quoting a
price called the contract price whereupon the owner would enter into a
construction contract with the contractor provided inter alia the contract
price was "sensibly' not in excess of Rs.20 million and where in default of
entering into such contract the owner bound himself to reimburse the
contractor his expenses in sterling, but the contractor delivered the contract
documents nine days late and fixed the contract price finally at £ 2,003,000
sterling yet the owner accepted the tender by agreement XI and bound itself to
fulfil certain conditions in Clause 6 of XI but failed to fulfil them-

**

Held -

**

On the Contractor claiming to be reimbursed his expenses in sterling:

(1) The owner must be deemed to have declined to enter into a firm
construction contract.

(2) The delay in tendering the contract documents was waived by the owner by
entering into agreement XI.

(3) The proviso that the contract price should not "sensibly" exceed Rs. 20
million was not a fundamental term in the contract.

(4) The owner (defendant) was liable to reimburse the contractor (plaintiff)
his expenses in sterling certified by the Auditors at £ 68,723,12sh. 8d. and
in rupees at the exchange rate prevailing at the date of payment with
interest.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _P. Naguleswaran_ and _Senaka Weeraratne_ for
defendant-appellant and defendant-respondent.

_

Dr. H.W. Jayewardene, Q.C._ with _L.C. Seneviratne, P.C. and A. L. B. Brito
Mutunayagam_ for plaintiff-appellant and plaintiff-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

February 13, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

The plaintiff is a company incorporated in England concerned principally in
civil engineering and building construction outside the United Kingdom. It
filed this action on the 9th August, 1969:

( _a_ ) to recover from the defendant a sum of £ 68,723,12sh. 8d. which in
Ceylon currency amounted to Rs. 981,948.84 together with legal interest
thereon from the date thereof from the date of action till the date of decree
and thereafter on the aggregate amount till payment in full,

( _b_ ) for a declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to be paid in
sterling in London the sum of £ 68,723, 12sh. 8d. __ together with legal
interest as aforesaid.

**264**

The defendant in 1966 intended to erect on a site in the city of Colombo, a
hotel of about 200 guest rooms of international standards with the ancillaries
used in the case of such hotels. In this connection one Mr. Massarik, a
representative of the plaintiff-company arrived in Sri Lanka in November 1966,
and had discussions with the Directors and Members of the defendant company.
As a consequence of such discussions an agreement was entered into between the
plaintiff and the defendant which agreement was executed by the defendant at
Colombo on the 14th November 1966, and by the plaintiff in England on
25.11.1966. This agreement was produced at the trial in this case marked ‘A'.
This agreement 'A' envisaged the designing of a hotel project and the
construction and equipping the hotel by the plaintiff company and required the
plaintiff-company to deliver construction documents which included the form of
tender, quoting a price called "contract price" for the design, construction
and equipping of the Project. This agreement further envisaged that after the
delivery of the said contract documents the plaintiff and defendants would
enter into a further agreement called "Construction contract" for the design,
construction, equipping and financing of the hotel Project based on the
contract documents. This agreement in its recital contained the statement that
the defendant desired that the aggregate costs of the hotel should not be more
than Rs. 20 million, exclusive of the cost of the site and that the plaintiff
would finance part of the cost of contract.

The crucial clauses of this agreement for the purposes of this action, are
clauses 13, and 14. _Clause 13 of this Agreement 'A '_ Provides -

"the owner and CCL shall within 30 days of the date of delivery of the
contract documents enter into an Agreement (in this agreement referred to as
the Construction Agreement) for the designing, construction, equipping and
financing of the Project based on the contract documents, the construction
contract being the second stage of the arrangements between the parties hereto
for the purposes hereinbefore recited;

Provided always that the owner shall have the option to decline to enter into
the Construction Contract in the event of the occurrence of any of the
following, viz:-

( _a_ ) the failure of CCL to deliver the contract documents within the period
provided for in clause 9 of the Agreement ;

( _b_ ) the failure of CCL to produce the Quantity Surveyor's Certificate as
required by clause 12 of this Agreement ,

**265**

( _c_ ) the failure of CCL to offer a loan equivalent to at least 60% of the
contract price and at a rate of interest not more than 5 1/2 per annum;

( _d_ )  the contract price being sensibly not in excess of the said sum of
Rupees Twenty Million."

_

Clause 14_ states that-

"In the event of the owner declining under the provisions of clause 13 to
enter into the Construction Contract with CCL as referred to in that clause,
the owner shall Pay to CCL at the expiry of the period of thirty days referred
to in that clause a sum of money amounting to the expenses CCL has reasonably
incurred in the fulfilment of CCL's obligations under this agreement such
payment to be made in sterling and in rupees corresponding to the currency in
which such expenses were financed and such expenses to be certified as correct
by CCL's Auditors in London and on the making of such payment all Contract
documents provided by CCL shall become the property of the owner."

(The "owner" referred to in Agreement 'A' is the defendant-company and 'CCL'
refers to the plaintiff-company.)

The plaintiff submitted its tender for the said contract on the 22nd June,
1967. According to this tender the contract price was £ 2,747,000 sterling. At
the request of the defendant this tender was amended by tender dated the 4th
August, 1967, by which the contract price was reduced to £ 2,065,000 sterling
and this figure was further reduced by tender of 19th August, 1967, to £
2,003,000 sterling.

In pursuance of the said tender and Subsequent amendments the plaintiff and
the defendant-company entered into an agreement on or about 1st September,
1967. This agreement has been marked as "X 1". Clause 1 of this agreement
specifically states -

"Subject to the provisions of _clause 6_ hereof the Employer (the defendant)
accepts the said tender submitted by the said contractor (the plaintiff) for
the design construction and equipment of the said works ......"

**266**

_

Clause 6_ states-

"this Agreement is conditional upon the Employer on or before the 22nd day of
September, 1967, concluding satisfactory negotiations with the Bank of Ceylon
in regard to finance and obtaining from the share-holders of the Employer (the
defendant approval of this Agreement and from the Government of Ceylon
satisfactory assurances in regard to -

(i) tax concessions both to the Employer and to the Contractor including the
foreign personnel of the Contractor ;

(ii) relief or part relief in respect of Import or Customs duties and Import
Licence fees; and

(iii) any portion of the rupee element of the contract price not required in
Ceylon by the Contractor for the said works would be freely remittable to the
Contractor in England in Sterling converted at the rate of exchange of
Rs.13.33 to the Pound Sterling.

Upon the foregoing conditions being fulfilled this Agreement shall forthwith
become unconditional........."

_

Clause 7_ states -

"If this Agreement shall not become unconditional by the said 22nd day of
September, 1967, the said tender is deemed to be unacceptable and this
Agreement and the documents forming the contract shall be deemed to be
cancelled and shall cease to have any legal effect."

The defendant-company tailed to fulfil the conditions specified in clause 6 of
the Agreement 'X1' and the plaintiff by its letter dated 20.12.1967 informed
the defendant that the construction contract 'X1 ' ceased to have any legal
effect as from 22nd September, 1967, inasmuch as the conditions in clause 6
have not been fulfilled by the defendant-company. The plaintiff further
informed that consequently the defendant was deemed to have not accepted the
plaintiff's tender as defined in the preamble to the Construction Contract
'X1', and that the defendant had declined and/or was thus deemed to have
declined to enter into the Construction Contract. The plaintiff also notified
the defendant that it was in terms of clause 14 of Agreement ‘A', under an
obligation to reimburse the plaintiff, the expenses which the plaintiff had
reasonably incurred up to 22.9.67. The Auditors by their certificate dated
20th June, 1969, and marked as "C" had duly

**267**

certified as correct the expenses incurred by the plaintiff in the fulfilment
of the obligation under agreement "A" as amounting to £ 68,723, 12sh. 8d.
sterling.

The plaintiff submitted to the defendant its invoice dated 23.2.1968, for the
said amount and demanded payment thereof. The defendant having failed and
neglected to pay the said sum to the plaintiff, the plaintiff, instituted this
action for recovery of the said sum of £ 68,723, 12sh. 8d. sterling as being
payable to the plaintiff by the defendant in terms of clause 14 of the
Agreement "A".

The plaintiff also pleaded as a second alternative cause of action that the
plaintiff was entitled to recover the said sum from the defendant on the
ground that the defendant had been unjustly enriched by the plaintiff having
to spend the said money and engaging the services of several persons to make
available to the defendant the construction documents, which were received by
the defendant-company for its benefit. The plaintiff further sought to recover
the said sum of money on the 3rd or further alternative cause of action on the
ground that the plaintiff was entitled, in law to the payment of a reasonable
price for the aforesaid contract documents, and/or for the work and services
involved therein, benefit of which the defendant had received on the basis of
a quantum meruit.

The defendant resisted the claim of plaintiff on the ground-

"that the term in Agreement 'A' that the cost of the said Project should not
sensibly be in excess of Rs.20 million was a fundamental term of the contract
and that the word "sensibly" meant and was understood to mean an increase of
not more than 5% of the said sum of Rs.20 million. The defendant contended
that inasmuch as the tender and the amended tenders submitted by the
plaintiff-company was in excess of the said amount, the plaintiff was in
breach of an essential and fundamental term of the Agreement and that the
defendant was therefore under no obligation, ( _a_ ) to enter into a
construction contract with the plaintiff under clause 13 of Agreement "A", or
( _b_ ) to pay any expenses incurred by the plaintiff which expenses **** are
refered to in clause 14 of Agreement "A".

The defendant also pleaded that the Agreement marked X1 dated the 1st
September 1967 was a separate contract entered into between the plaintiff and
the defendant by reason of an offer made by the plaintiff on or about the 22nd
of August, 1967 to construct a hotel of 189 guest rooms with ancilliaries at a
cost of approximately rupees

**268**

twenty-four million. The defendant denied that this Agreement X1 was entered
into in pursuance of clause 13 of agreement 'A' which the defendant stated had
been discharged earlier by reason of the wrongful breach by the plaintiff.

The defendant claimed in reconvention a sum of Rs.5,345,745 being damages it
had suffered in consequence of the representation made by the plaintiff that
the contract price would not sensibly be in excess of Rs.20 million.

The trial judge by his judgment dismissed the plaintiff's action and the claim
in reconvention. He held inter alia as follows: -

"(i) That the term that the contract price should not be sensibly be in excess
of Rs.20 million contained in the agreement 'A' was not a fundamental term of
the agreement 'A' and that the plaintiff-company had therefore not acted in
breach of a condition in agreement ‘A'.

"(ii) The plaintiff in producing the tender of 22nd June, 1967 for a sum of
approximately thirty-six million rupees was not in breach of the Agreement
‘A', as a contract price of rupees twenty million was not a term of the
agreement but was only a desire of __ the defendant;

"(iii) That in view of the terms of the agreement 'X1', there was no
justification for the plaintiff to import the terms of clauses 13 and 14 of
this agreement 'A' to make its claim on the main cause of action on the basis
that the defendant should be deemed to have declined to enter into the
construction contract;

(iv) That clause 7 of the agreement 'X1' had the effect of __ putting the
parties in the position ‘as if the plaintiff had not tendered. That is the
straightforward effect of the contract documents being of no force. If the
plaintiff does not tender hence arises the reimbursement or damage to the
plaintiff';

(v) That the plaintiff's claim on the alternative causes of action also must
fail. In the case of unjust enrichment one of the rules preventing such a
claim 'is that enrichment must not have occurred in the fulfilment of a
contractual obligation lying on the party impoverished';

(vi) That the preparation of contract documents is not a part - performance of
the contract ;

(vii) That the defendant's claim in reconvention fails."

**269**

The plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeal from the said judgment. The
Court of Appeal by its judgment dated 31st day of May 1984, affirmed the
judgment of the trial judge dismissing the plaintiff's action on the main
cause of action and in doing so, held that the agreement 'X1' dated 1st
September, 1967 was the construction contract envisaged in the agreement ‘A',
and that the plaintiff could not claim reimbursement of expenses under clause
14 of the agreement 'A' as the defendant had not declined to enter into the
contract.

The defendant's cross appeal against the dismissal of its claim in
reconvention was dismissed. It was not pressed at the hearing of the appeal
and the Court of Appeal agreed with the trial judge that a contract price of
Rupees twenty million was not a term of the Agreement ‘A'.

However, the Court of Appeal held that the plaintiff was entitled to succeed
in its claim on the alternative causes of action of unjust enrichment and
quantum meruit and entered judgment for the plaintiff -

"in a sum of Rs. 981,948.84 being the equivalent is Ceylon on Rupees of £
68,723. 12s. 8d. sterling together with legal interest from date of action
till date of decree and thereafter on the aggregate amount until payment in __
full, at the prevailing rate of exchange at the time of payment including the
cost of Foreign Exchange Entitlement Certificate at the time of payment, or
any other requirement of the law of Ceylon together with costs of this action
in appeal and in the District Court."

Both the plaintiff and the defendant have preferred appeals to this court from
the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

Plaintiff was granted leave to appeal to this court by the Court of Appeal on
the following substantive questions of law: -

( _a_ ) whether the failure of the defendant-respondent to fulfil the
conditions in clause 6 of the agreement 'X1' which consequently made the
agreement 'X1' cease to have any legal effect in terms of clause 7 of the said
agreement was a declining and/or could be deemed to have been declined on the
part of the defendant-respondent to enter into Construction Contract in terms
of clause 13 of the agreement 'A' and,

**270**

( _b_ ) whether, in any event, judgment should have been entered in favour of
the plaintiff in terms of prayers ( _a_ ), ( _b_ ) __ and ( _c_ ) of the
plaint, instead of in terms of prayer ( _d_ ) of the plaint.

The plaintiff obtained leave of this court to appeal on the ground that there
was no basis for holding that the defendant had enjoyed any benefit or other
advantage from contract documents or otherwise as would sustain a claim for
unjust enrichment, and that the defendant derived no benefit from the contract
documents so as to give rise to a claim on the basis of quantum meruit.

By order dated 8th August 1984, this court directed that both appeals of the
plaintiff and the defendant be consolidated and that the parties would be
heard on all matters in issue between them.

As regards the main cause of action prayed for by the plaintiff, the defence
of the defendant was that the agreement 'X1' entered into by the plaintiff and
the defendant was upon a separate offer made by the plaintiff to the defendant
to construct a hotel of 189 guest rooms at a cost of approximately 24 million
rupees, which offer had been accepted by the defendant-company. The defendant
denied that the agreement 'X1' was entered into in pursuance of the provisions
of clause 13 of the agreement ‘A'.

This contention of the defendant is untenable; reading both agreements 'A' and
'X1', there can be no doubt that agreement 'X1' is referable to agreement 'A'
and is a sequel thereof.

Clause 9 of the agreement 'A' stipulates that the plaintiff shall deliver to
the owner (defendant) the contract documents as defined in clause 10 of the
agreement. Clause 10 of __ the agreement 'A' states that the contract
documents shall consist of the following, namely-

( _a_ ) a set of preliminary architectural and, structural drawings in the
**** scale 1/8" to one foot, giving dimensions of the main structural systems
and comprising foundation plan, site plan, floor plan of all floor and areas,
elevations, sections and perspectives;

( _b_ ) ................

( _c_ ) ................

( _d_ ) ................

( _e_ ) ................

**271**

( _f_ ) a form of tender quoting a price (hereinafter called "Contract Price")
for the design, construction and equipping of the Project, which price shall
include all professional fees and related expenses (including fees and
expenses to be expended by CCL (plaintiff) for the fulfilment of its
obligations under this agreement) all finance charges other than interest and
other than customs duties which shall both be borne by the owner (defendant).

The recitals to agreement 'X1' refers to the tender dated 22.2.1967 made by
the plaintiff and which was amended by the plaintiff by his tender dated 4th
May, 1967 and 19th August, 1967 all of which are hereinafter collectively
referred to as "the said Tender " for the designing, construction and
equipment of a hotel in Colombo (hereinafter called "the said works") By
clause 1 of the agreement X1 the defendant accepts the said tender "subject to
the provisions of clause 6". The defendant accepted the said tender submitted
by the plaintiff for the designing, construction and equipment of the said
works. There can be no doubt that the tender referred to in the clause 1 was
made by the plaintiff, pursuant to the provisions of agreement 'A' and that
Agreement 'X1' was entered into in furtherance of clause 13 of the agreement
‘A'. The substantial defence of the defendant was that agreement 'A' was
discharged by the wrongful conduct of the plaintiff in preparing tender
wherein the estimated cost of the hotel project sensibly exceeded 20 million
rupees.

In my view the District Judge came to the correct conclusion that the cost of
the hotel project was not a fundamental term of the contract 'A' and that the
plaintiff had not committed any breach of the agreement 'A' in preparing
contract documents where the contract price exceeded 20 million rupees.

According to clause 1 of the agreement. 'X1' the defendant had accepted the
"said tender" referred to in the agreement "A" submitted by the Plaintiff
subject to the provisions of the clause 6, referred to above. Clause 6 states
"this agreement is conditional upon the Employer (defendant) on or before the

**272**

22nd September, 1967, satisfying the conditions set out therein." Admittedly
the defendant had failed to fulfil the conditions in clause 6 of Agreement 'X1
' and the plaintiff was hence justified in informing by his letter dated
20.12.1967, produced as 'B', its conclusion that the said Construction
Contract ‘XI' ceased to have any legal effect as from the 22nd September,
1967. Since the defendant had accepted the plaintiff's tender "subject to the
provisions of clause 6" of 'X1' and since the conditions prescribed in clause
6 had not been performed by the defendant, the resulting position would appear
to be that the defendant had not accepted the tender submitted by the
plaintiff. The defendant's acceptance was a conditional acceptance of
plaintiff's tender and since the conditions have failed to materialise, the
defendant should be considered to have declined to enter into the construction
contract contemplated by clause 13 of Agreement ‘A'. In this situation clause
14 of the agreement 'A' comes into operation. The defendant having failed to
enter into the Construction contract referred to in clause 13 of 'A' became
liable to pay the expenses that the plaintiff had reasonably incurred in the
fulfilment of its obligations under agreement ‘A'. The facts do not show that
the defendant could have invoked the provisions to clause 13 for his
declination to enter into the Construction contract. Proviso ( _a_ ) states
that if the plaintiff failed to deliver contract documents within a period of
200 days provided for in clause 9 of the agreement ‘A', the option was open to
the defendant to decline to enter into that construction contract. 'XI' was in
fact entered into after a lapse of 200 days. In view of the fact that the
defendant chose to enter into Agreement 'XI' in spite this delay of nine days
it should be considered to have waived plaintiff's delay and it is not open to
the defendant to fall back on that proviso after the subsequent developments
and his failure to satisfy the conditions set out in clause 6 of ‘XI'.

The facts show that the defendant declined to enter into the Construction
Contract not on account of the occurance of any of the events set out in the
provisos to clause 13, but because agreement 'X1' had not become unconditional
by 22nd day of September, 1967.

In the circumstances in terms of clause 7 of the agreement 'X1' "the said
tender is deemed to be unacceptable and this agreement and the documents
forming the contract shall be taken to be cancelled and shall cease to have
any legal effect." The construction contract thus failed to get off the
ground.

The Agreement envisaged by clause 13 ultimately failed to materalise because
the defendant did not accept the said tender of the plaintiff, the said tender
was in terms of clause 7 of 'XI' deemed unacceptable and the owner (the
defendant) had therefore declined to

**273**

enter into a firm construction contract. The consequence was that clause 14 of
agreement 'A' came into operation and the defendant became liable to pay the
expenses stipulated thereon.

In my view the District Judge was in error in holding that there was no
justification for the plaintiff to import the terms of clause 13 and 14 of
agreement 'A' to sustain his claim on the main cause of action on the basis
that the defendant should be deemed to have declined to enter into the
Construction Contract. The District Judge gravely misdirected himself in
coming to the conclusion "it seems to me that the parties intended by clause 7
of 'X1 ' to put themselves in the position as if the plaintiffs had not
tendered". According to clause 7 the plaintiff's tender was to be deemed
unacceptable to the defendant and agreement 'XI' was to be deemed cancelled
and the said tender unacceptable from 22nd September, 1967.

The trial judge further erred in holding that "the tender has been submitted
by the plaintiff and it became unacceptable to the defendant, not by the
defendant's own conduct but due to circumstances beyond its control. The
argument that the defendant must be made liable because it calmly declines is
unsound". The defendant is bound by the provisions of Agreement 'A' and 'X1'.
In terms of clause 7 of 'XI' the agreement had admittedly "not become
unconditional by the 22nd day of September 1967" and hence the consequences
agreed to by the defendant follow. The defendant had thus in terms of clause
14 __ of agreement 'A' declined or should be __ deemed to have declined to
enter into the Construction Contract, referred to in clause 13 of the
agreement ‘A'. In terms of clause 14 of the agreement, the defendant thus
became liable to reimburse the plaintiff the expenses that the plaintiff had
incurred as referred to in clause 14.

he Court of Appeal misdirected itself in its construction of clause 14 of
Agreement ‘A'. I cannot agree with the Court of Appeal that clause 14
envisages only a case "where a contract is not entered into between the
defendant company for any of the reasons set out in proviso to clause 13 and
that it contemplates a situation of initial failure to enter into a
Construction Contract 'XI' and does not envisage a case where the parties
enter into a Construction Contract, but the contract fails due to supervening
circumstances, "and that" clause 14 of the agreement envisages a case of
deliberate refusal or repudiation to sign the Construction Contract after the
plaintiff had made the

**274**

tender". On the facts of this case the Court of Appeal held that there was no
declension or failure to enter into a contract as referred to in clause 14
upon which the plaintiff was entitled to have his claim for reimbursement for
expenses in the first cause of action. Having regard to the relevant clauses
'A' and 'XI' this conclusion cannot be supported. The end result of the
dealings and negotiations between the parties is that the defendant had
declined or failed to enter into a firm Construction Contract, as contemplated
by clause 13 and hence it became liable to reimburse the plaintiff for the
expenses. The plaintiff is not to suffer for the situation in which the
defendant found itself ultimately. If things did not turn out as calculated by
the defendant that is its misfortune. The supervening circumstances referred
to did not frustrate the agreements.

In my view the plaintiff is entitled to judgment on the main cause of action
pleaded by it in its plaint. The defendant has in terms of clause 14 of
agreement 'A' declined under the provisions of clause 13 of the said agreement
to enter into the Construction Contract with the plaintiff and thus had become
liable to pay in sterling as stipulated by clause 14 the plaintiff the sum of
£ 68,723.12 sh. 8d. certified as correct by the auditors as representing the
expenses incurred by the plaintiff in the fulfilment of the obligations under
the agreement ‘A'.

Since the plaintiff is entitled to judgment on the principal cause of action
set out in the plaint, it is not necessary to consider or express any
concluded view on the alternative causes of action prayed for by the plaintiff
and upheld by the Court of Appeal.

I allow the appeal of the plaintiff-appellant, set aside the judgments of the
Court of Appeal and the District Court and enter judgment in favour of the
plaintiff in a sum of £ 68, 723 12sh. 8d. in sterling and rupees at the
exchange rate prevailing at the date of payment together with legal interest
in terms of prayer ( _a_ ). I also grant prayers ( _b_ ) and ( _c_ ) of the
plaint.

The plaintiff will be entitled to costs of this Court and of the Court of
Appeal and of the District Court.

I dismiss the appeal of the defendant without Costs.

**

ATUKORALE, J. -** I agree.

**

DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/26.html_  

