##  Vanderbona v. Justin Perera - SLR - 62, Vol 2 of 1985 [1985] LKSC 26;
(1985) 2 Sri LR 62 (24 June 1985)

**

62

VANDERBONA  
v.  
JUSTIN PERERA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C. J. RANASINGHE, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S. C. APPEAL No. 16/84 - S. C. SPL. LA. 78/83. - CA No. 238/78(F).  
D. C. COLOMBO No. D/ 1948/ RE.  
MAY 13, 1985.

_

Landlord and tenant - Arrears of rent for over three months - Initial burden
of proof - Best evidence rule.

_

In a suit for rent and ejectment on the ground of arrears there was
conflicting testimony on the question whether the defendant (tenant) was in
arrears of rent. The defendant's position was that she paid rent regularly but
the plaintiff though she issued receipts for the payments of rent for the
first three months of the tenancy (up to May 1972), did not issue receipts for
the payments of rent thereafter which she had made through her sons. Hence,
rents from November 1975 were paid by Money Order and from February 1976 by
deposit with the Town Council, Dalugama. The District Judge held that, the
defendant was not in arrears and dismissed the suit. The Court of Appeal
reversed this

**63**

decision holding that the burden of proof of payment was on the defendant and
she had failed to call her sons as witnesses and so produce the best evidence
available on the question of payment. -

**

Held :

**

(1) The initial burden of proof of arrears of rent is on the landlord as the
allegation of arrears though a negative allegation forms an essential part of
the landlord's case. Once both parties have adduced their evidence the
question of onus becomes immaterial. Onus will then become a determining fact
if the evidence pro and con is so evenly balanced that the tribunal can come
to no conclusion.

(2) The best evidence rule is now whittled down and though the non-production
of the best evidence may be a matter for comment or may affect the weight of
the evidence that has been produced, it is not true that the best evidence
must be given to prove a fact. The appellant's evidence of payment of rent
through her sons is admissible but the weight to be attached to such evidence
in view of her failure to call her sons will be a matter for the court to
decide on a consideration of the entirety of the evidence in the case.

(3) The District Judge's findings are supported by the evidence.

**

Cases referred to

**

_

  1. Saunadhigal v. Veeramma Reddi AIR 1922 Madras 292 (P. C.). 

  2. King v. Peter Nonis (1947) 49 NLR 16, 17.

_ **

APPEAL** from the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de. Silva, P. C. with K. C. Tillekeratne for defendant-respondent-
appellant.

H. W. Jayawardene, Q. C. with L. C. Seneviratne, P. C. Lakshman Perera and
Miss T. Keenavinna for plaintiff-appellant-respondent.

_

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 24, 1985. **  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J.

**

The plaintiff-appellant-respondent (referred to hereinafter as the respondent)
instituted an action in the District Court of Colombo for the ejectment of his
tenant, the defendant-respondent-appellant respondent) instituted an action in
the District Court of Colombo for the ejectment of his tenant, the defendant -
respondent - appellant (referred to hereinafter as the appellant) from the
premises in suit and proceeded to trial solely on the ground that the
appellant was in arrears of rent for over three months. The learned District
Judge held that the appellant was not in arrears of rent and dismissed the
respondent's action with costs. The respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal
against the judgment and the Court of Appeal reversed the finding of the
District Judge and entered judgment in favour of the respondent for the
ejectment of the appellant, arrears of rent, damages and costs. The appellant
now appeals to this court, after first obtaining special leave, against the
judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**64**

Learned Counsel for the appellant contended that the Court of Appeal erred in
law in placing the burden on the appellant to prove that she paid the rent
regularly and was not in arrears on the footing that the respondent does not
have to prove a negative, namely, that he-did not receive the monthly rent.

Plaint was filed by -the respondent on 12.08.1976 under the Administration of
Justice Law No. 25 of 1975, which was then in operation. The respondent
purchased the premises in 1971 from one Dias who had let them to the
appellant. The appellant attorned to the respondent and paid him the rent. The
respondent's case, according to his plaint, is that the appellant paid him
rent only up to the end of May 1972 and fell into-arrears for about 3 112
years. On the 16th of February 1976, he gave the appellant notice to Quit the
premises on or before 31.05.1976 through his Attorney- at- Law, but the
appellant failed to vacate the premises, and he filed this action.

The appellant's position is that she paid the monthly rent regularly up to
date and is not in arrears. The respondent issued her receipts, D 1 to D3, for
only the first three months commencing December 1971 and thereafter stopped
doing so. The respondent's son married in October 1975 and when the appellant
learnt that the respondent was-seeking to evict her from the house in order to
give it to his son, she sent the rent by Money Orders accompanied by letters
D7 and D6, for the months of November and December 1975 and January 1976
respectively. Thereafter one Leena Dias claimed ownership of the house, and
the appellant deposited the rent with the Town Council, Dalugama and obtained
receipts D7 to D25.

In this state of the pleadings, it becomes necessary to determine on whom the
burden lies to prove that the rent was in arrears.

Section 22 of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 prohibits an action or proceedings
for ejectment of the tenant of any premises being instituted in or entertained
by any Court, unless where, inter alia, the rent of such premises has been in
arrears. The burden therefore lay clearly on the plaintiff in this action to
prove that the tenant was in arrears of rent.. The respondent, accordingly
framed his first issue (as translated) in the following manner:

"Has the defendant been in arrears of rent for three months or more between
01.06.72 and 31.05.76-.

**65**

The rule regulating the burden of proof is contained in sections 101 to 103 of
the Evidence Ordinance. "The true meaning of the rule," states Monir in the
Law of Evidence, 5th Ed. page 400, in regard to those sections of the Indian
Evidence Act, (which correspond with ours) is -

"that he who asks the court to believe in the existence of a certain fact or
set of facts, must prove that fact or set of facts exist. Non-existence of a
fact is as much a fact as the existence of a fact and, therefore, the non-
existence of a fact is as much within the meaning of sections 103 and 101 as
the existence of a fact. Thus interpreted, these two sections of the Evidence
Act may be taken to lay down the general rule that where a given allegation,
whether affirmative or negative, forms an essential part of a party's case the
proof of such allegation rests on such party, and that is how the rule is
stated in the English cases '". . . . . Monir then elaborates it as follows :
"the rule applicable to all such cases is that where a claim or defence rests
upon a negative allegation, the one asserting such claim or defence is not
relieved of the onus probandi by reason of the form of the allegation, or the
inconvenience of proving a negative. Where in order to show a right to relief,
it becomes necessary for a party, under the substantive law, to prove the non-
existence of a fact, the burden of proving such 'negative allegation' will be
on, him ...... and indeed, in every case in which the plaintiff grounds his
right of action upon a negative allegation and the establishment of this
negative is consequently an essential element in support of his claim. . ."

The Court of Appeal was therefore clearly in error when it took the view that
the plaintiff-respondent does not have to prove a negative and placed the
burden of proving the payment of rent on the defendant-appellant.

Of course, as learned Counsel for the respondent contended, once the initial
burden of proof on the plaintiff is discharged and the evidence of the two
parties is led, the question is not looked at from the point of view of onus.
Learned Counsel cited the Indian case of Saunadhigal v. Veeramma Reddi (1)
where it was held by the Board that when the entire evidence on both sides is
before the court, the debate as to the onus is purely academic. Where the
relevant facts are before the court, all that remains for decision is what
inference should be drawn from them. Monir in the Law of Evidence, 5th Ed. at
page 603, referring to this case states -

**66**

"But where both parties have adduced evidence on the issue in support of their
respective allegations, . the question of onus becomes immaterial, as the
conclusion reached does not depend on the question of onus, but depends on the
evidence produced by the parties. The strict meaning of the term onus probandi
is this, that if no evidence is given by the party on whom the burden is cast,
.. the issue must be found. against him. Onus as a determining factor of the
whole case can only arise if the tribunal finds the evidence pro and con so
evenly balanced that it can come to no conclusion. Then the onus will
determine the matter. But if the tribunal, after weighing the evidence, comes
to a determinate conclusion, the onus has nothing to do with it, and need not
be further considered...... where each side has adduced its evidence, the
question of onus of proof loses the importance which at one stage it had, and
would only resume its importance if on considering the evidence as a whole,
irrespective of which side adduced it, the court is left with reasonable doubt
on any material question."

I am of opinion that this is the correct approach to the consideration of the
evidence in this case.

In the present case, we have, on the one hand, the evidence of the respondent
that the appellant ceased to pay rent after May 1972, and in December 1975,
sent a Money Order for Rs. 350 as rent for November and December 1975 and
another Money Order for Rs. 175 as rent for January, 1976. Thereafter she
deposited the rent with the Town Council, Dalugama.

The appellant, on the other hand, stated that she paid rent for the premises
regularly from December 1971 and produced three receipts D 1 to D3 in
acknowledgment of the payment of the rent for the first three months.
Thereafter the respondent ceased to issue her any receipt and she made no
request for them because of the trust she had in him. She said she used to
send the rent through her two sons. ., But her sons were not called to give
evidence to support her. The Court of Appeal took the view that consequently
her evidence was hearsay and observed that the trial Judge had not given his
mind to that aspect of the matter. Having taken the view that the burden of
proving the payment of rent was on the tenant, the Court of Appeal came to the
conclusion that that burden had not been discharged. I fail to see how the
appellant's evidence can be dubbed hearsay. The

**67**

appellant was not cross-examined on this point and no evidence was elicited
from her that her sons had informed her that they handed the rent to the
plaintiff. It may well have been that the appellant took it for granted that
the rent had reached the hands of the respondent because no demand was made
for it thereafter, that is, according to her case that she continued paying
rent.

Learned Counsel for the respondent argued that in view of the respondent's
denial of the payment of rent by the appellant after May 1972, the latter
should have placed the best evidence possible of its payment by calling her
sons as witnesses. It was contended that the failure to lead the best evidence
available should result in the exclusion of the inferior evidence that has
been placed before court. But Dr. G. L. Peiris on The Law of Evidence in Sri
Lanka, at page 290 says -

"The best evidence rule which was considered sacrosanct by the English courts
during the last century, has now been whittled down in scope to such an extent
that English writers have been prompted to speak of "the remains of the rule".
One authority on the law of evidence has justifiably concluded that "Perhaps
the most conspicuous feature of the modern law is its persistent recession
from this once famous principle." The numerous departures sanctioned by the
Evidence Ordinance of Ceylon from the best evidence rule, viewed both as an
inclusionary and as an exclusionary doctrine, render this conclusion
applicable to the law of Ceylon as well.....""

In the King v. Peter Nonis, (2) Windham, J., with whom Howard, C. J., agreed
said

"In any case, what is the meaning of "best evidence", in the English Law sense
? It certainly does not and never did mean that no other direct evidence of
the fact in dispute could be tendered. Its meaning is rather that the best
evidence must be given of which the nature of the case permits..... The "best
evidence" rule in England has been subjected to a whittling down. process for
over a century, and today it is not true that the best evidence must be given,
though its non-production where available may be a matter for comment and may
affect the weight to be attached to the evidence which is produced in its
stead."

**68**

"In the present day, then, it is not true that the best evidence must, or even
may, always be given, though its non-production may be matter for comment or
affect the weight of that which is produced. All admissible evidence is in
general equally accepted." Phipson on Evidence, 13th Ed. (1952) pg. 70.'"

The appellant's evidence of the payment of rent through her sons is therefore
admissible although the weight to be attached to it, in view of her failure to
call her sons in support, is a matter for the court to decide, on a
consideration of the entirety of the evidence in the case.

The appellant's evidence is that she sent the rent regularly through her sons
from December 1971 and that the respondent issued her receipts for only the
first three months. Thereafter she paid the rent from November 1975 by Money
Order when she learnt that the respondent was attempting to eject her from the
house in order to give it to his son who had just got married, and then
deposited the rent with the Town Council, Dalugama, when a dispute arose over
the ownership of the house. It is significant that the respondent's son
admittedly married in October 1975 and it was then only that the appellant
paid the rent by Money Order evidently to have proof of the payment since,
according to her,' the respondent was not in the habit of issuing her receipts
for the rents. The respondent on the other hand states that he issued the
appellant receipts for rent up to May 1972 and thereafter had no occasion to
issue any receipts because the appellant ceased to pay rent. His version is
that he told the appellant that he had purchased the house for his son and
asked the appellant to quit and hand over the house when his son got married.
The appellant replied that she could not pay rent until she found another
house, and that was the reason the respondent gave for not taking any action
to recover the arrears of rent.

The appellant admittedly had the financial capacity to pay the rent. One would
have thought that the appellant's failure to pay rent from May 1972 would have
afforded the respondent a splendid opportunity of instituting an action to
eject her on the ground of arrears of rent. But he waited for over three and a
half years to do so. It is inconceivable that the respondent would have let
the rent fall into arrears for such a long period without taking any action to
recover it and to eject the appellant by filing action promptly, especially as
he desperately needed the house for his son who was about to get

**69**

married. The learned trial Judge has refused to accept the respondent's
evidence on this point and I see no reason to disagree with him.

Learned Counsel for the respondent contended that the respondent may have
deliberately allowed the rent to accumulate beyond the means of the appellant
to tender it on or before the date fixed in the summons under section 22 (3)
(c) of the Rent Act when action was filed. This was not the reason given by
the respondent at the trial for letting the rent fall into arrears, and cannot
be accepted.

The appellant's case all along was that receipts were issued to her , only for
the first three months ending February 1972, and she has produced them marked
D 1 to D3. The respondent admitted the issue of these rent receipts but went
on to say further that he issued receipts up to May 1972, and stopped when the
appellant ceased paying rent. The rent receipts up to May, according to the
respondent, were issued from the same receipt book as D 1 to D3. The
respondent could easily have produced the counterfoils of these receipts from
that book and shown up the falsity of the appellant's evidence that receipts
were issued for only the first three months of payment, but did not do Another
circumstance that bears out the appellant's version is that in the letter D7
dated 31.12.75 accompanying the first Money Order for Rs.350 the appellant
specifically states that the amount is sent as rent for the months of November
and December 1975, that is, on the basis that rent up to October 1975 had been
paid regularly by her. The respondent admitted receipt of the Money Order and
letter, but failed to deny promptly that assertion and to state that the money
would be set off as damages for June and July 1972, if, as was his case, the
appellant was in arrears of rent from 1.6.72.

It is noteworthy that no receipt was issued even for this payment. Indeed no
reference is made at all to this payment in the notice to quit dated 15.2.76
(D4) sent by the respondent's lawyer to the appellant.

Again on 6.2. 76 the appellant sent another letter D6 with a Money Order for
Rs.175 as rent for January 1976, on the basis that all the earlier rents had
been paid. The respondent however has not replied immediately challenging this
position. In the notice to quit D4; however, sent later, on 15.2.76 by his
lawyer, he sought for the first time, to set this payment off, as damages for
the month of May 1972,

**70**

on the ground that the appellant was in arrears from that month. But in his
plaint and evidence he has admitted the payment of rent for that month.

Having regard to all these circumstances the Court of Appeal in my view, was
not justified in interfering with the finding of the District

Judge that rent had been regularly paid by the appellant.

I am of opinion that the judgment of the District Judge is correct and must be
affirmed. I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and allow the appeal
with costs in the Court of Appeal and in this Court and affirm the judgment of
'the District Judge dismissing plaintiff's action with costs.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.** \- I agree.

**

RANASINGHE, J.** \- I agree

_Appeal allowed_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/26.html_  

