##  Wickramaratne v. Thavendrarajah - SLR - 479, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 26;
(1982) 2 Sri LR 479 (10 November 1982)

# 479

**  WICKRAMARATNE**

**v.**

**THAVENDRARAJAH**

SUPREME COURT

SAMARAKOON, C. J., WANASUNDERA, J., AND COLIN‑THOME, J.

S. C. 17/82.

CA/LA 6/82; C.A.(S.C.)71/75(F).

D.C. MT. LAVINIA 2501/ZL.

OCTOBER 27, 1982.



    Landlord and tenant ‑ Lease of business ‑ Whether really lease of premises ‑Evidence Ordinance, section 92 ‑ Admissibility of parol evidence ‑ Illegal contract ‑ Whether payment of excess rent can be recovered.



By Indenture of Lease (P4) the plaintiff leased a business called Modern
Drapery Stores to the respondent for a period of 3 years. The plaintiff sued
the respondent for failure to pay the rent for 3 consecutive months and
sub‑letting/assigning/parting with possession of the said premises And praying
inter alia for cancellation of the lease, ejectment of the respondent and
restoration of the premises and the business along with certain movables
alleged to have been handed over with the business. The respondent in the
answer denied the plaintiff's claims and alleged that P4 was a camouflage in
order to recover rent in excess of the authorised rent and therefore claimed
in reconvention, the excess rent and deposit that had already been paid. The
learned District Judge held that P4 was a camouflage and really was a lease of
the premises and therefore dismissed the plaintiff's action and gave the
respondent judgment in reconvention in the sum recovered in excess of the
authorised rent. The appellant appealed unsuccessfully to the Court of Appeal
and from the order of that court to the Supreme Court. The appellant had
earlier conducted a business in groceries and provisions in the premises
referred to in P4 under the name Ratna Stores. He leased the business along
with the equipment to one T. and later to the respondent. On 17.6.1969 the
appellant registered a new business under the name Modern Drapery Stores as
being run in these premises although he had truly not run such a business.



# 480



Thereafter on P4 he purported to lease the business with only some of the
movables of the business of Ratna Stores which could be used for a drapery
store to the respondent.



# Held ‑



(1)        The lease P4 was a sham and an attempt to evade the punitive
provisions of the Rent Restriction Act. There was in fact no agreement as was
recited in (P4). Parol evidence to prove such a fact is admissible and is not
barred by s.92 of the Evidence Ordinance.



(2)        As the excess rent was paid to the appellant on an illegal contract
‑ illegal to the knowledge of both the respondent and the appellant the
respondent is not entitled to recover the sum paid in excess of the authorised
rent.



**Case referred to:**



(1)        _Vitharne v. De Zylva (1954) 56 N.L.R.57_

**  **

**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



_Nimal Senanayake, S. A.,_ with _K. P. Guneratna, Mrs. S. M. Senaratne, B.
Jayamanne_ and _Miss A.D.D.N. Telespha_ for plaintiff‑appellant.



Defendant‑respondent absent and unrepresented.



November 10, 1982.



**SAMARAKOON, C.J.**



The appellant complained that by Indenture of Lease No. 849 dated 26.6.1969
(marked P4) he had leased a business called and known as Modern Drapery Stores
carried on by him at No.5, High Street (now W.A. De Silva Mawatha), Colombo 6
to the respondent for a period of 3 years at a monthly rental of Rs. 275/‑ but
that the respondent had in contravention of the express terms of the agreement
sublet and/or assigned and/or parted with possession of the said premises to
one Mohideen. He also complained that the respondent failed to pay rents for
three consecutive months ending 31.03.1971. He therefore prayed for the
cancellation of the lease, for the ejectment of the respondent, for
restoration of the premises and the business and for the return of the
movables set out in the second schedule to the plaint to the value of
Rs.3,625/‑. He also claimed the return of the movables set out in the third
schedule to the plaint or the payment of their value of Rs.6,596/‑. The
respondent in his answer denied liability on the lease and alleged that it was
a subterfuge or a camouflage to cloak the recovery of rent in excess of the
authorised rent of the premises. He claimed in reconvention a sum of
Rs.11,421/30 being excess rent recovered during the period



**481**



September 1966 to February 1972 and a further sum of Rs. 2,694/15 deposited by
him in excess of the three months' deposit of Rs. 305/89 which the appellant
was entitled to in law. The learned District Judge held that the lease P4 was
a subterfuge and a camouflage and that it only let the premises to the
respondent at Rs. 275/‑ per mensem. There was no dispute in regard to the
authorised rent of the premises and on that basis the District Judge gave the
respondent judgment in a sum of Rs. 6,046/62 recovered by the appellant in
excess during the period July 1969 to 31st July 1974. He dismissed the
appellant's action. The appellant appealed unsuccessfully to the Court of
Appeal. Hence this appeal to this Court.



Counsel for the appellant contended that the learned District Judge
misconstrued the evidence. He referred us to the earlier documents relating to
leases of the business at these premises and argued that they showed that P4
was a genuine lease. The burden of his song was that the appellant had fallen
into a. trap cleverly set by the respondent. A close scrutiny of the documents
becomes necessary. The Certificate of Registration (P1) issued under the
Business Names Ordinance (Cap.149) dated 04.09.1958 shows that the appellant
had commenced a business in Groceries and Provisions under the name "Ratna
Stores" at the said premises from 1st September 1958\. By Indenture of Lease
No.355 dated 7th November 1964(P2) he leased the business of "Ratna Stores"
for a period of 3 years commencing 1st November 1964 to one S.
Thedchanamoorthy. This lease was due to expire on 31.10.1967. Before this
lease expired the appellant entered into another lease of the said business by
Indenture of Lease No.558 dated 16th September 1966(P3) whereby he leased the
said business to the respondent for a period of 3 years commencing 16th
September 1966. This lease was due to expire on 16th September 1969. The
Schedule to each of the leases P2 and P3 describe the business and the
movables belonging to the business. They are identical. By Indenture No.791
dated 21st November 1968 (P9) it was agreed between the parties that upon the
expiration of the lease P3 the lease would continue for a further period of 4
years commencing 17th September 1969. The Schedule describing the business and
its movables is identical with the Schedules in P2 and P3. Then comes a
significant change. A business by the name of Modern Drapery Stores was
registered on the .17th June 1969 (P5). This business is stated to have been
commenced by the appellant at the said premises on the 13th December 1968. The
appellant then enters into an Indenture of Lease No.849 dated 26th June
1969(P4) whereby he



# 482



leased the business of Modern Drapery Stores carried on at the said premises
to the respondent for a period of 3 years commencing 1st June 1969. The
Schedule to P4 describes the business and only some of the movables of the
business of Ratna Stores which obviously could be used for a Drapery Store.
They consisted of two large show cases, one small show case and a glass
fronted almirah. All the other movables which were useful for a grocery store
were described in a separate list (marked P6) signed by the respondent whereby
he acknowledged that he held them for and on behalf of the appellant. The
conclusion is obvious. The respondent had ceased to carry on the grocery
business of Ratna Stores and had commenced the business of Modern Drapery
Stores. Therefore the lease had to be renewed and for that purpose the
business of Modern Drapery Stores had to be registered in the appellant's
name. Otherwise the lease would have to be purely a lease of the premises.
Herein lies the sham transaction. This conclusion is further strengthened by
the appellant's admission in evidence that he did not at any time carry on the
business of Modern Drapery Stores. It was indeed a camouflage. The true
agreement was not in it and was otherwise. It was a subterfuge and it was an
attempt to evade the punitive provisions of the Rent. Restriction Act. It was
a concerted effort of both appellant and respondent to evade the law. They
were both culpable ‑ each for his own part in the circumvention of the rigours
of the Statute. The resulting position is that there was in fact no agreement
as is recited in P4. It was a sham from beginning to end. The proof of such a
fact is not precluded by the provisions of section 92 of the Evidence
Ordinance. Parol evidence is admissible to prove such fact. "All that this
section excludes is oral evidence to contradict, vary, add to or subtract from
the terms of the contract which has been reduced into writing. It does not
preclude a party from showing that the writing was not really the contract
between the parties but was only a fictitious or colourable device which
cloaked something else". (Woodroffe & Ameer Ali's Law of Evidence, Eleventh
Edition, page 1549).) The appellant's action was therefore rightly dismissed.



The learned District Judge has entered judgment for the respondent in a sum of
Rs. 6,046/62 being excess rent paid to the appellant. This was money recovered
on an illegal contract. It was given colour of legitimacy by a lease of a
business in terms of P4. The respondent has acquiesced in this mode of
recovery and thereby colluded with and assisted the appellant in his attempt
to evade the law and punishment thereunder. They were both aware that it was
an offence



# 483



for the appellant to receive and for the respondent to pay any sum exceeding
the authorized rent. It is an illegal contract in that it was as much an
offence to give as to receive. The Court cannot help the respondent to recover
monies paid under such circumstances. _Vitharne vs. De Zylva._ (1) I would
therefore set aside the decree I entered in favour of the respondent in the
said sum of Rs. 6,046/62.



The Court of Appeal has ordered the respondent to deliver to the appellant the
movables set out in Schedule 2 to the plaint and ordered the appellant to
refund a security deposit of Rs. 3,000/‑ to the respondent on such return, the
appellant being entitled to deduct from this sum the value of any article not
returned. The Court has also ordered the respondent to return the movables set
out in the list P6 and on his failure to return any article on or before a
date stipulated by the District Judge he will pay its value to the appellant.
These two orders will stand. Subject to this the appeal is dismissed without
costs.



**WANASUNDERA, J**. ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J**. ‑ I agree.



_Decree varied and_

_appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/26.html_  

