##  Narendrakumar v. Ziyard and Others - SLR - 251, Vol 1 of 2000 [2000] LKSC
26; (2000) 1 Sri LR 251 (31 March 2000)

**251**

**NARENDRAKUMAR  
 v.  
ZIYARD AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
S. N. SILVA, C. J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S. C. (FR) APPLICATION No. 777/96  
29TH OCTOBER, 1999.  
  
Fundamental rights -Complaint against appointments in a Bank-Articles 12(1),
17 and 126(1) of the Constitution - Time bar.  
  
The petitioner and three others Ziyard, Jayawardena and Kiritharan applied for
the post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer of the 2nd respondent Bank. All of them
were eligible to apply for the post. After interview the Board of Directors
selected Jayawardena and the formal announcement of her appointment was made
on 31.08.1995. That appointment was challenged by Ziyard, the 1st respondent
to this application in SC (FR) 483/95 in which the petitioner to this
application and Kiritharan (the 14th respondent to this application) were not
made parties. Ziyard was granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged
infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. While that application was
pending, Ziyard reached the optional age of retirement. The Bank had on
18.01.1996 refused to grant him an extension of service. This prompted him to
file application SC (FR) 240/96 on 15.02.1996 against the Bank. In that
application also, leave to proceed was granted in respect of the alleged
infringement of Article 12(1).  
  
Kiritharan applied to intervene in SC (FR) 483/95. This was refused by the
Court on 30.09.1996. On 23.10.1996 both applications were concluded by a
settlement in Court whereby the Bank agreed to appoint Ziyard as Deputy Chief
Legal Officer (Supernumerary) with effect from that day and Ziyard agreed to
retire after going on leave prior to retirement from that day on available
privilege leave. It was also agreed that his pension will be computed on the
basis of his appointment as Deputy Chief Legal Officer (Supernumerary).  
  
Whereupon. the petitioner filed the present application on 25.11.1996 naming
as respondents inter alia, Ziyard. Jayawardena and Kiritharan

**252**

as the 1st, 9th and 14th respondents respectively on the ground of alleged
infringement of Article 12(1).  
  
**Held:**  
  
As regards Jayawardena's appointment, the application was way outside the
period of one month prescribed by Article 126(1). As regards Ziyard's
appointment the application made on the ground that the said appointment,
recorded by Court as a settlement, was arbitrary and capricious, is
misconceived in that what Ziyard received was a retiral benefit. The
settlement effectively prevented him from functioning in the appointment which
he received pro forma. The petitioner not having reached the optional age of
retirement, was not in the same class of persons as Ziyard.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
1\. Gunawardena v. Senanayake FRD Vol. 1 p. 177.  
  
2\. Jayawardena v. Attorney - General FRD Vol. 1 p. 175.  
  
3\. Krishna Mining Co. Ltd. v. JEDB (1996) 2 SRI LR. 209.  
  
4\. Gamaethige v. Siriwardena and others (1998) 1 SRI LR. 384.  
  
5\. Ramanathan v. Tennakoon (1988) 2 CALR 187.  
  
6\. Edirisinghe v. Navaratne (1985) 1 SRI LR. 100 at 1.06.  
  
7\. Saman v. Leeladasa (1989) 1 SRI LR. 1.  
  
8\. Namasivayam v. Gunawardena (1989) 1 SRI LR. 394.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_S. Sivarasa, F. C. with E. R S. R. Coomaraswamy and A. R. Sivendran_ for
petitioner.  
  
_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for the Island 2nd respondents.  
  
_E. D. Wickremanayake_ for the 2nd to 8th and 12th to 13th respondents.  
  
_Romesh de Silva. P. C. with Harsha Amarasekera_ for the 9th respondent.  
  
_Nilanthi Mendis_ for the 10th respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**253**

March 31, 2000  
**S. N. SILVA, C. J.  
**  
This Application has been filed on 25.11.96 and the Petitioner has been
granted leave to proceed on 30.1.97 in respect of the alleged infringement of
Artcile 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
The Application is linked with a previous application S. C. (FR) 483/95 filed
on 1.9.95 to which is linked to yet another Application S. C. 240/96. Both
these Applications were concluded by an order made by this Court on 23.10.96.
In essence the dispute in all these applications relate to the appointment of
a Deputy Chief Legal Officer of the 1st Respondent Bank. The pleadings in this
application make extensive references to the pleadings and proceedings in the
previous applications and in view of objections that have been raised, I would
set out briefly the material facts and sequence of events relevant to them.  
  
Taking the picture that emerges from the totality of the pleadings, the
dispute in these applications involve four persons, namely (i) the petitioner
(Narendrakumar) (ii) the 1st Respondent (Ziyard) (iii) 9th Respondent
(Jayawardena) -and (iv) the 14th Respondent (Kiritharan). They have been all
officers attached to the Legal Branch of the Bank, Their long service in the
Bank commenced in 1976/1977 and the initial appointments in the service of the
Bank were made as follows:  
  
Ziyard - 01.12.1976  
  
Jayawardena - 22.03.1977  
  
Kiritharan - 27.03.1977  
  
Narendrakumar - 30.03.1997  
  
They were promoted to the grade of Senior Legal Officer on the same day ie.
1.1.1990. Things appear to have moved smoothly until the pyramid narrowed and
the time came for

**254**

the appointment to the single post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer, upon the
premature retirement of the then incumbent on 31.5.1995.  
  
According to the applicable organisational chart and the promotional scheme,
the eligibility for the post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer is three years
service as a Senior Legal Officer Grade I. Thus, the four persons referred to
above were eligible and were required to submit their bio-data which was done
in the 2nd week of July 1995. They were interviewed by the Board of Directors
of the Bank on 4.8.1995 and the Petitioner has stated in his affidavit that a
short time after the interviews were concluded, he was informed that
Jayawardena has been selected for the post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer. The
formal announcement of her appointment was made by letter dated 31.8.1995 and
she was appointed to that post with effect from 1.8.1995.  
  
Ziyard filed application bearing No. S. C. 483/95 in this court on 1.9.1985
alleging that the selection of Jayawardena constituted an infringement of his
fundamental right to equality. Neither the Petitioner Narendrakumar nor
Kiritharan were made parties to that application. The application was
supported for leave to proceed on 4.9:95 and leave was granted in respect of
the alleged of infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution. The case was
fixed for hearing on 31.10.95, on which date it was refixed for hearing on
9.2.96, since Ziyard being the Petitioner moved for time to file a counter
affidavit. Thereafter the application was listed for hearing on 25.3.96.  
  
In the meanwhile there was another development in which Ziyard who was
reaching the optional age of retirement in the service of the Bank sought an
extension of his period of service which was refused by the Bank by letter
dated 18.1.96. In the result Ziyard had to retire with effect from 16.4.1996.
This prompted him to file application S. C. (FR) 240/96 on 15.2.96. That
application was supported on 8.3.96 and leave to proceed was granted in
respect of alleged infringement of Article 12(1)

**255**

of the Constitution. The application was listed for hearing on 8.7.96 and
relisted on 15.10.96.  
  
When application S. C. (FR) 483/95 was taken up for hearing on 16.9.96,
arising from the submissions made in court, it was recorded that the
Petitioner agreed to explore the possibility of a settlement and the case was
to be called on 30.9.96 to ascertain whether a settlement had been reached and
if not, to list the case for resumption of hearing. When that case was called
on 30.9.96, an application was made by Kiritharan to intervene in that case.
In his petition for intervention dated 27.9.96, Kiritharan stated that the
appointment of Jayawardena to the post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer is
arbitrary and flawed by discrimination and sought an order cancelling her
appointment. On 30.9.96 the Court refused the application of Kiritharan for
intervention. The journal entry states that the applications for intervention
by Kiritharan and Narendrakumar are rejected. However, the record in that case
contains only an application of Kiritharan for intervention. Be that as it
may, in the proceedings it is further. recorded that counsel informed court
that it had not been possible to pursue a settlement in view of the
application for intervention and moved for a further date. The case was then
fixed for 23.10.96.  
  
The cases S. C. (FR) 483/95 and 240/96 were concluded by the order made by
Court on 23.10.96. Since both counsel have made extensive references to
portions of that order, I would set out the entire order:  
  
"The Petitioner (Ziyard) is present and through his Counsel agrees to the
following terms of settlement  
  
In view of the Bank (1st Respondent) agreeing to place the Petitioner in the
post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer (Supernumerary) with effect from today i.
e. 23.10.1996 and to adjust his salary accordingly, the Petitioner: -

**256**

(a) will go on leave prior to retirement and will avail himself of the
privilege leave available to him with effect from today; and  
  
(b) will be entitled to his pension computed on the basis of this appointment
as Deputy Chief Legal Officer (Supernumerary)  
  
The Court makes order in terms of the above settlement. This settlement will
not in any way affect the rights of the 8th Respondent (Jayawardena) who has
been appointed as Deputy Chief Legal Officer.  
  
In view of the above settlement, the Petitioner withdraws S. C. Application
No. 240/96.  
  
**" Registrar to note  
**  
A copy of this to be filed in the docket of S. C. Application No. 240/96."  
  
This application was filed by Narendrakumar on 25.11.96, naming Ziyard being
the Petitioner in both previous applications as the I st Respondent and
Jayawardena as the 9th Respondent, and Kiritharan who sought to intervene in
the previous application as the 14th Respondent. Thus all four aspirants to
the post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer are now in court, in what is
numerically the 3rd round of litigation relating to the much coveted office.  
  
The petitioner has been granted leave to proceed on the alleged infringement
of Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
Two preliminary objections have been raised by the Respondents on the basis  
  
(iv) that this application is misconceived;  
  
(v) that it is time-barred.

**257**

Since there are wide ranging averments in the Petition and in view of the
preliminary objections raised, it is necessary to focus on the specific
infringement alleged and the corresponding relief that has been sought. The
thrust of the averments in the Petition is two fold: firstly it is directed at
the appointment of Jayawardena as the Deputy Chief Legal Officer. Secondly, it
is directed at the appointment of Ziyard as Supernumerary Deputy Chief Legal
Officer.  
  
Paragraphs 8 to 13 of the Petition refer to the criteria and the process
adopted by the Board of Directors for the selection of a candidate for the
post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer and the Petitioner draws an inference from
what he has set out in paragraph 14 as follows  
  
"In all these circumstances it is submitted that a fair and equitable
evaluation based on rational criteria could not have been made. The whole
process smacks of arbitrariness and discrimination. The procedure adopted by
the Board, functioning as a Selection Board, has been arbitrary and not guided
by any rule or principle known in advance."  
  
The complaint regarding the appointment of the 1st Respondent as Supernumerary
Deputy Chief Legal Officer is somewhat muted and restricted to a single
paragraph of the petition, where it is merely alleged that the appointment is
"arbitrary, capricious and without cancelling the appointment of the 9th
Respondent and in violation of the 2nd Respondents own cadre and procedure."
These averments are followed up by way of relief in a single sub-paragraph in
the prayer by which an order is sought directing the 2nd Respondent Bank to
cancel the appointments of 9th Respondent Jayawardena and the 1st Respondent
Ziyard.  
  
Although the Petitioner with a degree of ingenuity has rolled up the relief in
respect of both appointments in the said sub paragraph of the prayer, in view
of the objection of time bar

**258**

we have to examine the alleged infringements in relation to the respective
appointments, separately.  
  
The selection of Jayawardena to the post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer was
made immediately after the interview held on 4.8.95, as alleged by the
Petitioner himself. The appointment was effected by letter dated 31.8.95 with
effect from 1.8.95. Whereas the appointment of Ziyard as Supernumerary Deputy
Chief Legal Officer was made with effect from 23.10.96 pursuant to a
settlement in Court.  
  
The objection of time bar relates to the infringement alleged in respect of
the appointment of Jayawardena.  
  
Article 126(2) of the Constitution gives the right to a person who alleges an
infringement or imminent infringement of a fundamental right guaranteed by the
Constitution to apply to this Court within one month of such infringement.  
  
In the early cases in which the question of time bar was considered by this
court it was held that the general rule is that an application has to be made
within one month of the petitioner becoming aware of the alleged infringement
- vide Gunawardena vs. Senanayake(1) \- FRD Vol. I page 177.  
  
In the case of imminent infringement, the period is computed from the date the
Petitioner had an apprehension that his fundamental rights are about to be
infringed (vide Jayawardene us. Attorney-General(2)).  
  
In Krishna Mining Co. Ltd, vs. JEDB(3) - it was held that although a
-Petitioner is entitled to challenge an imminent infringement, he was
nevertheless entitled to wait until there was an actual infringement when the
application pertains to the infringement, as such. Thus, for the purposes of
applying the time bar an alleged imminent infringement and the actual
infringement have to be considered separately although the acts complained of
may constitute a single executive or. administrative process.

**259**

In the case of Gamaethige vs. Siriwardena and others(4), a strict
interpretation was adopted. It was held that the time limit was mandatory and
the pursuit of other remedies judicial or administrative does not prevent or
interrupt the operation of the time limit.  
  
This decision was followed in Ramanathan vs. Tennakoon(5), where it was held
that the delay cannot be excused on the basis of an application to a
commission appointed under the Regulations made in terms of the Sri Lanka
Foundation Law. A statutory exception has now been introduced in relation to
applications made within the one month period to the Human Rights Commission
of Sri Lanka by Section 13(1) of Act No. 21 of 1996.  
  
The Court has recognised that there is an element of discretion in
entertaining an application that is ex facie outside the one month time limit.
To avail of this discretionary power "the Petitioner must provide an adequate
excuse for the delay in presenting the petition "vide Edirisinghe vs.
Navaratne(6). The rationale of the exercise of discretion in this regard is
the application of the principle lex non cogit ad impossibilia which has been
recognised in several cases relating to alleged infringements of Articles
13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution, arising from the arrest and detention of
persons. [vide Saman vs. Leeladasa(7) and Namasivayam vs Gunawardena (8).  
  
In the background of the aforestated consistent trend of decisions in applying
the one month rule as contained in Article 126(2) of the Constitution, I would
now deal with the arguments in this case which involve yet another dimension
relevant to the nature of proceedings contemplated by Article 126 and the
application of rule. As noted above the principal complaint of the Petitioner
relates to the appointment of Jayawardena as Deputy Chief Legal Officer. The
Petitioner became aware of the appointment very early in the state of affairs,
i. e. on the date of the interview itself, being 4.8.95. This application has
been filed on 25.11.96 which is ex facie way

**260**

outside the period of one month from the date the Petitioner became aware of
the alleged infringement. He seeks to excuse the delay on the basis that the
complaint regarding the appointment of Jayawardena was made to this court by
Ziyard well within the period of one month of the appointment. That, the
Petitioner and Kiritharan identified themselves with the complaint of Ziyard.
But, when Ziyard sought to enter into a settlement with the Bank in relation
to the proceedings instituted by him, they (in fact only Kiritharan) sought to
intervene in those proceedings and having failed in that endeavour the
Petitioner instituted the present proceedings, within one month of the
application filed by Ziyard being concluded upon the settlement referred to
above.  
  
On a consideration of the factual matters I am inclined to believe the
assertion of the Petitioner that Kiritharan and he identified themselves fully
with the applications filed by Ziyard. They expected Ziyard to "deliver the
goods" by dislodging Jayawardena from the post which they aspired to secure
for each of them. It appears from the pleadings, that they viewed Jayawardena
as the common adversary. However, the issue that we are now confronted with
cannot be resolved on such a simplistic factual basis. It involves mixed
questions of fact and law. It involves four elements, they are  
  
(i) the question relating to a right;  
  
(ii) the correlative duty;  
  
(iii) an alleged infringement; and  
  
(iv) the institution of the legal proceedings to redress that infringement.  
  
These four elements are encompassed in the classic phrase "cause of action"
which runs through the gamut of Civil Procedure. Section 5 of the Civil
Procedure Code defines a cause of action as "the wrong for the prevention or
redress

**261**

of which an action may be brought and includes the denial of a right . . .".
If we, only for purpose of clearer comprehension, relate that definition to
the proceedings provided for by Article 126 of the Constitution, it will be
seen that the right that is claimed is a fundamental right. In terms of
Article 4(d) of the Constitution fundamental rights constitute part of the
sovereignty of the People which are declared and recognised by the
Constitution, that is in Articles 10 to 14 of the Constitution. The
correlative duty is also laid down in Article 4(d) which mandates all organs
of Government to respect, secure and advance the fundamental rights of the
People as are declared and recognized by the Constitution. It is further
mandated that these rights shall not be abridged, restricted or denied save of
the manner and to the extent as provided in the Constitution.  
  
Every person, is entitled to the rights and freedoms recognized in Articles
10,11,12(1) and 13 of the Constitution. Every citizen is entitled to the
rights and freedoms recognized in Article 12(2) and 14 of the Constitution.
The right to equality which is guaranteed by Article 12(1) being the one in
issue, carries with it the concept of classification based on intelligible
differentia, having a rational relation to the object sought to be achieved by
such classification. Thus there is a common element in these rights and the
correlative duty lying upon the organs of the Government, to respect, secure
and advance these rights, in the sense that they pertain to every person or
citizen as the case may be. In this respect these rights transcend personal
and contractual, rights recognized and enforced in private law by the civil
courts.  
  
Although these rights and freedoms are common to everybody or every citizen,
as noted above, the right to invoke the Constitutional remedy in Article
126(1) upon an infringement of such a right is individual to the person who is
aggrieved by such infringement. This is the necessary inference of the words
as contained in Article 17 and 126(2) of the Constitution.

**262**

**Which reads thus:**  
  
Article 17: "Every person shall be entitled to apply to the Supreme Court, as
provided by Article 126, in respect of the infringement or imminent
infringement, by executive of administrative action, of a fundamental right to
which such person is entitled under the provisions of this Chapter.  
  
Article 126(2) "Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right or
language right relating to such person has been infringed or is about to be
infringed by executive or administrative action, he may himself or by an
attorney-at-law on his behalf, within one month thereof, in accordance with
such rules of court as may be in force, apply to the Supreme Court by way of
petition in writing addressed to such Court praying for relief or redress in
respect of such infringement. Such application may be proceeded with only with
leave to proceed first had and obtained from the Supreme Court, which leave
may be granted or refused, as the case may be, by not less than two Judges."  
  
Thus the four aspirants to the post of Deputy Chief Legal Officer, who faced
the interview on 4.8.1995 enjoyed the common right to the equal protection of
the law as guaranteed by Article' 12(1) of the Constitution. Some of them may
have had a similar perception that the selection process was flawed by
arbitrariness and the absence of rational criteria as is alleged resulting in
an infringement of their right to the equal protection of the law. The right
to apply to this Court in respect of such infringement which also takes the
form of a fundamental right in the manner it is stated in Article 17 of the
Constitution may also be common to those who allege the same infringement.
But, the manner of making such an application as provided in Article 126(2) is
restrictive and gives that process a personal or individual character. The
words, "where **any person** alleges that any such fundamental right or

**263**

language right relating. to **such person** has been infringed or about to be
infringed by executive or administrative action, **he may** **himself** or by
an attorney-at-Law **on his behalf** , within one month thereof........ apply
to the Supreme Court........ (emphasis by me) as appearing in Article 126(2)
amply demonstrate the personal or individual character of the right to
institute proceedings in relation to the special jurisdiction vested in this
court for the enforcement of fundamental and language rights as declared and
recognised by Chapters III and IV of the Constitution. Hence a person who
alleges an infringement cannot stay his hand on the basis that the
infringement perceived by him is already before Court through a proceeding
instituted by another similarly situated. If he elects to do so, he puts in
peril the right he has in terms of Article 17 to apply to this Court in
respect of the infringement of the fundamental right as alleged by him. This
is a clear application of the maxim vegilantbus nor dormientibus, jura
subveniunt (the laws assist those who are vigilant, not those who sleep over
their rights).  
  
For these reasons, I uphold the preliminary objection of time bar as to the
infringement, that is alleged in respect of the appointment of the 9th
Respondent as Deputy Chief Legal Officer.  
  
The other infringement alleged is in respect of the appointment of Ziyard as
Supernumerary Deputy Chief Legal Officer. The objection that is raised is that
the application is misconceived in this regard. Several arguments have been
raised on the question whether, this appointment made pursuant to a settlement
entered in Court constitutes executive or administrative action or is in the
nature of judicial action which is outside the jurisdiction of this Court in
view of Article 126 of the Constitution.  
  
The order made by this Court on 23.10.96 in S. C. (FR) 483/95 and 240/96 has
been set out by me in its entirety in a preceding section of this judgment. It
is clear that the Court

**264**

has merely taken note of a settlement that has been entered into by the
parties. It appears that the process involves elements of executive and
administrative action on the one hand and judicial action, on the other. It is
not necessary in the context of this application to dwell on this matter
further. The Petitioner's complaint is that the appointment of Ziyard as
Supernumerary Deputy Chief Legal Officer without cancelling the appointment of
the 9th Respondent is arbitrary and capricious and in violation of the
provisions relating to the cadre of officers in the Bank and the procedures
relevant to appointments. Although ex facie Ziyard has been given an
appointment as Supernumerary Deputy Chief Legal Officer, an examination of the
terms of settlement reveals that in effect what he has received is a retiral
benefit. As noted above Ziyard reached the optional age of retirement when his
application was pending and was retired from the service of the Bank. The
settlement effectively prevents him from functioning in the appointment which
he received pro forma. The appointment at issue is nothing but a means of
enhancing the benefits he receives upon retirement. The Petitioner has not
reached the optional age of retirement. He is thus not in the same class. of
persons as Ziyard and is precluded from alleging an infringement in relation
to retiral benefits to which he is not in any event entitled to. The
application is therefore misconceived in this respect.  
  
Accordingly, I uphold the preliminary objections that have been raised and
dismiss the application and make no order as to costs.  
  
**PERERA, J**. - I agree  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree  
  
_Preliminary objections upheld;  
_  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/26.html_  

