##  Karunathilaka and Another v. Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of
Elections and Others (Case No.1) - SLR - 157, Vol 1 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 26;
(1999) 1 Sri LR 157 (27 January 1999)

**157**

**KARUNATHILAKA AND ANOTHER  
v.  
DAYANANDA DISSANAYAKE,  
COMMISSIONER OF ELECTIONS AND OTHERS  
(Case No. 1)**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA,  
CJ., FERNANDO, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 509/98  
DECEMBER 04 AND 07, 1998

_Fundamental rights - Provincial Councils Election - Date of the poll - S. 22
(1) of the Provincial Councils Elections Act - Cancellation of the date by
Emergency Regulation - Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (a) of the Constitution._

The period of office of the Central, Uva, North-Central, Western and
Sabaragamuwa Provincial Councils came to an end in June, 1998. The
Commissioner of Elections (the 1st respondent) fixed the nomination period in
terms of section 10 of the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988.
After the receipt of nominations which concluded on 15.07.1998 each returning
officer fixed 28.8.98 as the date of the poll by a notice under section 22 (1)
of the Act. The issue of postal ballot papers in terms of section 24 of the
Act read with Regulation 10 of the second schedule to the Act was fixed for
4.8.98. But by telegram dated 3.8.98, the respective returning officers
suspended the postal voting without adducing any reason therefore. The very
next day on 4.8.98 the President issued a Proclamation under section 2 of the
Public Security Ordinance (PSO) bringing the provisions of Part If of the
Ordinance into operation throughout Sri Lanka and made an Emergency Regulation
under section 5 which had the legal effect of cancelling the date of the poll.
Thereafter, the 1st respondent took no steps to fix a fresh date for the poll
in terms of section 22 (6) of the Act, even after 28.8.98. In the meantime the
term of office of the North-Western Provincial Council came to an end and the
date of the poll for that Council was fixed for 25.1.99.

**Held:**

1\. The making of the Proclamation and the Regulation as welt as the conduct
of the respondents in relation to the five elections, clearly constitute
"executive action' and the court would ordinarily have jurisdiction under

158

Article 126 of the Constitution. That jurisdiction is not ousted by Article
35. Article 35 only prohibits the institution of legal proceedings against the
President while in office. It does not exclude judicial review of an impugned
act or omission against some other person who does not enjoy immunity from
suit but relies on an act done by the President in order to justify his
conduct.

2\. In the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 126 the court has the
power, notwithstanding the ouster clause in section 8 of the PSO, to review
the validity of the impugned regulation.

3\. The impugned regulation is not a valid exercise of the power under section
5 of the PSO. It is not an Emergency Regulation. It has, rather, the character
of an order purporting to suspend notices lawfully issued under the Act. Such
an order is not authorized by law. In any event, the impugned regulation
cannot be sustained as being for a purpose set out in section 5 of the PSO as
the petitioner had established that prima facie upto the end of July, 1998,
there was no known threat to national security, public order, etc., and the
respondents failed to show that even in August, 1998, there was any such
threat.

4\. The suspension of the issue of postal ballot papers in which the 1st
respondent acquiesced was unlawful, arbitrary and not bona fide, it was done
with knowledge that the impugned proclamation and regulation would be made the
next day and for a collateral purpose; whether the impugned regulation was
valid or not the 1st respondent had the power to appoint a fresh date for the
poll in terms of section 22 (6) of the Provincial Councils Elections Act. He
failed to exercise that power. In the meantime the date of the poll for the
North-Western Provincial Council was fixed for 25.1.1999 whereby the voters of
the other five provinces were treated less favourably. In the circumstances
Article 12 (1) was infringed.

5\. The respondents also infringed the petitioner's rights under Article 14
(1) (a) of the Constitution. The freedom of 'speech and expression' guaranteed
by that Article should be broadly construed to include the exercise of the
right of an elector to vote at the election.

_Per_ Fernando, J.

"The silent and secret expression of a citizen's preference between one
candidate and another by casting his vote is no less an exercise of the
freedom of speech and expression than the most eloquent speech from a public
platform."

**159**

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Joseph Perera v. AG_ (1992) 1 Sri LR 199, 230.

2. _Wickremabandu v. Herath_ (1990) 2 Sri LR 348, 361, 374.

3. _Silva v. Bandaranayake_ (1997) 1 Sri LR 92.

4. _Weerasinghe v. Samarasinghe_ (1966) 68 NLR 361.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R. K W. Goonesekera_ with _Suranjith Hewamanne, J. C. Weliamuna_ and _Ms.
Krishanthi Pinto-Jayawardena_ for the petitioners.

_K C. Kamalasabayson, PC, SG_ with _U. Egalahewa, S. C. Viran Corea, SC_ and
_M. Gopallawa, SC_ for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 27, 1999.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

This application is a sequel to the failure to hold elections for the
Provincial Councils of the Central, Uva, North-Central, Western and
Sabaragamuwa provinces.

The five-year terms of office of those Provincial Councils came to an end in
June, 1998, although not on the same day. Each province consists of two or
more administrative districts, and each such district constitutes an electoral
area for the purpose of elections to the Provincial Council of that province.
Section 7 of the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988, (the Act),
requires the Commissioner of Elections to appoint a returning officer for each
such district. Section 10 provides:

(1) Within one week of the dissolution of a Provincial Council by reason of
the operation of Article 154E of the Constitution **. . .** the Commissioner
shall publish a notice of his intention to hold an election to such Council.
The notice shall specify [the "nomination period"] during which such
nomination papers

160

shall be received by the returning officer of each administrative district in
the province **. . .**

(2) The nomination period shall commence on the fourteenth day after the
publication of the notice **. . .** and expire **. . .** on the twenty-first
day after the day of publication of such notice."

Notices under section 10 of the Act were duly published in June, 1998. The
nomination periods for two, elections expired on 3.7.98, for the third on
11.7.98, and for the other two on 15.7.98, and the nomination processes had
been completed by those dates. All five elections being contested, section 22
(1) required every returning officer, "as soon as may be after the conclusion
of the [nomination] proceedings", to publish a notice specifying the date of
poll - "being a date not less than five weeks or more than eight weeks from
the date of publication of the notice" \- as well as other particulars
relating to the duly nominated candidates and the situation of the polling
stations. Notices in respect of all the districts - twelve in number - were
published on 15.7.98, fixing 28.8.98 as the date of poll.

It appears from the above statutory provisions that the Act was intended to
ensure a speedy election, within about three months of dissolution. That
object would have been achieved had the poll been taken on 28.8.98. But that
did not happen.

In this application the two petitioners complain that the failure of the 1st
respondent, the Commissioner of Elections (the Commissioner), and the 2nd to
13th respondents (the returning officers of the twelve districts) to hold
elections to the five Provincial Councils, on and after 28.8.98, was an
infringement of their fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (a).

Before that date of poll was fixed, the 1st respondent had summoned a meeting
of all recognized political parties. According to the minutes of that meeting,
held on 25.6.98, the 1st respondent stated

161

that "elections to Provincial Councils will be held on a single day as
mentioned at the previous meeting", and the Inspector-General of Police stated
that "necessary security will be provided for the election and that he is
working out a scheme to fulfil these requirements". He made no reference to
any difficulty in providing security, whether the five elections were
simultaneous or staggered.

The 1st respondent, in his affidavit filed in these proceedings, did not
allege any change in the security situation, or any difficulty in obtaining or
providing security for the poll. On the other hand, in support of their
contention that security was not a problem during the relevant period, the
petitioners pointed out that the Summit of the South Asian Association for
Regional Co-operation was held in Colombo, with the participation of the Heads
of Member States, during the last week of July.

I must refer at this stage to another important matter. The Act provides for
postal voting. Regulation 10 of the Postal Voters' (Provincial Councils
Elections) Regulations, 1988, contained in the second schedule to the Act,
requires every returning officer "not later than ten days after the last day
of the nomination period" to give notice of the time and place at which he
would issue postal ballot papers.

Regulation 17 provides that every returning officer "shall, immediately on
receipt of a [postal ballot] before the close of the poll, place it unopened
in the postal voters' ballot box"; and Regulation 19 provides for the counting
of postal votes "as soon as possible after the close of the poll". There is
thus no provision - and, indeed, no need for provision - for a separate date
of poll in respect of postal voting. The postal voting process is ancillary to
the poll itself, and would end with the poll, whether taken on the date
originally fixed or on some subsequent date. The Regulations do not expressly
authorize the postponement or cancellation of the postal voting process. That
is unnecessary: if the original date of poll is postponed, Regulation 17
ensures that the postal voting process would continue

162

until the close of the poll on the new date; and if the poll itself is validly
cancelled, that would automatically abort that process.

It is not disputed that all the returning officers had given notice that
postal ballot papers would be issued on 4.8.98. The petitioners produced one
such notice dated 23.7.98. If all the notices had been issued on that date, it
would mean that in respect of three Provincial Councils notices had been
issued more than ten days after the last day of the nomination period.
Nevertheless, that would have left 24 days for the completion of the postal
voting process. The petitioners averred that "by telegram dated 3.8.98, the
respective returning officers suspended the postal voting that was fixed for
4.8.98 **. . .** and no reasons were given for such suspension", and this the
respondents admitted. A copy of one such telegram sent by the Assistant
Commissioner of Elections, Kalutatra, was produced. Our attention was not
drawn to any provision of the Act or of the Regulations which empowered the
Commissioner, an Assistant Commissioner, or returning officers to suspend the
issue of postal ballot papers; or to restart that process after suspension.
But even if such provisions can be implied, that suspension, at that point of
time, made it extremely difficult to restart the postal voting process in time
to complete it by 28.8.98. It is most unsatisfactory that neither the 1st
respondent, nor the 2nd to 13th respondents, have explained to the public and
to this Court, why the issue of postal ballot papers was suspended. Article
103 of the Constitution guarantees to the Commissioner of Elections a high
degree of independence in order to ensure that he may duly exercise -
efficiently, impartially and without interference - the important functions
entrusted to him by Article 104 in regard to the conduct of elections,
including Provincial Council elections. But the constitutional guarantee of
independence does not authorize arbitrariness. That guarantee is essential for
the Rule of Law, and one corollary of independence is accountability.
Accordingly, the Commissioner could not withhold the reasons for his conduct -
just as the constitutional guarantee of independence of the Judiciary does not
dispense with the need to give reasons for judgments.

163

The very next day, on 4.8.98, HE the President issued a Proclamation under
section 2 bringing the provisions of Part II of the Public Security Ordinance
(PSO) into operation throughout Sri Lanka, and made the following Regulation
(the "impugned Regulation") under section 5 :

"For so long, and so long only, as Part II of the Public Security Ordinance is
in operation in a province for which a Provincial Council specified in Column
I of the Schedule hereto has been established, such part of the Notice under
section 22 of the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988, published
in the Gazette specified in the corresponding entry in Column 11 of the
Schedule hereto, as relates to the date of poll for the holding of elections
to such Provincial Council shall be deemed, for all purposes, to be of no
effect."

The previous Proclamation under section 2, made one month before, had brought
the provisions of Part II of the PSO into operation in the Northern and
Eastern provinces and in some parts only of the other seven Provinces :
namely, in specified parts of seven (out of the seventeen) districts in those
seven provinces. Indeed, it was the Petitioners' contention - which was not
disputed - that for a considerable period before August, 1998, the
Proclamations made, from time to time, under section 2 applied mainly to those
two provinces, and not to the whole of Sri Lanka. The petitioners also averred
that the 1994 Presidential Election had been held while a similar Proclamation
had been in force.

The learned Solicitor-General stated during the oral argument that the
impugned Emergency Regulation was the only one made pursuant to the extension
of the emergency to the whole of Sri Lanka.

The poll was not taken on 28.8.98. It must be noted that the impugned
Regulation did not purport to cancel the five elections altogether, but only
to "deem to be of no effect" \- in effect, to cancel - the particular date of
poll (namely, 28.8.98) already fixed by notices

164

under section 22. It invalidated or suspended those notices, but did not
purport to override, amend or suspend any provision of the Act or of the
Regulations, and it left untouched the provisions of section 22 (6)

"(6) Where at an election of members of a Provincial Council from the
administrative districts within the Province for which that Provincial Council
is established, due to any emergency or unforeseen circumstances the poll in
any such administrative district cannot be taken on the day specified in the
notice published under subsection (1), the Commissioner [of Elections] may, by
notice published in the Gazette, appoint another day for the taking of the
poll in such administrative district and in every other administrative
district within that province, such other day being a day not earlier than the
fourteenth day after the publication of the notice in [the] Gazette."
[emphasis added]

Although speedy elections were, undeniably, a matter of paramount public
importance, the 1st respondent did nothing, on and after 4.8.98, to fix
another date of poll.

The petitioners filed this application on 3.9.98, alleging that:

(1) the Proclamation was an unwarranted and unlawful exercise of discretion
contrary to the Constitution, not made bona fide or in consideration of the
security situation in the country or the five provinces, but solely in order
to postpone the five elections;

(2) the Proclamation and the impugned Regulation constituted an unlawful
interference with and usurpation of functions vested in the Commissioner of
Elections, under the Constitution and the Act, and compromised his
constitutionally guaranteed independent status;

(3) the impugned Regulation was contrary to Article 155 (2) of the
Constitution, because it had the legal effect of overriding and suspending the
provisions of the Constitution relating to -

165

(i) the continued existence of the five Provincial Councils,  
  
(ii) the franchise, and  
  
(iii) Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (a); and

(4) the conduct of the 1st to 13th respondents in not holding the said five
elections was "unreasonable, arbitrary, contrary to law, for a collateral
purpose, discriminatory, and in violation of Article 12 (1) and Article 14 (1)
(a) of the Constitution".

They prayed for a declaration that their fundamental rights under Articles 12
(1) and 14 (1) (a) had been violated, and for an order directing the 1st to
13th respondents to nominate a fresh date for the five elections and to take
steps to hold those elections in terms of section 22 of the Act forthwith.
Although they prayed for costs they did not ask for compensation.

At this stage I must mention two important events which occurred thereafter,
in or about November, 1998: the Provincial Councils Elections (Special
Provisions) Bill (the Bill) was placed on the Order Paper of Parliament, and
the Provincial Council of the North-Western province was dissolved upon the
expiration of its five-year term of office.

The Bill sought to achieve two objectives. Clause 2 purported to vest in the
Commissioner the duty, within four weeks of the date of commencement of the
Bill when enacted into law, to appoint a date of poll for the said five
elections "having regard to the periods specified in section 22 (1) (c)" of
the Act, "in lieu of the date of poll specified in the Notice published under
section 22". Clause 3 purported to empower the Secretary of a recognized
political party or the group leader of an independent group to substitute, in
place of the name of any candidate appearing in an already completed and
accepted nomination paper, the name of another person with his consent - but
without the consent of, and even without notice to, the former candidate.

The Bill contained no provision which would have enabled the Commissioner or
the returning officers, notwithstanding the lapse of

166

more than ten days after the last day of the nomination periods, to give
notice afresh of the time and place of issue of postal ballot papers. It is
true that Regulation 10 (2) does provide for a "subsequent issue" of postal
ballot papers, but that cannot be done unless an initial issue (ie of the
identical ballot papers) had already taken place under Regulation 10 (1). And
even if an initial issue had taken place, the "subsequent issue" contemplated
by Regulation 10 (2) is an issue of identical ballot papers, and not of
"amended" ballot papers.

This Court, in its determination made on 30.11.98, held that both clauses were
inconsistent with, inter alia, Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. In coming
to that conclusion, this Court found that the Act already made provision, in
section 22 (6), for fixing another date for the poll, and went on to consider
the impact of the Bill on that provision:

"If for any reason, which falls within the ambit of "any emergency or
unforeseen circumstances", the poll cannot be taken on the day specified by
the returning officer under section 22 (1), section 22 (6) gives the
Commissioner the power to appoint another day. It is clear that he may do so
either before the appointed day, or on or after the appointed day; for
instance, if one week before that day widespread floods (or a serious
epidemic) make it evident that a proper poll cannot be held on that day, or if
on that day, any "emergency or unforeseen circumstances" prevent the taking of
the poll. Here, on 4.8.98, the Commissioner was faced with an Emergency
Regulation purporting to suspend the notices issued under section 22 in
relation to the date of poll. If the Proclamation had ceased to be operative
before 28.8.98 (in all five provinces or even in one province) - by virtue of
revocation, or disapproval by Parliament, or otherwise - then some or all of
those notices would once again have become unquestionably operative, and the
poll could have been taken on 28.8.98. But that did not happen, and ex facie
the Proclamation continued to be operative: and so the poll was not taken on
the due date. As far as the Commissioner was concerned, on and after 28.8.98
the position (whether the Regulation was valid or not) was that the poll had
not been taken on the due date because of "emergency or unforeseen

167

circumstances". Section 22 (6) was therefore applicable. He had therefore the
power to appoint another day for the poll. And if he had done so, a poll would
have been taken on the basis of (i) the notice which he then issued under
section 22 (6), which notice could not have been affected in any way by the
Emergency Regulation previously made on 4.8.98, and (ii) the nominations
already published in the "nominations" part of the notices issued by the
returning officers on 15.7.98, which part the Emergency Regulation had not
touched." [emphasis added]

From the learned Solicitor-General's written submissions filed in this
application, it appears that he does not agree with the conclusion that "as
far as the Commissioner was concerned, on and after 28.8.98 the position
(whether the Regulation was valid or not) was that the poll had not been taken
on the due date because of 'emergency or unforeseen circumstances' [and that]
he had therefore the power to appoint another date for the poll". The learned
Solicitor-General contended that the Commissioner could exercise his power
only if the Proclamation and Regulation are valid: if not, "section 22 (6)
cannot be invoked".

I am unable to accept that contention because it requires the addition of
restrictive words to section 22 (6), so as to make it read:

"Where **. . .** due to any emergency or unforeseen circumstances, arising
otherwise than from the unlawful for invalid or improper] acts of any person,
the poll **. . .** cannot be taken on the day specified **. . .** the
Commissioner may **. . .** appoint another day **. . .** "

The language of section 22 (6) is plain and unambiguous. The word "any", used
in relation to "emergency or unforeseen circumstances", is an unambiguously
clear indication that all such events and circumstances are included,
howsoever caused. There is no justification for restricting that provision in
any way: it applies whether the emergency or the unforeseen circumstances are
the consequence of natural causes or of human acts; and in regard to

168

the latter, whether they are the acts of the Commissioner (or his officers),
or of candidates (or their supporters), or of third parties. Likewise, the
section makes no distinction between lawful and unlawful acts.

Even if there had been any ambiguity or uncertainty (and I am satisfied that
there is none), the context demands that a broader rather than a narrower
interpretation be adopted. If the Commissioner had power to fix a new date
only where the poll was not taken due to a lawful act, it would mean that in
all other cases a fresh poll could not be taken: there would then be no
election, and therefore no elected Provincial Council. That would render
nugatory the provisions of Chapter XVII A, and especially Article 154 A, of
the Constitution which contemplate the continued existence of elected
Provincial Councils. Further, to accept an interpretation which would not
permit the fixing of a new date, where unlawful acts prevented the taking of
the poll on the date originally fixed, would be an open invitation for the
disruption of the poll - by the political thuggery of contestants, by the
terrorist acts of non-contestants, or by any other means. Again, if the
Commissioner's officials deliberately destroyed the ballot papers and thereby
prevented the poll, the Commissioner would be unable to fix a new date. To
restrict the ambit of section 22 (6), as the learned Solicitor-General
suggests, would do violence to its language.

In my view, "any", "emergency" and "unforeseen circumstances", and the power
of the Commissioner to fix a new date, must be given the widest construction
which is reasonably possible, so as to enable an election to be held, and not
a construction which would result in its indefinite postponement or
cancellation.

The learned Solicitor-General's contention exposes a flagrant contradiction in
the 1st respondent's position. The 1st respondent averred that the impugned
Regulation was validly made under section 5, and that upon its publication he
"had no alternative but to refrain from taking any further steps towards the
holding of the Provincial Councils elections". If indeed it was his position
that he could exercise

169

his power under section 22 (6) only if the Proclamation and the Regulation
were valid, and if his honest view was that the Proclamation and the
Regulation were valid, why did he not promptly fix a new date? The conclusion
is inescapable that the 1st respondent did not consider whether the impugned
Regulation was valid and what his powers and duties were, but tamely
acquiesced in the indefinite postponement of those elections.

It is necessary at this stage to consider whether "may" in section 22 (6)
confers an unfettered and unreviewable discretion, or a power coupled with a
duty. Since Article 154A contemplates the continued existence of elected
Provincial Councils, it follows that elections must not be delayed more than
is really necessary. The power to fix a new date must therefore be exercised
whenever the circumstances demand it, and especially where the taking of the
poll is prevented by unlawful means. Had the 1st respondent refrained,
initially, from exercising his discretion because in his honest opinion he
reasonably concluded that the prevailing circumstances did not permit a poll
to be taken, that would have been a proper exercise of discretion; but even
so, he would have been obliged, thereafter, to exercise his discretion no
sooner the circumstances changed. Here, the 1st respondent did not even
consider, initially or at any subsequent stage, whether he should fix a new
date. Instead he simply assumed that he was bound to refrain from taking any
further steps towards holding Provincial Council elections. He persisted in
his failure to fix a new date, despite the determination of this Court dated
30.11.98, and what transpired on 7.12.98, when judgment was reserved in this
case:

"The Solicitor-General states that he would discuss with the 1st respondent
the question of appointing another date for the taking of a poll in respect of
these five elections in terms of section 22(6) **. . .** in the light of the
determination of this Court **. . .** made on 30.11.98."

We then made it clear that :

"There is no objection to the 1st respondent taking steps under section 22 (6)
while judgment has been reserved."

170

That failure was the more serious because during the oral argument counsel
stated that the term of office of the Provincial Council of the North-Western
province had come to an end, and that the nomination process was under way.
The date of poll has now been fixed for 25.1.99, following - as the
respondents' written submissions state - "the normal procedure in terms of the
existing law". The result is that an election will take place first in respect
of that Council, dissolved nearly six months after the other five, although a
new date of poll has not even been fixed for the latter. Citizens resident in
the five provinces are thus being less favourably treated than those of the
North-Western province, in respect of their right to vote.

The respondents have attempted to disclaim responsibility for the continuing
failure to hold the elections to those five Provincial Councils. The written
submissions filed on their behalf claim that "the petitioners' application is
misconceived in law for the reason that their main challenge which is in
respect of [the impugned Proclamation and Regulation, which] are totally
unrelated to the functions of the Commissioner of Elections". It is argued
that the impugned Regulation compelled the 1st respondent "to refrain from
taking any further steps", and that any action by the respondents contrary to
the impugned Regulation "would be dangerous and expose the people and the
voters to unnecessary risks". And so, it is urged, "the respondents' action in
not proceeding with the election and thereby giving effect to [the impugned
Proclamation and Regulation] cannot infringe upon the fundamental rights of
the petitioners".

That plea is misconceived both in law and in fact. The Commissioner has been
entrusted by Article 104 with powers, duties and functions pertaining to
elections, and has been given guarantees of independence by Article 103, in
order that he may ensure that elections are conducted according to law: not to
allow elections to be wrongfully or improperly cancelled or suspended, or
disrupted, by violence or otherwise. He was not entitled to assume. that the
impugned Regulation was valid; and even if it was valid it was his duty, in
the exercise of his power under section 22 (6), to have fixed a new date on
which - in his best judgment - a free and fair poll would have been possible.

171

Further, the undisputed facts establish that the 1st respondent was not acting
independently. The learned Solicitor-General was unable to cite any statutory
provision justifying the "suspension" of the issue of postal ballot papers
even before the impugned Regulation was made. The respondents have not given
any explanation for that suspension. It was therefore unlawful, arbitrary and
not bona fide. They do not claim, and it is inconceivable, that it was a mere
coincidence that the 2nd to 13th respondents simultaneously decided to suspend
the issue of postal ballot papers on the eve of the impugned Regulation; and
there is no doubt that suspension was with the full knowledge and approval of
the 1st respondent. The irresistible inference is that the respondents had
foreknowledge of the impending Proclamation and Regulation. Had that decision
been made bona fide, the 1st respondent's official files and documents would
have contained the official communications, between him and "outsiders", and
between him and his officers, leading up to that suspension, as well as his
reasoned decision in respect of that suspension; and there would have been a
full and frank disclosure of all that material. However, the respondents have
failed to produce a single document relating to that suspension, and that
failure gives rise to a grave suspicion that the decision was for a collateral
purpose. That is not speculation. Clause 3 of the Bill indicates what that
collateral purpose probably was. If the issue of postal ballot papers had
taken place on 4.8.98, voters would have received ballot papers and could have
proceeded to cast their vote. If the postal voting process had commenced in
that way, substitution of candidates in the nomination papers would have
required the drastic step of cancelling ballot papers already issued, and
postal votes already cast. That would have been a serious interference with a
pending election. The suspension of the issue of postal ballots would have
facilitated the subsequent substitution of candidates without the need to
cancel any part of the voting process, and it seems probable that was the
purpose of that suspension.

That suspension had two unsatisfactory consequences. If the postal ballot
papers had been issued, postal voting could have taken place, on and after
4.8.98, without any fear of disruption: as postal voting did not require
public polling booths and the kind of security needed at polling booths.
Consequently, if the impugned Regulation had

172

ceased to be operative - as, for instance, if Parliament had refused to
approve the Proclamation, or if HE the President had revoked the Regulation -
the poll could have taken place on 28.8.98. But the suspension of the postal
voting process virtually ensured that the poll would not take place on that
day. The respondents were thus indirectly and partially responsible for the
failure to take the poll on 28.8.98. Secondly, the 1st respondent had power to
fix a new date, in terms of section 22 (6), with fourteen days' notice. But as
a result of the suspension of the postal voting process, it became impossible
for the 1st respondent to fix such an early date : he had to allow additional
time for the postal voting process to commence afresh. Thus that suspension
virtually compelled the postponement of the original poll, and also placed an
unnecessary fetter on the 1st respondent's discretion, compelling him to give
at least five weeks' notice of any new date of poll.

The 1st respondent therefore was at least partly responsible for the failure
to take the poll on 28.8.98; and was wholly responsible for the failure
promptly to fix a new date, on and after 28.8.98, after that Regulation had
spent its force.

I must now consider whether the conduct of the 1st respondent resulted in an
infringement of the petitioners' fundamental rights. Learned counsel urged on
their behalf, first, that there was an interference with the franchise,
contrary to Article 4 (e); that although Article 4 (e) does not expressly
refer to Provincial Council elections, that was because Provincial Councils
were introduced only subsequently, by the Thirteenth Amendment; and that it
must now be interpreted as applying to Provincial Council elections as well.
The learned Solicitor-General contended that by the Thirteenth Amendment
Parliament could have included Provincial Council elections, if it wished to,
and that the omission to do so was deliberate; and that in any event a
violation of Article 4 (e) may not, by itself, amount to a violation of a
fundamental right. It is unnecessary to rule on this issue in view of my
findings in relation to Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (a).

Learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the right to vote is one
form of "speech and expression" which Article 14 (1) (a)

173

protects. The learned Solicitor-General urged, however, that there is a clear
distinction between the franchise and fundamental rights; that "the franchise
cannot be incorporated as a fundamental right as contained in Chapter III";
and that the position is different under the American Constitution because
"specific provisions are contained therein which convert the right to vote as
a fundamental right".

When Article 14 (1) (a) entrenches the freedom of speech and expression, it
guarantees all forms of speech and expression. One cannot define the ambit of
that Article on the basis that, according to the dictionary, "speech" means
"X", and "expression" means "Y", and therefore "speech and expression" equals
"X" plus "Y". Concepts such as "equality before the law", "the equal
protection of the law", and "freedom of speech and expression, including
publication", occurring in a statement of constitutionally entrenched
fundamental rights, have to be broadly interpreted in the light of fundamental
principles of democracy and the Rule of Law which are the bedrock of the
Constitution.

I find it unnecessary to refer to the various authorities cited, because in my
view the matter admits of no doubt. A Provincial Council election involves a
contest between two or more sets of candidates contesting for office. A voter
had the right to choose between such candidates, because in a democracy it is
he who must select those who are to govern - or rather, to serve - him. A
voter can therefore express his opinion about candidates, their past
performance in office, and their suitability for office in the future. The
verbal expression of such opinions, as, for instance, that the performance in
office of one set of candidates was so bad that they ought not to be re-
elected, or that another set deserved re-election - whether expressed directly
to the candidates themselves, or to other voters - would clearly be within the
scope of "speech and expression"; and there is also no doubt that "speech and
expression" can take many forms besides the verbal. But although it is
important for the average voter to be able to speak out in that way, that will
not directly bring candidates into office or throw them out of office; and he
may not be persuasive enough even to convince other voters. In contrast, the
most effective manner in which a voter may give expression to his views, with

174

minimum risk to himself and his family, is by silently marking his ballot
paper in the secrecy of the polling booth. The silent and secret expression of
a citizen's preference as between one candidate and another by casting his
vote is no less an exercise of the freedom of speech and expression, than the
most eloquent speech from a political platform. To hold otherwise is to
undermine the very foundations of the Constitution. The petitioners are
citizens and registered voters, and the 1st respondent's conduct has resulted
in a grossly unjustified delay in the exercise of their right to vote, in
violation of Article 14 (1) (a).

Turning to Article 12 (1), the petitioners' contention was that the failure to
take the poll on 28.8.98 and the failure to fix a new date resulted in a
denial of equality before the law, and of the equal protection of the law, to
voters in the five affected provinces, vis-a-vis voters in other provinces.
The respondents' reply was that when the impugned Regulation came into
operation the only elections that were to be held were for those five
Councils; that no other councils were involved; and that therefore the
postponement of the poll affected all the Councils which were in the same
class equally and without discrimination. They conceded that "presently, [the]
date for election has been fixed in relation to [another] province which is
not referred to in [the impugned Regulation]. This process has followed the
normal procedure in terms of the existing law".

Two distinct issues are involved: first, whether the impugned Regulation was
valid and the 1st respondent acted properly in not taking steps to hold the
elections on 28.8.98 (which I will consider later in this judgment), and
second, whether the 1st respondent's conduct, in permitting the suspension of
postal voting and in failing to fix a new date, was in violation of Article 12
(1). Even before the impugned Regulation was made, the 1st respondent
acquiesced in, and probably authorized, the suspension of the issue of postal
ballot papers; that was unlawful, arbitrary and not bona fide, that was done
with knowledge that the impugned Proclamation and Regulation would be made the
next day, and for a collateral purpose; and he thereby placed a fetter on his
discretionary power under section 22 (6). Upon the impugned Regulation being
made, the 1st respondent had

175

power to act under section 22 (6) - whether that Regulation was valid or not -
but failed even to consider whether he had such power, and he failed to
exercise that power even after 28.8.98 (when the Regulation had ceased to be
applicable), despite the decision and observations of this Court; and even
when it became evident that elections would take place in the North-Western
province before the elections in the other five provinces, thus denying to the
voters in those five provinces the protection of the law, by his failure to
exercise, perform and discharge the powers, duties and functions reposed in
him by the Constitution and the Act, and treating them less favourably than
voters in the North-Western province. Article 12 (1) has been infringed.

The 1st respondent's aforesaid conduct in violation of Articles 12 (1) and 14
(1) (a) was neither authorized nor justified by any legal provision falling
within the ambit of the restrictions permitted by Article 15. Article 15 (2)
permits certain restrictions on the freedom of speech only if prescribed by
"law" (not including emergency regulations), and Article 15 (7) permits
restrictions on the right to equality and the freedom' of speech if prescribed
by "law" or by emergency regulations, "in the interests of national security,
public order and the protection of public health, or for the purpose of
securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others, or
of meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a democratic
society". The 1st respondent's conduct was not authorized by any "law", and so
Article 15 (2) was inapplicable. It was not authorized by any emergency
regulation, and so Article 15 (7) was inapplicable.

Learned counsel for the petitioners strenuously contended that the impugned
Proclamation as well as the Regulation were ultra vires. He urged that the
Proclamation had been made for the sole purpose of postponing elections; the
fact that no other Emergency Regulation had been made pursuant to that
Proclamation proved that it had been issued only to enable that Regulation to
be made; both were part of one scheme, to postpone these five elections; and
that was confirmed by the failure of the respondents to produce any material
suggesting that the Proclamation and the Regulation had been made for any
lawful purpose, connected with considerations of national security or public
order.

176

In his affidavit, the 1st respondent pleaded that the impugned Regulation
could not be questioned by virtue of the PSO. The learned Solicitor-General
further submitted that since HE the President could not be made a party by
virtue of Article 35, and since the petitioners had not cited as respondents
any other persons who could answer the allegations pertaining to the vires of
the impugned Proclamation and Regulation, this Court should make no
pronouncement pertaining to their validity. In any event, he urged, the
holding of elections could have affected national security.

The making of the Proclamation and the Regulation, as well as the conduct of
the respondents in relation to the five elections, clearly constitute
"executive action", and this Court would ordinarily have jurisdiction under
Article 126\. The question is whether that jurisdiction is ousted by reason of
Article 35, or the failure to join necessary parties, or any relevant ouster
clause.

The immunity conferred by Article 35 is neither absolute nor perpetual. While
Article 35 (1) appears to prohibit the institution or continuation of legal
proceedings against the President, in respect of all acts and omissions
(official and private), Article 35 (3) excludes immunity in respect of the
acts therein described. It does so in two ways. First, it completely removes
immunity in respect of one category of acts (by permitting the institution of
proceedings against the President personally); and second, it partially
removes Presidential immunity in respect of another category of acts, but
requires that proceedings be instituted against the Attorney-General. What is
prohibited is the institution (or continuation) of proceedings against the
President. Article 35 does not purport to prohibit the institution of
proceedings against any other person, where that is permissible under any
other law. It is also relevant that immunity endures only "while any person
holds office as President". It is a necessary consequence that immunity ceases
immediately thereafter; indeed, it would be anomalous in the extreme if
immunity for private acts were to continue. Any lingering doubt about that is
completely removed by Article 35 (2), which excludes such period of office,
when calculating whether any proceedings have been brought within the
prescriptive period. The need for such exclusion arises only because legal
proceedings can

177

be instituted or continued thereafter. If immunity protected a President even
out of office, it was unnecessary to provide how prescription was to be
reckoned.

I hold that Article 35 only prohibits the institution (or continuation) of
legal proceedings against the President while in office; it imposes no bar
whatsoever on proceedings (a) against him when he is no longer in office, and
(b) other persons at any time. That is a consequence of the very nature of
immunity: immunity is a shield for the doer, not for the act. Very different
language is used when it is intended to exclude legal proceedings which seek
to impugn the act. Article 35, therefore, neither transforms an unlawful act
into a lawful one, nor renders it one which shall not be questioned in any
Court. It does not exclude judicial review of the lawfulness or propriety of
an impugned act or omission, in appropriate proceedings against some other
person who does not enjoy immunity from suit; as, for instance, a defendant or
a respondent who relies on an act done by the President, in order to justify
his own conduct. It is for that reason that this Court has entertained and
decided questions in relation to emergency regulations made by the President
(see _Joseph Perera v. AG_ ,(1) _Wickremabandu v. Herath_ ,(2) and
Presidential appointments (see _Silva v. Bandaranayake_ ,(3)). It is the
respondents who rely on the Proclamation and Regulation, and the review
thereof by this Court is not in any way inconsistent with the prohibition in
Article 35 on the institution of proceedings against the President.

As for the alleged failure to join the "proper" respondents, the learned
Solicitor-General submitted that the petitioners should have made responsible
officers of the "defence establishment" respondents, because they alone could
produce the necessary material on the basis of which the Proclamation and
Regulation were made; and the respondents "could never have placed any
material before Court on matters of public security".

In fundamental rights applications, the proper respondents (beside the
Attorney-General) are those who are alleged to have infringed the petitioner's
rights; not persons who may be able to give relevant evidence. It would
improper in such applications, as in other legal

178

proceedings, to join as respondents persons who are no more than witnesses.
Here the petitioners' real complaint is the failure to hold the elections on
28.8.98 and to fix a new date in lieu; the alleged infringement was by the 1st
respondent and the returning officers, and the Supreme Court Rules did not
require anyone else to be made respondents. The Proclamation and Regulation
were therefore relevant, not to the petitioners' case, but to the respondents'
defence of justification, and the burden was therefore on them to produce
evidence from the "defence establishment" if they wished to. It would have
been improper for the petitioners to join a person as respondent for the sole
purpose of forcing him to produce evidence, however important, to support
their own case \- even an essential witness is not a necessary party. How then
can they be under any obligation to make someone from the "defence
establishment" a respondent, in order to compel him to produce evidence in
support of the respondents?

I must mention that the respondents' plea that they had no knowledge of the
public security aspects of the Proclamation and the Regulation confirms that
when the impugned Regulation was made the 1st respondent did not inquire why
it was made, and that he failed or declined to fix a new date of poll despite
the lack of any information suggesting an adverse security situation. While I
agree that it was theoretically possible for the holding of elections to have
affected national security - for instance, if a significant number of security
personnel had to be withdrawn from the "operational areas" in order to provide
security for the elections, that might have affected national security in
those areas - yet the Inspector-General of Police did not think so on 25.6.98,
and the 1st respondent did not have any material suggesting that any change
had taken place at any time thereafter.

I am therefore of the view that neither Article 35 nor the failure to join an
officer from the "defence establishment" is a bar to this application.

However, the question whether this Court had jurisdiction to review the
Proclamation and the Regulation did arise. It was only towards the conclusion
of the oral argument that reference was made to Article

179

154 J (2), which may oust the jurisdiction of this Court in regard to the
Proclamation. Without the benefit of a full argument, I am reluctant to rule
on that matter. As I am of the view that the impugned Regulation was invalid,
the application can be disposed of without considering the vires of the
Proclamation. I must also mention that learned counsel for the petitioners
submitted that he was not challenging the Proclamation in its entirety, but
only in regard to its application to areas additional to those to which the
previous Proclamation applied. That involves a further question - whether the
Proclamation was severable - and on that too we did not have the benefit of
assistance from counsel.

The learned Solicitor-General relied on section 8 of the PSO, which provides
that "no emergency regulation ... shall be called in question in any court",
as ousting the jurisdiction of the Courts to review the impugned Regulation.
Article 155 (2) imposes a Constitutional limitation on the power to make
emergency regulations: they cannot have the legal effect of overriding,
amending or suspending the operation of any provisions of the Constitution. If
section 8 ousts the jurisdiction of this Court to review emergency
regulations, then the consequence would be that even a regulation violative of
the Constitution is valid: and Article 155 (2) would be nugatory. However, if
Parliament had sought to enact similar legislation, that would have been
subject to review by this Court under Article 121. If section 8 ousts the
jurisdiction of this Court, then that which Parliament cannot do by
legislation, can nevertheless be done by an emergency regulation made in the
exercise of delegated legislative power! Article 168 (1) did not keep in force
prior enactments where the Constitution expressly provided otherwise. The
Constitution has made such express provision by entrenching several
jurisdictions of this Court (see Wickremabandu, at 361), and section 8 of the
PSO is therefore subject to such express provision. I hold that, in the
exercise of the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 126, this Court has
power to review the validity of the impugned regulation.

Article 76 (2) permits Parliament to make, in any law relating to national
security, provision empowering the President to make emergency regulations.
Article 155 deems the PSO to be a law

180

enacted by Parliament, and section 5 of the PSO authorizes the President to
make emergency regulations "as appear to him to be necessary or expedient in
the interests of public security and the preservation of public order and the
suppression of mutiny, riot and civil commotion, or for the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the life of the community". Section 5 is
thus a provision for the delegation of legislative power in a public emergency
(see _Weerasinghe v. Samarasinghe_ )(4) and emergency regulations are
delegated legislation. An emergency regulation must therefore be in form
legislative, rather than executive or judicial; it must be a rule, rather than
an order or a decision. If it was considered necessary to suspend the notices
issued under section 22 of the Act, there should first have been enacted a
regulation (ie delegated legislation) conferring power, in general terms, on
some authority to suspend notices already issued under section 22, and then
only could there have been an exercise of that power, in relation to
particular instances. Further, such regulation could not have been absolute
and unfettered, but relevant criteria or guidelines (ie "national security-
oriented" criteria) were necessary. Thereupon judicial review would have been
possible at two stages: first, whether the regulation itself was intra vires,
and second, whether the act done was a proper exercise of power, in keeping
with the criteria or guidelines and for valid reasons. As Sharvananda, CJ.
observed in Joseph Perera's case:

"Regulation 28 violates Article 12 of the Constitution. The Article ensures
equality before the law and strikes at discriminatory State action. Where the
State exercises any power, statutory or otherwise it must not discriminate
unfairly between one person and another. If the power conferred by any
regulation on any authority of the State is vague and unconfined and no
standard or principles are laid down by the regulations to guide and control
the exercise of such power, the regulation would be violative of the equality
provision because it would permit arbitrary and capricious exercise of power
which is the antithesis of equality before law. No regulation should clothe an
official with unguided and arbitrary powers enabling him to discriminate -
Yick Wo v. Hopkins. Regulation 28 confers a naked and arbitrary power on the
Police to grant or refuse permission to distribute pamphlets or posters as it
pleases, in

181

exercise of its absolute and uncontrolled discretion, without any guiding
principle or policy to control and regulate the exercise of such discretion.
There is no mention in the regulation of the reasons for which an application
for permission may be refused. The conferment of this arbitrary power is in
violation of the constitutional mandate of equality before the law and is
void:"

Sharvananda, CJ. was dealing with an emergency regulation which purported to
confer a power on an official, and he held the regulation to be invalid
because it purported to confer a power which was vague and unconfined, and
which could be exercised arbitrarily and capriciously. Here the impugned
Regulation does not purport to confer a power (to suspend statutory notices of
election under section 22 of the Act): it does not specify the criteria for
the exercise of the power; and it purports to suspend such notices without any
stated reason.

I hold that the impugned Regulation is not a valid exercise of power under
section 5 of the PSO. It is not an emergency regulation. It has, rather, the
character of an order, purporting to suspend notices lawfully issued under the
Act. There was not in force, then or later, any legal provision which
authorized the making of an order suspending such notices.

But in any event, even treating the impugned regulation as if it had been an
order made under a valid emergency regulation, the suspension of the notices
issued under section 22 could have been sustained only if it had been for one
of the purposes set out in section 5 of the PSO. The petitioners have
established, prima facie, that from 25.6.98 up to the end of July, 1998, there
was no known threat to national security, public order, etc., which warranted
the postponement of the elections. The respondents have failed to adduce any
material whatever which suggests that, in August, 1998, there was any such
threat. Accordingly, the suspension of the notices by means of the impugned
Regulation was arbitrary and unreasonable. That suspension infringed the
fundamental rights of the petitioners under Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (a),
for the reasons already stated.

182

Should the 1st respondent have insisted on the poll being held on 28.8.98?
While I appreciate the difficult situation in which he was, nevertheless it is
necessary to remember that the Constitution assures him independence, so that
he may fearlessly insist on due compliance with the law in regard to all
aspects of elections - even, if necessary, by instituting appropriate legal
proceedings in order to obtain judicial orders. But the material available to
this Court indicates that he made no effort to ascertain the legal position,
or to have recourse to legal remedies.

I grant the petitioners declarations that the 1st to 13th respondents have
infringed their fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (a) by the
suspension of the issue of postal ballots, thereby contributing to the
postponement of the poll; and that the 1st respondent has infringed their
fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (a) by failing to take
steps to enable the taking of the poll, for the Provincial Council elections,
on 28.8.98, and by failing to fix a new date of poll.

I direct the 1st respondent to take immediate action to fix, within two weeks
from today, in respect of all five elections (a) a new date or dates, not
later than four weeks from today, for the issue of postal ballot papers, and
(b) a new date or dates of poll, not later than three months from today.

The petitioners have not prayed for compensation. They will be entitled to
costs in a sum of Rs. 30,000 payable by the State.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Relief granted._

_Respondents directed to fix new dates for issue of postal ballot papers and
poll._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/26.html_  

