##  Jayawardena v. Akmeemana Pradeshiya Sabha and Others - SLR - 316, Vol 1 of
1998 [1997] LKSC 26; (1998) 1 Sri LR 316 (24 September 1997)

**316**

**JAYAWARDENA  
 v.  
AKMEEMANA PRADESHIYA SABHA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WIJETUNGE J.  
GUNAWARDENA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 594/96/FR  
SEPTEMBER 15, 1997.  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Article 14 (1)(g) of the Constitution - National
Environmental Act, Nos. 47 of 1980 & 56 of 1988 ss. 23A, 23B, 23D, 23E and 26
- National Environmental (Protection & Quality) Regulations No. 1 of 1990 Reg.
2 & 10 - Right to cancel Environment Protection Licence - Noise pollution and
Dust pollution - Right to hearing before cancellation - Infringement only when
the occupation, business or trade is lawful and not when it is unlawful-
Failure to comply with conditions of licence - Allegation of political
motives.  
_  
The son of the petitioner on October 26, 1995, applied for permission to set
up a metal crushing operation at Kalahe. This was refused on July 08, 1996,
the petitioner sought permission for setting up metal crushing operation on a
land, some 25 metres away from the first taken on lease by his son. The
Central Environmental Authority (CEA) inspected the land and by letter dated
July 08. 1996, addressed to the Chairman (2nd respondent) of the Pradeshiya
Sabha granted permission. On July 17, 1996, the petitioner submitted an
application to the Pradeshiya Sabha for an Environmental Protection Licence
and paid the prescribed inspection fees. After the site was inspected an
Environmental Protection Licence was issued on July 24, 1996, to the
petitioner. The petitioner commenced operations on July 25, 1996. On July 27,
1996, the Chairman (2nd respondent) informed the petitioner that the 3rd
respondent Hon. Richard Pathirana, Minister of Education and Higher Education
had objected and found fault with him for permitting the setting-up of the
metal crushing operation. Two Police officers also visited the petitioner and
directed him to stop work. The 3rd respondent Minister in his affidavit stated
he only asked the Chairman 2nd respondent to look into the grievance of the
respondents. He did not ask the 2nd respondent to cancel the licence and he
was not responsible for what the Police did. The Chairman 2nd respondent in
his affidavit stated a public petition had been handed to him and about 100
residents had gathered round the Sabha premises and protested and the Police
had to be brought in to maintain law and order. Some of the residents handed
over a petition and on this the Environment officers of the Pradeshiya Sabha
carried out a site inspection. They found the petitioner had commenced
operations without obtaining a Trade Licence which was one of the conditions.
The importance of the Trade Licence is that it is issued only if there

**317**

is a report from the Public Hearth office. Further the conditions for
minimizing noise and dust pollution had not been complied with. On July 27,
1996, the Chairman wrote to the petitioner cancelling the licence. At the
Chairman's request, the Commissioner of Local Government had after inspection
advised against the issue of an Environmental Protection Licence.  
  
The Akmeemana Pradeshiya Sabha was exercising power, duties and functions of
the Central Environmental Authority under delegation, in terms of section 26
of the National Environmental Act.  
  
**Held:**  
  
1\. The emission of dust and noise from the metal crushing operation was
lawful if only such operation was licenced. A licence was issued to the
petitioner but it was subject to specified conditions. A person who does not
comply with the conditions of a licence, acts as if he had no licence.
Therefore the petitioner's occupation, business or enterprise was unlawful in
terms of section 23A read with section 23B of the National Environmental Act.  
  
2\. The petitioner acted in violation of the conditions subject to which he
was permitted to carry on operations and the Authority was entitled to cancel
the licence.  
  
3.The air pollution and noise pollution altered the receiving environment by
making it less conducive to public safety and health. The strong protest of
the affected community underscored the urgency to take remedial action. In the
circumstances the Akmeemana Pradeshiya Sabha and its Chairman were entitled to
use the powers given to them by section 23D of the National Environmental Act
and the proviso to  Regulation 10 of the National Environmental (Protection &
Quality) Regulations No. 1 of 1990 to forthwith issue an order cancelling the
licence rather than affording the petitioner an opportunity of showing cause
why the licence should not be cancelled.  
  
4\.  The allegation that the Pradeshiya Sabha failed to act in accordance with
the law and were acting in arbitrary capricious and mala fide manner at the
instigation of the 3rd respondent Minister fails.  
  
5\. The allegation that the authority was   moved by the political ulterior
consideration of ill will to the petitioner and his family to cancel the
licence cannot be sustained.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed
under Article 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution.  
  
_T. Marapana, P.C with Nalin Ladduwahetty, Jayantha Fernando and Dhammika D.
Yapa_ for petitioner.  
  
_Lalanath de Silva with Mihiri Gunawardene_ for the 1st and 2nd respondents.

**318**

_E. D. Wickramanayake with A. W. Yoosuf_ for the 3rd respondent.  
  
_N. Pulle,_ State Counsel for the Attorney-General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 24, 1997.  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
The petitioner was granted leave to proceed with his application for the
alleged infringement of Articles 12 (1) and 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution.  
  
On 26 October, 1995, Ravi Jayewardena, the son of the petitioner applied for
permission to set up a metal crushing operation at Kalahe. On 21 November,
1995, the Central Environmental Authority, after investigation, advised the
Chairman of the Akmeemana Pradeshiya Sabha that due to noise and dust
pollution which was likely to affect the occupants of the several houses
situated close to the proposed site of the operation, permission to set up the
proposed operation was refused. On 10 April, 1996, Ravi Jayewardena leased a
land of 14.9 perches in extent situated some twenty-five metres from the site
on which he had earlier intended to set up the metal crushing operation to
enable his father, the petitioner, to set up a metal crushing operation on the
leased land. The petitioner submitted an application on 25 April, 1996, to the
Central Environmental Authority (CEA) and paid the inspection fee. Officers of
the CEA inspected the proposed site and by its letter dated 8 July, 1996,
addressed to the 2nd respondent -the Chairman of the Akmeemana Pradeshiya
Sabha - granted per­mission for the proposed metal crushing operation. A copy
of that letter was sent to the petitioner. On 17 July, 1996, the petitioner
submitted an application to the Akmeemana Pradeshiya Sabha - the 1st
respondent - for an Environmental Protection Licence and paid the prescribed
inspection fees. Thereafter three officials of the Pradeshiya Sabha, including
the 2nd respondent and two Environ­ment Officers visited the site and on 24
July, 1996, the Pradeshiya Sabha issued the Environmental Protection Licence.
The petitioner commenced operations on 25 July, 1996.  
  
On 27 July, 1996, the 2nd respondent informed the petitioner that he had
received a telephone call from the 3rd respondent - The Hon. Richard
Pathirana, Minister of Education and Higher Education.

**319**

According to the petitioner the Honourable Minister had told the 2nd
respondent that he objected to the petitioner being allowed to conduct his
business and had found fault with him for permitting the petitioner to set up
the metal crushing operation. Two police officers called on the petitioner and
requested him to stop his operations. According to the petitioner the
Honourable Minister had telephoned the Officer-in-Charge of the Habaraduwa
Police Station and instructed him to stop the petitioner's metal crushing
operations. The Honourable Minister admits that he did telephone the 2nd
respondent and asked him to look into representations made to him that noise
and dust pollution resulting from the operation of the metal crusher would
adversely affect the lives of the residents in the area, but denies any other
involvement. The 2nd respondent in his affidavit states that the 3rd
respondent did not ask him to cancel the licence but requested him "to look
into the grievances of the residents whom he said he had seen and complained
about the metal crusher". I have no hesitation in accepting the evidence of
the 3rd respondent. He was the Member of Parliament of the area and had every
right and indeed a duty to require the 2nd respondent to look into the
complaints made by his constituents. He was not responsible for the action
taken by the 2nd respondent or by the police and I therefore declare that the
3rd respondent did not violate any of the petitioner's fundamental rights.  
  
The manner in which the operations were brought to a halt is explained in
paragraph 11 of the affidavit of the Chairman of the Pradeshiya Sabha dated 22
November, 1996: "... A public petition against the construction of the metal
crusher was handed over to me by a large number of residents in the area on
26.07.1996 ... On 27.07.1996 over 100 residents from around the petitioner's
site gathered at the Pradeshiya Sabha premises, surrounded it and protested
strongly against the authorization of the metal crusher. In order to maintain
law and order. I requested the Officer-in-Charge of the Habaraduwa Police
Station - the 4th respondent - to take steps to stop the activities of the
said metal crusher temporarily. Some Of the residents who handed over the
petition have made several complaints to the police on the said metal
crusher".  
  
Upon receipt of the petition the Environment Officers of the Pradeshiya Sabha
carried out a site inspection on 26 July, 1996. It was found that the
petitioner had commenced operations without obtaining a Trade Licence as he
was obliged to do by law and the

**320**

Sri Lanka Law Reports terms of the letter of approval issued by the Central
Environmental Authority on 8 July, 1996 and the terms of the licence issued by
the Pradeshiya Sabha on 24 July, 1996\. The importance of obtaining a Trade
Licence before the commencement of operations is that such a Licence is issued
only if there is a report from a Public Health Officer in terms of the form
printed behind the application for the Licence with regard to a proposed
undertaking. At the time of the commencement of the petitioner's operations,
there was no such report yet called for by the Pradeshiya Sabha with regard to
the petitioner's application which appears to have been dated the 25th of
July, 1996: It seems the date was altered. The receipt for the payment of the
Trade Licence Fee is dated 31 July, 1996\. Additionally, the conditions
stipulated in the letter of recommendation of the Central Environmental
Authority and in the Environmental Protection Licence aimed at preventing or
minimizing noise and dust pollution had not been complied with prior to the
commencement of the operations. On 27 July, 1996, the 2nd respondent wrote to
the petitioner cancelling the Environmental Protection Licence issued by him
on 24 July, 1996. On 1 August,1996, the 2nd respondent requested the
Commissioner of Local Government to carry out a site inspection. The
Commissioner of Local Government in his letter dated 9 September, 1996,
advised against the issue of an Environmental Protection Licence stating that
the location was unsuitable for a metal crushing operation.  
  
In terms of section 23 A of the National Environmental Act Nos. 47 of 1980 &
56 of 1988 "no person shall discharge, deposit or emit waste into the
environment which will cause pollution except (a) under the authority of a
licence issued by the Authority; and (b) in accordance with such standards and
other criteria as may be prescribed under this Act". Regulation 2 of the
National Environmental (Protection & Quality) Regulations No. 1 of 1990 makes
it clear that "pollution" includes "noise pollution". Section 23 B (2) states,
inter alia, that every such licence "shall be subject to such terms,
conditions and standards as may be prescribed". Section 23 D states: "Where a
licence has been issued to any person . . . and such person acts in violation
of any of the terms, standards and conditions of the licence . . .the
Authority may by order . . . cancel such licence". Any person who is aggrieved
by such an order may appeal against such cancellation to the Secretary to the
Ministry, (section 23 E). Regulation 10 states that "The Authority may, before
issuing an order . . . cancelling a licence under section 23 D of the Act give
the holder of the licence

**321**

an opportunity to show cause why such order should not be issued. Provided
that, where, since the issue of the licence, the receiving environment has
been altered or changed due to natural factors or otherwise or where continued
discharge, deposition or emission of waste into the environment under the
licence will or could affect any beneficial use adversely, the Authority shall
forthwith issue an order suspending the licence for a period to be specified
in the order or cancel such licence".  
  
It was not in dispute that the Akmeemana Pradeshiya Sabha was exercising the
powers, duties and functions of the Central Environmental Authority under
delegation in terms of section 26 of the National Environmental Act.  
  
Article 14 (1) (g) of the Constitution declares and recognizes the right of
every citizen to the freedom to engage by himself or in association with
others in any lawful occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise.
(The emphasis is mine). The emission of dust and noise from the metal crushing
operation was lawful only if such operation was licensed. A licence was issued
to the petitioner: but it was subject to specified conditions. In my view a
person who does not comply with the conditions of a licence, acts as if he had
no licence, for the licence would not have been issued except on the basis
that the conditions were complied with. In the circumstances, the petitioner's
occupation, business or enterprise was unlawful in terms of section 23 A read
with section 23 B of the National Environmental Act and he cannot complain
that he had any right to carry on such an activity. I therefore declare that
Article 14 (1) (g) was not violated.  
  
The petitioner acted in violation of the conditions subject to which he was
permitted to commence and carry on operations and the Authority was entitled
in law to cancel the licence. The Authority may have given the petitioner an
opportunity of showing cause why his licence Should not be cancelled; however,
in my view, by his failure to comply with the conditions of the licence - the
conditions on the basis of which the Central Environmental Authority
authorized the Pradeshiya Sabha to issue the licence - the petitioner's metal
crushing operation by the noise it created caused at least irritation; by
discharging dust it brought about an undesirable change in the characteristics
of the air which could adversely affect the inhabitants

**322**

of the neighbourhood. The air pollution and noise pollution altered the
receiving environment and adversely affected the beneficial use of the
environment by making it less conducive to public safety and health. The
strong protests of the affected community underscored the urgency to take
immediate remedial action. In the circumstances, in my view the Akmeemana
Pradeshiya Sabha and its Chairman, the 1st and 2nd respondents, were entitled
to use the powers given to them by section 23 D of the National Environmental
Act and the proviso to Regulation 10 of the National Environmental (Protection
& Quality) Regulations No. 1 of 1990 to forthwith issue an order cancelling
the licence rather than first affording the petitioner an opportunity of
showing cause why the licence should not be cancelled.  
  
I reject the allegation that the 1 st and 2nd respondents had failed to act in
accordance with the law and that they were acting in an arbitrary, capricious
and mala fide manner at the instigation of the 3rd respondent. The petitioner
alleged that the 3rd respondent was not favourably disposed to the petitioner
and his family because his son had "campaigned vigorously" for a Member of
Parliament elected from a rival political party - the U.N.P. The 3rd
respondent in his affidavit states that he was aware that the petitioner is a
supporter of the U.N.P, but adds that "until reading this petition, I believed
that the petitioner's son . . . was a staunch supporter of the Sri Lanka
Freedom Party as he represented himself to be and acted as though he was such
a supporter". The petitioner's son was issued a licence by the same Pradeshiya
Sabha to operate a saw mill and this is inconsistent with the petitioner's
suggestion that the authority concerned was moved by the alleged ulterior
consideration of ill will to the petitioner and his family to cancel the
licence issued to the petitioner. I have already explained why the 3rd
respondent cannot be said to have been instrumental in having the licence
cancelled. I have also explained why it was lawful for the 1st and 2nd
respondents to cancel the licence. In the circumstances, it has not been
established that the 1st and 2nd respondents either acted in an unlawfully
discriminatory manner or that they transgressed the petitioner's right to
equality before the law and equal protection of the law declared and
recognized by Article 12 of the Constitution.  
  
For the reasons stated in my judgment I declare that Articles 12 and 14 (1)
(g) of the Constitution have not been violated by the 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th
respondents and make order dismissing the application.

**323**

Learned counsel for the 1st and 2nd respondents properly conceded that the
Central Environmental Authority, who is not a party to these proceedings, but
on whose instructions the Pradeshiya Sabha acted, had failed to act in
accordance with the prescribed guidelines. In the circumstances the parties
shall bear their own costs.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J. - I agree.  
  
GUNAWARDENA, J. - I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/26.html_  

