##  Premawathie v. Fowzie, Minister of Healthand Others - SLR - 373, Vol 2 of
1998 [1996] LKSC 26; (1998) 2 Sri LR 373 (23 October 1996)

**373**

**PREMAWATHIE  
v.  
FOWZIE, MINISTER OF HEALTH  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 528/96  
SEPTEMBER 25TH, 1996

_Fundamental Rights - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution - Settlement proposed
by parties - Duty of court to make just and equitable order notwithstanding
such arrangement - Article 126 of the Constitution._

The petitioner who was a telephone operator in the Ministry of Health was
interdicted on 14.10.94 and charged with several acts of misconduct. The
inquiring officer exonerated her of all the serious charges. However, on
31.7.95 the Director General of Health Services held without adducing any
reason, that all the charges had been proved and dismissed her from service.
The Public Service Commission revoked the said decision and reinstated her in
a demoted position as a labourer without back wages. After the judgment was
reserved the respondents filed a motion agreeing to reinstate the petitioner
as a telephone operator with effect from 9.10.96 with back wages from the date
of interdiction.

**Held:**

1\. Once the court grants leave to proceed, Article 126 imposes a duty to make
an order which is just and equitable and so the court cannot merely give
effect to a settlement proposed by the parties.

2\. The petitioner is entitled to reinstatement with back wages as agreed but
with increments for 1994, 1995 and 1996 in addition to costs.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena for petitioner.  
  
K. Sripavan DSG with S. Fernando, SC for respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult_

374

October 23, 1996  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

Having joined the public service as a casual labourer in the Ministry of
Health on 5.3.80, and having been made permanent on 1.10.85, the petitioner
was appointed a telephone operator with effect from 15.6.91, subject to a
3-year probationary period. While serving in that capacity at the General
Hospital, Colombo, she received a letter dated 29.6.92 issued by the Director
of that Hospital, confirming her in that post with effect from 15.6.91. She
was transferred to the Lady Ridgeway Children's Hospital on 17.9.93. She
complains of the violation of her fundamental right under Article 12 (1) by
reason of her demotion to the post of labourer, and transfer to the Leprosy
Hospital, Hendala.

On 8.10.94, she was on duty for the night shift, which was from 4.00 p.m. that
day till 8.00 a.m. on 9.10.94 - a period of sixteen hours, during which the
practice was to have only one telephone operator. Just before midnight she
received a call from someone who said he was calling from the Health
Minister's residence: and a little later another call from Dr. Jeganathan,
Deputy Director-General of Health Services. This was followed by a surprise
visit at 1.15 a.m. by the 3rd respondent, a Deputy Director of the Hospital.
It is unnecessary to refer to these events in more detail in view of the
settlement which the parties suggested after judgment was reserved.

It is sufficient to say that on 14.10.94 the petitioner was interdicted on
half-pay for allegedly sleeping whilst on duty on 8.10.94. She was then served
with a charge-sheet dated 2.12.94 which alleged, in substance, that she was
rude to the Minister of Health and to Dr. Jeganathan when they telephoned on
8.10.94; that she did not connect them, as requested, to ward 10; that she was
sleeping whilst on duty during the shift; and that when Dr. Jeganathan asked
to be connected to a ward close to ward 10 (if ward No. 10 could not be
connected), the petitioner failed to connect him.

Although the petitioner became aware of it only after this application was
filed, it now transpires that the inquiring officer exonerated her of all
those charges except the last and of two purely consequential charges of
defaulting in her duties and bringing the public service into disrepute.
However, the 2nd respondent, the Director-General of Health

375

Services, by letter dated 31.7.95 told her that he had decided, in terms of
section 15.1 of Chapter XLVIII of the Establishments Code, that all the
charges had been proved. He neither told her of the inquiring officer's
verdict, nor of his reasons, if any, for not agreeing with it. He added that
according to her personal file her past service record was extremely
unsatisfactory, and that she had not improved despite warnings, and dismissed
her with effect from 14.10.94.

She appealed to the Public Service Commission (PSC). By letter dated 23.5.96,
!the 4th respondent informed her that the PSC had reinstated her in' service,
subject to a reduction in rank to her original post of labourer, and a
transfer to the Leprosy Hospital at Hendala, without any back wages for the
period of interdiction, the period when she was not in service being treated
as leave without pay. The actual order of the PSC, or even the basis on which
it was made, was never disclosed to her. It now transpires that the PSC had
revoked the decision of the 2nd respondent and restored the findings of the
inquiring officer. Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that reduction
in rank was a major punishment, appropriate only for serious misconduct as
defined in the Establishments Code; that in any event it was grossly
disproportionate to the petitioner's lapse, particularly considering the
enormous loss of back wages; and that it was therefore unreasonable, arbitrary
and capricious. He referred to a previous instance in which another telephone
operator, had admittedly been dealt with far more leniently.

In his affidavit the 3rd respondent disputed the letter of confirmation issued
to the petitioner, querying its signatures and its issue after just one year.
He alleged that multiple complaints had been received of inefficiency and lack
of courtesy on her part. The learned DSG tendered photocopies of several
documents from the petitioner's personal file (which are now part of the
record). From those we found that the petitioner's confirmation had been
recommended and approved in June, 1992, upon her work, conduct, health and
efficiency being assessed as satisfactory; that the file contained a copy of
the letter of confirmation dated 29.6.92 produced by the petitioner; and that
there were no documents recording particulars of any complaints made against
her. It is not open to the respondents now to dispute her confirmation, after
the lapse of five years. It is possible that the fact that she had already
served a probationary period upon her appointment as a labourer was taken into
account, but be that as

376

it may, her confirmation cannot be collaterally attacked in these proceedings.

We also found that by letter dated 21.2.94 the petitioner had been warned for
inefficiency and told that if there was no improvement, steps would be taken
to demote her. By letter dated 10.10.94 she was asked to show cause within
three days why disciplinary action should not be taken against her for that
(and the charges arising from the events of 8.10.94). By letter dated 11.10.94
she submitted her explanation on all those matters. Significantly, the charge-
sheet did not include any allegation of inefficiency or failure to improve
despite warnings. Despite this, the 2nd respondent's letter of 31.7.95
referred to her alleged failure to improve her efficiency in spite of
warnings: a finding made without a charge and without an opportunity to defend
herself.

After full argument on 25.9.96, judgment was reserved. On 7.10.96 counsel on
both sides stated that they were negotiating a settlement. The respondents
filed a motion dated 10.10.96 stating that:

the petitioner has been reinstated to the post of telephone operator with
effect from 9th October, 1996, in the General Hospital, Ragama, as mutually
agreed upon between the parties . . . the petitioner is entitled to the
payment of back wages from the date of her interdiction until the date of
reinstatement in the Ragama Hospital.

A copy of a letter dated 9.10.96 sent to the petitioner was also tendered.

There is no doubt that the petitioner's fundamental right to the equal
protection of the law has been infringed by the PSC by reason of an arbitrary,
unreasonable and grossly disproportionate punishment: an enormous loss of back
wages, continuing reduction in earnings for the rest of her working life, and
a probable decrease in her pension benefits thereafter - all for a single
lapse occurring half-way through a sixteen-hour duty shift. Although the
ultimately operative decision was that of the PSC, the 2nd and the 3rd
respondents had also been closely involved in an oppressive use, or misuse, of
disciplinary powers and proceedings leading up to that infringement. There was
no reason for keeping the petitioner under interdiction for more than three
months

377

whilst that inquiry was pending. The terms of settlement do not adequately
redress the wrong that has been done to her. Once this court grants leave to
proceed, Article 126 imposes a duty to make an order which is just and
equitable, and so we cannot merely give effect to a settlement proposed by the
parties. In this case the facts were fully probed during the hearing and
pointed out the course which justice and equity demanded. Being an equitable
jurisdiction, the court cannot acquiesce in a compromise which disturbs its
conscience.

Here the victim has been deprived of her means of livelihood for a long
period, with resulting anxiety, pain of mind, and suffering to herself and her
family. The arrears of salary due to her are likely to amount to about Rs.
50,000 (on which interest would be considerable), and she has had to fight an
injustice whilst being deprived of her salary.

I must add that there has been no suggestion that the 1st, 4th and 5th
respondents have been concerned in the infringement of the petitioner's
fundamental right.

We make order for re-instatement in terms of the motion dated 10.10.96, with
back wages (on the basis that the petitioner had been duly confirmed on
29.6.92 with effect from 15.6.91), and with increments for 1994, 1995 and
1996. The State is directed to pay her a sum of Rs. 25,000 as compensation and
costs.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/26.html_  

