##  Abeysinghe and 3 Others V.Central Engineering Consultancy Bureau and 6
Others - SLR - 36, Vol 2 of 1996 [1995] LKSC 26; (1996) 2 Sri LR 36 (3 May
1995)

**36**

**ABEYSINGHE AND 3 OTHERS  
v.  
CENTRAL ENGINEERING CONSULTANCY BUREAU AND 6 OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO J.  
GOONEWARDANE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA J.  
S.C. 356/93 (FR)  
MARCH 1, 1994.

_Fundamental Rights ‑Constitution, Article 12 (1)‑Eligibility‑Apportionment of
Marks ‑ Suitability to a Post‑Interview process was it flawed._

The four Petitioners allege that the 1st Respondent has violated their
fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) by the appointment of the 5th
Respondent as DGM (Projects) for two reasons (i) that he was not eligible (ii)
that the interview process was flawed.

**Held:**

(1) The documents show that soon after the 5th Respondent became a member of
the Institution of Mining upon nomination by that institution, the Council
approved his registration on 5.11.1980, and that he was formally registered as
a Chartered Engineer on 24.3.81, and that a certificate is not issued unless
applied for and the date which appears on a certificate is the date on which
such application was received, and that, the 5th Respondent's application for
a Certificate of Registration had been received on 19.2.82.

These documents therefore indicate that the 5th Respondent had obtained full
membership not later than 24.3.81. He thus satisfied the requirements as to
professional qualifications and 11 years experience thereafter.

(2) As to the question whether the Leningrad Diploma, which the 5th Respondent
holds could not be regarded as being a Degree in Engineering or its
Equivalent‑ it was a matter for the 1st Respondent and the Interview Board and
as long as their decision was not perverse or unreasonable or tainted by
procedural error, court would not seek to substitute its views. The 1st
Respondent and the Interview Board, in the circumstances could reasonably have
concluded that the Leningrad Diploma was the equivalent of "a degree in
Engineering from a Recognised University."

**37**

(3) As regards the submission that the 5th Respondent did not work "in the
field" and did not have any practical experience. Rule 19 of the Institution's
Rules for Professional Review, prescribe as one of the requirements for
election as a Chartered Engineer (applying as a research candidate). Not less
than four years 'practical experience', and goes on to provide that this may
include upto 3 years on research for the award of a higher Degree.

**_Per_ Fernando, J.**

'If such periods are accepted as satisfying the requirement of Engineering
experience, no distinction can properly be made on this basis, apart from
that, it does not seem in any way unreasonable to treat appropriate experience
gained in the course of post graduate research studies in Engineering as being
"Engineering Experience."

(4) It is apparent that the job descriptions and the marking scheme to be
applied at the interview was not made known to the candidates prior to the
interview despite numerous requests. While it is desirable that criteria for
selection and the relative weightage be disclosed in advance, particularly
where the scheme of promotion is complex, in the present case the non
disclosure of the marking scheme in advance to all the candidates was not per
se discriminatory or a fatal irregularity. The apportionment of marks could
not be characterised as illegal or unreasonable, and the scheme itself was
therefore not improper.

(5) There was an unsatisfactory feature of the interview process, the
concealment of the job description and the marking scheme had left room for
doubt and suspicion, but the Petitioners had not shown that this affected
their performance at the interview, and there is nothing to suggest that the
Petitioners would have performed any better had this information been
disclosed. All candidates were equally disadvantaged in this respect.

**_Per_ Fernando, J.**

"The principle of promotion by reference to seniority and merit does not mean
that the needs of the institution and the Public or the demands of the post in
question must be ignored. Even if he had been given high marks nevertheless
the decision not to appoint him, to a post for which he was considered
unsuitable cannot be considered unlawful, unfair or unreasonable."

**AN APPLICATION** under Article 126 for infringement of Article 12 (1).

**38**

**Cases referred to:**

_Perera v Ranatunga, S.C._ 121/92, SCM 27.5.92. 1993‑1SLR 39.

_R. K.W. Goonesekera _ with _L. C. M. Swarnadhipathy _ for Petitioners.

_Sathyaa Hettige S.S.C._ for 1,2,3,4,5,6, Respondents.

_E. D. Wikremanayake  _ with _Dr. Jayampathy Wickremaratne_ and _Ms Anandhi
Cooray_ for 5th Respondent.

May 03, 1995.

**FERNANDO, J.**

_Cur. adv. vult._

The four Petitioners allege that the 1st Respondent Bureau has violated their
fundamental rights under Article 12(1) by the appointment of the 5th
Respondent as Deputy General Manager, Projects, for two reasons: that the 5th
Respondent was not eligible, and that the interview process was flawed.

The Petitioners, the 5th Respondent, and five others-holding the posts of
Project Manager or Specialist Engineer, which were in the same grade‑ were
invited to attend an interview on 24.11.92, to select two persons for
appointment as Deputy General Manager ("DGM"), and another for appointment as
Acting DGM. On 16.3.93 two persons were appointed as DGM, Buildings, and
Acting DGM, Contracts; the Petitioners make no complaint in respect of these
appointments. On 6.7.93 the 5th Respondent was appointed as DGM, Projects.

The candidates were aware of the following requirements of the scheme of
recruitment:

SCHEME OF RECRUITMENT FOR ENGINEERS CIVIL/ELECTRICAL/  
MECHANICAL /GEOTECHNICAL

Designation of Post | **:** | Deputy General Manager  
---|---|---  
Salary Scale (Rupees) | **:** |  7,800 ‑ 8 x 400 ‑ 11,000  
Qualifications and Experience | **:** |  A degree in Engineering from a
recognized University or equivalent and  
  
**39**

> > > full membership of a recognized Institution  
>  of Engineers  
>  and  
>  18 years engineering experience after  
>  graduation, of which 11 years should be after full membership.

Method of Selection |

**:** | Interview.  
---|---|---  
  
It is common ground that the Petitioners were eligible. Learned Counsel
appearing for them subjected the 5th Respondent's qualifications and
experience to minute scrutiny. He was admitted in 1968 to the Leningrad
Institute of Mining in the U. S. S. R.: after following a five year

course in Hydrogeology and Engineering Geology, he was conferred a "Diploma
with Honours" which recited that he was conferred the degree of Master of
Geological and Mineralogical Sciences: in 1973 he was awarded a bursary by the
Department of Engineering Geology of that Institute to pursue research studies
leading to the Ph. D. in Geology and Mineralogy, which he obtained in June
1977; he also followed a six‑month postgraduate advanced training course in
Engineering Geology in the same Department from September 1976 to March 1977;
and from March 1977 to March 1978 he was employed as a Research Engineer in
the same Department. He joined the 1st Respondent in April 1978 as a
Geologist; in 1980, at his request, he was re‑designated as "Engineering
Geologist." He was elected a Member of the (U. K) Institution of Mining and
Metallurgy ("the Institution of Mining") on 21.10.1980. Thereafter he was
registered by the (U.K.) Council of Engineering Institutions ("the Council")
as a Chattered Engineer; while the Petitioners accept that this constituted
"full membership of a recognized Institution of Engineers", they dispute the
effective date of his registration. In September 1983, Engineering Geologists
and Geolo­gists employed by the 1st Respondent, who were members of the
In­stitution of Mining and were registered by the Council as Chartered
Engineers, successfully made representations to the 1st Respondent to change
their designation to "Geotechnical Engineers".

The Petitioners contend that:

1\. as at November 1992, the 5th Respondent did not have eleven years
experience after "full membership" because the effective date of such
membership was February, 1982;

**40**

2\. the 5th Respondent did not have eighteen years "engineering expe­rience"
after graduation, because ‑

(a) "graduation" meant obtaining a "degree in Engineering or equivalent" and
the 1973 Leningrad Diploma did not satisfy this requirement;

(b) until 1983, when the 1st Respondent for the first time treated Geologists
as being Engineers, the 5th Respondent's work or service could not be regarded
as "engineering" experience; and

(c) in any event, the 5th Respondent's experience from 1973 to March 1978
should have been excluded as it was academic in nature; and

3\. The interview process was fatally flawed because ‑

(a) the 1st Respondent, and the 2nd Respondent (its Chairman), did not
disclose to the candidates the job descriptions of the vacant posts, and the
intended scheme of marking at the interview; and

(b) the Interview Board did not correctly compute the marks due to candidates
in respect of seniority.

1\. Learned Counsel for the Petitioners justifiably commented on the 5th
Respondent's failure to produce his certificate of registration as a Chartered
Engineer; and that is a document which the 1st Respondent and the Interview
Board ought to have called for and examined. However, the 5th Respondent
produced two letters received by him from the Council and the Institution of
Mining (though issued only in September 1993, after this petition was filed),
the authenticity of which the Petitioners do not challenge. These documents
show that soon after the 5th Respondent became a member of the Institution of
Mining, upon nomination by that Institution, the Council approved his
registration on 5.11.80; that he was formally registered as a Chartered
Engineer on 24.3.81; that a certificate is not issued unless applied for; that
the date which appears on a certificate is the date on which such application
was received; and that the 5th Respondent's application for a certificate of
registration had been received on 19.2.82. Thus whatever date the formal
certificate bears, these documents establish that

**41**

the 5th Respondent had obtained "full membership" not later than 24.3.81, and
not in February 1982 as the Petitioners contend. He thus satisfied the
requirements as to professional qualifications and eleven years experience
thereafter.

2\. It was strenuously contended that the 5th Respondent's first degree was
not in "Engineering"; that he was employed by the 1st Respondent as a
Geologist, and not as an Engineer, until his designation was changed in 1983;
and that therefore his work, service and experience prior to 1983 could not be
described as "engineering " experience. This submission depended on two
assumptions‑ firstly, that "a degree in Engineering " meant a degree in
Engineering as commonly understood in Sri Lanka, and included only a degree
obtained after a course of studies similar to a local course, and secondly,
that the nomenclature adopted by the 1st Respondent in classifying its staff
conclusively determined whether an employee was an "Engineer" or engaged in
"engineering" work. Both these assumptions may well have been valid, for the
purposes of this case, if the scheme of recruitment and other relevant
documents had expressly incorporated such restric­tions; but they did not. The
heading of the scheme of recruitment made it clear that "Geotechnical"
Engineers were included; necessarily, therefore, "Engineering" and
"engineering experience" included "Geotechnical" Engineers and "Geotechnical"
engineering experience; and there was no indication that this was effective
only from and after 1983. While it would be rash for me to attempt an
exhaustive definition of "Engineering", especially now that it is usual to
speak of Bioengineering, Genetic Engineering, Nuclear Engineering, Aerospace
Engi­neering, etc., I must observe that the discipline of Engineering is
neither diminishing nor static in scope. The Encyclopaedia Britannica
describes "Engineering" in these terms:

" . . . . . . . . . The application of scientific principles to the optimal
conversion of natural resources into structures, machines, products, systems,
and processes for the benefit of mankind . . . . . . . There are traditionally
four primary engineering disciplines, namely civil, mechanical, electrical and
chemical engineering, each of them having several distinct specialized
branches. Other important and distinct engineering disciplines are concerned
with mining, nuclear technology, and environmental, control . . . . . . . . .
Between these diverse fields of

**42**

engineering there is inevitably some overlap of interest and expertise. It is,
however, common to all branches of engineering that academic' training must
begin with a thorough grounding in the fundamental principles of science,
particularly mathematics and physics. Education may then be continued in
general engineering subjects, including draftsmanship. There is naturally a
differing emphasis in these subjects according to the branch of engineering
selected by the student."

"Engineering Geology" is described as the scientific discipline concerned with
the application of geological knowledge to engineering problems ‑ e.g. to
reservoir design and location, determination of slope stability for
construction purposes, and determination of earthquake, flood or subsidence
damage in areas considered for roads, pipelines or other engineering works.

Nowadays, for practical reasons, a degree course necessarily requires
specialization in some particular department, whether described as "Civil",
"Mechanical", "Electrical ", or otherwise. A degree in Engineering would
therefore include a degree in any area of specialization.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that the 5th Respondent's
Leningrad Diploma could not be regarded as being a degree in Engineering, or
its equivalent, as it was a qualification in Geology, and not in
**Engineering** as understood in Sri Lanka. The Respondents produced details
of the subjects offered for that Diploma, and Counsel submitted that these
could not be considered equivalent to those prescribed for a local degree in
Engineering. It is not for us to determine, on the merits, whether the Diploma
conferred by the Leningrad Institute of Mining was the equivalent of a degree
in Engineering from a recognized University; that was a matter for the 1st
Respondent and the Interview Board, and as long as their decision was not
perverse or unreasonable, or tainted by procedural error, this Court would not
seek to substitute its views. Further, this submission assumes an undue
narrowness in the field of Engineering which is not true even locally. Thus
the University Grants Commission's rules for admission to courses for 1990/91
refers to "Mining and Minerals Engineering " as a recog­nized field of
specialization in Engineering at the University of Moratuwa. Given the
emphasis **** on the construction of dams for irrigation and power in Sri
Lanka, in the absence of compelling reasons it would be unrea‑

**43**

sonable to exclude "Hydrogeology and Engineering Geology" from the discipline
of Engineering ‑ particularly in a country proud of its ancient hydraulic
civilization. The Petitioners have averred (and the Respondents have not
denied) that the purposes for which the 1st Respondent Bureau was established
included:

(i) the preparation of feasibility reports, plans, designs and estimates of
single and multipurpose irrigation, flood control and power projects, highway
projects, water supply and sewerage projects and similar engineering projects.

(ii) carrying out investigations, studies and research required for the
preparation of feasibility reports and plans, designs and estimates on such
projects.

It is also significant that the Institution of Engineers, Sri Lanka, has
confirmed that the engineering content of the 5th Respondent's degree course
has been accepted as satisfying the academic component for Associate
Membership of that Institution. According to the minutes of the Council of
that Institution, produced by the Petitioners, the Council approved the
guideline that "the academic component of a candidate's qualifications should
have a substantial engineering content". The fact that the 1st Respondent
initially appointed the 5th Respondent as a Geologist does not mean either
that he was not an Engineer or that his work was not in the field of
Engineering. The Respondents have produced details of the work done by him
from April 1978; this includes foundation investigations for major irrigation
and power projects, the preparation of reports on geotechnical investigations,
and the supervision of the construction of dams. There is nothing to suggest
that it was unreasonable to treat all this as engineering experience.

I am of the view that the 1st Respondent and the Interview Board could
reasonably have concluded that the Leningrad Diploma was the equivalent of "a
degree in Engineering from a recognized University"; that the 5th Respondent
graduated in 1973; that, whatever the designation given by the 1st Respondent
to his post, the work done by the 5th Respondent from April 1978 fell within
the description of "engineering experience".

**44**

It was then submitted that from 1973 to March 1978 the 5th Respondent did not
work "in the field", and did not have any "practical" experience; that work
done for postgraduate studies, research or training was academic in nature,
and could not be considered as "engineering experience". It appears, however,
that the 1st Respondent has not interpreted this requirement in this strict
manner; thus spells of administrative work, such as running and maintaining a
site office and quarters, administration of staff attached to the site office,
and public relations activities, as well as periods of postgraduate study
abroad, have been accepted (in regard to the 1st, 3rd and 4th Petitioners), as
satisfying this requirement. Learned Counsel for the Petitioners explained
this as being a concession made by the 1st Respondent in respect of periods of
work or study **while** in its service, and not for similar periods **before**
joining the 1st Respondent; and that this concession was made, not on account
of the substance of their studies, but because they continued to be employed
by the 1st Respondent as Engineers. If such periods are accepted as satisfying
the requirement of engineering experience, no distinction can properly be made
on this basis. Apart from that, it does not seem in any way unreasonable to
treat appropriate experience gained in the course of postgraduate research
studies in Engineering as being "engineering experience". Thus the Institution
of Engineers, Sri Lanka, prescribes as one of the requirements for election as
a Chartered Engineer (applying as a research candidate) not less than four
years "practical" experience, and goes on to provide that this may include "up
to three years on research for the award of a higher degree" (see Rule 19 of
the Institution's Rules for Professional Review). I hold that the 1st
Respondent and the Interview Board were entitled to take the view that the 5th
Respondent had the required period of experience.

3\. The Petitioners state that neither the job descriptions nor the marking
scheme to be applied at the interview was made known to the candidates prior
to the interview despite numerous requests. The 2nd Respondent did not deny
this, and explained that the posts of DGM were basically managerial posts,
that the duties involved changed from time to time, and that therefore he
decided that the exact job descriptions could not be given. He produced two
circulars issued in 1990 which, he claimed, indicated how the allocation of
duties had previously been made. Those circulars referred to three DGMs,
designated

**45**

as DGM (E & M) DGM **** (II) and DGM (III), and also indicated the specific
projects and functions allocated to each. However this would have been of
little assistance to the candidates, and might even have been misleading,
because the allocation of duties made immediately after the appointment of the
5th Respondent was quite different. As for the marking scheme, the 2nd
Respondent says he decided that this should be determined by the Interview
Board, and that "the Interview Board initially deliberated and decided on the
marking scheme". He also says that the Board applied the principle of merit
and seniority, and that candidates were interviewed as regards their past work
experience, to identify their special aptitudes, and to ascertain their
performance and suitability. That marking scheme was as follows:

Seniority | **‑** | 50  
---|---|---  
Engineering Experience | **‑** | 20  
Qualifications & experience in the relevant field | **‑** | 10  
Qualifications & experience in a connected field | **‑** | 05  
Performance at the interview | **‑** | 15  
Total | **‑** | 100  
  
(Seniority ‑ 30 marks proportionately for the first 4 years and 2 marks for
each additional year).

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners justifiably criticised the 2nd
Respondent's explanation for the failure to disclose the job descriptions,
correctly pointing out that the Interview Board obviously knew for what
specific posts they were interviewing the candidates. Thus, in regard to two
candidates (one of whom was the 2nd Petitioner), the Interview Board decided
that each was "good, but does not fit the posts **available "; **again, the
Board recommended appointments to three specific posts ‑ DGM Buildings, DGM
**Projects,** and Acting DGM **Contracts,** and hence obviously it was
considering candidates for those three posts; and finally, the Board adopted
the criterion "qualifications and experience **** in **the relevant field ",
**showing that from the outset it was looking for candidates in particular
"fields" and not others.

While it is desirable that criteria for selection and the active weightage be
disclosed in advance, particularly where the scheme of promotion is complex,
in the present case the nondisclosure of the

**46**

marking scheme in advance to all the candidates was not **_per se_**
discriminatory or a fatal irregularity. Counsel conceded that the
apportionment of marks, among the selected Criteria, could not be
characterised as illegal or unreasonable the scheme itself was therfore not
improper. He submitted, however, that the assessment of seniority was not
properly done, as the 1st, 2nd and 4th Petitioners 14 or 15 years of service
were each given 30 marks, while the 3rd Petitioner with 16 years was given
only eight marks for seniority. However, it turned out that it was not
seniority in overall service with the 1st Respondent, but seniority **in the
grade** (i.e. of Project Managers and Specialist Engineers) which had been
taken into account. It was not unreasonable or improper to allocate marks for
seniority on that basis, and there was no complaint of any error in
computation on that basis.

The Petitioners also complain that the marks actually given to each candidate
for "engineering experience" should have been allocated strictly in proportion
to the length of experience and not with reference to its quality. In my view,
the Interview Board was entitled to consider both aspects. Even if this
contention of the Petitioners is correct the additional marks which they would
have obtained could not have affected the result. They have made no complaint
in respect of any other aspect of the allocation of marks.

There is no allegation of **_mala fides_ **in regard to the interview or the
selection.

The net result is that the 5th Respondent was eligible for appointment but
there was an unsatisfactory feature of the interview process, in that the 1st
Respondent, the 2nd Respondent and the Interview Board though aware which
posts had to be filled, and the requirements thereof, withheld this
information from the candidates. Such concealment was unnecessary, and left
room for doubt and suspicion. However the petitioners have not shown that this
affected their performance at the interview; and there is nothing to suggest
that the Petitioners would have performed any better had this information been
disclosed. All candidates were equally disadvantaged in this respect.

The Interview Board did not record, in the form of marks its assessment of the
2nd Petitioner's performance: this itself is not an ir‑

**47**

regularity, because if, for some valid reasons a candidate is considered
unsuitable, it is not essential to go through the exercise of recording the
allocation of marks because of the fact that he was invited for the interview
does suggest that he was, **_prima facie_ , **suitable, but that is not
inconsistent with a later decision, after the interview, that he was not
suitable for the available posts. The principle of promotion by reference to
seniority and merit does not mean that the needs of the Institution and the
public, or the demands of the post in question, must be ignored (see _Perera v
Ranatunga_ (1) _,)_ Hence even if he had been given high marks, nevertheless
the decision not to appoint him, to a post for which he was considered
unsuitable, cannot be considered unlawful, unfair or unreasonable.

It was unnecessary secrecy about the interview process and the scheme of
marking that led to doubt and suspicion in the minds of the Petitioners.
However, the Petitioners have not succeeded in establishing, on a balance of
probability, that this resulted in any fundamental defect causing a denial of
equality, I therefore hold that an infringement of Article 12 (1) has not been
proved, and dismiss the application without costs.

**GOONEWARDENE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** ‑ I agree

_Application dismissed.s_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/26.html_  

