##  Thavaneethan v. Dayananda Dissanayake Commissioner of Elections and Others
- SLR - 74, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 26; (2003) 1 Sri LR 74 (7 October 2002)



**74**

**THAVANEETHAN** ****

**v.** ****

**DAYANANDA DISSANAYAKE** ****

**COMMISSIONER OF ELECTIONS  
AND OTHERS** ****

  


SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

ISMAIL, J., AND

WIGNESWARAN, J.

S.C. No. 20/2002 (FR) WITH SC Nos. 25 AND 26/2002 (FR)

7TH OCTOBER, 2002

_Fundamental Rights-General Election- Parliamentary Elections Act-Sudden
prevention of 55,000 voters including petitioners voting on alleged ground of
national security-Mala fide exclusion of voters-Unlawful arrangements for VVIP
voters to vote at their residence-Articles 12(1), 14(1) and 14(1)(h) of the
Constitution._

Arrangements were made to hold a General Election on 5.12.2001 throughout the
Island including in the Batticaloa District in which the petitioners were
vot­ers, but living within the area under the control of the LITE. Similar
situations prevailed in the Vanni and Trincomalee Districts. The Commissioner
of Elections (the 1st respondent) made arrangements to establish "cluster"
polling stations for voters resident in the uncleared areas to vote within
cleared areas, under Government control.



On the morning of 5.12.2001 the petitioners including a total of 40,000 voters
in the Batticaloa District and 15,000 voters in the Vanni District were
prevent­ed from entering the cleared area by the army presumably on oral and
secret instructions given by the Army Commander (the 3rd respondent)
purportedly in the interest of national security and to ensure "free and fair
elections" by pre­venting alleged infiltration of LTTE from uncleared areas to
cleared areas to launch an attack. These grounds were not supported by
evidence. On the other hand, the voters in the Batticaloa and Vanni Districts
at the previous Parliamentary General Election had been against the ruling
party; and the vot­ers in the Trincomalee District had been pro-Government. In
this context, the voters in the Trincomalee District entering from the cleared
areas from the uncleared areas were not stopped.



The 3rd respondent did not inform the 1st respondent about the stoppage of
vot­ers. No steps were taken by the 1st respondent to annul the poll in the
affected Districts or to postpone the same. At the same time special
arrangements were

75



made by a directive purporting to be under section 129 of the Parliamentary
Elections Act to enable the President, the Speaker, the Prime Minister and
three other Cabinet Ministers to cast their votes at their residences.

**Held :**

(1)        The order to bar the petitioners (or a total of about 55,000
voters) from voting was _mala fide_ for extraneous reasons probably to prevent
vot­ers from voting for the candidates of their choice. Thereby the
peti­tioners' right to freedom of movement guaranteed by Article 14(1 )(h) of
the Constitution was infringed. That right and rights under Article 12(1) and
14(1 )(a) could only have been restricted by law including Emergency
Regulations made under the Public Security Ordinance (Articles 15(6) and 15(7)
of the Constitution). A Regulation made by the President under the Prevention
of Terrorism Act by the President calling upon the Army to assist the police
did not permit the imposed restriction.

(2)       The impugned restriction which precluded the petitioners from voting
at the Election violated their freedom of expression under Article 14(1)(a) of
the Constitution which freedom is a collective right enjoyed by them with all
other voters. The petitioners are entitled to a free and fair election. Hence
their right is not a personal right limited to them as individuals. Therefore,
the petitioner's application is not a "public inter­est litigation".

(3)                 The 3rd respondent permitting the voters of the
Trincomalee District to vote without any restriction and the 1st respondent
permitting six important persons to vote at their residences infringed the
petitioner's right to equality under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

The purported direction under section 129 of the Parliamentary Elections Act
authorizing special voting facilities was unlawful in that the said section
had no application to the instant case. The favours granted to six VVIP and
VIPP were also made _mala fide_ and not based on rational grounds. On that
ground also the 1st respondent infringed the petitioner's rights under Article
12(1)

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

**Cases referred to :**

1 _Mallows_ v _Commissioner of Income Tax_ (1962) 66 NLR 32

2\. _Vadivelu_ v _OIC Sithambarapura Refugee Camp Police Post_ SC 44/2002 SCM
5.9.2002

76

3.           _Dias v Secretary, Ministry of Defence_ SC 604/2001 SCM 5.9.2002

4.     _Karunathilaka v Dissanayake_ (1999) 1 SRI LR 157 173-174

5.           _Egodawela v Dissanayake_ (Reported as Mediwake v Dissanayake (2001) SRI LR 177)

_J.C. Weliamuna_ with _Lavangi Weerapana_ and _Shantha Jayawardena_ for
peti­tioner in SC 20/2002

_K. Kanag-lswaran_ P.C. with _M.A. Sumanthiran_ for petitioners in SC 25/2002

_Dr. Jayantha de Almeida Gunaratne_ with _Kishali P. Jayawadena_ for
petitioners in SC 26/2002

_S. Marsoof,_ P.C. Additional Solicitor General with _S. Barrie,_ State
Counsel for 1st to 5th and 28th respondents in SC 20/2002 and for the 1st to
6th respon­dents in SC 25/2002 and SC 26/2002

# Cur. adv. vult

March 25, 2003

**FERNANDO, J.**

These three applications involve virtually identical issues connected with the
Parliamentary General Election held on 5.12.2001.



The five Petitioners in these three applications are citizens of Sri Lanka
registered to vote in the Batticaloa electoral district. They complain that on
5.12.2001, on their way to the polling stations allotted to them, army
personnel prevented them from entering the areas in which those polling
stations were situated (thus infringing their freedom of movement guaranteed
by Article 14(1)(h); that in consequence they were prevented from voting (a
denial of their freedom of expression guaranteed by Article 14(1)(a) read with
Article 4(e); that although large numbers of voters in the Batticaloa and
Vanni electoral districts were similarly prevented from voting -resulting in
the absence of a free and fair poll - a repoll was not ordered in the affected
areas (a further violation of their freedom of

77



expression); and that they were not treated equally with other vot­ers and/or
other sections of voters in Sri Lanka (in violation of their right to equality
and equal protection guaranteed by Article 12(1). The Petitioner in SC (FR)
Application No. 20/2002 ("the first Application") complains of a further
infringement of Article 12(1) in that the Commissioner of Elections, the 1st
Respondent, hastened to make special arrangements, not sanctioned by law, to
enable a handful of voters to vote from the safety of their homes, although no
action was taken to protect the exercise of his own right to vote.



When these applications were taken up for hearing on 7.10.2002, all Counsel
informed us that the facts were not serious­ly in dispute and requested that
all three matters be disposed of on written submissions, which were later
filed.

**THE FACTS**



It is sufficient to refer briefly to the facts disclosed in the peti­tion in
the first Application. The Batticaloa electoral district consists of three
polling divisions, namely Kalkudah, Batticaloa and Paddirippu. Each of those
divisions is sub-divided into a number of polling districts, for each of which
there were one or more polling stations. In 2001 Kalkudah had 79 polling
districts. For polling dis­tricts Nos. 70 to 79, there was only one polling
station, namely, the Mankerny Roman Catholic Tamil Mixed School (halls Nos. 1
to 10). Hall No. 5 was the polling station for polling district No. 74, the
Gramasevaka division of Vakarai central, where the Petitioner and his wife
resided. In normal circumstances, they should have been allotted a polling
station in or near Vakarai as they were residents of Vakarai. However, Vakarai
was an "uncleared" area (i.e. an area not within the control of the Government
and the armed forces of Sri Lanka), and in order to enable persons in
"uncleared" areas to vote, polling stations were allotted to them in "cleared"
areas. Such polling stations intended for voters in several different
"uncleared" areas were, for convenience and security, situated in one
location, in a "cluster". In order to vote at the Mankerny school, hall No. 5,
the Petitioner and his wife had to cross from the "uncleared" to the "cleared"
area, and that they had to do at the check-point (or entry point) at the
Kadjuwatte Army Camp. The Petitioner's complaint is

78

that on arrival at that check-point at 10.15 a.m. on 5.12.2001, he (and about
another 500 voters) were informed by the army officers present that they had
received orders from their superior officers not to permit any one to enter
the cleared areas that day. Nevertheless, hoping for a change of heart, they
waited till 2.30 pm., but that decision was not changed, and they returned
home disappointed.



The Petitioner stated that voters in the "uncleared" areas in the Batticaloa
and Vanni districts were similarly prevented from vot­ing, but not those in
the Trincomalee district which the ruling People's Alliance had won at the
previous Parliamentary General Election in 2000, securing 53,860 votes out of
133,130 valid votes polled. He further pleaded that:



".... the following persons are reported to have been given the vot­ing right
at their respective residences though they live in areas  
unaffected by war:

(a)        President Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga

(b)        Speaker Anura Bandaranaike

(c)        Prime Minister Ratnasiri Wickremanayake

(d)        Anuruddha Ratwatte



....no legal provision is prescribed to facilitate such persons to vote at
their residences in this manner."



The Petitioners in the other two applications were similarly prevented, at
various check-points, from entering "cleared" areas and voting at the polling
stations allotted to them. They alleged that the decision taken by the 3rd
Respondent to close the check-points was not in consultation with the 1st
Respondent, and was motivat­ed by political factors and not by a genuine
security need. They pleaded that they were treated differently to registered
voters in the rest of the country.



It is not disputed that at least 40,000 voters (out of a total of about
280,000) in the Batticaloa electoral district, and 15,000 vot­ers (out of a
total of about 210,000) in the Vanni electoral district, were similarly
prevented from voting. The 1st Respondent never­theless decided not to order a
repoll in the affected polling sta­tions.

 79

All the Petitioners prayed for declarations that their funda­mental rights
under Articles 12(1), 14(1 )(a) and 14(1)(h) had been infringed, and for
compensation and costs, while the Petitioner in the first Application also
sought a declaration that the voters in the "uncleared" areas of the
Batticaloa and Vanni districts are entitled to vote without any hindrance from
the Defence authorities as well as a repoll in those areas. The prayer for a
repoll was not pressed in the written submissions.

**Documents called for by the Court**



The first Application was filed on 4.1.2002, and leave to pro­ceed was granted
on 24.1.2002. The Respondents were granted time till 11.3.2002 for objections.
Since the matter was both impor­tant and urgent, as it concerned the
franchise, an early date of hearing was fixed, namely 2.4.2002, but it could
not be taken up till 7.10.2002. The 1st and 2nd Respondents (the Commissioner
of Elections and the Returning Officer for the Batticaloa district) were
directed to forward copies of (a) all correspondence with the Defence
authorities pertaining to the closure of entry points from "uncleared" areas
on 5.12.2002, (b) the material pertaining to the decision of the 1st
Respondent not to annul the results of the poll for the Batticaloa district
and not to hold a repoll, and (c) the material setting out the circumstances
in which the aforesaid four voters were permitted to vote at their residences,
and the relevant regulations or orders. The 3rd and 4th Respondents in the
first Application (the Commander of the Army, and the Commander of the 23rd
Division responsible for the Batticaloa district) were direct­ed to forward
copies of (a) the orders, messages and directives pertaining to the decision
to close the entry points, and (b) the cor­respondence and communications
between the 3rd Respondent and the officers of the Defence Ministry on that
decision.



There was no response from the 4th Respondent. By letter dated 20.2.2002
written on behalf of the 3rd Respondent, the Registrar of this Court was
informed that:

"all orders and instructions given to the subordinate officers _by the 3rd
Respondent_ with regard to the decision to close the entry points....

80

and the communication between the 3rd Respondent and the officers of the
Ministry of Defence were not written, but verbal." [emphasis added]



The Court order was to produce the orders, messages and directives pertaining
to the decision to close the entry points. It was not confined to the orders,
etc., given by the 3rd Respondent to his subordinates, but included the orders
etc. given _to_ the 3rd Respondent, as well as orders, etc. given, by the 4th
Respondent (and others in the Army) in order to implement that decision.
However, not a single document pertaining to the decision to close the entry
points, and the communication and implementation of that decision, was
furnished. The Petitioners in the second and third Applications produced a
copy of a facsimile message sent at 11.34 a.m. on 5.12.2001 from the
Headquarters of the 23 Division to the Headquarters of the 233 Brigade:

"From GOC for Bde Comd. Convey the fol text to District Secretary Bco from GOC
for Government Agent, District Secretary Bco and.... Returning Officer Bco.
AII entry points from uncleared area to cleared area have been closed based on
intel­ligence reports, to prevent LTTE plans to disrupt the conduct of free
and fair election and also to prevent the LTTE from infiltrat­ing to the
cleared area in the guise of voters."



The 2nd Respondent by letter dated 13.2.2002 forwarded to the Attorney-General
copies of six documents, requesting that these be submitted to this Court.
That was not done despite reminders from the Registrar. One of those documents
was described as a "message received from Headquarters of 23 Division, dated
5.12.2001, of the Army delivered to me by the Commanding Officer of 233
Brigade, Batticaloa."



It is clear that there were "orders, messages and directives" pertaining to
that decision and that they have been deliberately withheld from this Court.



The 1st Respondent failed to comply with the order made by this Court to
submit the material in regard to the aforesaid four vot­ers being permitted to
vote at their residences. He filed an affidavit dated 8.3.2003 which in effect
denied those allegations. It was only after this Court repeated that direction
on 2.4.2002 that the 1st

81



Respondent submitted three documents. One was a Gazette Extraordinary No.
1213/11 of 4.12.2001 containing an "Order under section 129 of the
Parliamentary Elections Act":  


".... having regard to the threat to the lives of the persons whose names are
specified in Column II of the schedule to these regulations by the LITE, [I]
do hereby direct the _Returning Officer of_ the Administrative Districts
specified in Column I... to be present at the respective _premises_
_described_ in the corresponding entry in Column III.... on December 05, 2001
_during the hours of poll_ and permit the aforesaid persons to cast their
votes in respect of the Parliamentary General Election _in his presence_ at
the afore­said premises....

** **

** **

**Column I Administrative district**

  ****

|

**Column II**

**Names**

**of Persons**

|

**Column III Description**

**of premises**

**  
  
**  
  
---|---|---  
  
** **

** **

Gampaha ****

** **





Kalutara ****

** **

** **

Colombo ****

** **

Matara ****

** **



Gampaha ****

** **

** **

Kandy ****

  ****

|

** **

** **

1 .Chandrika Bandaranaike Kumaratunga

2\. Ratnasiri Wickremanayake

3\. Lakshman Kadirgamar

4.Mangala Samaraweera

5.Anura Bandaranaike





6\. Anuruddha Ratwatte ****

|

President's House, Fort, Colombo I





Temple Trees, Colombo 03



Wijerama Mawatha, Colombo 07



Francis Samaraweera Mawatha.Gabada Weediya, Matara



Horagolla Walauwa, Nittambuwa

Mahaiyawa, Kandy." [emphasis added]



  ****  
  
** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

** **

That Order did not purport to empower the Commissioner of Elections, or any
one else, to issue further directions the  or instructions.

He also forwarded a photocopy of a letter dated 3.12..2001 written to him by
the Secretary to the President ("the Secretary", with a copy to the Attorney-
General, with its annexure dated 4.12.2001 from the Additional Director-
General of the Directorate of

82

Internal Intelligence ("ADG/DII") to the 5th Respondent, the Inspector-General
of Police.



The Secretary's letter stated:



"This has reference to my telephone conversation with you _this afternoon_
regarding the information received from very reliable sources within Sri Lanka
and abroad that [the President, Prime Minister, former Speaker Anura
Bandaranaike, Minister Ratwatte, Minister Kadirgamar and Minister Samaraweera
are being targeted by the LITE to be assassinated on the day of the Poll...
_They have been_ _advised by the security forces to avoid attending polling
sta­tions_ to cast their vote as it would be impossible to ensure their
safety... If they are to proceed to the polling stations to cast their vote,
strict security arrangements would have to be made which would include
checking the polling station, checking all those coming for voting etc. This
would cause disorganization of the election process, and I therefore request
you to look into the possibility of making alternate arrangements for them to
cast their votes with any other authority you consider suitable.



The Government Agent or the Asst Government Agent or any other similar level
officer may be arranged to facilitate their voting. _These arrangements would
be known only to you and_ _the officer who is responsible for this function_
for security rea­sons. I have annexed hereto a copy of _a report received
from_ _the Directorate of Intelligence.._.which is self-explanatory. Please
make the necessary arrangements and keep me informed the names of those
officers."[emphasis added]



The ADG/DII's memorandum, titled "Threat to VVIP and VIPP" (copied to
"DIG/PSD"), referred to information from "reliable and sensitive" sources -



"....about a LTTE plan to assassinate the under-mentioned VVIP and VIPP during
the Polling Day...[the President, the Prime Minister, Minister Ratwatte,
former Speaker Anura Bandaranaike, and Minister Samaraweera]. Information of a
specific threat on H.E.. the President and General Ratwatte was received
earlier, too, from another sensitive source from

83



overseas last week.... Hence it is strongly suggested that all _precautionary
methods_ be taken _when the above-mentioned_ _VVIP (and VIPP) have to visit a
Polling Booth_ to cast their vote, please." [emphasis added]



Both these documents bear the 1st Respondent's date stamp "04 DEC 2001" with
"1,00 pm" written by hand. It is clear therefore that the report referred to
in the Secretary's letter of 3rd December is the ADG/DII's memorandum of 4th
December. That report could not have been available when the Secretary
telephoned the 1st Respondent on the 3rd afternoon, and there has been no
clarifica­tion as to the nature of the "information" which the Secretary
con­veyed to the 1st Respondent on that occasion.

**Documents produced by the Commissioner**



It is necessary to refer to some of the other documents pro­duced by the 1st
Respondent with his affidavit.



By letter dated 4.12..2001, the Deputy Leader of the Tamil Eelam Liberation
Organization ("TELO") complained to the 1st Respondent that the Army had
ordered the closure of the Vanni entry point, and asked him to request the 3rd
Respondent to lift the restrictions, and, "if[that] is impossible, _to send a
ballot box_ with the government officials to the uncleared area and help them
to regis­ter their votes".



In two letters dated 5.12 .2001, the Returning Officer, Vanni district,
complained of the closure of the sole entry point which gave access to voters
from the "uncleared" areas of Vavuniya and Mannar; he stated, without
contradiction, that a decision had been taken at the Security Co-coordinating
conference held as early as 6.11.2001 at the Security Forces Headquarters,
Vanni, to keep that entry point open to allow voters of the "uncleared" areas
to vote; and he stressed that that arrangement had been communicated to all
contestant political parties, independent groups and election observers, and
that the failure to open the entry point could be treated as misleading those
parties, groups, and observers, as well as the voters.

84

On 5.12 .2001 the Returning Officer, Batticaloa, complained about the closure
of all the entry points in Batticaloa; he also stat­ed that he had received
written complaints from party candidates that large-scale impersonation had
taken place at the "cluster" polling stations. A Batticaloa Member of
Parliament , Joseph Pararajasingham, also complained, adding that he had
spoken to the 3rd Respondent who had claimed that they had taken a deci­sion
on the grounds of security and hence would not allow any per­son to come from
the "uncleared" areas; he added:



"This I feel is a decision taken by the Government to prevent the voters from
exercising their rights which is a blow to democracy.... please use your
powers and instruct the [3rd Respondent] to lift the blockade or declare the
elections in the Batticaloa district null and void".



The 1st Respondent forwarded those complaints to the Secretary, Ministry of
Defence, requesting him "to assess the situ­ation and regulate any voters
coming from these areas to cast their votes where the polling stations are
clustered". The response, if any, was not produced.



The Centre for Monitoring Election Violence also joined in this chorus of
protests, requesting that instructions be given to allow entry or that a
repoll be ordered. It was emphasized that "the contesting candidates had
earlier been given permission to cam­paign in "uncleared" areas [and] it is
ironic that the people who were canvassed for their votes are now being denied
their basic rights to cast their vote".



The 1st Respondent also produced the minutes of two meet­ings: one with the
3rd and 5th Respondents on 6.12 .2001, and the other with the representatives
of political parties and independent groups on 7.12.2001. These documents
established that the secu­rity forces did not consult him prior to closing the
entry points; that the 3rd and 5th Respondents explained that this was due to
secu­rity reasons, as otherwise LTTE cadres would have mingled with the voters
and infiltrated into the "cleared" areas; that the 3rd Respondent maintained
that there was only one entry point for Vanni, at which only 300 persons could
be checked per nine hour day, while Batticaloa had a few entry points at which
2,500 to 3,000

85

could be checked; and that 15,000 voters in the Vanni district and 40,000 in
Batticaloa were prevented from voting. As for a possible repoll, the 3rd
Respondent stated that the situation would not change in the near future, and
suggested that the poll be staggered over a three or four day period. The 1st
Respondent did not con­sider that to be feasible, and decided not to order a
repoll. He made no reference to the complaints of large-scale impersonation
men­tioned by the Returning Officer, Batticaloa.

**Newspaper reports**

In view of the uncertainty as to who was responsible for the impugned
decision, and why and when it was taken, it is necessary to refer to certain
newspaper reports and other documents pro­duced by some of the Petitioners -
not as evidence of the truth of their contents, but to appreciate the 3
Respondent's respones to them, and to test the credibility of his affidavit.

The _Island_ of Thursday 6.12 .2001 reported that:

_ _

_" On a directive issued by the government _on Tuesday, five military
controlled civilian entry and exit points [in Vavuniya and Batticaloa] were
closed yesterday barring over 50,000 registered voters...government officials
said..." [emphasis added]

The _Sunday Times_ of 9.12..2001 quoted MP Pararajasingham:



"....thousands of voters in the uncleared areas...had been prevented from
voting by the security forces who closed the entry points into the cleared
area reportedly _on a special_ _directive from President Chandrika
Kumaratunga... " _[empha­sis added]



The Daily News of 13.12 .2001 reported:



"The Army in a press release [issued on 5.12 .2001] justified the action as a
move to ensure free and fair elections. 'To ensure free and fair elections in
the cleared area of Vanni and Batticaloa entry points were not opened today.
There were _credible intelligence reports_ that the LTTE were plan-

86



ning to enter cleared areas in the guise of voters to create violence in order
to disrupt free and fair elections'. But Vanni district TULF MRestates] The
hidden objective of the Clo­sure of entry points is _to prevent the TULF
supporters...from_ _voting'... " _[emphasis added]



In its preliminary report issued on 7.12 .2001, the European Union Observation
Mission commented:



"The decision of the army to close check points at Vavuniya and Batticaloa
prevented many thousands of people from exercising their right to vote. It
would seem that there is no justification for this action and serious
questions have to be raised about the political motivation behind it."
[emphasis added]



Criticism and speculation about the decision and its motiva­tion led the 3rd
Respondent to respond. The _island_ of 4.1.2002 reported thus:



"Balagalle replies to criticism of army's conduct during polls



The Army Commander at a meeting with the election moni­toring group PAFFREL...
sought to respond to severe criti­cism made against the army....'ft _is bad
for the army's morale_ _to feel that it is politicized_ the Army Commander
told the group... _the Army Commander himself had called the meet­_ _ing....
to explain the events of Dec.5_ According to PAF- FREI General Balagalle
explaining the closure of the entry points.... had said that it had not _been
done on the initiative of the army...._ at a meeting on December 3 of the top
brass of security forces the Inspector-General of Police had filed two reports
that the LTTE planned to infiltrate and destabilize the East. This , he said,
supplemented military intelligence reports _over previous weeks...._ He had
explained that defer­ence had been given to the police reports as it was the
Police force that was in charge of elections... The decision to shut down
according to him was one _taken by the civilian author­_ _ities._ He had
suggested alternatively that the elections be held on a staggered basis, that
is over two days, to make it possible for the security forces to have enough
numbers to keep the check points open. He had added that when there

87



was a call for a repoll in the East, he had informed the Commissioner of
Elections that it would be possible for the security forces to keep the check
points open and provide adequate security....The Army Commander [also referred
to an army] platoon....specifically told to provide just protection to the
Deputy Minister of Defence..." [emphasis added]

**Respondents' affidavits**



The 3rd Respondent did not refer to that report in his affidavit dated
11.3.2002 filed in these proceedings, but stated that:

(a)                 on 24.11.2001 the Inspector-General of Police (the 5th
Respondent) requested that an additional 8,000 army per­sonnel be made
available so that police officers could be released for election duty;

(b)                 a conference was accordingly held at the Joint Operational
Headquarters [it was not stated when] and it was pointed  
out that such a large number could not be provided as it would affect security
arrangements;

(c)                 after further discussions [it was not stated when] between
Director Operations of the Army and the senior police officer  
in charge of election security 99 platoons (of 30 men) were provided from non-
operational areas in order to release police officers for election duty and
another 72 platoons were placed on reserve in different districts to assist
the police;

(d) in the context of inadequate reserve troops to handle the large number of
persons who would be crossing over to the  
cleared areas in order to cast their vote in the Batticaloa and Vanni
districts, and the _possibility that_ LTTE cadres may use  
the opportunity to infiltrate into the cleared areas from the uncleared areas
with the objective of disrupting the election,  
_certain discussions were held_ [it was not stated when] _by_ _him with Field
Commanders;_

(e) "as the said _discussions_ disclosed the dangers involved in permitting
such a large number of persons crossing over to  
the cleared areas giving rise to security risks, whereby a

88



large number of voters in the cleared areas may be pre­vented from voting, a
_recommendation was made to the Chief of Defence Staff_ to close down all
entry points from the uncleared areas to the cleared areas in Vanni and
Batticaloa districts in order to prevent LTTE infiltration, which
_recommendation was approved by the Chief of Defence Staff.... ";_

(f)                     action to prevent persons crossing from the
"uncleared" areas was taken _bona fide_ in the interest of national securi­ty,
for the preservation of public order, and enable a peace­ful election;

(g)                 on 6.12 .2001 he had agreed to provide security at a
repoll provided the poll was staggered over a period of three or  
four day. [emphasis added throughout]

I find the 3rd Respondent's affidavit not worthy of credit for sev­eral
reasons. First, scrutiny of the affidavit reveals several unsatis­factory
features. The rights of over 50,000 voters were involved in a very important,
highly controversial, and extremely sensitive mat­ter, but the 3rd Respondent
failed to give any explanation for not informing the 1st Respondent, for
treating Trincomalee differently, and for the absence of any written record of
the impugned decision and its communication. The affidavit did not even
disclose whether that decision had been communicated to the President, as
Commander-in-Chief and Minister of Defence, let alone other high officials of
that Ministry and the other branches of the security forces. The necessary
implication of his affidavit is that such an important decision (both the
recommendation and the approval) was based - not on factual reports - but on a
"possibility", and/or "dangers" disclosed at "discussions". It made no mention
of a sin­gle report from any source whatsoever. Second, the position that
there was no written record is inconsistent with the facsimile mes­sage of
5.12. 2001. Finally, apart from a general denial, the 3rd Respondent did not
refer to the claim that he had called the press conference reported in the
_Island_ of 4.1.2002, or the accuracy of that report, which contains a wholly
different account of the deci­sion-making process.

89

Some of the glaring contradictions between the 3rd Respondent's explanation at
the press conference and his affidavit are as follows. The former attributes
the impugned decision to a meeting on 3.12. 2001 of the "top brass of the
security forces", _including_ the 5th Respondent, while the latter refers to a
meeting on an unspecified date between the 3rd Respondent and the Field
Commanders _with­out_ the 5th Respondent; the former refers to police reports
which confirmed previous military intelligence _reports,_ while the latter
refers only to _possibilities_ and _dangers;_ the former alleges that the
impugned decision was _not on the initiative of the army_ but was taken by the
_" civilian authorities", _while the latter unequivocally admits a
recommendation by (or with the concurrence of) the 3rd Respondent to the Chief
of Defence Staff to close the entry points; the former implies that the 3rd
Respondent was _against a_ closure, and had sug­gested that the poll be held,
though staggered over two days, while the latter admits that he was _in
favour_ of the closure; and the former claims that the 3rd Respondent had
informed the 1st Respondent that if a repoll was held that the entry points
could be kept open and security provided, while the latter made this offer
conditional upon the poll being staggered over three to four days.



The affidavits of the 1st and 3rd Respondents were not at all helpful. They
denied all the averments in the Petitioners' affidavits "except those
hereinafter specifically admitted"., then admitted two or three purely formal
averments, and pleaded unawareness of three or four other averments; and
finally answered the remaining twenty-odd averments by denying them (i.e. for
the second time) "in so far as they were inconsistent with" some facts which
they specif­ically pleaded. The result was that they did not "specifically
admit" the greater part of the Petitioners' averments, which had therefore to
be taken as denied. The matters denied in this way included the fact that the
6th to 17th Respondents were the General Secretaries of the Political Parties
which contested the Batticaloa district, the electoral divisions of that
district, the army checkpoints therein, the Gazette notification of the
dissolution of Parliament, and fact that 1st Respondent had made arrangements
for several persons to vote at their residences. Affidavits filed by State
officials must facil­itate, rather than hinder, the ascertainment of the
truth.

90

The written submissions filed on behalf of the 1st to 5th Respondents on
20.11.2002 obscured the factual position even fur­ther:



"On the eve of the election, army intelligence sources unveiled a plan by the
LTTE to infiltrate into cleared areas in the East on the 5th of December, and
_to lay under siege_ _a large area and to attack several military bases_ on or
about [election] day.



The seriousness of the security situation in the country was further confirmed
as the Inspector General of Police was in possession of 2 intelligence reports
clearly indicating that the LTTE was planning to enter in large number the
cleared areas...These reports were produced at a conference held at Joint
Operational Headquarters on the 3rd of December 2001 a mere 2 days prior to
[election day]."



The Respondents' affidavits did not refer to any "siege" or attacks on
military bases, or to a conference on 3.12 .2001 at which the 5th Respondent
was present and produced intelligence reports in his possession. The
conference of 3.12 .2001 was referred to only in the _Island_ report of
4.1.2002, and the above submissions seem to accept the accuracy of that
report, and give rise to further questions as to the "civilian authorities" to
whom the 3rd Respondent attributed responsibility for the impugned decision.

The 2nd,4th and 5th Respondents did not file affidavits. The 5th Respondent
passed away while these Applications were pend­ing.

**THE ISSUES**

Several questions arise for decision:

(1)                 Who took the decision to close the entry points, when, and
for what reason?

(2)                 Was the closure of the entry points an infringement of the
Petitioners' freedom of movement?

(3)                 (a) Was that closure an infringement of the Petitioners'
free­dom of expression?

91

(b) Was the failure to order and hold a repoll an infringe­ment of the
Petitioners' freedom of expression?

(4)                  Was that closure an infringement of the Petitioners'
right to equality and the equal protection of the law?

(5)                  Was the 1st Respondent's "Order under section 129" an
infringement of the Petitioners' right to equality and the  
equal protection of the law?

(6 If so, how grave were those infringements?

**DECISION TO CLOSE ENTRY POINTS**



There is no doubt whatsoever that on orders given by the 3rd Respondent, or
with his concurrence or approval, army personnel did suddenly close the entry
points in the Batticaloa and Vanni dis­tricts, and that neither the 3rd
Respondent nor other high officers of the army informed the 1st Respondent,
leaving him to learn of the closure only at the eleventh hour through others.
The fact that a complaint was made by TELO on 4.12 . 2001 shows that the
deci­sion had become known that day, and hence must have been made on 4.12
.2001 or earlier.

The failure to record, and to communicate, that decision in writing gives rise
to grave suspicions as to its _bona fides._ That deci­sion directly affected a
significant number of citizens, and not just a handful; it related to the
conduct of a general election of serious concern to all citizens (let alone
election observers, local and for­eign), particularly at a time when public
confidence in the integrity of the electoral process was sinking fast.
Furthermore, the decision was one that could only have been taken in the due
exercise and discharge of public powers and functions, and must have been
communicated to the civilian authorities. There was no need for secrecy.
Indeed, the need was for publicity. It was therefore impor­tant that the
decision should have been, and should also have been perceived as being, both
lawful and fair. It should, unquestionably, have been promptly reduced to
writing (so as to serve as evidence to guide those functionaries who had to
act on that decision, of _Mallows v Commissioner of Income Tax_ (1), and
communicated in writing. Respect for the Rule of Law required that the
decision-mak­ing process, particularly in a matter relating to the franchise,
should

92

not have been shrouded in secrecy, and that there should have been no
obscurity as to what the decision was and who was responsible for making it
(cf _Jayawardena v Wijayatilake,_ [2001] 1Sri LR 132,143). If the 3rd
Respondent was truthful when he stat­ed that the decision was not recorded or
communicated in writing, such secrecy - in the absence of some good reason for
secrecy -points to a desire to conceal some illegality and/or impropriety. If,
contrary to what the 3rd Respondent stated, the decision (and its
communication) was in fact duly documented, the failure to pro­duce the
relevant documents establishes that they were withheld because their
production would have disclosed some illegality and/or impropriety.



The real reason for the closure of the entry points remains shrouded in
mystery. According to the 3rd Respondent, what was feared were LTTE
infiltration, disruption and destabilization. A merely subjective or
speculative fear was not enough to justify clo­sure: there had to be an
objective and reasonable basis for such fear. However, his affidavit discloses
that his own recommendation as well as the approval of the Chief of Defence
Staff was _not_ based on any factual reports, but only on a "possibility", and
on "dangers" disclosed in the course of discussions, of LTTE infiltration,
disrup­tion and destabilization - without any elaboration or supporting
material. Had any one of ordinary intelligence been told during the election
period that it was proposed to allow voters from "uncleared" areas to enter
"cleared" areas in order to vote, his immediate response - without the benefit
of any intelligence reports - would have been that there was indeed a danger
of such infiltra­tion, etc.



That LTTE cadres, some having voting rights, might mingle with voters and
infiltrate into the "cleared" areas was by no means an unforeseen possibility
that arose unexpectedly. For the reasons stated in the next paragraph, it is
impossible to believe that this possibility occurred to responsible officials
in high places only a day or two before polling day.



It was a known and obvious danger from the outset - just as there were other
dangers in other districts and provinces. Those charged with assisting in the
conduct of a democratic election do not cave in to such dangers, but prepare
to meet them. That is why

93



the 1st Respondent and the security forces had been going ahead with
arrangements to allow voters to enter the "cleared" areas (as the Returning
Officer, Vanni, pointed out, four weeks previously the Security Coordinating
conference at Vanni had decided to keep the Vanni entry point open);"cluster"
polling stations were estab­lished for voters coming from "uncleared" areas;
and candidates were allowed to campaign in the "uncleared" areas. Obviously
all concerned were of the view that adequate safeguards could be taken in
respect of the risks involved. The 3rd Respondent's affi­davit did not
disclose whether, and how, that situation had changed. Besides, if the 3rd
Respondent truly believed that there had been a significant change in the
situation, he was under an obligation immediately to inform the 1st Respondent
who was responsible for the overall conduct of the election. The newspaper
report of his press interview claimed that the 5th Respondent had filed two
reports on 3.12. .2001, and the Respondents' written submissions make the same
claim. Even if I were to treat the newspaper report as evidence, there are
good reasons why the reports said to have been filed by the 5th Respondent
cannot be accepted as being the real reason for the impugned decision: the 3rd
Respondent claimed at that interview that there had been military intelligence
reports received "over previous weeks". If that was true, it meant that well
before 3.12 .2001 (and probably even before the meeting of 24.11.2001)
military intelligence reports had confirmed to him what commonsense had
already indicated - but the 3rd Respondent chose not to act on those reports,
and did not even consider it worthwhile to inform the 1st Respondent. Further,
none of those reports have been produced, no excuse has been offered for that
failure, the 5th Respondent has not filed an affidavit, and the Court has not
been told of their contents even in a general way. Either way, therefore, the
3rd Respondent has failed to establish that there were reasonable grounds,
based on national security, for the closure of the entry points.



Of course, the security forces were entitled - and indeed obliged - to take
those risks seriously. Careful search of persons crossing from the "uncleared"
areas was essential. The real prob­lem was the difficulty of searching large
numbers of such voters within a short space of time. But that was not a
difficulty which sud-



94

denly arose on 4.12.2001. It existed from the beginning, and was aggravated by
the 5th Respondent's request on 24.11.2001 for 8,000 army personnel. If the
real reason was that the army was unable to assign enough personnel to search
voters, that should have been communicated to the 1st Respondent at once.
Besides, if that was the reason, the army should not have closed the entry
points completely, but should at least have searched the few who could be
searched and allowed them to cross over. I must note also that there would
have been no lack of personnel if the poll in the affected areas was taken on
a later day, because then personnel from elsewhere could have been brought in.



That makes it necessary to consider why the 3rd Respondent kept the 1st
Respondent in the dark. Had the 1st Respondent been informed promptly, there
were other options which he could have considered. Section 24 of the
Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981 ("the Act"), empowers the
Commissioner of Elections - where it is necessary due to an emergency - to
alter the location of a polling station and/or to postpone the poll in any
electoral district. Section 33 empowers him to stipulate different hours of
polling. If the real difficulty which the forces faced was the lack of
personnel on 5.12.2001, the 1st Respondent may well have considered
postpon­ing the poll in Batticaloa to, say, the 10th and the poll in Vanni to
the 15th; and he may have considered suitably relocating the "cluster" polling
stations, perhaps to the entry points themselves. The ques­tion also arise
whether section 24(3) - on the principle that the greater includes the lesser,
or read with section 129 of the Act, to which reference is made later in this
judgement - permitted the post­ponement of the poll in respect of _a part_ of
the electoral division; and also whether, on a similar basis, he could extend
the hours of poll in respect of the "cluster" polling stations only. It is
necessary to spec­ulate as to what he might have done: the fact is that the
failure to inform him prevented him from exploring the feasibility of
alternative arrangements, consistent with national security, to enable a
signifi­cant section of the voters to cast their votes. Having regard to the
prompt and decisive action which he took within hours to ensure that a handful
of "VVIP and VIPP" were able to vote in safety, one can­not exclude the
likelihood of the 1st Respondent devising with equal urgency and ingenuity a
course of action to protect the exercise of the franchise by 55,000 voters,
albeit ordinary voters.

95

In the circumstances, the 3rd Respondent's unexplained fail­ure to inform the
1st Respondent makes it likely that his real inten­tion was to prevent them
voting either then or later, knowing that, that would further the interests of
parties or groups not hopeful of their support.



To sum up, the 3rd Respondent was wholly or mainly respon­sible for the
decision to close the entry points; the danger of LTTE infiltration was a
known danger, which could and should have been faced; there is no evidence
that on the 3rd or the 4th of December that danger suddenly became so grave as
to warrant the closure of the entry points; even assuming that it did, at
least the few voters who could have been checked should have been allowed to
enter the "cleared" area, and what is more the decision to close should not
have been concealed from the 1st Respondent; and the secre­cy, haste and other
circumstances show that the decision was not _bona fide,_ but motivated by
extraneous considerations.

**Freedom of Movement**  


Article 15(6) permits the freedom of movement guaranteed by Article 14(1)(h)
to be subjected to restrictions imposed by "law" in the interests of national
economy. Article 15(7) permits further restrictions in the interests of
national security, public order, the pro­tection of public health or morality,
and for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and
freedoms of others or of meeting the just requirements of the general welfare
of a democratic society; and "law" includes regulations made under the law
relating to public security.



In the written submissions tendered on behalf of the 1st to 5th Respondents,
they "emphatically state" that measures to close the entry points were taken
"under the specific powers vested upon them both by the Prevention of
Terrorism (Armed Forces) Regulations No.10 of 2001 and the Prevention of
Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979, made operative by gazette
notification No. 1212/15 of 28th November 2001"; that "the Respondents were
left with no choice but to ensure security to the public at large even if it
involved the restriction of movement of a category of persons seeking
clearance to the cleared areas"; and

96

 that "the said restriction of movement was imposed purely on the basis that
any or all of such persons who were thus restricted were 'suspected
terrorists' in the interest of preserving not only the fundamental rights but
also the lives of thousands of other citizens who would otherwise have been
affected."



I must note that the above submissions were made on behalf of the 1st and 2nd
Respondents as well, and thus imply that they, too, now seek to justify the
closure.



It was further submitted that Article 15(7) makes the funda­mental rights
recognised by Articles 12 and 14 subject to "such restrictions as may be
prescribed by law in the interests of nation­al security, public order...";
that 'law' _includes_ regulations made under the law for the time being
relating to public security"; that "the term "law" in the given context should
essentially constitute an Act of Parliament _or its recognized equivalent
promulgated in the interest of national security and public order, but is not
restricted to_ _regulations made under the Public Security Ordinance "; _and
that although specific reference has been made to that Ordinance, Article
15(7) "extends to all Acts enacted for the maintenance of national security,
public order, etc." The PTA, as its preamble shows, was enacted for the
purpose, _inter alia,_ of maintaining national security and public order; the
regulations and Order made under the PTA constitute "law"; and the
restrictions contained there­in constitute "restrictions prescribed by law"
for the purpose of Article 15(7).



The Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act No. 48 of 1979 ("the
PTA") empowers the Minister (in Part III) to make detention orders and
restriction orders in respect of particular **** per­sons suspected of
unlawful activity. Our attention was not drawn to any provision authorizing
restriction of movement in general, or in respect of unspecified persons.



Section 27 of the PTA empowers the Minister to make regu­lations for the
purpose of carrying out or giving effect to the princi­ples and provisions of
that Act. The President, as the Minister, made and gazetted on 3.8.2001 the
PTA (Armed Forces) Regulations No.10 of 2001, Regulation 2 of which provided:

97

"The President may, where she is of the opinion that, for the purpose of
giving effect to the principles and provisions of [the PTA] and for combating
terrorism or other civil distur­bances and for the purpose of maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the life of the community, it is neces­sary
to do so, by Order, call out the armed forces on active service _for the
aforesaid purposes in such areas as may be specified in such Order, for
assisting the Police Force in car­rying out their duties in terms of the
aforesaid Act. " _[empha­sis added]

The President thereafter made an Order under Regulation 2, gazetted on
28.11.2001, calling out the "armed forces on active ser­vice [in specified
areas including Batticaloa and Vanni] for the pur­pose of giving effect to the
principles and provisions of the PTA and for combating terrorism or other
civil disturbances, [etc]."



The essence of the Respondents' contention is that the PTA is a law relating
to national security and/or public order; that "law" includes regulations
under the law relating to public security, and that (1) the word "includes"
indicates that other regulations (besides those under the Public Security
Ordinance) are within that definition of "law", and (2) the PTA is in any
event part of "the law relating to public security; and therefore that the PTA
Regulations No. 10 of 2001 and the Order of 28.11.2001 are regulations that
validly impose restrictions on Article 14(1)(h).



I agree that the PTA _is_ a law relating to national security and/or public
order, however the PTA itself does not impose any restrictions on freedom of
movement, except in respect of specified persons, suspected of unlawful
activity, in terms of orders made by the Minister. The PTA did not authorize
any of the Respondents to impose any restrictions on the Petitioners' rights
under Article



The word "includes" in Article 15(7) does not bring in regula­tions under
other laws. "Law" is restrictively defined in Article 170 to _mean_ Acts of
Parliament and laws enacted by any previous legis­lature, and to include
Orders-in-Council. That definition would have excluded all regulations and
subordinate legislation. The effect of

98

the word "includes" was therefore only to expand the definition in Article 170
by bringing in regulations under the law relating to pub­lic security.



While at first sight "public security" may seem to cover much the same ground
as "national security and public order", it is clear that "the law relating to
public security" has been used in a narrow sense, as meaning the Public
Security Ordinance and any enact­ment which takes its place, which contain the
safeguards of Parliamentary control set out in Chapter XVIII of the
Constitution. Article 15 does not permit restrictions on fundamental rights
other than by plenary legislation \- which is subject to pre-enactment review
for constitutionality. It does not permit restrictions by execu­tive action
(i.e. by regulations), the sole exception permitted by Article 15(1) and 15(7)
being emergency regulations under the Public Security Ordinance because those
are subject to constitu­tional controls and limitations, in particular because
the power to make such regulations arise only upon a Proclamation of
emer­gency, because such Proclamations are subject to almost immediate
Parliamentary review, and because Article 42 provides that the President shall
be responsible to Parliament for the due exercise of powers under the law
relating to public security. It is noteworthy that Article 76(2) expressly
recognizes that Parliament may delegate to the President the power to make
emergency regulations under the law relating to public security. Other
regulations and orders which are not subject to those control made under the
PTA and other statutes, are therefore not within the extended definition of
"law".



In any event, neither the PTA Regulations nor the Order thereunder purport to
impose restrictions on the freedom of move­ment. The PTA Regulations only
authorize the making of an Order to call out the armed forces, for the limited
purpose of assisting the Police Force, in carrying out their duties under the
PTA.

I hold that there was thus no "law" validly imposing restric­tions on the
Petitioners' freedom of movement.



However, the freedom of movement is subject, independent­ly of Article 15, to
certain inherent limitations, just as the freedom of speech does not entitle a
person to falsely cry, "Fire!" in a crowded theatre (of _Vadivelu_ v _O.I.C.
Sithambarapuram Refugee Camp_

99

_Police Post_ (2). Thus during a riot or a fire the police may justifiably
restrict entry to an area to which the public would otherwise have a right of
access if that was necessary in order to quell the riot or to fight the fire.
If the army personnel at the various check-points had prevented the
Petitioners from entering the "cleared" areas, _bona_ _fide,_ in order to
protect national security or to prevent the disruption of the election, I
doubt whether the Petitioners could have com­plained that their freedom of
movement had been infringed. In this instance, however, the army personnel
were carrying out orders given _malafide,_ for extraneous purposes. As I have
already observed, the failure to inform the 1st Respondent of the closure, and
the fact that even the 300 voters who could have been searched at each entry
point were denied entry, confirm that the denial of access was anything but
_bona fide._



Furthermore, it is clear that the restrictions thus placed on the freedom of
movement of the Petitioners cannot be regarded as minor irritants (cf _Dias_ v
_Secretary, Ministry of Defence_ (3) inciden­tal to verifying identity and
checking baggage reasonably neces­sary for regulating entry into "cleared"
areas. It was well known that the Petitioners (and many others) wished to
travel on 5.12.2001 in order to vote, and that even a few hours' delay would
make such travel futile.



I therefore hold that the Petitioners' fundamental rights under Article
14(1)(h) have been infringed by the 3rd Respondent.

**Freedom of Expression**

It is not disputed that the closure of the entry points had the foreseen
result of denying the Petitioners and numerous other vot­ers the opportunity
to exercise their right to vote. As I held in _Karunathilaka_ v _Dissanayake_
(4), the silent and secret expression of a citizen's preference, as between
one candidate and another, by the exercise of his right to vote is an exercise
of the freedom of speech and expression. That freedom was totally denied, and
not merely delayed.

The Petitioners have also complained that other voters - the wife of the
Petitioner in the first Application, other voters in the

100



same electoral district, and even voters in another district - have been
prevented from exercising their right to vote. In _Egodawela_ v
_Dissanayakd5)_ (reported as _Mediwake_ v _Dissanayake),_ it was held, for the
reasons stated at pages 210-213, that the right to vote had both an individual
and a collective aspect. Being a Parliamentary General Election the result at
the Petitioners' polling station affected the result in the Batticaloa
electoral division, and that in turn affected the result nationally. The
Petitioners thus had an interest in the results of all electoral divisions.
Impairment of the rights of voters elsewhere diluted the value of their own
votes. I do not regard the Petitioners' applications as being "public interest
liti­gation" to enforce the rights of others, because it is not the right of
others, or of the public, which they seek to vindicate, but an integral aspect
of their own fundamental rights.



I therefore hold that the Petitioners' freedom of speech and expression under
Article 14(1)(a) read with Article 4(e) has been infringed by the 3rd
Respondent.



However, that infringement was not final. The law provided a remedy. The
minutes of the meeting of 7.12.2001 show that the 1st Respondent himself
recognized that the circumstances in which 55,000 voters were suddenly
prevented from voting cried out for a repoll - it was quite plain that there
had been no genuine poll in the affected "cluster" polling stations, and the
decision in _Egodawela_ (cf pages 201-202) was applicable. The 1st Respondent
did not order a repoll only because the 3rd Respondent stated that security
could not be provided unless the poll was staggered for three or four days. It
is not easy to apportion blame, and I would only reiterate what I observed in
_Egodawela:_ the 1st Respondent made an hon­est effort - although inadequate -
to ensure a genuine election, but his authority was insidiously undermined by
withholding the neces­sary support and resources. It is the obligation of the
State to ensure "the full realization of the fundamental rights and freedoms
of all persons" and to "strengthen and broaden the democratic structure of
government and the democratic rights of the People.... by affording all
possible opportunities to the People to participate at every level in national
life and in government" (cf Articles 27(2)(a) and 27(4)). Here, in one way or
another, the State machinery has been manipulated to ensure the converse - a
flagrant denial of the fundamental

101

 rights of 55,000 voters, which made the election for the Batticaloa and Vanni
districts neither free nor fair. The failure to order a repoll would only
encourage future infringements.



I hold that the Petitioners' freedom of speech and expression was infringed by
the 1st Respondent.

**Right to Equality**



The decision to close the entry points was neither _bona fide_ nor merely
mistaken; it was arbitrary, and intended to prevent the Petitioners exercising
their franchise probably for political reasons.

There were aggravating factors. Other voters, similarly cir­cumstanced, living
in "uncleared" areas in the Trincomalee district were not subjected to similar
restrictions, and there was not a word of explanation as to how the dangers of
LITE infiltration, disruption and destabilization were averted in Trincomalee.
Remedial action in the form of a repoll was denied.



I therefore hold that the Petitioners' right to equality and the equal
protection of the law under Article 12(1) was infringed by the 3rd Respondent.

**Order under Section 129**

Section 129 of the Parliamentary Elections Act provides thus for the "removal
of difficulties"



"If any difficulty arises in _first giving effect to any of the pro­visions of
this Act,_ the Commissioner may, by Order pub­lished in the Gazette, issue all
such directions as he may deem necessary with a view to providing for any
special or unforeseen circumstances; or to determining or adjusting _any
question or matter for the determination or adjustment of which no provision
or effec­tive provision is made by this Act. " _[emphasis added]



I have already referred to the letter dated 3rd December sent by the Secretary
to the President to the 1st Respondent, to which was annexed a copy of the
memorandum dated _4th_ December addressed by the ADG/DII to the 5th
Respondent.

102

These documents gave rise to several queries. How did the Secretary's letter
of the 3rd refer to and annex a copy of a memo­randum which was written only
the next day? How did the Secretary conclude, and the 1st Respondent decide,
first, that Minister Kadirgamar was under LTTE threat when the memoran­dum did
not mention him? And second, that the security forces had advised the six
specified VVIP and VIPP to _avoid_ attending polling booths, when the
memorandum only advised that precautions be taken _when_ they visited polling
booths? Had the six VVIP and VIPP requested special voting arrangements? If,
as claimed in the mem­orandum, information had previously been received of a
specific threat to the President and General Ratwatte, why did the ADG/DII
delay until 4th December to inform the 5th Respondent?



The 1st Respondent's affidavit did not contain a word about the circumstances
in which he came to make his "Order under sec­tion 129". To clarify matters
the Registrar was directed to request the Attorney-General to obtain from the
1st Respondent and sub­mit:

"1\. the material on the basis of which the 1st Respondent formed the opinion
that there was a threat to the lives of the six persons specified in the Order
dated 4.12.2001, includ­ing any police reports received by him;

2.                     the material containing any advice by the security forces to those six persons to avoid attending polling stations on  
5.12.2001;

3.                     the material containing any request by or on behalf of the said six persons to vote elsewhere than at their allotted polling stations;

4.                     the directions or instructions given to the Returning Officers of each of the Districts mentioned in the Order dated 4.12.2001, pursuant to that Order."



The same three documents were sent again, without any other material relevant
to items (1) to (3). In regard to item (4), copies were furnished of the
instructions issued to the Returning Officers in regard to the voting
procedure for five of the named per­sons - but not of the instructions
relating to Minister Kadirgamar. Those instructions disclosed that special
arrangements had been

103



made, quite contrary to the principles and procedures laid down in the Act.
Each Returning Officer was directed to order a Assistant Returning Officer to
collect the ballot paper of the named individual from the Senior Presiding
Officer of the polling station, having placed the official mark thereon and
enclosed it in a sealed enve­lope, to take it in a vehicle with a police
escort to that individual's residence, to allow him to vote secretly in a
closed room, to take that ballot paper in a sealed envelope to the polling
station by vehi­cle with a police escort, and then to put the envelope into
the bal­lot box. Safeguards - such as the application of indelible ink -
con­sidered essential in the case of ordinary voters were ignored.



The material available to the 1st Respondent did not disclose any threat
whatsoever to Minister Kadirgamar, nor did it disclose that the security
forces had advised the six VVIP and VIPP to _avoid_ visiting polling booths.
In the written submissions filed on behalf of the Respondents it was alleged
that two intelligence reports, from internal intelligence sources, produced by
the 5th Respondent on 3.12.2001, contained information about this possible
assassination attempt, and that the 1st Respondent was apprised of the
serious­ness of that threat. Those reports were not produced, and the 5th
Respondent did not disclose their contents in an affidavit, nor explain how
the 1st Respondent had been informed. But that apart, if two such reports,
from internal intelligence sources, were already in the 5th Respondent's
possession on 3.12.2001, why was it nec­essary for the ADG/DII in charge of
internal intelligence, to inform the 5th Respondent of that threat on the
_4th_ of December? There was also no evidence that any of the six VVIP and
VIPP had requested any special voting arrangements, and the 1st Respondent
should have realized that any one with basic democ­ratic instincts would have
squirmed in embarrassment at the very thought of even asking for such
preferential treatment at an elec­tion. The privileges which the holders of
high office enjoy on other occasions or at other times come to an end when it
comes to the exercise of the right to vote on election day, for elections must
be free, _equal_ and secret - so that voters are equal, and must be treated
equally.



It is clear beyond reasonable doubt that \- whatever material the security
forces may have had - the 1st Respondent himself did

104



not have any material on which he could reasonably have conclud­ed that there
was a serious threat to the lives of the six VVIP and VIPP and that the
security forces had advised them to avoid attend­ing polling stations. He
acted blindly upon the unsubstantiated rep­resentations of the Secretary and
extended quite extraordinary privileges to six persons without even receiving
a request from them. I must also note the otherwise commendable promptitude
which the 1st Respondent displayed on that occasion. Having received the
Secretary's letter at 1.00 p.m. on 4.12.2001, his Order was made and gazetted
the very same day, after having ascer­tained on his own the electoral
districts and residences of the six VVIP and VIPP, but without the precaution
of seeking the views of the Attorney-General (to whom that letter had been
copied). The Petitioner in the first Application was therefore justified in
com­plaining that 55,000 voters (including himself) from Batticaloa and Vanni
were treated very differently: that a few who had the privilege of extensive
security provided by the State were given the addi­tional facility of voting
at home, while from those who had no secu­rity at all even the right to vote
had been stealthily taken away.



The 1st Respondent's Order was therefore arbitrary, unrea­sonable and
discriminatory, and in violation of Article 12(1).



That Order was unlawful for several other reasons as well. Section 129 does
not give the Commissioner of Elections any power to issue directions which are
contrary to the fundamental principles of the Act. The Act requires, as a
general rule, that vot­ers must vote in person, and not by proxy; it is
exceptionally, only, that voting by post is permitted for specified categories
of persons - basically, because they may have official duties connected with
the election itself. Further, voters are required to travel by public
transport or on foot - unless with the prior written authority of the
Returning Officer given on account of physical disability. "Voting at home" is
alien to the fundamental principles of the Act. If the Commissioner had power
under section 129 to introduce such pro­cedures unasked, there is no reason
why he did not establish pro­cedures to enable, for instance, voting at
embassies abroad by the many migrant workers who contributed so substantially
to our national economy. Besides, the "difficulty" which section 129
con­templates appears to be a difficulty which the Commissioner (or his

105



staff) encounters in giving effect to the provisions of the Act - not any of
the difficulties which individual voters may face in exercising their rights
under the Act, for instance, because of death threats.



I hold that section 129 empowers the Commissioner of Elections to give
directions only when there is a difficulty in _giving_ _effect to_ a provision
of the Act: i.e. a difficulty experienced in _imple­_ _menting_ any provision
of the Act, and not in dealing with a _casus_ _omissus._ Although section 129
refers to "determining .... any ques­tion .... for the determination .... of
which no provision .... is made", that power to determine a question not
covered by the Act can only be exercised if initially the Commissioner had
been faced with a dif­ficulty in implementing some provision of the Act. Thus
if the Commissioner took steps, for instance, to implement the provisions of
the Act in regard to the postponement of the poll, or the ordering of a
repoll, and if in so doing a question arose for which the Act had made no
provision, then he could issue directions with a view to determining such
question. A condition precedent to the exercise of the power conferred by
section 129 is the existence of a difficulty in implementing any provision of
the Act. In this case, the 1st Respondent was not faced with any such
difficulty, but only with the alleged personal problems of six voters who
apprehended serious difficulty in attending their allotted polling booths.



Further, the power under section 129 can only be exercised on the _first_
occasion on which a particular difficulty arises. The alleged "difficulty" in
this case was the inability to attend the allotted polling booth. Whether that
difficulty arose because of death threats or other threats - from the LTTE, or
a political party or an individ­ual \- or because threats of injury had been
carried out and the vic­tims were immobilized in hospital, made no difference.
The Commissioner of Elections, in particular, would have been well aware that,
that was by no means the _first_ occasion on which that particular difficulty
had arisen after section 129 was enacted.



Finally, the power to issue directions conferred by section 129 was a power to
issue published _general_ directions applicable to all similar situations, and
not a power to make _ad hoc_ decisions in respect of particular voters, on
request or otherwise. To interpret "directions" otherwise would mean that if
there were several similar complaints the Commissioner could issue directions
only in respect

106



of the first, with the result that the other complaints would remain
unremedied: resulting in unequal treatment. Faced with two possi­ble
interpretations of section 129, that which is consistent with equal treatment
should be preferred to that which results in unequal treatment. If section 129
did empower the Commissioner to issue directions when there were threats
deterring voters from attending their allotted polling booths, those
directions should have covered all such instances, and should have applied to
future elections as well - thereby effectively "removing" the difficulty. The
failure to do so amounted to an infringement of Article 12(1). Besides,
neither section 129 nor the impugned Order authorized the 1st Respondent to
issue "instructions", especially unpublished secret instructions, governing
the procedure for voting at home. Those instructions were also inconsistent
with the gazetted Order: while the latter directed Returning Officers to be
present at the residence of the VVIP and VIPP concerned, by the unpublished
instructions the 1st Respondent directed the Returning Officers to delegate
their functions to Assistant Returning Officers.

**Gravity of the Infringements**  



The proved infringements were in themselves serious. The number of voters
affected was so large that the elections in the Batticaloa and Vanni districts
were neither free nor fair. The deci­sion-making processes which resulted in
those infringements were shrouded in secrecy, haste and bad faith. The
infringements took place at a time when there was a serious erosion of public
confi­dence in the integrity of the electoral process, and when it was
extremely important to ensure that elections were free and fair, par­ticularly
in the "uncleared" areas - because citizens living in those areas needed
reassurance, if peace and national reconciliation were to become realities,
that elections would be truly democratic, that fundamental rights would be
respected and protected, and that judicial remedies would be available for
wrongdoing. In that con­text, the infringements were a national disaster.

**Order**  

I grant the Petitioners in all three Applications declarations that their
fundamental rights under Articles 12(1) and 14(1)(a) have been infringed by
the 1st and 3rd Respondents, and that their fun-

107

damental rights under Article 14 (1)(h) have been infringed by the 3rd
Respondent. I award the Petitioner(s) in each Application (a) a sum of Rs.
100,000 as compensation payable by the State (totalling Rs. 300,000), and (b)
a sum of Rs, 30,000 as costs payable personally by the 3rd Respondent
(totalling Rs. 90,000). I further award the Petitioner in the first
Application a sum of Rs. 1,000 as nominal compensation in respect of the 1st
Respondent's Order under section 129, payable personally by the 1st
Respondent. All these payments shall be made on or before 31.5.2003.

**ISMAIL, J : **\- I agree

**WIGNESWARAN, J :** \- I agree

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/26.html_  

