##  Elmo Rex Lord and Another, Partners, Mercantile Printers and Stationers v.
Eksath Kamkaru Samithiya On Behalf of Somadasa - SLR - 161, Vol 1 of 2001
[2001] LKSC 27; (2001) 1 Sri LR 161 (7 March 2001)

**161**

**ELMO REX LORD AND ANOTHER, PARTNERS, MERCANTILE  
PRINTERS AND STATIONERS  
v.  
EKSATH KAMKARU SAMITHIYA ON BEHALF OF SOMADASA**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
PERERA, J. AND  
EDUSSURIYA, J.  
SC APPEAL 37/99  
S.C.S.L.A. APPLICATION NO. 204/98  
H.C.A. L.T NO. 1357/96  
LT ADDITIONAL NO. 89/85  
6TH NOVEMBER, 2000  
  
_Industrial dispute - Termination of services - Probationary employment -
Summary termination of employment for continued absenteeism \- Errors by the
Labour Tribunal regarding findings of fact - Errors by the High Court
regarding evaluation of evidence.  
  
_The workman Somadasa was employed as a compositor in the printing business
carried on by the appellants-partners. He was appointed on 7.11.1990 on
probation for six months or such further period as may be determined by the
employers. The letter of appointment informed him that he will be advised on
satisfactory completion of his probation period ending which inter alia, he
will be subject to summary termination "for continued absenteeism in spite of
written warnings".  
  
In 1991 the workman was absent on 24 1/2 days for which he was warned that his
service may have to be summarily terminated. In 1992 he was absent on 34 1/2
days. In 1991 and 1992 he was absent in all on 48 days, without prior leave to
do so, except on 3 days. In the mean time he received some increased wages not
on account of improved service but by way of mandatory statutory increases in
the printing trade.  
  
In 1992 while the workman was absenting himself from work the appellants
warned him that if such "intolerable" absence was repeated instant termination
may follow. Thereafter they watched his progress and when he had taken 34 1/2
days off in 1992 his probationary employment was terminated with immediate
effect.  
  
The Labour Tribunal President disputed the exact number of days the workman
was absent and ordered reinstatement with Rs.40,000/= as back wages. At the
hearing of the appeal counsel for the workman conceded the fact that the
workman was absent as alleged. The High Court opined that

**162**

the workman had not been warned in writing regarding his "work and conduct"
and affirmed the decision of the Labour Tribunal.  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. The findings of the Labour Tribunal were not supported by evidence; and
the High Court erred in evaluating evidence in that the letter of appointment
refers specifically to absenteeism as a ground of termination. In any event
absenteeism cannot be separated from work and conduct.  
  
2\. The High Court erred in the evaluation of evidence particularly in regard
to the issue of the letters of warning.  
  
**Case referred to :  
  
**_Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers Union_ (1974) 75 NLR
182  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the High Court.  
  
_Shirly M. Fernando_ and _Ruwan P.V. Dias_ for appellants.  
  
_L.V.P. Wettasinghe_ with _Ms. Ganga Gunathilake_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 07, 2001  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
  
**The respondent, the Eksath Kamkaru Samithiya, was a Trade Union acting for
and on behalf of one of its members. Mr. S. Somadasa. Somadasa was a
compositor in the printing trade. He was employed by the appellants in their
business as printers on the 7th of November 1990. His services were terminated
by the letter of the appellants dated the 17th of November 1992 on the ground
of absenteeism, despite warnings, while he was on probation. The respondent
complained against the termination of Somadasa to the Labour Tribunal and
sought relief. The Labour Tribunal made order that Somadasa be reinstated from
the date of the termination of his services and that he be paid a sum of Rs.
40,000 as wages due to him from that date. The appellants appealed to the
Provincial High Court of Colombo which affirmed the order of the Tribunal. The
appellants then applied for special leave to appeal to this Court. Special
leave to appeal was granted on the following matters:

**163**

1\. Has the High Court erred in the evaluation of the evidence, particularly
in regard to the issue of the letters of warning and the alleged failure to
take disciplinary action against the other employees similarly placed?  
  
2\. In view of the findings of fact of the Labour Tribunal with regard to the
matters set out in question 1, in any event will the decision in this case be
different?  
  
3\. Are the findings of fact of the Labour Tribunal regarding the matters
raised in question 1 supported by the evidence."  
  
The terms and conditions of Somadasa's employment were set out in his letter
of appointment. He accepted the terms and conditions set out in that letter.
The letter, among other things, stated as follows:  
  
"In the first instance you will be on probation for a period of six months
during which time your services may be terminated without notice for
incompetence or dishonesty or for conduct detrimental to our business. We,
however, reserve the right to extend the probationary period of employment for
a further period to enable you to satisfy our requirements. On satisfactory
completion of your probationary period of which you will be advised, this
contract will be terminable with a month's notice or payment therefor by
either side. Also, your services may be summarily terminated for continued
absenteeism in spite of written warnings."  
  
The emphasis is mine.  
  
On the 14th of October 1991 the appellants wrote to Somadasa pointing out that
his record of attendance showed that he had been absent on 29 1/2 days up to
the end of September 1991. He was warned:  
  
"Please note that this type of attendance is not acceptable to us and will be
taken into account when assessing the

**164**

amount of bonus, if any, in December 1991. Further, if you continue your
irregular attendance, disciplinary action will be taken, even to the extent of
summarily terminating your services."  
  
On the 12th of February 1992, the appellants wrote to Somadasa stating that he
had been absent on 35 1/2 days during the last year when his earned leave
entitlement was only 1 day. He was warned:  
  
"Please note that this record of absence is intolerable, and that if it is
repeated this year as well, it will merit the instant termination of your
employment. Your absence will be closely watched, and if warranted, according
to our opinion, your next increment when falling due, will be deferred."  
  
On the 30th of April 1992, the appellants drew attention to their two letters
and stated that in the circumstances Somadasa's probationary period had been
extended. They warned:  
  
"if there is no improvement in your attendance, we shall be compelled to
terminate your employment."  
  
On the 17th of November 1992, the appellants wrote to Somadasa referring to
their previous letters, and concluded with the following words:  
  
" **. . .** You were not confirmed in your employment. Your absence up to
date, 17th November, is 34 1/2 days against an entitlement of only 14 days. In
view of the above your probationary employment is terminated with immediate
effect."  
  
The learned Judge of the High Court came to the conclusion that at no time had
Somadasa been warned in writing with regard to his `work and conduct'. Learned
counsel for Somadasa maintained that position was 'factually correct' since
the warnings had been in respect of 'absenteeism'. The letter of

**165**

appointment refers specifically to absenteeism as a ground for termination.
The letters of warning too refer to the matter of absenteeism. In any event,
absenteeism, in my view, cannot be separated from 'work and conduct' in the
circumstances of the case as established by the evidence. Such a distinction
would be highly artificial. The Labour Tribunal disputed the calculations of
the appellants with regard to the exact number of days when Somadasa was
absent. Learned counsel for Somadasa in his written submissions however
conceded that his client was absent on 24 1/2 days in 1991 and on 34 1/2 days
in 1992. Absenteeism on such a scale may be objectionable, but it reaches, in
the words of the appellants, an 'intolerable' level when absence takes place
in the manner chosen by Somadasa. The documents adduced in evidence show that
he was absent on some 48 days between the 13th of February 1991 and the 16th
of November 1992\. In every instance, except three, he was absent without
prior leave to do so. In all of the other instances, his explanations for
absence were made after resuming duties. In my view, absenteeism in that
manner, brought his conduct within the ambit of the prohibition in the letter
of appointment relating to 'conduct' that was 'detrimental to the business' of
the appellants and justified the termination of the employee's services.  
  
The law relating to employment is not a one-way street. Justice, fairness and
equity must be meted out even-handedly to employees and employers alike. An
employee is no doubt entitled to exercise the rights and enjoy the privileges
and benefits granted by law or conceded by agreement. Yet, he or she must act
with a due sense of responsibility. Article 28 (c) of the Constitution reminds
us that the enjoyment of rights. and freedoms is 'inseparable from the
performance of duties and obligations, and accordingly it is the duty of every
person in Sri Lanka **. . .** to work conscientiously in his chosen
occupation.' Specifically on the matter of absence from work, Weeramantry J in
_Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers' Union_ (1) observed in
a case involving a compositor like Somadasa, that :

**166**

"while an employee is no doubt entitled to his quota of leave, he must not as
far as is avoidable draw on his leave without prior notice to the management;
nor must he repeatedly draw on such leave in such a manner as would throw out
of gear the work of the establishment he serves."  
  
Alfred Avins in Employees' Misconduct (1968) pp. 5-6 expressed a similar view:  
  
"The necessity for employees to be present for duty at the time and place
required is obvious. No enterprise of any kind could function if employees
were able to come and go as they choose. Without knowing the size of its
labour force, no employer could plan any productive undertaking."  
  
The High Court, in my view, erred not only in putting a wrong construction on
the workman's absence, it also erred in misconstruing the fact Somadasa had
been paid his salary increments. Admittedly, in the light of the appellants'
threat in their letter of the 12th of February 1992 to defer Somadasa's
increase in wages unless there was an improvement in his conduct, the payment
of the increase in wages might appear to be a recognition of his satisfactory
service. However, such an inference was wrong in the circumstances of this
case, for the payment of increased wages did not depend on the quality of the
employee's service. Somadasa, as a person employed in the printing trade was
statutorily entitled to a salary increase. (See Sri Lanka Labour Gazette, Vol.
47 No. 1 Jan-March 1996). The payment of enhanced wages was not a matter of
discretion for the workman s employers based on their estimation of his worth
or satisfaction with regard to his performance. Learned counsel for the
respondent urged that the increases in wages paid to his client greatly
exceeded the statutorily prescribed amounts and therefore meant that his
employers had not only condoned past lapses but were greatly pleased with his
services. I am unable to accept that view in the light of the communications
addressed to Somadasa, especially the plain and clearly expressed view that
his conduct was 'intolerable' whatever other explanation

**167**

there may have been for payments in excess of the prescribed statutory
minimum.  
  
In the circumstances, responding to a question raised by this Court in
granting leave, I am of the view that the High Court did err 'in the
evaluation of the evidence particularly in regard to the issue of the letters
of warning.'  
  
With regard to the question raised by this Court in granting leave whether the
High Court erred on the question of `the alleged failure to take disciplinary
action against the other workmen similarly placed', having regard to the
evidence on record, I find myself unable to answer that question except in the
affirmative. The view of the High Court in that regard has no support from the
evidence in the record. No persons were named who were supposed to have
received preferential treatment, except for one Piyasena, and the evidence
about him was that he was a loyal employee who had, however, joined another
establishment to further his prospects. Piyasena's case therefore offered no
basis for the allegation of invidious discrimination which the respondent
claimed was triggered by the role of the employee in Trade Union activities.  
  
For the reasons stated in my judgment, I set aside the decisions and orders of
the High Court and the Labour Tribunal.  
  
In all the circumstances, however, I make no order as to costs.  
  
**PERERA, J. -    **I  agree.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -  **I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/27.html_  

