##  Deshapriya and Another v. Municipal Council, Nuwara Eliya and Others - SLR
- 362, Vol 1 of 1995 [1992] LKSC 27; (1995) 1 Sri LR 362 (10 October 1992)

**362**

**DESHAPRIYA AND ANOTHER** **  
v.** **  
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL, NUWARA ELIYA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 884/92  
FEBRUARY 10 AND MARCH 06, 1995.

_Fundamental Rights - Freedom of speech and expression - Article 14(1) (a) of
the Constitution - Seizure of the newspaper "Yukthiya"_

The petitioners are the Editor and Proprietor, respectively of the weekly
newspaper "Yukthiya". They allege that to 20 respondent who is an A Mayoress
of the Nuwara Eliya Municipal Council forcibly took away four bundles
containing about 450 copies of the "Yukthiya" on 10.10.92 from the stall of
one Jayasundera and thus prevented this newspaper from reaching its

**Held:**

(1) The 2nd respondent took away these copies of the "Yukthiya" under colour
of her office as Mayoress of the Nuwara Eliya Municipal seizure was therefore
by executive or administrative action. Her motive was to prevented an anti-
government newspaper for political ends. The seizure directly prevented the
publication of one issue of the "Yukthiya" not entirely but in just a small
part of Sri Lanka and related only to 450 copies of the newspaper. The Freedom
of speech and Expression, including publication of the Editor and Proprietor
was thereby abridged even though not totally denied.

(2) **Per Fernando, J.** ****

The infringement of Article 14(l) (a) by executive or administrative action,
can take many forms and may be direct or indirect; the exclusion of anti-
government news and views in newspapers owned and controlled particularly when
it amounts to a denial of equal treatment or discrimination because of
political opinion (of Article 12), would be as much an infringement in this
case as to suppression (by force or otherwise) of such news and views in
newspapers independent of the Government. The infringement in this case was in
the latter category, and in my opinion was more serious.

(3) Another aggravating factor was that the 2nd respondent power of Lake Home
newspapers 75% of the shareholding of which was held by Government to
reinforce her efforts to discourage the publication and distribute of the
"Yukthiya". Thus the 2nd respondent not only infringed the petitioner rights
directly, but aggravated her conduct by threatening also to procure an
improper exercise of the powers of the Government.

363

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola (1983) 1 Sri LR 461 ._  
_2\. De Jonge v. Oregon (1937) 299 U.S. 353._  
_3\. Amaratunga v. Sirimal (1993) 1 Sri L. R 264_  
_4\. Wijeratne v. Perera S.C. 379/93 SCM of 2.3.1994._  
_5\. Pieris v. A.G S.C. 156-155 LC 166/92 SCM of 17.6.1994._

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R. K. W Goonesekera with J. C. Weliamuna and L. C. M. Swarnadhipathi for
petitioners.  
_  
_L. C. Seneviratne, P.C. with Ronald Perera and H. Situge for the 1st and 2nd
respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 10, 1995.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The petitioners are the Editor and Proprietor, respectively, of the weekly
newspaper "Yukthiya" which is printed in Colombo. They complain that their,
fundamental right of Freedom of Speech and Expression guaranteed by Article
14(1) (a) was infringed by the 2nd respondent, an Attorney-at-Law and the
Mayoress of Nuwara Eliya, who, they allege, forcibly took away four bundles
(containing about 450 copies) of the "Yukthiya" on 10.10.92, thereby
preventing the newspaper from reaching its intended readers.

The practice followed in regard to the distribution of the "Yukthiya" in and
around Nuwara Eliya was to entrust 450 copies in four bundles to its transport
agent, Weliwatta, in Colombo, for delivery by him to the Lake House newspaper
stall run by one Jayasundere at Nuwara Eliya; these newspapers were not sold
at this stall, but Jayasundere was responsible for transporting them to
"Yukthiya" selling agents at Halgran Oya, Nanu Oya, Keppetipola and Welimada.

There is no dispute that on 10.10.92 Weliwatta did deliver four bundles of the
"Yukthiya" (as well as the "Ravaya" newspaper) to the Lake House newspaper
stall situated near the entrance to the Park; that Jayasundere's sister-in-
law, Mrs. Sarojanee Jayawardene, was the agent for the newspapers published by
the Associated Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd.; that because Jayasundere had to be
away in Colombo from 8.10.92, he had asked one Thevapalan to work at the
stall; that Thevapalan had been carrying on business as a handling agent for
newspapers in Nuwara Eliya for many years; that

364

Thevapalan took delivery of the newspapers to be handed to Jayasundere on his
return; that the 2nd respondent, her husband and another person, came to the
stall that morning; that the 2nd Respondent went into the stall and spoke to
Thevapalan; that this stall belonged to the 1st respondent, the Municipal
Council of Nuwara Eliya. The 2nd respondent was an ardent supporter of the
United National Party, then in power both in Parliament and in the Municipal
Council.

There is a sharp conflict in the affidavits as to what happened that morning:
the exact time is not important - it was at about 11.00 a.m., according to the
petitioners, or a little before 10.30 a.m., according to the respondents. The
petitioners case was that the 2nd respondent asked Thevapalan "Why are you
taking these newspapers? Your newspaper agency will be cancelled"; this is
supported by the affidavits of Weliwatta and one Medagama who was also at the
stall at that time. Weliwatta stated that he then left to meet a relative upon
some (unspecified) urgent personal matter. The 2nd respondent then said "You
can't, be allowed to do these things as you please", and directed the other
person who was with her to put the bundles of newspapers into her car; this
was done; this is supported only by Medagama's affidavit. Half and hour later
Weliwatta returned to the stall, whereupon, he says Thevapalan told him that
the 2nd respondent had taken the "Yukthiya" and "Ravaya" newspapers in her
car, saying that these would be sent to Lake House; Thevapalan denied having
said this, but confirmed that Weliwatta did return to the stall. After he
returned to Colombo, Weliwatta informed the "Yukthiya" management of the
incident, and swore an affidavit on 13.10.92 setting out what happened Joe
Seneviratne, the Managing Editor of the "Yukthiya", says that the incident was
reported to him on 12 10.92 and that on.15:10.92 he submitted a written
complaint dated 1.4.10.92, to the IGP, annexing this affidavit. Admittedly but
regrettably, the Police took no action. Before making that complaint
Seneviratne telephoned the 2nd respondent on 13.10.92 at 5.30. p.m. for
verification; he introduced himself and asked her why she had forcibly taken
away the "Yukthiya" newspapers delivered to Jayasundere's stall on 0. 10 92
and she replied that the shall run by Jayasundere was owned by the Municipal
Council of Nuwara Eliya and that he could not sell anti-government newspapers
such as Yukthiya" The petitioners stated that in consequence of this incident,
the "Yukthiya" selling agents at HalgranOya, Nanu oya Keppetipola and Welimada
were refusing to accept that newspaper, but here were neither affidavits nor
documentary proof of this.

365

The petitioners further alleged that, as a protest against the 2nd
respondent's conduct, a demonstration was held on 17.10.92, that this was
disrupted by the Police, and so on. They have produced some news items and
editorials about this demonstration. One was the "Island" editorial of
28.10.92 which stated that the "Yukthiya" was seized "by armed thugs"; and it
went on to claim that for three weeks in succession the newspaper had been
seized. However, the petitioners have not alleged that there was any thuggery
or violence; Medagama did not say that Thevapalan had been intimidated by any
show of force; no one even hinted that there were any weapons; and all
referred to one single seizure on 10.10.92. Another news item in the "Island"
of 4.10.92 stated that the papers were "hijacked ... while being transported
from Colombo for distribution", which is nobody's case. Newspapers have a wide
margin for comment, which of course is free, but facts are sacred here the
facts have been exaggerated to the point of distortion. Not only is this
material unreliable, but it does not show that this was a demonstration
against the seizure of newspapers by the 2nd respondent. Even if there had
been such a demonstration, that would have shown, at best, that there was a
widespread belief in her complicity; but not that that belief was probably
justified. In the final analysis, therefore, the Petitioners case depends on
whether the direct evidence establishes, on a balance of probability, that the
2nd respondent was responsible for the seizure, and it is unnecessary for me
to consider the sequel to the alleged seizure.

The 2nd respondent's case was that twice or thrice a month she toured the town
accompanied by officials; to ensure that the town, was kept in a clean and
sanitary condition; one such visit was on 10. 10.92 when she was accompanied
by her husband as well as four others: S. M. Withanage (Secretary to the
Municipal Council), S. E. Jeyarajah (Municipal Engineer); and M. Ghany Cassim
and, D. Madhavan (Members of the Municipal: Council).

She did not deny the presence of Weliwatta and Medagama; she said that she
went to Jayasundere's stall to buy a newspaper; noticing that the precincts of
the stall were in an insanitary condition; she told Thevapalan, who was then
the sole occupant, to have the place cleaned up. Thevapalan confirmed this in
his affidavit, and

366

stated that he engaged a labourer the same day and had the place cleaned up.
He also admitted that bundles of the "Yukthiya" were delivered to him, but
denies that they were seized by the 2nd respondents but neither he nor anyone
else explains what happened to the four bundles whether they were seized by
someone else, or delivered in due course to Jayasundere or the "Yukthiya"
selling agents, or remained undelivered.

The 2nd respondent's denial of the seizure is supported by the affidavits of
Withanage, Cassim and Thevapalan. I do not regard the absence of affidavits
from her husband and the other officials as weakening her case.

The 2nd respondent admitted receiving a telephone call from a person calling
himself the Editor of the "Yukthiya", but did not give any particulars about
the conversation, saying only that "the telephone call was in the nature of a
threat to my life and l replied that I was not afraid of such threats and
replaced the receiver". She did not take steps to verify the source of the
call or to complain to the Police. Seneviratne's assertion that he did accuse
her of the alleged seizure of the "Yukthiya" thus remained uncontradicted.

The evidence as to the seizure of the newspapers by the 2nd respondent is thus
fairly evenly balanced. The petitioners depend on the direct evidence of
Medagama, who seems not to have been connected to either party; however, the
2nd respondent alleged that he was "closely associated with the DUNF, and
[was] politically opposed to the UNP", although she did not allege that he was
ill-disposed towards her personally. That is not a sufficient reason to
disbelieve Medagama, just as the affidavits of Withanage and Cassim cannot be
discredited simply because of their official or political association with the
2nd respondent. No reason has been suggested why Weliwatta should falsely
implicate the 2nd respondent, who had once appeared for him in a criminal
case; his evidence contradicts the 2nd respondent's version that she merely
bought a newspaper, because he says that she threatened cancellation of the
Lake House newspaper agency if "Yukthiya" newspapers were kept in the
premises. It was submitted that Weliwatte's evidence was not satisfactory
because he failed to make a prompt complaint about the incident to anyone
until 12.10.92; and that he did not even telephone

367

the "Yukthiya" management. But one can understand his reluctance to get too
involved; the newspaper had not been taken from him; he had discharged his
responsibility, and so was content to wait until he got back to Colombo. He
was not an employee of the newspaper, and the fact that he waited till he had
finished his business and returned to Colombo is hardly sufficient to
discredit his evidence. Seneviratne's evidence of his telephone call to the
2nd respondent shows, at the lowest, that the 2nd respondent failed to deny a
direct accusation made against her that it was she who had seized the
newspapers. Finally, if the 2nd respondent had not seized the newspapers, what
happened to them? Thevapalan's failure to explain such a simple matter tends
to cast some doubt on his veracity. It is true that the petitioners themselves
could have obtained affidavits from the "Yukthiya" selling agents, but they
have a plausible explanation, namely, that after this incident these agents
feared to handle the newspaper. If that is true, they would also have feared
to give affidavits. Learned President's Counsel submitted that the burden was
on the petitioners to obtain an affidavit from Jayasundera, to the effect that
Thevapalan did not give him any newspapers, in the circumstances, it would be
unreal for the petitioners to have expected Jayasundera to say anything
unfavourable to the 2nd respondent, for there was much to lose by antagonising
the 2nd respondent stall, agency, and livelihood.

Learned' President's Counsel for the respondent also submitted that the
"Yukthiya" was being published in breach of the law prior to 8.10.92, because,
he said, it was only on that day that information was given under section 2 of
the Newspapers Ordinance (Cap. 180) to the Registrar of Newspapers; he
contended that it was unlikely that the "Yukthiya" could have had a network of
agents prior to October 1992. However, there is nothing to suggest that this
was the first information given under section 2, and may well have been given
pursuant to a change Since this submission was made for the first time in the
course of the hearing, it is not possible to come to a finding that the
"Yukthiya" was being published in breach of the law.

It would not have been possible to decide between these two conflicting
versions, but for two significant matters. It was by no means improper or
unusual for Seneviratne to have confronted the 2nd respondent with the
accusation which Weliwatta had conveyed

368

to, him, before making a complaint to the Police against her; he had no
personal knowledge of the truth of what Weliwatta had told him. While saying
that her life was threatened, she does not clarify whether any reason was
given, as it was not an anonymous call, if no reason was given, did she not
inquire why she was being threatened?- If a reason **was** given, what was her
response or reaction? It is unsatisfactory that she did not clarify the matter
by replying to. the specific averments in Jayasundere's affidavit. Seneviratne
filed a second affidavit to clarify the telephone call, and specifically
denied making any threat; although she filed a further affidavit, the 2nd
respondent did not clarify her version of the telephone call, contenting
herself with a bare denial of Seneviratne's averments. It was urged that
Seneviratne's complaint to the IGP made no mention of his telephone call to
the 2nd respondent. If he made that call in order to check on the truth of
Weliwatta's story, which by then had been reduced to an affidavit, it was not
necessary for him to refer to that conversation, for he was only making a
complaint having satisfied himself that there were grounds for complaint. I
find Seneviratne's version of the telephone call to be more probable.
Secondly, the question whether the newspapers had been seized by the 2nd
respondent could have been conclusively settled by the affidavit of the person
into whose custody they were delivered; Thevapalan. Although the 2nd
respondent obtained an affidavit from him, Thevapalan did not explain what
happened to the newspapers subsequently; since he said he took charge of them
to be handed to Jayasundere on his return, why did he not clarify whether that
was done? Or whether they were delivered to the "Yukthiya" selling agents, and
if so what records existed as to such delivery or if they had been stolen by
another while in his custody, whether that was reported to the Police, or to
the transport agent? The matter was especially within his knowledge, and his
failure to clarify it suggests that he had no explanation to offer. It was
submitted that Thevapalan was only answering the specific allegation that the
2nd respondent had seized the newspapers from his custody, and need not have
explained anything else but his affidavit purports to do much more than rebut
the allegation of seizure, and proceeds to explain his conduct that day. His
default assumes greater significance in contrast to the pains he took to
explain a much less important matter - how he had carried out the 2nd
respondent's

369

order to clean up the premises, although that was no part of his duties. If
there had been no seizure, then as in the past the newspapers would have been
delivered to the "Yukthiya" selling agents at Halgran Oya, Nanu Oya,
Keppetipola and Welimada; and there is no reason why Thevapalan could not have
said so. But if there had been a seizure, Thevapalan could not have alleged
delivery without running the risk of contradiction by those selling agents. It
seems to me therefore that, intrinsically, Thevapalan's affidavit cannot be
relied on, particularly because if the 2nd respondent had threatened
cancellation of the Lake House agency, an affidavit by him, contradicting her,
might have jeopardized the interests of Jayasundere and the Lake House agent.

I hold that the 2nd respondent did seize 450 copies of the "Yukthiya" on
10.10.92; that she did so while purporting to exercise her functions, and
while acting under colour of her office, as Mayoress of the Nuwara Eliya
Municipal Council. The seizure was therefore by executive or administrative
action. I further hold that her motive was to discourage an anti-Government
newspaper, for political ends.

The seizure directly prevented the publication of one issue of the "Yukthiya",
not entirely but in just a small part of Sri Lanka; and related to only 450
copies of the newspaper. I hold that the freedom of speech and expression,
including publication, of the Editor and Proprietor was thereby abridged; even
though not totally denied. In Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola (1) the seizure of
20,000 pamphlets was held to be a serious violation of the freedom of speech
and expression, including publication; which called for the award of
substantial damages; Rs. 10,000% was awarded, which was perhaps no more than
the value of the pamphlets.

In my view the gravity of an infringement can only be determined by a deeper
scrutiny of its context.

While infringements of Article 14(1) (a) may sometimes have to be viewed in
isolation, they often do involve other factors, such as denial of equal
treatment or political discrimination violative of Article 12. Suppressing
freedom of speech and` expression including

370

publication, whether by preventing a newspaper being published or otherwise
would be graver, if motivated either by a desire to benefit a rival or by
political antagonism. The facts that the "Yukthiya" was an anti-Government
newspaper, and that the 2nd respondent threatened cancellation of the Lake
House newspaper agency, are therefore relevant.

The infringement of Article 14(1) (a), by executive or administrative action,
can take many forms, and may be direct or indirect; the exclusion of anti-
Government news and views in newspapers owned or, controlled, by the
Government, particularly when it amounts to a denial of equal treatment or
discrimination because of political opinion (of Article 12), would be as much
an infringement as the suppression (by force or otherwise) of such news and
views in newspapers independent of the Government. The infringement in this
case was in the latter category, and in my opinion was more serious. The right
to support or to criticise governments and political parties, policies and
programmes is fundamental to the democratic way of life; the freedom of speech
and expression is one "which cannot be denied without violating those
fundamental principles of liberty and justice which lie at the base of all
civil and political institutions"; and democracy requires not merely that
dissent be tolerated, but that it be encouraged ( _De Jonge v. Oregon_ (2),
_Amaratunga v. Sirimal_ (3), _Wijeratne v Perera_ (4)and _Pieris v. A. G. P_.
(5))

Another aggravating factor was that the 2nd respondent attempted to use the
power of the Lake House newspapers to reinforce her efforts to discourage the
publication and distribution of the "Yukthiya". Under the Associated
Newspapers of Ceylon Ltd. (Special Provisions) Law, No. 28 of 1973, 75% of the
shareholding of the company is vested in the Government, which is thus
effectively in control of the company's newspapers. Thus the 2nd respondent
not only infringed the petitioners' rights directly, but aggravated her
conduct by threatening also to procure an improper exercise of the powers of
the Government.

Here, those powers were not actually used. But it is clear that in seizing the
"Yukthiya" the 2nd respondent was not only influenced by the fact that it was
an anti-Government newspaper, but also by the

371

desire to promote the expression of views politically favoured by her; her
threat to cancel the Lake House newspaper agency would undoubtedly have seemed
very real to Thevapalan, and therefore quite sufficient to inhibit lawful
resistance - particularly as the stall itself belonged to the Municipal
Council of which she was the Mayoress.

These are circumstances which aggravate the infringement. It would not be
right to assess compensation at a few thousand rupees, simply because the
newspaper was sold for seven rupees a copy; that would only be the pecuniary
loss caused by the violation of the petitioners' rights of property under
ordinary law. We are here concerned with a fundamental right, which not only
transcends property rights but which is guaranteed by the Constitution; and
with an infringement which darkens the climate of freedom in which the
peaceful clash of ideas and the exchange of information must take place in a
democratic society. Compensation must therefore be measured by the yardstick
of liberty, and not weighed in the scales of commerce.

The seizure was thus a grave, deliberate and unprovoked, infringement, and not
one which occurred in a sudden emergency or at a time of public disorder or
through an error of judgment in a borderline case. Having regard to awards in
_Amaratunga v. Sirimal, Wijeratne v. Perera, and Pieris v. A. G_. I hold hat
the petitioners are entitled to compensation in a sum of Rs. 100,000/-. In the
circumstances, it is neither just nor equitable to order the State or the
Municipal Council to pay that compensation. I direct the 2nd respondent to pay
the petitioners compensation in a sum of Rs. 100,000/- together with costs in
a sum of Rs 10,000/-.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** -I agree.  

**WADUGODAPITIYA J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/27.html_  

