##  Lanka Jathika Sarvodaya Shramadana Sangamaya v. Heengama Director General
of Customs and Others - SLR - 1, Vol 1 of 1993 [1991] LKSC 27; (1993) 1 Sri LR
1 (25 January 1991)

**1**

**LANKA JATHIKA SARVODAYA SHRAMADANA SANGAMAYA** **  
v.** **  
HEENGAMA  
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF CUSTOMS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J., KULATUNGA, J.

AND RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 173/91.  
OCTOBER 05, DECEMBER 11 AND 15, 1992.

JANUARY 18 AND 29, 1993.

_     Fundamental Rights - Constitution, Article 12 (1) - Seizure of goods as
forfeited - Power to mitigate forfeiture \- Customs Ordinance, Sections 52,
163._

The petitioner (a non-governmental organization) imported a "Harris Web V15A
Press" and accessories for use in its printing business. The Director of
Customs decided that the said goods are forfeited under s. 52 of the Customs
Ordinance on the ground of undervaluation for purposes of customs duty, and
detained the goods whereupon the petitioner applied to the Director General of
Customs to mitigate the said forfeiture under s. 163 of that Ordinance on
payment of duty on an uplifted value and to release the goods. This was
refused. The petitioner complained that such refusal infringed his rights
under Article 12(1) of the Constitution in that it was discriminatory vis-a-
vis other importers whose requests for mitigation of the forfeiture of goods
under s. 52 had been allowed in terms of s. 163 of the Ordinance.

**Held**

(1) The goods imported by the petitioner are forfeited by operation of law
under s. 52 of the Ordinance and had been seized by customs as required by s.
125.

(2) Ordinarily, the only remedy available to the petitioner for claiming the
said goods is to institute proceedings in terms of s. 154, challenging the
validity of the seizure. Article 126 of the Constitution has since provided an
additional remedy in appropriate cases.

(3) Mitigation of forfeiture of goods is a question to be decided in the
discretion of the Director General of Customs, on the facts of each case.
However, on the material placed before the Court the other cases relied upon
by the petitioner cannot be distinguished as being not similarly
circumstanced; there has been a failure to fairly consider the petitioner's
application for mitigation; and that by reason of such discrimination the
petitioner's right to equal protection of the law under Article 12(1) has been
infringed.

2

(4) The seizure of the forfeited goods is vitiated by reason of discrimination
in the exercise of the Director General's powers under s.163 of the Customs
Ordinance.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Moosajees v. Attorney-General, S.C. Appeal No. 62/87 - S.C. Minutes of
25.01.1991.  
_  
_2\. C.W. Mackie & Co. v. Commissioner-General of Inland Revenue, (1986) 1 Sri
L.R. 300, 301,308.  
_  
_3\. Abeywardena v. The I.G.P., S. C. Appeal 92/91 S.C. Minutes 23.8.1991.  
_  
_4\. Neville Fernando v. Liyanage, F.R.D. Vol. 2 p. 300.  
_  
_5\. Yick Wo v. Hopkins, 118 US 356.  
_  
_6\. Gooneratne v. Commissioner of Elections, (1987) 2 Sri LR. 165.  
_  
_7\. Jayanetti v. The Land Reform Commission, (1984) 2 Sri L.R. 172._

  
_8\. Roberts v. Ratnayake, (1986) 2 Sri LR. 36, 79._

  
_9\. Elmore Perera v. Jayawickrema, (1985) 1 Sri LR. 285._

  
_10\. Palasamy Nadar v. Lanktree, 51 N.L.R. 520, 522, 523, 526._

  
_11\. The Anandale (1877) 38 LT. 139.  
_  
_12\. De Keyser v. Hams (1936) 1 K.B. 224._

  
_13\. Jayawardena v. Silva 72 NLR 25, 29, 30, 38, 39._

  
_14\. Arumugaperumal v. The Attorney-General 48 N.L.R. 510, 514, 515._  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights under
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.  


_R. K. W. Goonesekera with Chandra Goonesekera, Javid Yusuf and J.C.Weliamuna
for petitioner._

  
_A. S. M. Perera, Deputy Solicitor-General for respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 12, 1993.  
**KULATUNGA J.**

This is an application arising upon the detention by Sri Lanka Customs of a
"Harris Web V15A Press" and accessories imported by the petitioner (a non-
governmental organization) for use in its printing business. The 2nd
respondent (Director of Customs) decided that the said goods are forfeited
under S. 52 of the Customs Ordinance on

3

the ground of undervaluation for purposes of customs duty whereupon the
petitioner applied to the 1st respondent (The Director General of Customs) to
mitigate the said forfeiture under S. 163 of the Ordinance on payment of duty
on an uplifted value and to release the goods (without prejudice to the
petitioner's right to challenge such value in Court). This was refused;
whereupon the petitioner gave the 1st respondent a notice of an action in
terms of S. 154(1) of the Customs Ordinance and filed an action in the
District Court of Colombo praying for the following reliefs :

(a) a declaration that the seizure and forfeiture of the said goods is
wrongful and illegal;

(b) a declaration that the plaintiff is entitled to the restoration of the
goods or their value;

(c) damages in a sum of Rs. 21,565,184/- upto the date of institution of the
action and continuing damages in a sum of Rs. 700,000/- per month thereafter
until satisfaction of decree ; and

(d) costs.

**THE CASE FOR THE PETITIONER**

In this application the petitioner complains that the refusal of the 1st
respondent to mitigate the forfeiture under section 163 of the Customs
Ordinance is discriminatory and hence violative of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution in that it is the general practice in cases of undervaluation of
goods to mitigate the forfeiture even where the customs valuation results in a
100% increase over the declared value of goods; in such cases goods have been
released to the importer after payment of additional duty and in appropriate
cases subject also to the payment of a penalty. In the instant case the
request for mitigation was refused arbitrarily without due consideration of
the merits of the petitioner's appeal. The petitioner prays for the following
reliefs

(a) a declaration that the petitioner's rights under Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution have been violated ;

4

(b) an order declaring the impugned forfeiture to be illegal and ordering the
machine to be released on payment of duty on an uplifted value without
prejudice to the petitioner's right to challenge the validity of such
additional value in an appropriate forum ;

(c) compensation in a sum of Rs. 3,500,000/-.

Learned Deputy Solicitor General for the respondents conceded that the
exercise of the power of mitigation under S. 163 of the Customs Ordinance
constitutes executive and administrative action within the ambit of Articles
17 and 126 of the Constitution and that a person aggrieved by a forfeiture
under S. 52 of the Ordinance is not confined to his remedy of a suit under the
Ordinance but may seek relief from this Court in the exercise of its
jurisdiction under Article 126 of the Constitution. However, this is the first
such application in which relief has been sought both in this Court as well as
in the District Court arising from a seizure of goods under the Customs
Ordinance. It seems to me, therefore, that in making our determination we have
to examine the relevant principles of Customs Law and further, in the event of
the decision being in favour of the petitioner decide what relief he is
entitled to bearing in mind the need to ensure that there will be no
duplication of reliefs by reason of proceedings in this Court and in the
District Court.

It has been alleged that the "government controlled newspapers" have engaged
in a campaign to vilify the petitioner's organization and its President Dr. A.
T. Ariyaratne. Two statements issued by Dr. A. T. Ariyaratne have been
produced marked P24 and P25. It is urged that this campaign tends to establish
that the refusal by the Customs Officers to release the printing press was
mala fide; and that the motive for seizing it is to prevent criticism of the
government by the petitioner's organization.

The printing press in question is a second hand machine from Denmark,
purchased by the petitioner from Rotatech Grafiche Machines BV of Holland as
per sale agreement dated 30.01.91 (p11). The price stated in P11 is DFI.
479,260/-, freight and insurance to be added. In a letter dated 23.08.90
addressed to the petitioner, (P5), Rotatech indicated that the exchange rate
of the said currency was 1 US $ = DFI. 1.738. According to the pro forma
invoice dated 07.02.91 (P13) the price is as follows:

**5**

Cost Insurance + Freight |  DFI. |  472.860  
---|---|---  
  | DFI.  | 15,000  
Total (Cost &Insurance) |  DFI. |  487,860  
  
The said machine arrived in Sri Lanka by ship and was entered for duty at a
value of Rs. 11,091,929/- in Customs Bill of Entry No. 04C 1833 dated 05.04.91
and a duty of Rs. 3,155,544/- was paid. The petitioner states that the said
value of Rs. 11,091,929/was the Sri Lankan Rupee equivalent of the "actual
price" based on customs parity rate.

On 12.04.91 a customs inspection of the machine was held at the customs
premises after opening the containers. Among those who conducted that
inspection were the 1st and 2nd respondents, Messrs H. L. A. de Silva, Deputy
Director of Customs (Intelligence) L. Gunawardena (Deputy Government Printer)
Vas Gunawardena, Chairman of the Port Authority and Customs Officer Ranagala.
On 23.04.91 there was another customs inspection at which the 1st respondent,
Mr. Neville Nanayakkara (The Government Printer) and Mr. A. C. Lawrence
retired Deputy Inspector General of Police were present. The petitioner states
that an inspection attended by so many senior officials was most unusual.

On 06.05.91 Susiri de Silva, Managing Director of Vishva Lekha Press owned by
the petitioner and his Counsel met the 1st respondent and inquired why the
machine was not being released. The 1st respondent said that this was due to
alleged undervaluation and that an investigation was in progress. By his
letter dated 24.05.91 (P17) Susiri de Silva requested that steps be taken to
have the machine released early. This was followed by a customs inquiry at
which Susiri de Silva gave evidence and produced documents in proof of the
value of the machine and the spares. The Superintendent of Customs Valuation,
the Appraiser of the Customs Valuation Branch and the Government Printer also
gave evidence on the valuation of the machine and the spares. The inquiry was
held on nine dates at which the petitioner was represented by Counsel who also
tendered written submissions. Consequently, the Customs fixed the value of the
goods at Rs. 18 Million and on that basis the 2nd respondent addressed

6

a letter dated 05.09.91 (P18) calling upon Susiri de Silva to show cause why
the machine and its accessories should not be declared forfeit under S. 52 of
the Customs Ordinance on the ground of undervaluation.

By his letter dated 30.09.91 (P19), Susiri de Silva replied P18 requesting the
1st respondent to permit the removal of the goods on the payment of the full
amount of duty payable on the value thereof fixed by the customs without
prejudice to the position that the true value of the goods is as set out in
the relevant Bill of Entry dated 05.04.91. In reply the 2nd respondent sent a
letter dated 01.11.91 (P20) informing Susiri de Silva that the machine and its
accessories were forfeit in terms of S. 52 of the Ordinance.

We then have the letter dated 11.11.92 (P23) addressed to the 1st respondent
by Counsel for the petitioner which was an application for a mitigation of the
forfeiture of the goods in the exercise of the powers of the 1st respondent
under S. 163 of the Customs Ordinance. Counsel, however, made that application
"without prejudice to the (petitioner's) right to take steps in Court to have
the order of forfeiture declared invalid". Counsel insisted that the true
value of the goods for purposes of duty was Rs. 11,091,929/- and not Rs. 18
Million. They argued that this was the first time a V1 5A model machine had
been imported and that the Customs Officers or the Government Printer did not
possess any expertise in valuing this type of printing machine. As additional
grounds in support of the petitioner's valuation of the goods, Counsel
submitted that

(i) the machine was no longer in production ;

(ii) the machine was 11 years old ; and

(iii) the fact that no penalty under S. 129 was imposed proved that there was
no dealing by the petitioner with intent to defraud the revenue or to act
fraudulently.

Counsel submitted that in the circumstances market price for purposes of duty
should be the actual price paid by the petitioner namely Rs. 11,091,929/-.
Counsel also cited the decision in _Moosajees v. Attorney General_ (1). In
that case, where this Court invalidated a seizure of goods as forfeit under S.
57 of the Customs Ordinance the Court observed

7

"It is difficult to imagine that the law gave an untrammelled discretion to
the Collector to act in any manner he thinks fit; such discretion must
undoubtedly be exercised reasonably with the purposes and objects of the
Customs Ordinance in mind"

By his reply dated 23.11.91 (P22) the 1st respondent declined to vary the
forfeiture of the goods.

As proof of discrimination, the petitioner has cited 15 cases of importation
(giving reference to the relevant customs files) where the goods had been
grossly undervalued but the 1st respondent had mitigated the forfeiture after
payment of duty on an uplifted value; where the undervaluation is over 100%,
the importer had been ordered to pay additional duty plus a penalty prior to
the release of goods. The goods imported in the cases cited consist of radio
cassette spare parts, ceiling fans in knocked down condition, spare parts for
sewing machines, motor spare parts, used machines, printing machinery fabrics
and electrical parts. In one such case the true value of the goods was Rs.
5,907,168/-. The petitioner states that there are many such instances, the
records of which are in the possession of the 1st and 2nd respondents and to
which the petitioner had no access and they establish the practice that
forfeiture is not inflicted where there is a mere difference in valuation of
the goods. Three of the 15 instances cited were in 1989, two in 1990 and
remainder in 1991.

In his affidavit filed on 09.03.92, Susiri de Silva states that a Web offset
machine similar to the one imported by the petitioner was imported by Express
Newspapers Ceylon Ltd. on 24.12.91; that duty was charged on US $ 262,015,00
(approximately Rs.11,004,630/-) which was the CIF value of the machine
according to the pro forma invoice ; and that the said machine was thereafter
cleared without delay. In rebuttal, the 1st respondent has filed an affidavit
(together with a supporting affidavit (IRIA) from the Government Printer)
wherein he states that the machine imported by Express Newspapers Ceylon Ltd.
was not similar to the one imported by the petitioner in that whilst the
former had 6 printing units, a folding unit and a stocking unit the latter had
only 4 printing units and a folding unit. Susiri de Silva filed a further
affidavit wherein he appears to have abandoned the position that the two
machines are similar but maintains that

8

the machine imported by Express Newspapers Ceylon Ltd. had accessories which
had not been separately valued and that the value of 11 Million declared by
the importer was accepted without query. I observe from the Bill of Entry
(P26) for the machine imported by Express Newspapers Ceylon Ltd. that the CIF
value declared was for the machine with accessories and hence reject the
petitioner's contention that its true value was more than the amount declared
by the importer. I accept the 1st respondent's version that the said machine
is not similar to the one imported by the petitioner. In the circumstances,
the importation by Express Newspapers Ceylon Ltd. cannot be considered as
evidence of discrimination.

**THE CASE FOR THE RESPONDENTS**

The case for the respondents is to be found in the counter affidavit of the
1st respondent filed on 06.03.92 together with counter submissions on behalf
of the 1st and the 2nd respondents wherein they maintain that the customs
valuation of the goods as Rs. 18 Million is supported by the available
evidence; that the petitioner's declaration of the value of goods as 11
Million constitutes an undervaluation in view of which the said goods are
forfeit by operation of law under S. 52 of the Customs Ordinance, as amended
by Act No. 83 of 1988 ; that this was a gross undervaluation resulting in a
heavy loss of revenue to the State ; that in view of the quantum of
undervaluation the 1st respondent was satisfied that the forfeiture was not
unduly severe, and hence rejected the application for mitigation of the
forfeiture in terms of S. 163 of the Ordinance ; that the said goods have
since been treated as state property ; and that in the circumstances, the
petitioner is confined to his remedy in the District Court where he has
challenged the said forfeiture under the provisions of the Customs Ordinance.

The 1st respondent denies the alleged infringement of the petitioner's rights
under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution. He also denies the averment that the
established practice in the Customs House is that a forfeiture is not
inflicted on a mere undervaluation but that the goods are released on payment
of additional duty together with a penalty where the undervaluation is over
100%. At the same time the 1st respondent denies the particular paragraph in
Susiri de Silva's affidavit which refers to the cases of mitigation relied
upon by the petitioner. However, there is no specific denial of the said

9

cases or the existence of the relevant files quoted in Susiri de Silva's
affidavit. In view of this, Susiri de Silva, in his affidavit filed on
08.03.92, called upon the respondents to produce inter alia the files relating
to the cases mentioned in his original affidavit. The 1st respondent filed an
affidavit in reply to the said affidavit by Susiri de Silva in which he makes
no references to the files called for. In these circumstances, I reject the
1st respondent's bald denial of the cases of mitigation relied upon by the
petitioner. In fact the learned Deputy Solicitor General who represented the
respondents at the hearing did not support the said denial but submitted inter
alia, that the importers in the said cases were not similarly circumstanced as
the petitioner and hence there is no infringement of Article 12 of the
Constitution.

**SUBMISSIONS OF COUNSEL**

The learned Deputy Solicitor General made the following submissions in defence
of the refusal by the 1st respondent to release the goods to the petitioner

(i) On the basis of the evidence of the officers of the Customs Valuation
Branch and the Government Printer, the machine imported by the petitioner with
additional spares and accessories was worth Rs. 18 Million and not 11 Million
as declared in the Bill of Entry. As such the said goods are forfeit by
operation of law, under S. 52 of the Customs Ordinance and were duly seized by
officers of the customs. He submitted that the customs valuation is supported
by the certificate of inspection dated 31.12.90 (P7) which had been submitted
to the National Development Bank by a Danish firm (SGS,; Inspection (Denmark)
A/S) in connection with the petitioner's application for a loan for the
purchase of the said machine. P7 states that the plant may work satisfactorily
for another 12-15 years and that "an estimated value of a similar plant with
the same function today would be approximately US $ 1,200,000/-" (Rs. 48
Million).

(ii) On the question of mitigation of forfeiture, the Deputy Solicitor General
submitted that S. 163 of the Customs Ordinance empowers the 1st respondent to
exercise that power prior to the seizure of the goods which are forfeit. In
the instant

10

case, when the application for a mitigation was received, goods had been
seized as forfeit and hence S. 163 had no application; the 1st respondent had
no power to mitigate (even if he had mistakenly thought otherwise); such goods
can be restored only by the Minister, under S. 164. The petitioner has not
applied to the Minister for such relief. He also submitted that it is S. 164
(and not S. 163) which empowers the restoration of goods "detained as
undervalued". As such the 1st respondent had no power of mitigation not only
in the instant case but also in the other cases relied upon by the petitioner.
The purported mitigations in the other cases were invalid; if so, the
petitioner cannot claim the right to an order for the restoration of the goods
on the ground of discrimination. He submitted that S.12 (1) guaranteed the
right to equal protection and not equal violation of the law and cited in
support the decisions in _C. W. Mackie & Co. v. Commissioner General Inland
Revenue_(2) and _Abeywardena v. The I.G.P_.(3)

(iii) Assuming that the 1st respondent had the power of mitigation under S.
163, he has exercised that power reasonably when he declined to mitigate the
forfeiture in view of the amount of undervaluation, which was as much as Rs. 6
Million. In none of the cases relied upon by the petitioner was there such
undervaluation; the petitioner was not similarly circumstanced as the
importers in the said cases; and as such the charge of discrimination has not
been established.

Learned Counsel for the petitioner made the following submissions:

(i) On the question of the value of the machine he argued that in the absence
of fraud the value declared by the petitioner on the basis of which a duty of
Rs. 3 Million was computed and paid (in the light of import documents) should
be accepted as the correct market value. He said that he would not challenge
the integrity of Mr. Nanayakkara, the Government Printer who valued the
machine at Rs. 18 Million but submitted that Mr. Nanayakkara is not an expert
in valuing a second hand printing press not being in possession of any data
for ascertaining the "market value" of such a machine, especially the model
imported by the petitioner. As regards the SGS certificate (P7) referred to by
the Deputy Solicitor General, Counsel submitted that

11

by their letter dated 25. 07.91 (P21), S.G.S. clarified that the value of 48
Million quoted in P7 for a new machine was for the more advanced V15D model
but that the closest model to V15A imported by the petitioner (and no longer
in production) was V15C which was priced about 27.6 Million and hence the
machine in dispute should be valued having regard to the price of the V1 5C
model and not the V1 51) model.

(ii) On the question of mitigation of forfeiture, Counsel submitted

(a) that the D.S.G.' s contention that S. 163 of the Customs Ordinance had no
application and that in the other cases of mitigation relied on by the
petitioner the mitigations were invalid is untenable in that this position has
not been taken either in the affidavit of the 1st respondent or in the counter
submissions filed on behalf of the respondents. The position taken there is
that the petitioner had sought mitigation under S. 163 "as he lawfully might"
and this was refused in view of the amount of undervaluation and upon the view
that the forfeiture was not unduly severe. Counsel argued, that in any event,
if the goods were forfeit, SAW is applicable and an application for a
mitigation thereunder was duly made by the petitioner ;

(b) that the decision to refuse mitigation was not fairly taken having regard
to the other importers and that it is tainted by extraneous considerations. He
argued that the amount of undervaluation is not a rational guide for
discrimination and that the discretion should be exercised in the context of
the value of the article and other considerations. It was submitted that in
other cases, the forfeiture had been mitigated even where the goods had been
undervalued by over 100% ; here the undervaluation is much less percentage \-
wise but mitigation was refused, based on the amount of undervaluation. Such
discrimination is unreasonable. Counsel further submitted that even though by
reason of the decision in _Neville Fernando v. Liyanage_ (4) the petitioner

12

(being a corporate body) is unable to complain of infringement of Article 14
(a) which guarantees freedom of expression, the Court should, in deciding
whether the refusal to mitigate was violative of Article 12 (1), take into
account the fact that the goods consist of a printing press used in the
production of publications by the petitioner's organization which engages in
social service activity in terms of its objects contained in S. 3 of Act No. 1
& of 1972 by which the said organization has been incorporated ;

(c) that there are circumstances which indicate that the refusal to mitigate
the forfeiture is tainted by extraneous considerations. Counsel drew our
attention to the following allegations made in the petition

(i) On 18.03.91, the Managing Director of the Press was informed by an officer
of ABN Bank (which gave the petitioner a facility to purchase the machine)
that the Controller of Exchange had personally come to the Bank to collect a
copy of the letter of credit.

(ii) On 28.03.91, Superintendent of Police CID Mr. Ottanpitiya inquired from
the Managing Director of the Press regarding the importation of the machine.

(iii) The unusual interest shown in the machine by a number of high ranking
officials.

Counsel for the petitioner next set out the following legal principles in
support of his submissions:

1\. There can be discrimination in the application of a law.

2\. Acts which appear to be neutral on their face but are in truth
characterised by arbitrariness violate the right to equal protection of the
law.

3\. Exercise of unguided discretion constitutes arbitrariness and may per se
justify a complaint of unequal treatment. If there is a motive for such
conduct, it may strengthen the allegation.

13

4\. Equals must be treated equally.

As authority for the said legal principles Counsel cited

_Yick Wo v. Hopkins_ 118 US 356 (5)  
  
Equal Protection of the Laws, Polyviou 649-650  
  
Chaudhury and Chaturvedi's Law of Fundamental Rights 3rd Ed.  
  
93, 103.  
  
_Gooneratne v. Commissioner of Elections (6)  
  
Jayanetti v. The Land Reform Commission (7)  
  
C. W. Mackie & Co. v. Commissioner of Inland Revenue (2)  
  
Roberts v. Ratnayake (8)  
  
Elmore Perera v. Jayawickrema (9) ___

**RELEVANT PRINCIPLES OF CUSTOMS LAW**

**(a) FORFEITURE & SEIZURE OF GOODS **

The Customs Law applicable to forfeiture and seizure of goods is relevant to a
proper determination of the application before us. Forfeiture of goods is one
of the consequences of a breach of the provisions of the Customs Ordinance.
Some of the sections provide that in the event of such breach the goods shall
be forfeited e.g. Sections 34 (1), 43, 44, 50, 50A (1) (b), 52, 55, 65, 75,
100A (2), 107, 107A (1), 107A (2), 121, 131 and 142. Section 57 provides that
in the absence of any explanation to the satisfaction of the Director General
of Customs, the goods shall be forfeited. Sections 38 and 68 provide that the
goods shall be liable to forfeiture.

In _Palasamy Nadar v. Lanktree_ (10) (a case in which the goods became
forfeited under S.46 (now 44) of the Ordinance) Gratiaen J. said (p. 522-523)

"If goods are declared to be "forfeited" as opposed to "liable to forfeiture"
on the happening of a given event, their owner is automatically and by
operation of law divested of his property in the goods as soon as the event
occurs. No adjudication declaring the forfeiture to have taken place is
required to implement the automatic incident of forfeiture. This seems to be
the effect of the decisions of the English Courts in the

14

_Anandale_ (11) and _De Keyser v. Harris_ (12). In _Jayawardena v. Silva_ (13)
Fernando CJ., Samarawickrema J. and Weeramantry J. adopted the above view with
approval.

**(b) FORFEITURE FOR UNDERVALUATION**

S. 52 provides - "Where it shall appear to the officers of the customs that
the value declared in respect of any goods is not in accordance with the
provisions of Schedule E, the goods in respect of which such declaration has
been made shall be forfeited together with the package in which they are
contained.....". This provision for forfeiture was introduced by the amending
Act No. 83 of 1988\. Prior to this amendment, S. 52 only empowered the customs
to detain goods which are undervalued and upon final examination for duty to
take such goods for the use of the Crown after which the Collector was
required to pay the amount of such valuation, together with the duties paid
upon such goods to the importer or proprietor of such goods and to dispose of
such goods for the benefit of the Crown. By the aforesaid amendment, the
legislature has provided for the automatic forfeiture of undervalued goods, by
operation of law and thereby effected a fundamental alteration of the law.
This principle of automatic forfeiture is not affected by the decision of this
Court in Moosajees case (supra) where the provision which was considered was
S. 57 under which the goods are declared forfeited "in the absence of any
explanation to the satisfaction of the Director-General". Such language
invests the Director General with a measure of discretion in the matter of
forfeiture; but S. 52 and other sections which provide for forfeiture of goods
are not so qualified.

S. 125 of the Ordinance inter alia; requires the customs to seize goods which
are declared to be forfeited. Such seizure (in the sense of a physical act of
seizure) is necessary to complete the ownership of the State to the goods-
_Arumugaperumal v. The Attorney - General_ (14). Goods are seized when they
are taken forcible possession of with the intention that ultimate loss by
forfeiture and condemnation would result from the seizure - _Palasamy Nadar v.
Lanktree_ (10) S. 154 provides for the manner of instituting proceedings for
claiming seized goods. This is the only remedy available to the owner for
challenging the validity of the seizure and alleged forfeiture. It has been
held that unless an action is instituted in a competent Court to so challenge
the seizure, the property in the goods will be lost

15

to the owner. _Palasamy Nadar v. Lanktree_ (10), _Jayawardena v. Silva_ (13).
Article 126 of the Constitution has since provided an additional remedy in
appropriate cases.

**(c) VALUE OF GOODS**

Schedule 'E' of the Ordinance prescribes the following rules for fixing the
value of imported goods

1\. It means their normal price i.e. the price in the open market between a
buyer and a seller independent of each other.

2\. Normal price is determined, inter alia, on the following assumptions

(i) that the goods are delivered to the buyer at the port or place of
introduction in Sri Lanka ;

(ii) that the seller bears the costs, charges and expenses of the sale and
delivery of the goods at such port or place which are hence included in the
normal price ; Costs, charges and expenses referred to above include, inter
alia, the following:

(a) carriage and freight to Sri Lanka ;

(b) insurance.

(iii) that the buyer bears all duties in Sri Lanka ;

(iv) that a sale in the open market between a buyer and a seller independent
of each other presupposes inter alia, that the price is the sole
consideration.

3\. The price paid or payable may be accepted as the value for customs
purposes if the price corresponds at the time of valuation to the normal price
as indicated at 1 above and the price is adjusted if necessary to take account
of circumstances of sale which differ from those on which the normal price is
based.

16

To summarise, value of goods for customs purposes means the normal price or
the open market price and the normal price includes costs, insurance and
freight i.e. the CIF value. Prima facie the price paid or payable for goods
i.e. the CIF value is acceptable as value for customs purposes provided,
however, it corresponds to the normal price determined subject to the
qualifications contained in Schedule E e.g. that in the matter of the sale
between the buyer and the seller, price is the sole consideration; and if the
circumstances of the sale differ from those on which the normal price is
based, the price will be adjusted if necessary taking account of such
circumstances. In other words, CIF value need not necessarily be the value of
the goods for customs purposes.

**APPLICATION OF THE LAW TO THE FACTS OF THIS CASE**

Learned Counsel have addressed us on two issues namely the forfeiture of the
goods (on the ground of undervaluation) and the refusal by the 1st respondent
to mitigate the forfeiture. Both these issues have been agitated by the
parties in their pleadings. This application is rooted in the second of these
issues and hence we need not ordinarily have considered the first issue. It
has, however, become relevant for the following reasons

(a) The petitioner's application for a mitigation was without prejudice to the
petitioner's right to take steps in Court to have the order of forfeiture
declared invalid which is an unusual condition for an importer to insist on
when applying for a mitigation. This condition is repeated in the petitioner's
prayer for relief where he seeks an order from this Court declaring the
impugned forfeiture to be illegal (for violation of Article 12 (1) and
'ordering the machine to be released on payment of an uplifted value without
prejudice to the petitioner's right to challenge the validity of such
additional value in an appropriate forum. He also seeks compensation in a sum
of Rs. 3,500,000/-.

(b) In the pending District Court action too he claims the goods on the basis
that their (seizure) and forfeiture are wrongful and illegal but this claim is
made in terms of the Customs Ordinance. He also seeks to recover damages in a
sum of Rs. 21,565,184/- and continuing damages.

17

It seems to me that the granting of relief subject to the aforesaid
reservation and leading to such overlapping of reliefs as is likely to occur
in the context of the proceedings before this Court and the District Court
would not be "just and equitable" in terms of Article 126(4) of the
Constitution. I am, therefore, compelled to decide both the said issues which
the parties have raised before this Court for the purpose of ensuring that the
relief, if any, that may be granted in these proceedings would be just and
equitable.

**FORFEITURE OF GOODS**

The machine was seized as forfeit on the ground that Rs. 11 Million declared
by the petitioner was an undervaluation. The respondents state that its value
is Rs. 18 Million. The parties have placed the following material for the
consideration of this Court

(i) Susiri de Silva's affidavit in which he asserts that Rs. 11 Million (CIF
value) is the correct value for customs purposes. In support of this value,
the petitioner has annexed the SGS inspection certificate dated 31.12.90 (P7)
according to which the machine had been manufactured in 1979 ; its value at
the time of purchase (in 1979) was DKK 3,400,000 (Rs. 12 Million) ; and the
plant may work satisfactorily for another 12-15 years. P7 also states that the
estimated value of a similar plant with the same function as on the date of
inspection was US 1,200,000 (Rs. 48 Million).

(ii) The 1st respondent's affidavit in which he states that the true value of
the machine is Rs. 18 Million. This is supported by the affidavit of the
Government Printer Mr. Neville Nanayakkara (1R1).

Mr. Nanayakkara states that he has been attached to the Department of
Government Printing for a period of over 21 years of which for a period of 11
years he has been functioning as the Government Printer ; that he is called
upon every month to give valuations to various banks on the post value and
replacement value of printing machinery ; that accordingly every month he
obtains information relating to the availability of second hand printing
machines and their prices from U.S.A., U.K., Japan and India; and that he is
fully aware of the current price structure of second hand printing machinery.

18

(iii) Exhibit P23 (petitioners written submissions dated 11.11.91) addressed
to the 1st respondent states that the officers of the Customs Valuation Branch
fixed the value of the machine at 19 Million by depreciating 60% from the
value of a similar new machine referred to in P7. In other words, it was their
opinion that if a new machine with the same function would cost 48 Million,
the value of the used machine imported by the petitioner should be 19 Million.
This would mean that an increase in the price of a new machine could also
result in the appreciation of the value of a used machine, which is not an
unreasonable view. Mr. Nanayakkara has reduced a further 1 Million and fixed
the value of the machine at 18 Million.

(iv) Exhibit P. 21 (SGS letter dated 25.07.91). This was obtained by the
petitioner during the pendancy of the customs inquiry presumably to neutralise
the effect of Exhibit P7 in respect of the valuation of the machine imported
by the petitioner. P21 seeks to achieve this by attempting a clarification
which is briefly as follows

(a) V15A model which was imported is no longer produced: (b) the models were
available in the market as follows

V 15A - 1966 to 1987  
  
V 15C - 1979 to 1990  
  
V 15D - 1979 - current

(c) V 15D is the newest and much better version than; V 15A. In P7 reference
was made to the V 15D model where it stated that "an estimated value of a
similar plant with the same function today would be approximately US $
1,200,000" because from1990 the only replacement model for V 15A was V 15D and
the seller had been offered a V 15D model as replacement for the V 15A ;

(d) based on information since received they state, that a V 15C model with
same capabilities as the V 15A under reference would be priced around US
$665,000 ex plant, (which is equivalent to about Rs. 27.6 Million CIF
Colombo).

19

It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioner that going on the value of
model V 15C, depreciated according to the percentage (60%) used by the
customs, the value of the machine imported by the petitioner is only Rs. 11
Million. I am unable to agree with this submission because at the time of the
said importation, V 15C model was no longer being produced. P21 itself states
that from 1990 the only replacement model for V 15A was V 15D. If so, the
valuation of the second hand V 15A machine with reference to the value of the
V 15D ex plant cannot be faulted.

(v) Exhibit P5, Rotatech letter dated 23.08.9& addressed to Susiri de Silva.
In this letter Rotatech informed "we have traded this press for US $ 270,000
because our main interest is selling new presses nowadays and it is not
necessary to make a big profit on second hand equipment". This indicates that
it was not a sale in the open market between a buyer and a seller independent
of each other where the price was the sole consideration as required by
Schedule 'E' of the Ordinance. The seller's object was not so much to make a
profit related to the demand but to dispose of the second hand machine
quickly. 1n all the circumstances, I am of the view that this is a case in
which the price paid cannot be accepted as the value for customs purposes and
the customs officers were justified in inquiring into the value.

**CONCLUSION**

On the question of valuation, the petitioner relies on the CIF value and the
fact that the machine was 11 years old at the time of importation. The
respondent's case is supported by the evidence of the Government Printer and
other circumstances which I have enumerated above. The Government Printer has
set out his qualifications and experience to give an opinion and these have
not been contradicted by the petitioner. As such, I am unable to accept the
submission of the petitioner's Counsel that the Government Printer is not
competent to assess the market value of the machine. On the available
evidence, the customs decision that the value of the machine is Rs. 18 Million
is justified. Accordingly, the petitioner had undervalued the goods when he
declared its value as Rs. 11 Million. True, no fraud has been alleged in that
regard. This, however, does not preclude the customs from determining the true
value of the goods.

20

I hold that the goods are forfeit on the ground of undervaluation, in terms of
S. 52 of the Ordinance, by operation of law. Such goods must be seized; but in
this case there is no express seizure of the goods. However, the 1st
respondent's letter dated 25.11.91 (P22) wherein he refused to vary the
forfeiture discloses a clear intention to permanently deprive the petitioner
of the goods and hence it constitutes a seizure of the goods within the ambit
of S. 125. The question then is whether the said seizure is vitiated on the
ground of discrimination by reason of the 1st respondent's failure to mitigate
the forfeiture under S. 163.

**ALLEGED DISCRIMINATION WITH REFERENCE TO S. 163**

I cannot accept the D.S.G.'s submission that S. 163 had no application because
the goods had been seized as forfeit and that the proper remedy was for the
petitioner to have appealed to the Minister under S. 164. The application for
mitigation (though subject to an unusual reservation of the right to challenge
the forfeiture in Court) was made prior to the seizure and hence it was a
valid application. I am of the opinion that the other submission that goods
"detained as undervalued" can only be released by the Minister under S. 164 is
untenable.

That appears to have been the position prior to the amendment of S. 52 when
the goods could only have been detained for undervaluation for the use of the
Crown subject to payment of their value to the importer or the owner of such
goods. Under the amended S. 52, undervalued goods are forfeit by operation of
law. Such forfeiture attracts S. 163. It follows that in the other cases
referred to by the petitioner, 1st respondent was competent to mitigate the
forfeiture and he did mitigate such forfeitures validly, before the goods were
seized in terms of S. 125. This Court will indeed presume that the said
mitigations were validly made.

As regards the refusal to mitigate the forfeiture, I agree with the
petitioner's Counsel that the amount of the undervaluation is not a reasonable
guide for refusal, particularly for the reason that such amount would depend
on the nature of the article. However, I do not agree that merely because the
forfeiture had been mitigated even where the undervaluation was 100%, the 1st
respondent is bound to mitigate in every such case. That is a question to be
decided in

21

the discretion of the 1st respondent, on the facts of each case ; but upon a
consideration of all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the refusal to
mitigate the instant forfeiture was unreasonable and hence discriminatory. The
fact that the goods consist of a printing press and that no fraud is alleged
against the petitioner are very relevant circumstances which do not appear to
have received consideration.

It is true that the application for mitigation was subject to an unusual
condition namely, without prejudice to the petitioner's right to challenge in
Court the forfeiture of the goods. It is unusual because a mitigation can be
made on the assumption that the forfeiture is valid but unduly severe ; and if
it was thought prudent to reserve any right, the appropriate course would have
been to make the application without prejudice to the petitioner's right to
challenge the forfeiture in Court, in the event of a refusal to mitigate the
forfeiture. However, the 1st respondent's refusal to mitigate was not on that
ground but in view of the amount of the undervaluation leading to "a heavy
loss of revenue" to the State. (The D.S.G. informed us that the loss would be
around Rupees 1.9 Million in duty). It is clear that in view of the said
ground the 1st respondent was not prepared to release the goods, even if the
application to mitigate was unqualified. Such conduct constitutes an arbitrary
exercise of discretion which justifies the allegation of discrimination vis a
vis others who are similarly circumstanced.

While there is no cogent evidence to establish the allegation that the seizure
of the goods without mitigation was mala fide and for a collateral purpose,
yet the material placed before us shows that there has been a failure to
fairly consider the petitioner's application for mitigation. This in my view
is a case of undervaluation of goods and automatic forfeiture under S. 52 and
but for the discrimination that has been established in the instant
application the petitioner would have been compelled to challenge the
forfeiture by way of proceedings in the District Court. I hold that by reason
of such discrimination the petitioner's right to the equal protection of the
law under Article 12 (1) has been infringed.

**RELIEF TO THE PETITIONER**

In the light of my findings, I hold that the impugned forfeiture is valid.
However, the seizure of the forfeited goods is vitiated by reason of
discrimination in the exercise of the 1st respondent's powers under S. 163 of
the Customs Ordinance. Accordingly, I grant

22

(a) a declaration that the petitioner's rights under Article 12

(1) have been infringed ;

(b) an order directing the 1st respondent to release to the petitioner the
said machine together with its accessories and spares on payment of duty on
the value of Rs. 18 Million. In view of my finding upholding the said value, I
disallow the prayer that this relief be without prejudice to the petitioner's
right to challenge the validity of the additional duty elsewhere ;

(c) compensation in a sum of Rs. 662,664.24 (Rupees Six Hundred and Sixty Two
Thousand, Six Hundred Sixty Four and Cents Twenty Four) being the sum equal to
legal interest for 21 months on duty paid by the petitioner on the Bill of
Entry dated 05.04.91 after which the petitioner was not permitted to clear the
machine ;

(d) costs in a sum of Rs. 5500/- (Rupees Five Thousand Five Hundred).

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.

  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/27.html_  

