##  Weligoda Pola v. Secretary, Ministry of Women'S Affairs and Teaching
Hospitals and Others - SLR - 63, Vol 2 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 27; (1989) 2 Sri LR
63 (31 March 1989)

**

63

** **

WELIGODAPOLA  
v.  
SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF WOMEN'S AFFAIRS AND  
TEACHING HOSPITALS AND OTHERS

**

SUPREME COURT  
TAMBIAH, J., FERNANDO, J. AND AMERASINGHE, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 5/88  
FEBRUARY 23 AND 24, 1989

_

Fundamental Rights - Right of equality - Article 12(1) of the Constitution -
Post Graduate Institute of Medicine (PGIM) - PGIM Ordinance No. 1 of 1980 -
General circular letters 1089 and 1389 of 20.09.1979.

_

The law recognizes that the principles of equality does not mean that every
law must have universal application for all persons who are not, by nature,
attainment or circumstances in the same position. What is required is that
persons who by nature, attainment or circumstances are similar are treated
alike. If there is a classification which deals alike with those who are
similarly situated, someone who is different cannot be allowed to complain
that he has not been treated equally; for being different, he must necessarily
expect to be treated differently.

The State is entitled to lay down conditions of efficiency and other
qualifications for securing the best service. And when it does so, this Court
will not insist that the classification is scientifically perfect and
logically complete. The classification may be refined but it should not be
artificial or irrational.

The classification (in Circulars 1089 and 1389 of 20.09.1978) which
distinguishes doctors with foreign qualifications who returned to the country
before 1 January 1980 and those sent by the Department from others who
obtained similar foreign qualifications for the purpose of deciding whether
they should be equally recognized with PGIM (Post Graduate Institute of
Medicine) graduates in the matter of appointment is not a classification
founded on an intelligent differentia and therefore violates the pledge of
equality given in Article 12(1) of the Constitution and is ultra virea, bad
and of no force or avail.

The Circulars are discriminatory and violative of Article 12(1).

( _Note by Ed:_ Fernando, J. while agreeing that the right of equality had
been violated, held that the Circulars were only _pro tanto_ void and did not
award a _solatium).

_

**

Cases referred to:

**

1\.  _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_ 30 US L Ed. 220

2\.  _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali_ AIR 1952 SC 75, 89

3\.  _Elmore Per era v. Monte ue Jayawickrema_ [1985] 1 Sri LR 285, 296, 297,
388

4\.  _Palihawadana v. Attorney-General_ [1979] 1 Fundamental Rights pp.6 - 9

**64**

5\.  _Yasapala v. Ranil Wickremasinghe and others_ [1980] 1 Fundamental Rights
Decisions 143, 161

6. _Probhudas Morajee Rajkotia and others_ AIR 1974 SC 1300

7. _State of Gujarat and another v. Shri Ambica Mills_ AIR 1974 SC 1300, 1312, 1313, paras 52, 53

8. _State of Bombay v. F.N. Balasara_ AIR 1951 SC 318, 326

9. _Ram Krishana Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar_ 1958 SC 538, 548

10. _Ganaga Ram v. Union of India_ AIR 1970 SC 2178, 2179

11. _Harakchand et al. v. Union of India_ AIR 1970 SC 1453, 1467

12. _Patchett v. Leathern_ (1949) 65 TLR 69, 70

13\.  _Dhirendra Kumar Mandal v. Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal
Affairs_ SCR (1954) 1 SCR 224

14. _Perera v. University Grants Commission_ (1980) 1 Fundamental Rights Decisions 103, 114

15. _P.S.U.N. Union v. Minister of Public Administration_ [1988] 1 Sri LR 229, 238

16\.  _Dayawathie and others v. Dr. M. Fernando and others_ [1988] 1 Sri LR
371, 372

17. _Jammu and Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa and others_ AIR 1974 1 SC 1, 11

18. _Budhan Choudhry and others v. State of Bihar_ AIR 1955 SC 191

19\.  _Jalan Trading Co. v. Mill Mazdoor Sabha_ AIR 1967 SC 691, 705

20. _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali_ AIR 1952 SC 75, 79, 83, 85, 86, 88, 93, 98, 99, 100, 102

21. _Reserve Bank of India v. Sahesranama_ AIR 1986 SC 1830

22. _Union of India v. Soundara Rajan_ AIR 1980 SC 959

23. _State of Mysore v. Narasinghe Rao_ AIR 1968 SC 349

24. _Union of India v. Dr. Mrs. Kohli_ AIR 1973 SC 811

25\.  _Pandurangarao v. The Andhra Pradesh Public Service Commission,
Hyderabad and another_ AIR 1963 SC 268

26\.  _Jaisinghani v. Union of India_ AIR 1967 SC 1427, 1431

27. _Rajendran v. Union of India_ AIR 1968 SC 507, 511

28. _Samarasinghe v. Bank of Ceylon_ (1980) 1 Fundamental Rights Decisions 165, 171 - 172

29. _Katra Education Society Allahabad v. State of U.P._ AIR 1966 SC 1307, 1312

30. _Andhra Industrial Works v. Chief Controller of Imports and others_ AIR 1974 SC 1539, 1541

31. _Western U.P. Electric Power and Supply Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P. and others_ AIR 1970 SC 21, 24

**

APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution complaining of
infringement of the fundamental right of equality.

**65**

_

R.K.W. Gunasekera_ with _Gomin Dayasiri_ for petitioner

_

K.M.P. Karunaratne S.S.C_ with _N. Kariapperuma SC_ for 1,2,3 and 5
respondents.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

March 31, 1989.

**

AMERASINGHE, J.

**

This is an application under Article 126 of the Constitution in which the
Petitioner prays for an order declaring that his rights to equality before the
law and equal protection of the law guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution have been violated. The essence of the Petitioner's complaint is
that in the matter of employment as an ENT Surgeon he has been denied an
equality of opportunity and discriminated against.

The Petitioner passed the Bachelor of Medicine and Bachelor of Surgery
(M.B.,B.S.) Examination in 1971 and thereafter, in compliance with the
provisions of the Compulsory Public Service Act No. 70 of 1961, served in the
Department of Health in various places and in various capacities until 21
September 1976 when he assumed duties as House Officer ENT of the General
Hospital in Kandy. He served in that capacity until 21 March 1978 when he
resigned from the Department of Health to enable him to proceed 'to the United
Kingdom to obtain specialist qualifications. In the United Kingdom the
Petitioner qualified himself to obtain the Diploma in Laryngology and Otology
from the Royal College of Physicians and the Royal College of Surgeons [D.L.O.
(Eng.)] on 13 November 1980; and having completed the required form of
training and passing the necessary examinations in Otolaryngology, he
qualified himself on 23rd March 1983 to be admitted to the Fellowship of the
Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh [F.R.C.S. (Edin.)]. During his period
of training he was, at various times in several hospitals, Senior House
Officer in ENT, Senior House Officer in General Surgery, Registrar ENT and
Associate Clinical Specialist (Clinical Assistant).

When the Petitioner proceeded to the United Kingdom to obtain further
qualifications, the Consultant ENT Surgeon under whom he had worked as a House
Officer, Dr. S. Mahendran, M.B.B.S., F.R.C.S.; in a letter dated 11 April 1978
(P 21), recommended that the Petitioner be given "all assistance and further
training to enable him to realise his ambition and return to this land where
ENT

**66**

Surgeons are the rarest species of doctors now."

The Petitioner having realized his ambition of obtaining the qualifications
and training he sought, returned to Sri Lanka in May 1983 to explore the
possibility of offering his recently acquired skills as an ENT Surgeon to Sri
Lanka. He met Dr. Joe Fernando, the Additional Deputy Director of Medical
Services, who said that the post of ENT Surgeon in the Galle General Hospital
was vacant. The Petitioner was offered the post of Resident ENT Surgeon,
Galle, on a temporary basis but on the salary scale of a Specialist as laid
down by General Circular No. 1208 (III) of the Ministry of Health. (P3), on 25
May 1983(P2). According to the Petitioner he had been assured by Dr. Joe
Fernando that the post of ENT Surgeon, Galle General Hospital, would be
advertised after the Petitioner reported for duty at the General Hospital,
Galle.

The Petitioner then returned to England, terminated his permanent employment
as Associate Clinical Specialist at Colindale Hospital and brought his family
back to Sri Lanka. He reported for work at Galle Hospital on 15 June 1983. On
18 June 1983 he wrote to the Director of Health Services through the Medical
Superintendent of Galle (P4) requesting him to advertise the Post of
Consultant ENT Surgeon in order to enable him to apply "and formally make the
appointment effective as you agreed at my interview with you prior to my
employment." There was, no reply to this letter.

On 15 July 1983 the Director of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine wrote
to the Director of Health Services (P5) stating that it had been brought to
the notice of the Otolaryngology Board of Study meeting that the Department of
Health Services had employed the Petitioner and two others as ENT Surgeons.
The Director goes on to state as follows: - "It appears that these doctors
have proceeded to the United Kingdom on their own and obtained the
qualifications F.R.C.S.(Eng.) after 1.1.80. These appointments are contrary to
the decision that qualifications obtained by doctors on their own (without the
Department sending them) are not to be recognized as specialists
qualifications. The qualifications to be recognized are the MS and MD given by
the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine.

The Board of Study in Otolaryngology has stated that if the three doctors wish
recognition as ENT Specialists they should obtain the MS (ENT) offered by the
Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine and fulfil the other requirements of the
Board of Study.

**67**

As this is bound to happen in other disciplines too, I would be grateful if
you could kindly let me know the policy decision on this matter so that I
could convey same to the Board of Studies."

The Petitioner on 26 November 1983 (P6) wrote to the Government Medical
Officers' Association (GMOA) appealing to it to take the matter up with the
Director of Health Services and persuade him to advertise the post. On 4
January 1984 the Secretary of the GMOA wrote to the Director of Health
Services (P7) stating that the GMOA had considered the Petitioner's case "in
detail" and "would like to recommend that he be posted for 2 years to Galle
initially on a permanent basis and "(sic.)" Post advertised at the end of 2
years so that this Post will be available if any officer has come back to the
island after completion of his/her period of no pay leave."

On 20 January 1984 the Director of Health Services replied (P8) stating that
the ENT Specialist Post at the General Hospital Galle "cannot be advertised
for 04 years from the date of temporary appointment."

Having interviewed the Secretary to the Ministry of Women's Affairs and
Teaching Hospitals, the Petitioner wrote to the Secretary on 26 July 1984 (P9)
stating as follows: - "At the interview you agreed that I possessed full
qualifications for appointment as a Consultant and that M.S. Part II was not a
requirement in my case as I joined the Department with full Specialist
Qualifications before the local M.S. Examination in E.N.T. has been held. I
would be thankful if you would now consider advertising the post at an early
date."

On 11 December 1986 the Petitioner wrote to the Director General of the
Ministry of Women's Affairs and Teaching Hospitals (P10) stating that he had
"Faithfully served the Government of Sri Lanka during the last 3 1/2 years
with the belief that the post in Galle would be advertised." He went on to
state as follows:

"I was made to understand by the relevant authorities in the Ministry of
Women's Affairs and Teaching Hospitals that in my case it was not necessary to
have board certification to obtain permanent employment as I joined the
Department on permanent basis as a fully qualified specialist before the first
MS Part II Examination in ENT was held by the PGIM.

I must respectfully submit that I am distressed and disillusioned because the
post was not advertised as agreed to at my discussions.

**68**

In view of this situation the reorganization and efficient management of the
ENT Department is hampered.

I should also like to submit that when I gave up my permanent appointment in
U.K., I made that decision in the belief that I could serve my country better
by returning home. The present situation has resulted in my losing a very
lucrative post in England "(sic)" having an uncertain future here."

On 20 March 1987 the Petitioner wrote to the Director General, Teaching
Hospitals (P11), referring to the letter of the Director of Health Services of
20 January 1984 (P8) stating that the Post could not be advertised for four
years from the date of temporary appointment. The Petitioner pointed out that,
since his appointment was on 25 May 1983, he was expecting the Post to be
advertised on 25 May 1987 to enable him to apply.

On 3 November 1987 the Post of ENT Surgeon, General Hospital Galle, was
advertised. The Petitioner passed the MS (ENT) Part II Examination held on 13
November 1987 and on 27 November 1987 applied for the Post which had been
advertised and requested that the requirement of Board Certification be waived
in his case in view of his qualifications and experience, the fact that the
question of passing the M.S. Examination had not been communicated to him
until 11 December 1986 and because the first opportunity he had to sit the
M.S. Examination was in November 1987.

On December 16, 1987 the Director of health Services wrote to the Petitioner
(P16) transferring him to the General Hospital Colombo as Assistant Surgeon
ENT with effect from 16 January 1988. In paragraph 33 of his Petition, the
Petitioner states that by transferring him to Colombo as Assistant Surgeon he
had been "penalised for sitting and passing the MS (ENT) Examination of the
PGIM." He adds that he had for four-and-a-half years been the Specialist
Surgeon (ENT) at the General Hospital, Galle (Teaching), and in which capacity
he had been a Lecturer and Examiner in ENT at the Medical Faculty, Ruhuna, and
was now "demoted as a PGIM trainee for 2 1/2 years."

The First, Second and Third Respondents deny this, and in their affidavits
state that the Petitioner was transferred to complete the training required
for Board Certification by the Board of Study and not as a punishment. The
Second Respondent in paragraph 16 of his

**69**

Affidavit explains that the transfer to Colombo was because "this training was
not available in Galle."

On 8 January 1988 the Petitioner filed papers in the Supreme Court alleging
the violation of his fundamental rights under Article 12(1) of the
Constitution and, among other reliefs, praying for an interim order preventing
his transfer from the Galle Hospital to the General Hospital Colombo as
Assistant Surgeon (ENT) and for an interim order staying the appointment of
the Fourth Respondent pending the disposal of this application. The interim
orders prayed for were granted on 12 January 1988.

Although on 18 January 1988 the Director of the Post Graduate Institute of
Medicine (PGIM) had informed the Petitioner that he should serve a post-MS
training period of 2 1/2 years (3R2), yet on 1 February 1989 the Director of
PGIM informed the Petitioner (X) that this period had been reduced to two
years and that this period would be reckoned from 13 November 1987 - the date
he passed the MS Part II Examination. He was to continue the remaining year of
training in Galle itself "supervised from time to time by Consultant ENT
Surgeons from Kandy and from Colombo."

The career misfortunes of the Petitioner are inextricably linked with the
happier events in the professional affairs of the Fourth Respondent,
culminating in his appointment to the post of ENT Surgeon of Galle which the
Peititioner eagerly desired to have. As if that were not enough, the PGIM by
its letter of 1 October 1987 to the Director of Teaching Hospitals (2RIC)
retrospectively dated the Board Certification of the Fourth Respondent to 10
March 1986, whereas he was, according to the PGIM's letter of 23 September
1987 to the Director of the Teaching Hospitals (2RIB), Board Certified on 18
September 1987.

The Petitioner declares and affirms in paragraph 34 of his Affidavit dated 7
January 1988 that the appointment of the Fourth Respondent in preference to
him was "unjust and discriminatory," among other reasons, because he is "more
qualified and more experienced" than the Fourth Respondent and because in
terms of Circular No. 923 of 14.7.79 (P17), under which the appointment was
made, he had "more points" than the Fourth Respondent. He goes on to allege in
Paragraph 34(t) of his affidavit that "the post if not advertised earlier
should have been advertised at the latest in May 1987 and it was deliberately
delayed until November 1987 to coincide with Board

**70**

Certification given" to the Fourth Respondent. This, he claims, "was an action
of purposeful discrimination by the 1st - 3rd Respondents to favour the Fourth
Respondent." In paragraph 35 of his Affidavit the Petitioner repeats his
assertion that there had been a "purposeful and hostile discrimination"
against him by the First, Second and Third Respondents in the matter of the
appointment of the Fourth Respondent to the post.

Counsel for the Petitioner did not press the claim that there was a purposeful
discrimination by the First, Second and Third Respondents. He rested his case
on the ground that discrimination arose out of the Circular itself, denying,
as he said it did, his rights to employment equally with others who were
similarly qualified. In these circumstances it is not incumbent on the
Petitioner, before he can claim relief on the basis of the violation of his
fundamental rights of equality before the law and equal protection of the law,
guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution, to assert and prove that the
Respondents acted with "an evil eye and unequal hand", _Yick Wo v. Hopkins_
(1) (Cf. _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali_ (2)). However, instruments of law
which are discriminatory may, it seems, be regarded as "hostile" in the sense
that they affect injuriously the interests of a person or class. (Cf. per
Mukherjea, J in _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali_ (2).)

And since learned Counsel for the Petitioner depended entirely upon the
invalidity of the Circular itself, it is not necessary for me to consider the
interesting submissions of learned Senior State Counsel that in order to show
hostile discrimination there must be evidence of systematic, as distinguished
from isolated, acts of discrimination if the Respondents had, as they claimed,
acted in good faith. For the same reason it is also unnecessary for me to
consider the effect of the Respondents acting in a discriminatory manner
merely on account of an error of judgment or arbitrariness. The Petitioner
claims that the Circular was ultra vires because it violated the Constitution.
He does not merely complain of a discriminatory application of a valid
Circular. If he had accepted the validity of the Circular, the reliefs he
might have prayed for would, perhaps, been of a different nature. I am not
called upon by the Petition or by the submissions of learned Counsel in this
case to consider the appropriateness of other reliefs - a difficult matter
upon which more than one opinion seems to have been expressed. (E.g. _Elmore
Perera v. Montague Jayawickrema_ (3)).

**71**

Senior State Counsel for the Respondents maintained that the only reason why
the Petitioner was not appointed was that he lacked the necessary
qualifications to be appointed to the post of permanent ENT Surgeon. This is
difficult to understand. Firstly, according to his Letter of Appointment (P2)
the Petitioner was paid a salary which in terms of Ministry of Health General
Circular No 1208 (III) of 26 April 1982 (P3) was payable to a "fully qualified
specialist." Secondly, if he was appointed as Resident ENT Surgeon because of
the urgent need to have an ENT Surgeon in Galle, he could not have been so
appointed, even temporarily, unless he was fully qualified, for Chapter II,
1:7 of the Establishments Code of the Government required that "only a person
eligible under the approved Scheme of Recruitment should be considered."
Thirdly, he performed the duties and functions of a specialist ENT Surgeon for
4 1/2 years and functioned as a Lecturer and Examiner at Ruhuna during that
time. Fourthly, he held foreign specialist qualifications (D.L.O., F.R.C.S)
which, the Petitioner states in his. Affidavit of 19 August 1988, entitled Dr.
A.C. Wijesurendra, F.R.C.S., Dr. R. Pathmanathan, F.R.C.S., Dr. Neil Halpe,
F.R.C.S., Dr. D.S. Rajapakse, M.R.C.O.G., Dr. M.R. Badudeen, F.R.C.S., and Dr.
D.G.M. Solangaarachchi, F.R.C.S., to appointments as permanent specialists.

The Second Respondent in his Affidavit dated 5 October 1988 states that Dr.
Solangaarachchi was not in fact given a permanent, specialist appointment "on
the same grounds as in the case of the Petitioner." What these grounds are,
are not stated in that Affidavit.

As for the other appointments, the Second Respondent in his Affidavit of 5
October 1988 explains that the appointments were made by the Ministry of
Health and not by the Ministry of Teaching Hospitals. Which Ministry of the
Government made the appointments is quite irrelevant: Does it matter whether
the right hand of the State or its left signed their letters of appointments?
Moreover Paragraph 8 of the Circular clearly contemplates appointments to all
"posts of specialists in the Department including" those in Teaching
Hospitals. Learned Senior State Counsel said that appointments to Teaching
Hospitals were made on the basis of a more careful selection of applicants. He
was, however, unable to explain why the Circular itself recognized foreign
qualifications as adequate or how the Petitioner came to be appointed even on
a temporary basis, why he was paid the salary of a fully qualified specialist
and how he had been called upon to perform the duties and functions of an ENT
Specialist,

**72**

Lecturer and Examiner if his specialist qualifications were not adequate. I
have no hesitation in rejecting the assertion of the First Respondent in
Paragraph 22 of his Affidavit dated 19 February 1988, that of the Second
Respondent in paragraph 20(b) of his Affidavit dated 22 July 1988 and that of
the Third Respondent in Paragraph 18(a) of his Affidavit dated 10 February
1988 that the Petitioner was not appointed for want of qualifications.

In his Affidavit dated 5 October 1988 the Second Respondent explains that the
other doctors, mentioned in the Petitioner's Affidavit of 19 August 1988, with
foreign qualifications who were given permanent specialist employment had been
taken "after they appealed to the Public Service Commission." No evidence was
placed before us as to what the grounds of the appeal were. But we are
entitled to assume that they would have been regarded as possessing adequate
qualifications in terms of the Scheme of Recruitment. The maxim _omnia
praesumuntur rite esse acta_ applied and we are entitled to assume that
official acts have been properly performed. (Cf. _Elmore Perera v. Major
Montague Jayawickrema_ ). (3)

Other categories of eligible specialists are set out in the Circular. The
Circular bears the caption "Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine' and goes on
to state that the Government has made the decisions set out in the Circular.
It states that "no Foreign Primary Examinations will be held in Sri Lanka
after 1.1.1980". Post Graduate Examinations of the Institute, it says, were to
be held from 1980 leading to the M.D. or M.S. degrees in the respective
specialities. It then sets out the fields in which Boards of Study had been
set up and states that the information with regard to examinations would be
notified from time to time.

The Circular then states as follows:

(4) Those Medical Officers who have passed Primary Part I of foreign
Examinations will be permitted to go abroad on no-pay leave to complete the
final examinations on a phased programme.

(5) Medical Officers who have the Foreign Primary Part I examination could sit
the final examinations of the Institute, provided they have the requisite
training and will on successful completion of the examination be found
assignments for further training up to one year in selected

**73**

institutions abroad, by the Ministry.

(6) Officers who have obtained full qualifications abroad and have overstayed
their periods of leave abroad, will be entitled to have their qualifications
recognised for appointments to posts of Specialists in the Department of
Health, provided they return to the Island before 1.1.1980.

(7) Medical Officers who have been sent abroad by the Department on no-pay
study leave will be entitled to have their qualifications recognised for
appointment for posts of Specialists in the Department, provided they return
within the stipulated period of leave.

(8) Subject to (6) and (7) above, with effect from 01.01.80, qualifications of
the local Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine will be given definite
preference in appointments to the posts of Specialists in the Department,
including Teaching Hospitals."

Having regard to the material placed before us, it would seem that, in
practice, the following classes of persons have been considered eligible and,
therefore, appointed to specialist posts:

1. Medical Officers who resigned from Government Service to proceed to England to obtain the full foreign specialist qualifications and decide to rejoin the Department immediately after obtaining such qualifications in terms of the Minute in Regard to Medical Personnel of the Health Services. (P1).

2. Officers who had ceased to be in Government Service, having vacated their posts by over-staying the leave granted but who returned to the country with full foreign specialist qualifications before 1 January 1980 in terms of paragraph (6) of the Circular.

3. Officers who had been sent by the Department and returned to the country within the period of leave granted having obtained full foreign specialist qualifications.

4. Officers who obtained full foreign specialist qualifications provided  the Public Service Commission ordered that they be appointed.

5. Officers who obtained full foreign specialist qualifications provided that the Ministry of Health and not the Ministry of Teaching Hospitals made the appointment.

**74**

6. Graduates of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine who had completed the prescribed course of training and obtained Board Certification.

The Petitioner complains that although he belonged to category (1), he was not
appointed, the Fourth Respondent being preferred to him. The Respondents
maintained that in terms of Paragraph (8) of the Circular, they were bound to
give preference to the Fourth Respondent since he was a PGIM Graduate. The
Petitioner complains that this differential treatment on the basis of the
classification in the Circular makes it discriminatory and violates Article
12(1) of the Constitution.

Article 12(1) of the Constitution declares that "All persons are equal before
the law and are entitled to the equal protection of the law." Undoubtedly, on
the face of it, the classification in the circular discriminates against the
petitioner. Indeed every classification discriminates between persons and
things. The very concept of classification is that of inequality. Yet, unless
classification is permitted, injustice is bound to take place, for it would
result in unequals being treated equally.

It would also inevitably lead to the objects of good Government being
defeated. If, for instance, the Government wishes ft. give the people an
efficient medical service, then it is inevitable that it should appoint
persons who have the relevant academic qualifications and experience as
doctors. It would be strange if someone who did not have such qualifications
and experience were to be appointed as a Surgeon on the basis that "all
persons are equal before the law". It would subvert the object of Government
to provide an efficient medical service, for rather than save lives, such a
course of action would necessarily result in mass murder.

The Courts have evolved a solution to this paradoxical situation of honouring
constitutional pledge of equality and at the same time recognizing the need to
classify. The solution is this. The law recognizes that the principle of
equality does not mean that every law must have universal application for all
persons who are not, by nature, attainment or circumstances, in the same
position. What is required is that persons who by nature, attainment or
circumstances are similar, are treated alike. If there is a classification
which deals alike with those who are similarly situated, someone who is
different

**75**

cannot be allowed to complain that he has not been treated equally, for being
different, he must necessarily expect to be treated differently. Our Supreme
Court has recognized this position in several cases (E.g. see _Palihawadana v.
Attorney-General,_ (4); _Yasapala v. Ranil Wickramasinghe and Others,_ (5);
_Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrama,_ (3). Several decisions of the
Indian Supreme Court which were cited by Counsel also support this position.
(E.g. see _Probhudas Morajee Rajkotia and Others v. Union of India,_ (6);
_State of Gujarat and another v. Shri Ambica Mills,_ (7). Indeed, these
principles were recognized by the Indian Supreme Court a very long time before
the decisions cited to us.(E.g. see _State of Bombay v. F.N.Balsara,_ (8).

In exercising its right to make distinctions between persons, I do not think
that the State wastes its precious and limited energies in making them without
a purpose. When the State makes distinctions, I therefore take it that it does
so correctly appreciating the needs of our people and having regard to its
experience, with a view to achieving something desirable because it is good
for our people. (See _State of Bombay v. F.N. Balsara,_ (8); _Ram Krishna
Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar,_ (9); _Ganga Ram v. Union of India,_ (10).

While I take it for granted at the beginning that the State had a purpose for
making the distinctions it did, I must find  out what the purpose was, for if
the classification had no connection with that good purpose, then, surely, I
cannot say that that classification was made to achieve that purpose. (Cf. per
Ramaswami, J. in _Harakchand et al. v. Union of India,_ (11)).

In trying to find out what purpose the State had in mind when making a
classification, I ought to consider "Prior Law" (Cf. per Ramaswami, J. in
_Harakchand et al. v. Union of India,_ (11)). This includes legislation by
Government Circulars and notifications, H.W.R.Wade, Administrative Law, 5th
Edn. at pp. 745-7, even though they be, as described and explained by _Justice
Streaffield in Patchett v. Leathem,_ (12), "to be at least four times cursed"
in comparison with legislation passed by Parliament. (Cf. _Dhirendra Kumar
Mandal v. Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs_ , (13)). And so, I
should consider the Minute in Regard to Medical Practitioners of the Health
Services (P1). In finding the end, I must also look at statements of objects
and reasons, matters of common knowledge, matters of common report and the
history of the times in trying to find

**76**

out what was the purpose of the classification. (Cf. per Das, C.J. in _Ram
Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar,_ (9) ), AIR 1958 S.C. 538 at p. 543 para.
12 and K.K. Mathew in Democracy, Equality and Freedom, Eastern Book Co., 1978,
at p. _217 fin_. - 218.

In trying to find out what the purpose of the Circular was, I have considered:

1. the circular in question (P12 and P17);

2. the Minute in Regard to Medical Personnel of the Medical Services (P1), upon which Counsel for the Petitioner laid much reliance, and which Counsel for the Respondents did not suggest was irrelevant or inoperative;

3. the statement of Dr. S. Mahendran, M.B., B.S., F.R.C.S. in his letter referred to earlier (P21) in which he describes ENT Surgeons as "the rarest of species now";

4. the letters of the Government Medical Officers' Association (GMOA) dated 4 January 1984 (P7) and 19 November 1987 (2R2);

5. the letter of the Director of Health Services dated 20 January 1984 (P8) in response to the letter of the GMOA dated 04.01.1984 (P7);

6. the several affidavits of the Petitioner and Respondents;

7. the Hand Book and Prospectus 1987 of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine;

8. the oral and written submissions of Counsel for the Petitioner and the represented-Respondents on this matter.

What then was the context in which the Circular was formulated? What was the
general good sought to be achieved or the harm sought to be eliminated? The
Hand Book and Prospectus 1987 of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine
provides the following information:

"Medical education in Sri Lanka started in 1870 with the establishment of the
Ceylon Medical College which after 7 decades, was converted to the Faculty of
Medicine in 1942 when the University of Ceylon was established.

Until 1952 no Post-Graduate Medical Examinations were conducted by the
University of Ceylon. For the first time examinations for the degrees of MD
and MOG were conducted in 1952. The examination for the degree of MS was
started in the following year.

There was no organized teaching or training of any kind. The training

**77**

in the specialities of Medicine at post-graduate level had to be done in the
U.K. and the diploma such as MRCP, FRCS, etc. of the U.K. Colleges were
recognized for consultant appointments.

The Advisory Committee on Post-Graduate Medical Education recommended to the
Government in 1973 that a supervised in-service training period of 3 years
followed by an examination should replace the existing scheme of training
abroad. Accordingly the Institute of Post-Graduate Medicine (IPM) was
established in 1976 under the provisions of the University of Ceylon Act No. 1
of 1976 and was attached to the University of Colombo. The Institute of Post-
Graduate Medicine was formally inaugurated on 2nd March 1976 by Dr. Halfdan
Mahler, the Director General of the WHO.

However, the work of the newly set up Institute was handicapped because
various examinations of the U.K. Colleges continued to be conducted in Colombo
and the doctors preferred these to the examinations of the Institute.
Therefore, a review of the work of the Institute became necessary. At the same
time the Government also decided to stop holding foreign examinations in Sri
Lanka and to grant full recognition and preference to the post-graduate
degrees of the Institute with effect from 1 January, 1980.

In order to achieve the objectives of the Institute, the Institute was
reestablished in 1979 under the provisions of the Universities Act No. 16 of
1978 and was re-named the Post-graduate Institute of Medicine (PGIM).
Accordingly PGIM Ordinance No. 1 of 1980 made under the provisions of the
Universities Act referred to above came into force on 10th April, 1980. The
Boards of Study for various specialities in Medicine were reorganised and the
courses of instruction and examination were arranged for the different
specialities."

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner maintained that the "positive public good"
to be achieved was the provision of a more efficient health service in Sri
Lanka. The harm sought to be avoided, as learned Senior State Counsel claimed,
was the "brain drain". These purposes were, it seems to me, two sides of the
same coin.

Learned Senior State Counsel in his written submissions states that the
impugned Circular "was brought into operation at a time when large numbers of
medical personnel were leaving the country and it was purely intended to
retain these medical personnel and also to offer them an opportunity to obtain
further qualifications locally." He further states that "in the instant case
the object of the Circular is to retain the medical personnel from leaving the
country and to

**78**

offer them an opportunity of obtaining higher education. The rationale of the
present classification is essential to retain those doctors who are in service
and to give a preference to them. The persons who resigned from the Health
Service must necessarily be classed separately."

The migratory propensities of professional people, ever in search of greener
pastures, has always been a disturbing factor. There have been various
methods, legislative and otherwise, adopted by Government and its agencies to
eliminate or mitigate the impact of that phenomenon which is popularly known
as the "brain drain". The requirement of compulsory public service for a
stipulated period after University education prescribed by the Public Service
Act No. 70 of 1961 was one such device. If, as explained by learned Senior
State Counsel, the object of the Circular in question was to control the
outward flow of doctors, in the interest of public welfare, it is difficult to
understand how the imposition of disabilities on those doctors like the
Petitioner, who were returning to the country to serve it could-be justified.
If at all the Circular would have the effect of discouraging people who wished
to return from doing so. It would undermine the object of providing an
efficient health service.

I am unable to agree with learned Senior State Counsel that in the pursuit of
its object to have an efficient medical service the Government was only
concerned with those already in Government Service. What was the need to
provide incentives to those who had over-stayed their leave but returned
before 1.1.80 if such persons were yet in Government Service? If they had
over-stayed with the consent of the authority granting leave, the date,
1.1.80, would be irrelevant, for the relevant date then would be that
specified by the authority granting leave. On the other hand if an officer had
overstayed his leave without permission, he would, in terms of the
Establishments Code, be deemed to have vacated his post. Paragraph 6 of the
Circular in my view was directed at those persons who had vacated their posts
and who had therefore ceased to be in Government Service. According to the
argument of learned Senior State Counsel the Government was prepared to take
those who had ceases to be in Government Service by reason of the application
of the punitive measure of vacation of post but unwilling to take back those
who had honorably resigned. I do not think so.

The Minute in Regard to Medical Personnel of the Health Services

**79**

published in the Ceylon Government Gazette No. 14.840 of February. 7 1969 (P1)
clearly indicates that the Government hoped for and welcomed the return of all
doctors who had left the service. Part B of the Minute deals with the terms of
employment to be offered to "Medical Officers who join after obtaining full
specialist qualifications or after years of private practice". A category
specially dealt with in the Minute is one into which the Petitioner fits
exactly, namely, category I. It refers to "Medical Officers who resign their
appointments to, proceed to England and obtain any of the full specialist
qualifications given in Appendix I which are accepted by the Department and
decide to rejoin the Department immediately after obtaining such
qualifications."

The differential attributes set out in the Circular do not bear a rational
nexus to the object of providing a more efficient health service by minimizing
the brain drain and attracting qualified specialists to undertake employment
in Government Service. In the circumstances, the classification in the
Circular is violative of Article 12(1) of the Constitution and must be held to
be ultra vires the Constitution and therefore bad in law and of no force or
avail. (Cf. _Perera v. University Grants Commission,_ (14); _P.S.U.N. Union v.
Minister of Public Administration,_ (15); _Dayawathie and Others v. Dr.
M.Fernando and Others,_ (16); _State of Jammu & Kashmir v. Triloki Nath Khosa
and Others,_ (17); _Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice S.R.Tendolkar,_ (9); _Budhan
Choudhry and Others v. State of Bihar,_ (18); _Harakchand v. Union of India,_
(11); supra, at p. 1467 per Ramaswami, J. at para. 23; _Jalan Trading Co. v.
Mill Mazdoor Sabha,_ (19); _State of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali,_ (20)).

If they were, as claimed by the Respondents, giving effect to settled
Government policy not to appoint foreign qualified specialists, I am at a loss
to understand:

(1) why the Director of PGIM would need to write to the Director of Health
Services on 15 July 1983 (P5) asking the Director to let him know "the policy
decision on this matter";

(2) how the Government Medical Officers Association, after considering the
case of the Petitioner "in detail", found it possible to recommend (P7) the
appointment of the Petitioner as permanent ENT specialist for two years and
then on 19 November 1987 writing to the Fourth Respondent (2R2) that the GMOA
had been assured by the Director-

**80**

General, Teaching Hospitals, that the appointment would be made "strictly on
the criteria laid down in the Circular and nothing else";

(3) why the Director of Health Services in January 1984, in response to the
request of the GMOA, held out a promise that the post would be advertised
"four years from the date of temporary appointment'." of the Petitioner
instead of saying that the Petitioner was not qualified at all;

(4) why the Ministry of Health (as distinguished from the Ministry of Teaching
Hospitals) appointed foreign qualified specialists.

(5) why the Public Services Commission directed the appointment of foreign
qualified specialists.

I agree with the submission of learned Senior State Counsel that the concept
of equality in the matter of employment or promotion can be predicated only
when the competing candidates are drawn from the same source. However, learned
Senior State Counsel, citing the decision in _Reserve Bank of India and others
v. G. N. Sahasranaman and others_ (21) and _Union of India v. E. S. Soundara
Rajan_ (22), also submitted that "there cannot be a case of discrimination
merely because fortuitous circumstances arising out of some peculiar
developments or situations create advantages of disadvantages for one group or
the other although in the earlier stages they were more or less alike."

The Reserve Bank case was concerned with certain Administrative Circulars of
the Bank with regard to a scheme of promotion for Class III employees of the
Bank. The main question for determination was whether a part of the scheme was
violative of the constitutional guarantee of equality before the law and of
equal opportunity in public employment enshrined in the Constitution. The
controversy in the matter before the Court lay within a narrow area but, as
Sabayasachi Mukharji, J. observed (at p. 1839 para. 34) aspects which were
"strictly not germane to the present issue" were also examined because it was
urged that the controversy was "against a vast compass".

I find no support for Learned Senior State Counsel's submission in _The
Reserve Bank_ decision. The Headnote in the case says this: "It is true that
the chances of promotion in some areas occur more often in smaller pentres
than in other bigger centres like Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi but that is
fortuitous and would not really affect the question

**81**

and violate articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution."

The chances of promotion were less in some places than in others. Where one
happened to be serving at a given time was a fortuitous circumstance and
"would not really affect the question and violate Articles 14 end 16. The
justice of the case should be judged in conjunction with other factors, the
convenience, the future of the family etc.", said Justice Sabayasachi
Mirkharji at p. 1840 pare. 40\. The learned Judge, however, emphasised (at p.
1839 pare. 39) that the "right of promotion should not be confused with the
mere chance of promotion. Though the right to be considered for promotion was
a condition of service, mere chances of promotion were not."

In the matter before us, the issue is not the mere chance of appointment but
the right to be considered for employment. The submission of learned Senior
State Counsel in this regard are couched in the words of Justice Krishna Iyer
at p. 961 pare. 4 in his judgment in the case of _Union of India v. ES.
Soundra Rajan_ (22). The learned Judge went on to add in that case that "if
one class has not been singled out for special treatment, the mere
circumstance of advantages accruing to one or the other cannot result in
breach of Article 14 of the Constitution."

In the case before us, the complaint is not that some accidental circumstances
have placed the Petitioner at a disadvantage in relation to others in the same
class to which he belonged but that by, what Mathew J. in _State of Gujarat v.
Shri Ambica Mills_ (7), described as an "underinclusive" classification, the
advantages conferred an others who were similarly stituated in the same class,
that is doctors obtaining foreign specialist qualifications, were not
conferred on him. He complains that PGIM graduates are in terms of the
Circular to be given preference not over all foreign qualified specialists,
but only over foreign qualified specialists who returned to the country after
1 January 1980 or those Who were appointed by the Public Service Commission
and those who were sent by the Department to obtain the qualifications.

The Petitioner specifically complains that he was passed over neither because
he lacked the appropriate foreign specialist qualifications nor because those
foreign qualifications were inadequate to equip him for the tasks of an E.N.T.
Surgeon but,

**82**

curious as it may seem, because he had at his own expense and on his own
proceeded to the U.K. to obtain those qualifications in a field where
specialists were rare, as Dr. Mahendran had said in his letter of
recommendation (P21) and at a time when appropriate qualifications could not
be obtained from the PGIM or any other local institution. There Otolaryngology
of was no mention of a Board of Study in PGIM in the impugned Circular nor in
the Ordinance made by the University Grants Commission under Section 140 read
with Section 18 of the Universities Act No. 16 of 1978 and published in
Gazette Extraordinary No. 83/7 of April 10, 1980 (P23), although, as we have
seen, specialists in that field were described as a "rare species." The First
M.S. LENT) Examination, according to paragraph 10 of the Second Respondent's
Affidavit, was held in August 1983, that is, two months after he had returned
to Sri Lanka and re-joined the service with full specialist qualifications
(D.L.O., F.R.C.S.). The Examination was subsequently held in September 1984
and in November 1987. The Petitioner passed the M.S. (ENT) Examination of the
Institute in 1987.

Despite the fact that the Petitioner possessed such full, specialist
qualifications as those which, in the case of other doctors, had been
recognised to be adequate by the impugned Circular, by the Public Service
Commission, and by the Ministry of Health; and despite the circumstances in
which he was compelled to privately seek those qualifications abroad, his
professional attainments, sufficient though they undoubtedly were for the
discharge of his duties and functions as an ENT Surgeon, did not entitle him
to be appointed because he had not been sent abroad by the Department to
acquire the relevant knowledge and skills. So the second Respondent seems to
say.

In Paragraph 9 of his Affidavit of 22 July 1988 the Second Respondent states
that "in terms of the General Circular Letter 1389 of 20.9.1979 with effect
from 01.01.1980 foreign specialist qualifications would be recognized provided
those officers were sent abroad by the Department. The Petitioner was not sent
by the Department to obtain foreign specialist qualifications."

We do not know what "peculiar developments or situations" there were at the
time the Circular was formulated except that it coincided with the
resuscitation of the Post-Graduate Institute of Medicine.

The State, as I have said before, is entitled to lay down conditions

**83**

of efficiency and other qualifications for securing the best service. And when
it does so, this Court will not, in my opinion, insist that the classification
is scientifically perfect and logically complete. (Cf. per Dua, J. in _Ganga
Ram and others v. Union of India and others_ (10) ). It may, for instance,
confer advantages in matters of appointment, promotion or remuneration on the
basis of educational qualifications. (E.g. see _State of Mysore v. Narasingh
Rao_ (23) _Union of India v. Dr. Mrs Kohli   _(24) _State of Jammu & Kashmir_,
supra). Indeed in Dr. Mrs. Kohli's case, as refined a classification as
between an F.R.C.S in General Surgery and an F.R.C.S in Orthopaedics was
upheld in relation to the appointment to the post of a professor , of
Orthopaedics. (See per Alagiriswami, J. esp. at p. 813 para. 7).

Classifications may be refined but they must not be artificial and therefore
irrational. They cannot be upheld if they are, as presented to us in this
case, irrational. What has a date of return to the country or the mode of
proceeding to obtain the qualifications to do with the duties and functions to
be performed? Moreover, such matters have not, it seems, been considered to be
relevant by the P.S.C. and the Ministry of Health in making appointments
thereby recognising the fact that the micro-distinctions sought to be made by
the Circular are not substantial in that they have no relation to the duties
and functions to be performed by the persons preferred in relation to others
similarly qualified. If the distinctions that are made are not qualitatively
substantial, they must be regarded as unacceptable. This, I think, is what was
decided by Krishna Iyer, J. at p. 4 para. 5 and by Justice Chandrachud, J. at
P. 11 para. 37 in their decisions in _The State of Jammu v. Triloki Nath Khosa
and others,_ (supra).

Having upheld the classification based on variant educational qualifications
in the case before him, Justice Chandrachud in _Kosha's_ case says at p. 16
para. 56 that it was hoped "that this judgment will not be construed as a
charter for making minute and microscopic classifications. Excellence is, or
-ought to be, the goal of all good government and excellence and equality are
not friendly bed-fellows. A pragmatic approach has therefore to be adopted in
order to harmonize the requirement of public services with the aspirations of
public servants. But let us not evolve, through imperceptible extensions, a
theory of classification which may subvert, perhaps submerge the precious
guarantee of equality. The eminent spirit of an ideal society is equality and
so we must not be left to ask in

**84**

wonderment: What after all is the operational residue of equality and equal
opportunity?"

Is the classification in the Circular founded on "substantial differences"
which distinguish doctors grouped together from those left out? The Circular
doss not suggest that a person will be appointed as a specialist only if he
passes the M.S. and M.D. examination of the PGIM and serves a prescribed
period of training and obtains Board Certification. Nor does it suggest that
the basis for preferring a person so qualified to a doctor who has obtained
foreign specialist qualifications is the superiority or greater relevance to
local conditions of PGIM examinations and training. A preference based on such
reasoning would have been unquestionable, for excellence, as Justice
Chandrachud said in Khosa's case, (supra), "is or ought to be the goal of good
government." Moreover, in those circumstances a foreign qualified specialist
not possessing the PGIM qualifications could not have claimed equal treatment,
being inferior and unequal.

The Circular, however, clearly recognises the equal suitability of both PGIM
and foreign qualified doctors for appointment to specialists posts. In
paragraph 5 it envisages continuing education abroad. Indeed, it would appear
from the letter of the Director of PGIM dated 21 April 1987 to the Second
Respondent (2RIA) that the Fourth Respondent had been sent to the United
Kingdom on two years leave with full pay after passing his PGIM examination.
In terms of paragraph 7 of the Circular read with paragraph 8 thereof, person
who obtains foreign specialist qualifications will not be placed in an
inferior position in relation to a PGIM graduate if he is sera abroad by the
Department and within the stipulated period of leave. Nor will he be passed
over in favour of a PGIM graduate if he had returned to Sri Lanka before 1
January 1980.

What has the arbitrarily fixed date of return to do with the duties the
Petitioner or others like him were called upon to perform as ENT Surgeons or
as other medical specialists? How is one's competence to act as a medical
specialist affected by the fact that he acquired his skills at the expense of
the taxpayer or with the benediction of the Health Department? Discriminatory
conditions and qualifications for employment must be related to the duties to
be performed. Otherwise they must be regarded as insubstantial, arbitrary,
fortuitous and artificial and therefore, irrational and unjustly
discriminatory. (See J. _Pandurangarao et. al. v. The Andhra Pradesh Public
Service_

**85**

_Commissioner, Hyderabad, and another_ (25), (Cf. per Ramaswami, J. in
_Jaisinghami v. Union of India_ (26), _C.A. Rajendren v. Union of India,
A.I.R. 1968 S.C. 507 at p. 511_ (27)). The classification which distinguishes
doctors with foreign qualifications who returned to the country before 1
January 1980 and those sent by the Department from others who obtained similar
foreign qualifications for the purpose of deciding whether they should be
equally recognized with PG1M graduates in the matter of appointment is not a
classification founded on an intelligible differentia and therefore, in my
view, violates 'the pledge of equality given in Article 12(1) of the
Constitution and must be declared to be ultra vires the Constitution and
therefore bad and of no force or avail. (Cf. _Perera v. University Grants
Commission;_ (14); _Samarasinghe v. Bank of Ceylon,_ (28); _P.S.U.N. Union v.
Minister of Public Administration_ (15); _Dayawathie and others v. Dr. M.
Fernando and others_ (16); _Ram Krishna Dalmia v. Justice Tendolkar_ (9);
_Budhan Choudhry and others v. State of Bihar,_ (18); _Harakchand et. al. v.
Union of India,_ (1), _Jalan Trading Co. v. Mill Mazdoor Sabha_ (19); _State
of West Bengal v. Anwar Ali_ (20).

This is not a case like that of _Elmore Perera v. Major Montague Jayawickrema_
(3), where the majority of the Court agreed with the finding of Chief Justice
Sharvananda (at p. 300 - 301) that the Petitioner had failed to prove that
others similarly placed had been treated differently. There was no "unequal,
selective or discriminatory treatment" in that case.

The Petitioner states in paragraph 34(1) of his petition that Circular Letter
No. 1089 dated 20.9.1979 (P12) (which is in the same terms as P19 and which I
have referred to as the Circular') was discriminatory and violative of
Article 12(1) of the Constitution and being ultra vires could not be the
legitimate basis for the preference of the Fourth Respondent in relation to
the Petitioner. Learned Senior State Counsel, however, suggested that Article
12(1) merely recognized that all persons are equal before the law and declared
them entitled to the equal protection of the law. True enough Article 12 of
the Constitution does not, as the Indian Constitution does in Article 14,
specially mention, the right of equality of opportunity for all citizens in
matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State or
to promotion from one office to a higher office. But those rights are
necessary incidents of the application of the concept of equality enshrined in
Article 12 of our Constitution. (Cf.

**86**

per Ramaswami, J. in _Jaisinghani v. Union of India_ (26); per Ramaswami, J.
in _C.A. Rajendran v. Union of India._ (27)).

Learned Senior State Counsel submitted that the Petitioner was not entitled to
relief since the Petition was vague. I agree that a claim of unlawful
discrimination cannot bye adjudged unless the petition contains a full
averment of the grounds on which equality is claimed and the denial of
equality is pleaded as not being based on a rational relation to the object
sought to be achieved. (Cf. _Perera v. University Grants Commission_ (14),
_Samarasighe v. Bank of Ceylon_ (28); _Elmore Perera v. Major Montague
Jayawickrema_ (3) L.R. 285 at pp. 298 - 299 per Sharvananda, C.J., Cf. also
Katra Education Society, _Allahabad v. State of U.P._ (29). However, I am
satisfied that the Petitioner in this case adequately satisfied the
requirements of law relating to this matter.

Learned Senior State Counsel reminded us that the onus of proof was on the
Petitioner to establish that his fundamental rights had been violated. (Cf.
_Andhra Industrial Works v. Chief Controller of Imports and others_ (30) 1541
para. 10; _Jalan Trading Co. v. Mill Mazdoor Sabha_ (19). I have in my
judgment explained why, in my opinion, the Petitioner has sufficiently
discharged the burden upon him. He has satisfied the test that as between
persons similarly circumstanced, some (including himself) were unreasonably
treated to their prejudice and that the differential treatment had no rational
relation to the object sought to be achieved. (Cf. per Shah J. in _Western U.
P. Electric Power and Supply Co. Ltd. v. State of U. P. and Others_ (31).

This case was unlike _Samarasinghe v. Bank of Ceylon,_ (28) where Weeraratne,
J. found (see p. 173) that the Petitioner had failed to place "any cogent and
convincing evidence to establish discrimination."

For the reasons set out in my judgment, make the following I declarations and
orders:

(1)  I declare that General Circular No. 1089 of 20 September 1979 and General
Circular Letter No. 1389 of 20 September 1979 issued by the Ministry of Health
violate the provisions of Article 12(1) of the Constitution and being ultra
vires the Constitution, they are, therefore, invalid in law.

**87**

(2) I further declare that the Petitioner's right to equal protection of the
law pledged by Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been violated in that he
has been denied an equality of opportunity to be appointed to the post of ENT
Surgeon, Galle.

(3) I confirm the Order of this Court dated 12 January 1988 staying the
appointment of the Fourth Respondent as ENT Surgeon, Galle, unless and until
the direction in the next succeeding paragraph are complied with.

(4) I direct the First, Second and Third Respondents or their successors in
office to advertise the Post of ENT Surgeon, Galle, within three months of the
date of this decision and I further direct that an appointment be made to the
said post of ENT Surgeon, Galle, taking due account of such educational and
other qualifications of the applicants as are relevant to the duties and
functions of the holder of the post of ENT Surgeon, Galle.

(5) I order the State to pay the Petitioner a sum of Rs.10,000/- by way of a
_solatium_ for the distress caused to him.

(6) I further order the State to pay the Petitioner a sum of  Rs.5000/- as
costs.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree.

**

FERNANDO, J :

**

Having had the advantage of reading the judgment of my brother Amerasinghe, I
need not to refer to the facts which have been so clearly set out by him.

While the State is entitled, as a matter of policy, to determine what foreign
qualifications it would recognise for recruitment and promotion of medical
officers and Specialists, if cannot be argued here that the State, by the
Circulars in question, refused to recognise the Petitioner's qualifications;
paragraphs 6 and 7 conclusively establish that those foreign qualifications
are fully recognised, and that no preference will be given to persons having
the local P.G.LM. qualification vis-a-vis persons having the aforesaid foreign
qualifications, and falling within the ambit of those paragraphs.

**88**

Further, It would be a legitimate management practice, designed to improve
motivation and to retain staff, to have a promotional scheme based on internal
promotions only (or giving preference to, or reserving a quota for, those
already in service), even though this may result in the exclusion of better
qualified persons. A policy of insisting upon the appointment of an "outsider"
as being the best-qualified person, regardless of other factors, may sometimes
result in a deterioration in morale among (and even loss of) staff already in
service, with a consequent decline in the overall efficiency of the
institution: hence the maintenance of an efficient service would often justify
some weightage being given to service within the institution. However, here
both the Petitioner and the 4th Respondent were already in service when the
specialist post was advertised. It seems to me that a State policy of giving
preference, in regard to appointments and promotions in the public sector, to
persons who have a longer period of service in Sri Lanka (even outside the
public sector) would not necessarily amount, per se, to an improper
classification. However, in this case, none of these factors would operate to
justify the Petitioner being excluded from consideration for appointment as
ENT Surgeon, Galle, on the basis that he was not qualified.

Despite the Respondents' original contention that the Petitioner did not
possess the recognised post-graduate qualifications, and that the 4th
Respondent was the only eligible candidate, learned Senior State Counsel had
to concede that the Petitioner was eligible, that if he had not been eligible
he could not have been given a temporary appointment in 1983, and that had the
post been advertised a few months earlier, the 4th Respondent would not have
been eligible and the Petitioner would inevitably have been appointed. It
follows that the 4th Respondent was appointed on the basis that the Petitioner
was not qualified, and not because of any "preference" given to the 4th
Respondent.

"The Circulars do not purport to permit such an exclusion, but that
circumstance _per se_ would not entitle the Petitioner to relief in these
proceedings, although it might entitle him to relief in Writ proceedings.

The Circulars apply to all medical officers in regard to appointments to the
posts of Specialists, and no distinction is drawn between Teaching Hospitals
and other Hospitals. Several other

**89**

medical officers had ,admittedly been appointed to Specialist posts, and this
cannot be explained away on the basis that it was done by some other Ministry
or Department. In the result, the Circulars have not been applied equally, and
the exclusion of the Petitioner was in denial of his rights under Article
12(1). That this infringement of his rights was not the result of
inadvertence, a mistake, or an error of judgment, is apparent from the failure
to fulfil the undertaking given to him, in 1983, to advertise the post soon:
from the failure to advertise even in May 1987, although the Petitioner was
told, in 1984, that the post would be advertised 4 years after his first
(temporary) appointment; and from the fact that, inexplicably, the post was
only advertised after the lapse of the time required for the 4th Respondent to
become eligible for appointment, which in my view was no mere coincidence.

It is clear that there was no reasonable basis on which the 4th Respondent
could have been "preferred" to the Petitioner. The Circulars contemplate that
"definite preference" will be given to "qualifications"; that such,
qualifications will be preferred to other qualifications, but not that the
_holder_ of the former will, regardless of all other facts and circumstances,
be preferred to the holder of the latter; it does not authorise the
_exclusion_ of others. "Preference" in that context would mean that, other
things being equal, the person with the local qualification will be appointed;
although as between competing qualifications, the local qualification will be
preferred, possession of the local qualification will not have the result of
entitling the holder to appointment although in every other respect another
candidate is more suitable or better qualified. Thus by giving "preference" to
the specified qualifications the Circulars do not authorise disregard of other
relevant criteria, such as seniority, service, experience, or other relevant
attributes. No ground whatever has been pleaded or urged before us as
justifying the "preference" of the 4th Respondent, other than the Petitioner's
lack of the P.G.I.M. qualifications. Every other relevant consideration cries
out in favour of the appointment of the Petitioner. He obtained his basic
qualification 9 years before the 4th Respondent; he has served in Sri Lanka in
Government Service for a period of 11 years (as against 7 years by the 4th
Respondent, of which 2 years was outside Sri Lanka); he has 4 1/2 years
experience in the Specialist post itself, having acted for that period, while
the 4th Respondent had none; he obtained his Specialist qualification 4 1/2
years before the 4th Respondent. It is

**90**

also relevant to mention that the Petitioner obtained his qualification before
the local examination was first held; i.e. at a time when it was not possible
for .him to have obtained that qualification except by going abroad. In those
circumstances, it is not surprising that the Respondents did not seek to
justify the appointment of the 4th Respondent on the basis of a "definite
preference" in terms of the Circulars, for that would have been unreasonable
and perverse in the circumstances. But for the denial of his fundamental
right, the Petitioner would undoubtedly have been appointed as ENT Surgeon,
General Hospital, Galle. There has already been many a slip 'twixt cup and lip
in the past 6 years, and the relief now awarded to the Petitioner must prevent
another.

Although I find it unnecessary to determine whether the Circulars of 1979
violate the Constitution or are _ultra vires,_ I would add that, if (contrary
to my view as to the meaning of "definite preference" in paragraph 8 of the
Circulars) that paragraph meant that where only one candidate had the local
P.G.I.M. qualifications, he must be appointed although his rivals had a
recognised foreign qualification, totally ignoring all other factors normally
considered relevant for such appointment, even then the entirety of the
Circulars would not be _ultra vires_ and void, but only _pro tanto.

_

As the interim order made by this Court has prevented the purported transfer
of the Petitioner, his Counsel has not pressed his claim to compensation. I
would therefore grant the Petitioner the following reliefs:

(a) a declaration that the Petitioner's fundamental right to equality before
the law and the equal protection of the law has been violated by the 1st, 2nd
and 3rd Respondents, by their conduct in treating him as not having the
qualifications required for appointment as ENT Surgeon, General Hospital,
Galle;

(b) a declaration that the transfer of the Petitioner to the General Hospital,
Colombo, as Assistant Surgeon (ENT) is null and void;

(c) a declaration that the appointment of the 4th Respondent as ENT Surgeon,
General Hospital, Galle, is null and void;

(d) a declaration that the Petitioner was entitled to be appointed as ENT
Surgeon, General Hospital, Galle, and a direction to the State, and the 1st,
2nd and 3rd Respondents (and their successors in office), to issue the
requisite letter of appointment forthwith, to be effective from a date not
later than 8th January 1988;

**91**

(e) costs in a sum of Rs.5,000 as against 1st, 2nd and 3rd Respondents and the
State.

_

**Application allowed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/27.html_  

