##  Gunaratne (Alexis Auction Rooms) v. Abeysinghe (Urban Development
Authority) - SLR - 255, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 27; (1988) 1 Sri LR 255 (19
May 1988)

**

255

GUNARATNE (ALEXIS AUCTION ROOMS)  
v.  
ABEYSINGHE (URBAN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY)

**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J., TAMBIAH, J.  
AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J. M.C. COLOMBO FORT 52489:  
C.A. APPLICATION 5_18/84; S.C. 54/85.  
FEBRUARY 18, MARCH 14, 24, 25 AND APRIL 29, 1988.

_

Landlord and tenant-Urban Development Project (Special provisions) Act No. 2
of 1980, S. 2-State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979, S. 3.

_ _

Revision-Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1980,
Sections 3(a) and 4(1)-Removal of revisionary and writ jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal by these provisions.

_

Alexis Auction Rooms were in occupation of the premises in suit as tenants for
about 35 years first under one Ameen and after acquisition on 29.05.198.1.,
under the U.D.A. The Company (Alexis Auction Rooms) fell into arrears of rent
and the U.D.A. served notice dated,10,10.83, under section 3 of the State
Lands (Recovery of Possession) ''Act No-. 7 of 1979 on Gunaratne a Director of
the Company to vacate the premises and hand them over on or before 25.10.1983
(i.e. in 15 days time). This was followed by the U.D.A. instituting
proceedings on 24.01.84 (i.e. 106 days later) in the Magistrate's, Court,
against Gunaratne seeking his eviction. On 04.04.84 the Magistrate made order
directing eviction on 18.04.84 two weeks.' time having been allowed at the
tenant's request: Gunaratne then applied to the Supreme Court and asked for a
Writ of Certiorari to quash the order of the Magistrate's Court but this was
refused as being out of time.

On. 19.04.84 Gunaratne moved the Court of Appeal for revision of the Order of
Magistrate's Court. This application was dismissed on 20.05.85. On the same
day the U.D.A. took possession. Gunaratne appealed to the Supreme Court from
the Order-of the Court of Appeal.

**

Held-

**

(1) The requirement of giving of notice under S. 3(1) of the State Lands
(Recovery of Possession) .Act to vacate and hand over possession is mandatory
and must be complied with.

(2) The stipulation of 30 days notice in S. 3(1) is, for the benefit of the
occupier and the authority may specify a date not less than 30 days or a
longer period. The quit notice given in this case being only 15 days was
defective in form but the tenant in fact had -106 days because ejectment
proceedings were filed only after 106 days and a further 2 weeks had been
given at the tenant's request by the Magistrate. The requirement of 30 days
notice in S. 3(1) must be treated as directory since there has been
substantial compliance with it

(3) . Section 7(1) of Act. No. 2 of 1980 enables recourse-to the provisions of
Act No. 7 of 1979 in order to take possession of the land:

**256**

(4) The Court of Appeal could not have entertained the Revision application of
the petitioner. The revisionary and writ jurisdiction of. the Court of Appeal
to grant reliefs in respect of the complaint of the petitioner have been
removed by S. 3(a) and S. 4(1) of Act No. 2 of 1980.

**

APPEAL** from an order of the Court of Appeal.

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with H. W Jayatissa Herath, G. O. Fonseka, Miss. W. R.
J. Herath, Miss. Chamantha Weerakoon and Hilary Jayawardena for the appellant.

K. N. Choksy P. C. with N. Mahendran and Miss. l: R. Rajapakse for the
respondent_.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 19, 1988 **  
  
THAMBIAH, J.

**

This case has a protracted history.

Alexis Auction Rooms Limited, was in occupation of the premises No. 295, Galle
Road, Colombo 3, as a tenant, for a period of about 35 years. The premises
belonged to one Ameen of No. 64, Ward Place, Colombo:

The premises were acquired under the Land Acquisition Act by the Urban
Development Authority (UDA) with effect from 29:5.81. The acquisition was made
with a view' to put up high rise buildings in terms of the Master Plan for the
Colombo Metropolitan area development.

After the acquisition, Alexis Auction Rooms Limited was treated by the UDA as
the tenant of the premises. The correspondence between the parties show that
the Company offered to purchase the premises and develop it according to plans
and specifications acceptable to` the UDA and, the latter was not agreeable;
that the UDA called upon the Company to: pay an enhanced rent of Rs. 5,000'
per month as fixed by the Municipal. Council, and that as at 31.7.82, the
Company was in arrears of rent amounting to Rs. 70,000 for the period
commencing from 29.5.81 to 3.1.8. 82:.

On 18.3.83, His Excellency the President made an order under S.2 of the Urban
Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1980 in relation to
premises No. 295, Galle Road, Colombo 3. The said order was published in
Government Gazette (Extraordinary) No. 237/1 1 dated 23rd March, 1983.-S.7 of
the said Act No.: 2 of 198

**257**

makes provision for the appropriate authority to have recourse to the State
Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act No. 7 of 1979 in order to obtain possession
of the premises. The respondent above named, purporting to act under the
provisions-of S.3 (1) of Act No. 7 of 1979; r as amended, served a notice
dated 10:10.83 on the appellant who is a Director of the' Company to vacate
and deliver vacant possession of the premises- on or before 25.10.83.
Thereafter, the respondent purporting to act under the said Act No. 7 of 1979,
as 'amended, made an application on 10.1.'84 in proceedings bearing No. 52489
of the Magistrate's Court, Fort, Colombo, and prayed for the ejectement of the
applicant from the said premises. Summons was served on the appellant and he
was represented by a lawyer so was the UDA. After hearing submissions on
26.3.84 and 28..3:84, the learned Magistrate made order on 4.4.84 that the
appellant be ejected from the premises forthwith: The appellant's lawyer
thereupon informed the learned Magistrate that there were goods worth about 30
lakhs on the premises entrusted to the appellant for auction that it would
take at least 2 weeks to hand back the items to the owners or to move them to
another place. The lawyer for the UDA had no objection and thereupon the
learned Magistrate made order that ,the writ of ejectment should, be operative
after 18..4.84 and that the appellant should vacate the premises on or before
5 p.m. on 18.4.84.

Soon thereafter,' the appellant made an application (S.C. 1/84 .(Special)) on
9..4.84 to the Supreme Court and asked for a Writ of Certiorari to quash,
inter' alia, the order of the learned Magistrate - directing that the
appellant be ejected from the Premises.' The writ was sought on the ground
that S.3(1) of Act No. 7 Of .1979 required that the date to be specified in
the notice should' be a date not less than 30 days from the date of its issue,
but, the appellant had been given only 15 days notice to quit; that S.5(2)
required that the application for ejectment be accompanied by a copy of the
notice to quit, and that the respondent had failed to do so that the failure
of the respondent to comply with the mandatory requirement of 30 days notice
and the' failure to comply with S.5 (2) vitiated, the entire Magistrate's
Court proceedings and that the order of the learned Magistrate was ex-facie
without jurisdiction. The Supreme- Court on 17.4.84 made order refusing the
application on the ground that the application was made under S.4 of Act No. 2
of 1980 which required the invocation of the Supreme Court's jurisdiction
within one month of

**258**

the order made, by the President under. S. 2 of the; Act. As this order was
made, on 23.3.83, the application was clearly out of time.

Thereupon, on 19.4.84 the appellant made an application in revision to the
Court of Appeal to have the order of the learned Magistrate for ejectment set
aside. In the said application, the appellant averred, inter alia, that the
statutory-provisions of Act No. 7 of 19.79, require that prior to an
application for ejectment, a due and valid notice to quit must be Served that
the notice served failed to comply with the clear mandatory requirement  S.3
(1) as it gave the appellant a period of only 15 days to quit that the,
application for ejectment made under S.5 was not accompanied by a due and
valid notice, and hence the learned Magistrate had no jurisdiction to proceed
with the application and has acted in excess of jurisdiction when he made the
'order for ejectment. The same grounds were urged and the same reliefs were
prayed for in the Writ Application that was dismissed. However, the statement
in the appellant's pleading that he made an application under S.4. Act. No. 2
of 1980 and that "Their Lordships stated; inter alias that the application had
been made to the wrong Court", is incorrect. Having filed this application the
appellant also obtained an ex-parte Order from the Court of Appeal to stay
writ until the final disposal of 'the application:

The Court of Appeal, ultimately delivered its order-on 20.5.85, and dismissed'
the application. Justice G.P.S. de Silva stated 'that 'the object of giving
one month's notice to quit is to enable the occupier of the premises to find
alternative accommodation. In the present case that object: was achieved, for,
the petitioner had more than the required statutory period of 30 days notice.
Thus though the quit notice was defective or irregular in form, yet I am
satisfied that in the instant case, it caused no prejudice to the substantial
rights of the petitioner. In the circumstances, this is not a fit and proper
case for the exercise of the extraordinary powers of revision vested in this
Court".

The Court of Appeal, however, thought it unnecessary to decide two preliminary
objections raised by learned Counsel for the respondent; namely, that it had
no jurisdiction in respect of the subject matter of the application in. view
of section 3(a) and 4(1) and 6 of Act No. 2 of 980, and that the appellant is
precluded from, maintaining the application as he had earlier unsuccessfully-
applied to the Supreme Court in Application No. 1/84 (Special) on the same
grounds to obtain the same relief.

**259**

Mr. Choksy, ' P. C: ; informed us that he Was' not pursuing the 2nd objection
which he had raised before the Court of, Appeal.

On 20.5.85, soon after judgement was delivered by the Court of Appeal, the UDA
took possession of premises No: 295. On 21.6.85, Alexis Auction Rooms Limited,
filed an application in the Supreme Court under Article 126 and 12(1) of the
Constitution. The Company's complaint was that the UDA had at no stage served
.a notice to quit under Act. No. 7' of 1979 on the Company which was in
possession of the premises as tenant of the UDA and that the purported notice
served on the appellant was bad in law and null and void, that the notice to
quit ought to have been served on the Company and it should have been made the
respondent in the Magistrate's Court proceedings for ejectment; that any
steps, proceedings and orders taken or made against the appellant did not bind
the Company. The Company also complained that it had been unlawfully and
forcibly ejected by the UDA from` the premises on 20.5.85, soon after delivery
of the judgement by the Court of Appeal: The Company prayed that the UDA be
directed to vacate the premises and that it be restored to possession-and it
be paid compensation for wrongful ejectment. The application was dismissed.

It is necessary to reproduce some of the provisions of `the State Lands
(Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979,-as amended by Act No. 29 of 1983.

S.3(1): When a competent authority is of opinion:

(a) that any land is State land; and

(b) that any person is in unauthorised possession or occupation of such land,
the: competent authority may serve notice on such person in  possession or
occupation thereof, or where the competent authority considers such service
impracticable or inexpedient, exhibit such notice in a conspicuous place in or
upon that land requiring such person to vacate such land with his dependants,
if any, and to deliver vacant possession of such land to such competent
authority or other authorised person as may be specified in the notice on or
before a specified date. The date to be specified in such notice shall be a,
date not less than thirty days from the date of the issue or the exhibition of
such notice.

(2) Every notice under sub-section (1) 'issued in respect of any State land,
is in this Act referred to as a "quit notice".

**260**

S.4 "Where a quit notice has been served or exhibited under S.3- the person in
possession or occupation of the land to whom

such notice relates......, shall riot be entitled to possess or occupy such
land. after the date specified in such notice or, to object.

(b) " the person in possession or occupation shall . . . duly vacate ' such
land and deliver vacant possession to the competent authority or person to
whom he is required to do so by such notice. `

S.5 (1) Where any person fails to comply with the provisions of S.4 (b) in
respect of any quit notice issued.... any competent `authority . . . may make
an application in Form B in the Schedule ...... .to the Magistrate's Court...

(a) setting forth the Following matters

(iii)' that a quit notice was. issued . . . or-exhibited.

(2) Every application ..... shall be supported by an affidavit in Form C .. ..
verifying the matters set out in such application and shall be accompanied by
a copy of the quit notice. .

(3) Every application supported by an affidavit and accompanied by a copy of
the quit notice . . . . shall be referred to as an "application for
ejectment".  ,

It is common ground that the notice to quit dated 10.10.83 gave the
petitioner, a period of only 15 days to vacate the premises. Dr. Colvin R. de
Silva referred us- to s. 3(2) and to the words "quit notice" repeatedly used
in sections 4 and 5 of Act No. 7 of 1979 as amended, and submitted as follows

(1) Statutes which encroach on the rights of the subject., whether as regards
person or property, are subject to a strict interpretation (Maxwell on "The
Interpretation of Statutes", 11th Edn. PP. 275; 276 was cited) S. 3 (1)
requires that the date -to be specified in the notice shall be a date not less
than 30 days from the date of its issue or the exhibition of such notice. As
far as S.3 is concerned, the notice given is no notice at all, as it does not
comply with the imperative requirements of s.3(1).

**261**

(2) It is through s.3(1) that jurisdiction s. given to the Magistrate's Court.
A valid notice to quit is the foundation on which the Magistrate's Court's
jurisdiction rests. It ,must be a minimum of 30 days notice; before the
Competent Authority can come to Court a pre-condition which he must fulfil in
order to activate the jurisdiction of the Magistrate's Court. A valid notice
must be given for `consequent steps to have the force of law; S.5 does not
come into play, unless a proper notice under. s.3(1) is given.

(3) The learned Magistrate had no jurisdiction to proceed with the purported
application under s. 5, and the order of ejectment was ex-facie bad, and made
without jurisdiction,

Mr. Choksy, P.C. on the other hand, submitted that (1) the Court of Appeal had
no jurisdiction to entertain the Revision application, and (2) the requirement
of a'30 days notice is a procedural requirement and no prejudice has been
caused to the petitioner, as the application for ejectment was filed in the
Magistrate's Court only on 10.1.84, and thus the petitioner continued to be in
occupation for a period of 3 months after the receipt of the notice to quit.

Parliament has prescribed the form in which a notice to quit has to be given,
but it has not specified the consequences of failure to do so. Mr. Choksy has
suggested a test which is to be "found in De Smith's Judicial Review of
Administrative Action":(4th Edn. pp. 122, 123, 142:-143).

When Parliament prescribes the manner or form in which a duty is to be
performed or a power exercised, it seldom lays down what will be the legal
consequences of failure to observe its prescriptions: That Courts must
therefore formulate their own criteria for determining whether the procedural
rules are to be regarded as mandatory, in which case disobedience will render
void or voidable what has been done, or as directory in which case
disobedience will be treated as an irregularity not affecting the validity of
what has been done (though in some cases it has been said that there must be-
substantial compliance with the `statutory provisions if the deviation is to
be excused as a mere irregularity). Judges have often stressed the
impracticability of specifying exact rules category: The whole scope and
purpose of the enactment must be considered, and one must assess the
importance of the provision that had been

**262**

disregarded, and; the relation of that provision to the general object
intended to be secured by the Act: Furthermore much may depend upon the
particular circumstances of the case in hand. Although nullification is the
natural and usual consequence of disobedience, breach of procedural or "formal
rules is likely to be treated as mere irregularity if the departure from the
terms-'0f the Act is of a trivial nature or if no substantial prejudice has
been suffered by those for whose benefit the requirements were introduced, or
if serious public inconvenience would be caused by holding them to be
mandatory, or if the court is for any reason disinclined to interfere with the
act or 'decision that is impugned."

This test appeals to me and I accept it and apply it. The object of the State
Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, No. 7 of 1979 is the speedy recovery of
possession of State lands from persons in unauthorised 'possession or
occupation. The object of giving notice is to tell the occupier that he must
vacate the land and hand over possession; otherwise, the Competent Authority
will resort to, the speedy remedy provided for in the Act. The giving of
notice under s. 3(1) to vacate and hand over possession is a mandatory
requirement and must be complied with, and that has been done in this case.

It seems to me that the stipulation of 30 days in s. 3 (1) has been inserted
for the benefit of the occupier. The Competent Authority, at his discretion,
may specify a date not less than 30 days or a longer period, having 'regard to
the type of premises to be dealt with, e.g., if it is factory premises, he
might specify 90 days to enable the occupier to dismantle the equipment and
find an alternate site. The notice that was, given in this case was defective
in form it gave only 15 days to vacate. In the words of De Smith "breach of
procedural or formal rules is likely to be treated as am ere irregularity .if
no substantial prejudice has been suggested by those for whose benefit the
requirements were introduced."

The notice to quit is dated 1,0.10 83. The application for ejectment was filed
on-24 1..84. i.e. the petitioner had 106 days to move out before legal
proceedings were instituted. In addition, on petitioner's own request, the
learned Magistrate granted him: a further 2 weeks for occupation. Thus, no
substantial prejudice has been caused to the occupies for, whose benefit the
time requirement was introduced. In My-view, the requirement in s. 3(1) of
Act, No. 7 of 1979, that a

**263**

minimum of 30 days be given to vacate must be treated as directory and there
has been a substantial compliance with the time requirement specified in' s.
3(1) of the Act.

Article 138(1) of the Constitution states that 'the Court of Appeal shall have
and exercise subject to the provisions of the Constitution or of any law, an.
appellate jurisdiction..... and sole and exclusive cognizance by way of
appeal, revision etc., ''(emphasis is mine). The revisionary powers of the
Court of Appeal is therefore subject to provisions of any law.

S. 2 of the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of
1980, empowers the President by Order published in the Gazette to declare that
any particular land is urgently required for Urban Development Projects.
S.3(a) places restrictions on the remedies available upon an Order made under
s 2.

S.3. No person aggrieved by an Order made or purported to have been made under
s .2 of this Act or affected by or who apprehends that he would be affected by
any act or step proposed to be taken under or purporting-to be taken under
this Act or under or any other written law, in or in relation to any
particular land or any land in any area, shall be entitted. (a) to any remedy,
redress or relief in any Court other than of compensation or damages.
(emphasis is mine).

S. 4. The jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of the
Constitution shall, in relation to any particular land or any land in any area
in respect of which an order \- under or purporting to be made under s. 2 of
this Act has been made shale be exercised by the Supreme Court and not by' the
Court of Appeal.

S. 6. Nothing contained in Section 3 of this Act. shall affect the powers
which the Supreme. Court may otherwise lawfully exercise in respect of any
application made under Article 126 of, the Constitution or in the exercise of
the jurisdiction referred to in section 4 (1) of this Act:

S-. ,7 (1) of the Act enables the Government or any, body or authority to take
steps under Act, No. 7 of 1979, where it becomes necessary for it to take
possession of any land in respect of which an order has been made under s.2:

**264**

S. 10 (2) of Act, No. 7 of 1979 states that no appeal shall lie against an
order of ejectment made by a Magistrate.

The Competent Authority purporting to act under S.3(1) of Act No. 7 of 1979,
as amended, server's notice on the petitioner requiring him to vacate the land
and hand over possession to him. In terms of s.3 of Act No. 2 of 1980, it was
a -step taken under or purporting to be under a written law. The, order of
ejectment was made under s.10(1) of Act No. 7' of 1`979, and in terms of s.3
of Act  2 of 1980 this too was a step taken under or purporting to 'be under a
written law.

Dr, Colvin R. de Silva contended that if the giving of notice is considered a
step under a written law under s.3 of Act No 2. of 1950 express mention of
Act. No. 7 of 1979 in s.7 of Act No. 2 of 1980 is superfluous; Act No. 7 of
1979 does not fall within the ambit of s.3 of Act No. 2 -of 1980: -

I cannot agree S. 7 (1) of Act No, 2 of .1980 enables the Government or any
body or authority to have resort to the provisions of Act. No. 7 of 1979, in
order to take. possession of the land. Through s:7(1 ), the provisions of the
later Act have been: incorporated into the Act. So. the giving of notice to
quit under s.3 (1) of Act No. 7 of 1979 can also be considered ,a "Step taken
under this act" in terms of s. 3 of Act No. 2 of 1980.

The Petitioner's complaint in the Revision Application is that the notice was
bad in law and void as it was in breach of s.3.(1) of Act. 7 of 1979 which
requires a minimum period of 30 days and therefore the learned Magistrate had
no jurisdiction to proceed with the' application for ejectment and made an
order for ejectment. He sought to set aside the order of ejectment made by the
Magistrate.

Having regard to the provisions of Act. No. 2 of 1980, it seems to me that the
only reliefs available to the petitioner were:.

(1) A claim for compensation and damages only under s: 3 (a).

(2) An application for the issue of writs by the Supreme Court under s.4(1).
The petitioner did apply for the issue of a Writ of Certiorari. (SC. 1 /84),
and urged the same grounds and asked - for the same reliefs as in the Revision
Application, but it Was ruled out as being out of time.

**265**

(3) A fundamental rights: application to-the Supreme Court under s.6. The
Company did 'apply under Article 126 of the Constitution but without 'Success.

The appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to give relief from an Order
of ejectment by the Magistrate has been removed by s.10(2) of Act - No: 7 of
1979. The Revisionary and Writ jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to grant
reliefs in respect of the complaint of the petitioner have been removed by the
aforesaid. provisions of sections 3(a) and 4(1); of Act No. 2 of 1980. In my
view, the Court of Appeal could not have entertained the Revision Application
of the petitioner.

Both submissions of Mr. Choksy are entitled to succeed. The Appeal is
dismissed, but, I make no order as to costs.

**

ATUKORALE, J**. - I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J.** \- I agree.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/27.html_  

