##  Karunanayake v. Karunasiri Perera - SLR - 27, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986] LKSC
27; (1986) 2 Sri LR 27 (13 March 1986)

**

27

KARUNANAYAKE  
v.  
KARUNASIRI PERERA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J, COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 7/84.  
C.A. APPEAL No. 391/80.  
M.C. BANDARAWELA 21875.  
FEBRUARY 7, 1986.

_

Maintenance-Illegitimate child-Corroboration-Corroborative value of falsehoods
uttered by respondent.

_

For a lie to be capable of amounting to corroboration firstly it must be
deliberate, secondly it must relate to a material issue, thirdly the motive
for the lie must be a realisation of guilt and a fear of the truth and not
merely an attempt to bolster up a just cause or out of shame or a wish to
conceal disgraceful behaviour from the family and fourthly the statement must
be clearly shown to be a lie by evidence other than that of the person who is
to be corroborated.

Neither the disbelief of the putative father's evidence where it contradicts
that of the mother nor the fact of the former having knowingly made false
statements would by themselves be capable in law of being corroborative of the
mother's evidence. It is only when the false statements made by the alleged
father are of such a nature and are made in such circumstances as to lead to
an inference in support of the evidence that they can be regarded as
corroborative evidence.

**

Cases referred to :

**_

(1) Tennekoon v Tennekoon-78 NLR 13.

(2) Vedin Singho v. Mency Nona-(1948) 51 NLR 209.

(3) Somapala v Muriel Sirr-(1953) 55 NLR 247

(4) Somasena v. Kusumawathie-(1958) 60 NLR 355.

_

**28**

_

(5) Dawson v. McKenzie-(1908) S. C. 648, 45 SLR 473

(6) Warawita v- Jane Nona-(1954) 58 NLR 111.

(7) Kredland v. Knowler-35 Cr App R. 48.

(8) Jones v. Thomas-(1934] 1 KR 323

(9) R. v Chapman and R v Baldwin-[ 1973] 2 WLR 876

(10) R- v. Lucas-[ 1981 ] 2 All E R 1008

_ **

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

R. K. W Goonesekera with Manix Kanagaratnarn for the appellant.

Ranjith Abeysuriya with Miss Mangalam Kanapathipillai and Atula Pathinayake
for the respondent

Cur. adv. vult.

_

March 13, 1986. **  
ATUKORALE, J.

**

This is an appeal from a judgment of the Court of Appeal setting aside an
order made by the Magistrate directing the respondent to pay maintenance for
the appellant's illegitimate child born on 7.8.1 978. It was the appellant's
case that she commenced employment as a domestic servant in the respondent's
household in early April, 1977. In October 1977 the mother of the respondent's
wife fell sick and was warded in a hospital in Colombo The respondent, his
wife, their small children and she left for Colombo and stayed in the house of
his wife's mother. The respondent's wife stayed over at the hospital for a few
days to attend on her sick mother. On the very first day that she was thus
away, the respondent returned home drunk in the night and had sexual intimacy
with the appellant. In all the respondent had sexual intimacy with her on 3
consecutive nights. After their return home from Colombo, when the appellant
informed the respondent that her menstrual period had stopped he told her not
to be afraid and not to tell his wife as there would be quarrels or anyone
else and that they would look after her if any trouble arose. She further
stated in evidence that after the Sinhala New Year in April 1978 her sister
came to see her as she had not gone home for the New Year. The sister having
observed signs of pregnancy asked her whether there was any trouble. The
appellant then divulged to her what had happened. The sister asked her whether
she informed the respondent's wife. She replied that she had not, as the
respondent had asked her not to do so. She further stated in evidence that her
sister came to see her on two subsequent occasions. In July 1978 she informed
the respondent's

**29**

wife that she was with child by the respondent and that she was unable to work
any more and requested that she be taken home. The respondent and his wife
quarrelled that day, damaged the furniture, put out the appellant with her
clothes, locked up the house and went away. The appellant's sister who arrived
a little later removed her to hospital where later on the child was born.

The appellant's sister, Somalatha, in her evidence stated that the appellant
was employed as a domestic servant in the respondent's house. In April 1978
she went, to see the appellant as she had not come home for the Sinhala New
Year. On noticing the appellant's, condition and questioning her, she told her
what had happened and that she was pregnant by the respondent. She also told
her that at the respondent's request she had not told anyone. The sister also
stated in evidence that on her first visit the respondent was not at home and
that the appellant asked her not to tell the wife as there would be quarrels
at home. She went to see the appellant again in May 1978. On that occasion the
respondent was at home and she told him that the appellant was expecting a
child. The respondent asked her not to tell his wife or anyone else about it
and that he will look after everything. On the third occasion she went to see
the appellant in July. The appellant had been locked out of the house and was
crying outside. The appellant told her that the respondent and his wife had
quarrelled and locked up the house and gone away leaving her outside. She then
took the appellant to hospital where later on the child was born. The evidence
of the appellant and, her sister was accepted by the Magistrate and was not
sought to be challenged either in the Court of Appeal or before us.

The respondent gave evidence and stated that the appellant worked as a
domestic servant in his house for only about 3 months from early April to
about the end of July 1977. He denied that the appellant continued in
employment thereafter or that he and his wife had ever gone to Colombo to see
his wife's mother or that the latter was warded in hospital in Colombo or that
the appellant or her sister (Somalatha) had ever spoken to him. He denied
sexual intimacy with the appellant or that he was the father of the child born
to the appellant. He, however, admitted that the appellant had filed a case in
the Labour Tribunal, Badulla, for the recovery of arrears of salary for a
period of 1 year. The Magistrate rejected the evidence of the respondent as
being totally false, a finding which was not challenged in appeal.

**30**

The case thus stood in the following position. Upon the evidence of the
appellant it has been established that the respondent is the father of the
child. But having regard to the provisions of s.6 of the Maintenance Ordinance
(Chap. 91, Vol. IV, L.E.) no order for maintenance of the child could be made
against the respondent on the evidence of the appellant (the mother) unless
the same is corroborated in some material particular by other evidence to the
satisfaction of the Magistrate. The Magistrate concluded that the sister's
evidence did not' provide the requisite corroboration-a-finding which was
challenged before us by learned counsel for the appellant as amounting to a
serious misdirection on the facts. He then proceeded to state as follows

"I accept the applicant's evidence. Because of that reason, the evidence of
the respondent that when he went to Colombo his wife remained at home without
staying in hospital is false. He gave that false evidence to show, that there
was no opportunity for him to have intercourse with the applicant. Due to that
reason his false evidence is sufficient to corroborate the applicant's
evidence in concluding that the applicant's child was begotten by the
respondent. In this connection my attention was focussed on the case of
Tennekoon v. Tennekoon (1) reported in 78 NLR 13. As reported in that
maintenance case, it is clear that the false evidence of the respondent does:
not support the evidence of the applicant. However, the false evidence of the
respondent above named in this case is sufficient to establish the vital facts
in the evidence given by the applicant in this application, that is, that the
child pertaining to this maintenance application was begotten by the
respondent."

On this basis the Magistrate ordered the respondent to pay the appellant a sum
of Rs. 100 per month as maintenance for the child. The respondent appealed
from this order to the Court of Appeal which, whilst proceeding on the

**31**

assumption that the appellant's evidence was not corroborated by that of her
sister (as found by the Magistrate), considered the question whether false
statements made by a defendant on oath in court could by themselves be capable
of constituting corroborative evidence as required by s.6 of the Maintenance
Ordinance. Relying mainly upon a passage from the judgment of Malcolm Perera,
J. in Tennekoon v. Tennekoon (supra) the Court of Appeal concluded that as the
appellant's evidence stood uncorroborated by the evidence of her sister-which
was an assumption based on the finding of the Magistrate-the falsity of the
respondent's evidence by itself did not afford the requisite corroboration of
the appellant's evidence. The Court of Appeal therefore set aside the order of
the Magistrate.

The question whether lies uttered by a defendant in maintenance and seduction
cases could be considered as corroborative of the evidence of the applicant or
plaintiff has been the subject of several local decisions. In Vedin Singho v.
Mency Nona (2) and in Somapala v. Muriel Sirr (3) there are dicta suggesting
that any false denial by the defendant may be considered to afford some
corroboration of the applicant's story. These two decisions and certain
Scottish and English cases were considered by H. N. G. Fernando J. (as he then
was) in Somasena v. Kusumawathie (4) and he took the view that except in the
particular case of the defendant's false denial of the opportunity for sexual
intimacy in the circumstances enumerated in the dictum of Lord Dunedin in
Dawson v. Mckenzie (5) when the falsity of the denial may be regarded as
corroborative of the evidence of the mother, there was no decision extending
the principle stated by Lord Dunedin to other false denials. The dictum of
Lord Dunedin is contained in the following passage of his judgment in Dawson
v. McKenzie (supra)

"Now, the mistake which the learned sheriff has made here is in taking the
mere proof of opportunity as amounting to corroboration. Mere opportunity
alone does not amount to corroboration, but two things may be said about it.
One is, that the opportunity may be of such a character as to bring in the
element of suspicion. That is, that the circumstances and locality of the
opportunity may be such as in themselves to amount to corroboration. The other
is, that the opportunity may have a complexion put upon it by statements made
by the defender which are proved to be false. It is not that a false statement
made by the defender proves that the pursuer's statements are true, but it may
give to a proved opportunity a different complexion from what it would have
borne had no such false statement been made."

In Warawita v. Jane Nona (6) Sansoni, J. applied the above dictum of Lord
Dunedin to the facts of the case before him. He held that the untruthful
denial by the defendant of the existence of the opportunity for intimacy which
was established by independent evidence did in the circumstances of that case
remove any doubt that existed on the question of corroboration.

**32**

In Tennekoon v. Tennekoon (supra) referred to by the Magistrate in his order
and in the judgment of the Court of Appeal, the defendant in his evidence
denied paternity of the child. He denied that he ever visited the house of the
child's mother or that he had ever spoken to her though they lived close to
each other and were close relatives. He also denied that the parents of the
mother of the child had ever met his parents to discuss the question of his
marriage with the mother of the child. It was contended that these false
statements of the defendant should be taken as corroborative of the evidence
of the mother. Refuting the contention that false statements uttered by the
defendant could always be taken as being corroborative of the applicant's
evidence, Malcolm Perera, J. stated that the practical effect of doing so
would be to dispense with corroboration altogether for the very fact that the
defendant in his evidence denies that he is the father of the child would
itself provide corroboration and any case put forward by him-which is
disbelieved may also be taken as being corroborative of the evidence of the
mother. Relying on certain passages from the judgment of Lord Goddrard, C.J.
in Kredland v. Knowler (7) and of Lard Hewart, C. J. in Jones v. Thomas (8) he
held that the question whether the false statements of the defendant would
amount to corroboration depends on the facts and circumstances of each case.
After examining the-nature of the false statements made by the defendant in
that case, Malcolm Perera, J. held that

"they are of such a nature and made under such circumstances as to erase any
doubt that may have existed in my mind on the question of corroborative
evidence."

Neither the disbelief of the putative father's evidence where it contradicts
that of the mother nor the fact of the former having knowingly made false
statements would by themselves be capable in law of being corroborative of the
mother's evidence. As-pointed out by Lord Hewart, C. J. in the case of Jones
v. Thomas (supra) it is only when the false statements made by the alleged
father are of such a nature and are made in such circumstances as to lead to
an inference in support of the evidence of the mother that they can be
regarded as being corroborative evidence. In R. v. Chapman and R. v. Baldwin
(9), it was sought to draw in principle a distinction between a lie told by a
defendant or an accused out of court and one uttered by him in court in the
witness box. Whilst the former was stated to be affirmative proof of the
untruth of his denial of guilt which may in turn tend to confirm the evidence
against him, an untruthful statement in court, it

**33**

was said, is not positive proof of anything but would only lead to a rejection
of the evidence given by him. This suggested distinction has, however, been
rejected in R. v. Lucas (10) which contains the most recent judicial
pronouncement in England on the question of corroboration. One of the
questions that arose for determination in that criminal case was whether the
trial judge gave the correct direction to the jury on the question as to when
statements made by the defendant, which are not shown to be lies by evidence
other than that of the accomplice who was sought to be corroborated, could be
regarded as capable of affording corroboration of the accomplice's evidence.
The direction given by the trial judge to the jury in that case was to the
effect that if the jury accepted the evidence of the accomplice and rejected
that of the defendant and accordingly came to the conclusion that the
defendant must have been lying to them, then that fact of itself could be
treated by the jury as corroboration of the accomplice's evidence. This
direction was held by court to be erroneous for the reason that the lies told
by the defendant were not shown to be lies by evidence other than that of the
accomplice who was to be corroborated. In the course of his judgment Lord
Lane, C. J. stated

"There is, without doubt, some confusion in the authorities as to the extent
to which lies may in some circumstances provide corroboration and it was this
confusion which probably and understandably led the judge astray in the
present case. In our judgment the position is as follows. Statements made out
of court, for example statements to the police, which are proved or admitted
to be false may in certain circumstances amount to corroboration ....... It
accords with good sense that a lie told by the defendant about a material
issue may show that the liar knew that if he told the truth he would be
sealing his fate....... To be capable of amounting to corroboration the lie
told out of court must first of all be deliberate. Secondly it must relate to
a material issue. Thirdly the motive for the lie must be a realisation of
guilt and a fear of the truth. The jury should in appropriate cases be
reminded that people sometimes lie, for example, in an attempt to bolster up a
just cause, or out of shame or out of a wish to conceal disgraceful behaviour
from their family. Fourthly the statement must be clearly shown to be a lie by
evidence other than that of the accomplice who is to be corroborated, that is
to say by admission or by evidence from an independent witness.

**34**

As a matter of good sense it is difficult to see why, subject to the same
safeguard, lies proved to have been told in court by a defendant should not
equally be capable of providing corroboration. In other common law
jurisdictions they are so treated: see the cases collated by Professor J. J.
Heydon (1973) 89 LOR at 561 and cited with apparent approval in Cross on
Evidence (5th Ed., 1979, p.210)."

Cross on Evidence (6th Ed., 1985, p.230) states that these principles are not
limited to criminal cases but will also apply to other situations in which
corroboration is, required such as affiliation proceedings.

Under s. 4 of the English Affiliation Proceedings Act of 1957, as amended by
the Affiliation Proceedings (Amendment) Act of 1972, the court shall not
adjudge the defendant to be the putative father of the child upon 'the
evidence. of -the mother unless her evidence is corroborated in some material
particular by other evidence to the satisfaction of court. Under s.6 of our
Maintenance Ordinance no order for maintenance shall be made on the evidence
of the mother of an illegitimate child unless corroborated in some material
particular by other evidence to the satisfaction of the Magistrate. In the two
enactments the provision relating to corroboration is the same. In cases
(including maintenance and seduction cases) in which the rather vexed question
of corroboration has arisen for consideration, our courts have had recourse to
and derived assistance from English decisions. With respect, it seems to me
that the tests which should be applied in determining whether a lie told by a
defendant or an accused, whether in or outside court, is capable of
constituting corroboration or not have been correctly set out by Lord Lane,
C.J. in the passage from his judgment quoted by me above. Under the
circumstances I think we should adopt and apply the criteria formulated by him
to local cases, both civil and criminal, in which the question arises for
consideration.

In the instant case the Magistrate has held that the evidence of the sister,
Somalatha, whom he has believed, does not corroborate the appellant's evidence
but that the falsity of the respondent's evidence relating to the opportunity
he had of sexual intimacy with the appellant in Colombo, which was established
by the evidence of the appellant alone, is itself sufficient to afford the
requisite corroboration. On an examination of the authorities referred to
above and the principles laid down therein the Magistrate was clearly wrong in
holding that the

**35**

falsity of the respondent's evidence by itself was capable of providing the
requisite corroboration. The Court of Appeal, proceeding as it did on the
assumption that the sister's evidence in fact was not corroborative of the
appellant's evidence, was therefore correct in holding that the appellant's
case must fail for the reason that there was no independent testimony to
establish the falsity of the respondent's evidence regarding the opportunity
he had for sexual intimacy with the appellant. However it was the contention
of learned counsel for the appellant before us that the Magistrate misdirected
himself in holding that the sister's evidence did not corroborate the
appellant's version. He submitted that there was evidence given by the sister
from which it could reasonably be inferred that the evidence of the respondent
that the appellant ceased to be in his employment in July 1977 and that
therefore he had no opportunity for sexual intimacy at or about the time that
conception was likely to have occurred was false. He submitted that the
sister's evidence had not been closely examined by the Magistrate as a result
of which the Magistrate had seriously misdirected himself on this point.

On a careful perusal of the evidence of the appellant's sister I am of the
opinion that this contention of learned counsel for the appellant is entitled
to succeed. The sister in her evidence stated that she was aware that the
appellant was employed in the respondent's house and that twice (in August and
September 1977). she saw the appellant being brought to her home by the
respondent in his jeep and taken back. She also stated that she first went to
see the appellant at the respondent's house in April 1978 as the appellant did
not come home for the Sinhala New Year. According to her she also went to see
the appellant on two more occasions, namely in. May and July 1978, on the last
of which she found the appellant locked out of the house with her clothes. She
thereupon removed the appellant to hospital where the child was born. This
evidence of the sister corroborates that of the appellant both in regard to
the period as well as the date of termination of the services of the appellant
under the respondent. The falsity of the respondent's statement in the witness
box 'that the appellant did not work 'as a domestic servant in his house after
July 1977 is thus established by the independent testimony of the sister. The
respondent's lie is one that has been uttered by him deliberately on a very
material issue with a view no doubt of concealing his guilt In the
circumstances of this case I am of the view that the lie told by the
respondent satisfies the four criteria laid down by Lord Lane, C.J. in R.

**36**

v. Lucas (supra) and does amount to corroboration of the appellant's evidence
as required by s. 6 of the Maintenance Ordinance. There is also, in my view,
another item of evidence in the case which appears to be decisively in favour
of the appellant. The sister, whose evidence has been accepted by the
Magistrate, stated that on the second occasion she went to see the appellant
at the respondent's house in May 1978, she met the respondent and told him
that the appellant was expecting a child. The respondent then told her not to
tell it to his wife or anyone else and that he will look after everything.
This item of evidence provides very strong corroborative evidence of the
appellant's story and in fact amounts to a virtual admission by the respondent
that he was responsible for the appellant's pregnant condition.

Accordingly I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of
Appeal. The Magistrate's finding that the respondent is the father of the
child and his order awarding the appellant a sum of Rs. 100 per month as
maintenance for the child will stand. The appellant will also be entitled to a
sum of Rs. 1,050 as costs of this appeal.

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.** \- I agree.

**

COLIN-THOME **\- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/27.html_  

