##  Cyril Alferd Rodrigo v. Mohamed Nulair - SLR - 217, Vol 1 of 1982 [1982]
LKSC 27; (1982) 1 Sri LR 217 (19 March 1982)

**217**

_  _

**SUPREME COURT  
  
Cyril Alfred Rodrigo**

**vs.**

**Mohamed Nulair**

**  **

##### S.C. Appeal No. 54/81‑C.A. Appeal No. 758/76‑M.C. Colombo No. 71



_Criminal   Breach of Trust Penal Code section 389 & 391 ; ‑ element of
entrustment essential in charge of Criminal Breach of Trust against a partner
‑ Who is a partner ? Money received as an accountant or partner._



The accused respondent was an accountant employed in the firm of Kolberg & Co.
On 1.5.66 the accused respondent was admitted as a partner on the following
terms (1) He would contribute no capital (2) He would receive an annual sum of
Rs. 2000/‑ as his share of the profits (3) He would not share in the losses
(4) He would not be entitled to the goodwill of the firm.



# 218



One of the partners, the complainant‑ Appellant filed a private complaint
against the accused charging him with criminal breach of trust of Rs.59,000/‑
entrusted to him in his capacity of accountant. The Magistrate convicted the
accused respondent for committing the offence of criminal breach of trust
simpliciter punishable under section 389 of the Penal Code.



On appeal to the Court of Appeal the conviction was quashed on the grounds
that the accused was a partner with limited rights and that in such a case
there must be a special agreement showing entrustment.



On appeal to the Supreme Court



**Held    **_1._ the accused respondent was a partner

> 2.there was a doubt whether the accused respondent received the money as an
> accountant or as a partner.

  **APPEAL** from Judgment of Court of Appeal



Before: **              **Wanasundera J., Wimalaratne J., &

                       Victor Perera J, ****



Counsel:         _A. C. de Zoysa, SAAL_ with _D. T. P. Rajapaksa_ for

                     Complainant‑Appellant. 

_                      V. S.A. Pullenayagam_ with _L. F. Ekanayake_ ,

         Miss M. Kanapathipillai & Miss D. Wijesundera 

                     for Accused‑Respondent.



Argued on: **        **1st March, 1982. __

_Cur. adv. Vult._

Decided on: **       **19th March 1982

**  **

  **WIMALARATNE. J.**



The firm of Kolberg & Co. commenced business as dealers in patent medicines,
acids, chemicals, textiles and a host of other items in about April 1948\. The
original partners were Fredric Walter Kolberg & Phyllis Edith Kolberg, husband
and wife who were German nationals. C.A. Rodrigo who is the Appellant became a
partner in January 1953. A. H. M. Nulair who is the accused respondent was
employed by the firm as an accountant from 1.9.56. The three partners by
indenture P5 attested by a Notary Public agreed to take Nulair into the
partnership from 1.5.66 to the extent and in the manner and upon the terms set
out in P5 to which all four persons



# 219



were signatories. The limitations on the rights of the new partners were
briefly as follows:‑



(a) The new partner was not required to contribute any part of the capital,
which was Rs.247,500/‑, whereas the other three contributed Rs.119,000/‑,
Rs.108,500/‑ and Rs.20,000/‑ respectively.



(b)  The profits and losses were to be shared and borne by the three original
partners in the proportions of the capital contributed by each.



(c)  Nulair was to continue to draw his salary as accountant, and was also to
receive as his share of the profits a sum of Rs.2000/‑ per year payable at the
end of each year. He was to have no interest in the capital assets and in the
goodwill, nor was he to be liable to contribute to the nett losses.



(d) Any two partners jointly were entitled to operate the Bank account of the
firm.



(e) Clause 13 expressly provided that Nulair "shall not have or exercise any
of the rights or powers of a partner in the said firm and shall not engage the
credit of the said firm or conduct or interfere in the management of the said
business except under the direction of the principal partners or partner."



(f) The goodwill and the rights to the firm name were to belong to Mr. & Mrs.,
Kolberg or the survivor of them.



The Kolbergs left Sri Lanka in 1970. On 15.8.73 C.A. Rodrigo instituted a
private prosecution in the Magistrate's Court charging Nulair with having
between 1.1.72 and 31.12.72, while being employed in the capacity of a
servant, to wit Accountant, Kolberg & Co. committed criminal breach of trust
in respect of a sum of Rs.59,000/­- entrusted to him in his capacity as such
servant, an offence punishable under section 391 of the Penal Code.



At the trial Rodrigo gave evidence and called a representative of the firm of
Alles, Martin & Co. to speak to the accounts of Kolberg & Co. for 1972. A
letter P1 dated 24.5.73 written by the accused to Rodrigo was also produced.
It disclosed the fact that the accused had taken for his own use money
belonging to the firm. The defence was that the shortage of Rs.59,000/‑ was as
a result of monies of the firm being handed over to a Mr. White to be remitted
to Mr.



# 220



Kolberg who was abroad. He explained that he wrote P1 as a result of being
compelled to do so by Rodrigo. The learned Magistrate convicted the accused of
having committed the offence of criminal breach of trust simpliciter,
punishable under 389 of the Penal Code and sentenced him to a term of 18
months R.I. and a fine of Rs.1,500/‑



The Court of Appeal set aside that conviction and sentence for the reason that
when a person is in the position of a partner a charge of criminal breach of
trust cannot succeed against him unless on the basis of some special agreement
showing entrustment. The Court has taken the view that the accused was a
partner with limited rights, principally because in P5 the other three
partners had recognised him as a partner and also because the Business Names
Register P4 gave his name as a partner. Another factor which had influenced
the Court was that the Magistrate had not convicted the accused on the basis
that he was a servant, but that he was guilty of criminal breach of trust
simpliciter. In coming to this conclusion the Court of Appeal has been guided
by a judgment of the Supreme Court of India, in the case of _Patel Vs. The
State of Maharashtra_ (1965) 2 Cr. L.J. 431 in terms of which where a partner
is authorised to recover dues of the partnership and spend monies in the
business of the partnership he cannot be guilty of criminal breach of trust
even in respect of the monies realised by him, because the offence of criminal
breach of trust rests principally on the element of entrustment, but a partner
has dominium over the partnership property by law and not by entrustment.



The correctness of the principle in _Patel's case_ is not challenged by
learned counsel for the complainant‑appellant. His contention is that on a
true appreciation of the documentary evidence, especially P5, and the conduct
of the parties, Nulair was never considered a partner by the other three
partners. He was only a paid accountant, and the partnership property was
entrusted to him in that capacity. Learned Counsel for the accused respondent
referred specifically to the designation of the accused as a partner in P5 and
the other documents, and to the fact that the accused was entitled to share in
the profits, although the amount was limited to a fixed sum of Rs.2,000/‑ per
year. He also relied on the principle that a partner cannot be employed by his
firm, for a man cannot be his own employer ‑ _Lindley on Partnership_ (13th
Ed) 26.



# 221



it is significant that Rodrigo did not produce P5 until it was shown to him
towards the end of his cross examination. He presented his whole case on the
footing that the accused's relationship with the firm was only that of an
accountant. When confronted with P5 he admitted that the accused was
considered as a partner by the others, and that after the Kolbergs left Sri
Lanka in 1970 cheques were signed by himself and the accused. That is to say
clause II of the agreement was acted upon. The evidence of Rodrigo also
established the fact that the accused was actively engaged in the business of
the firm: that could have only been possible if he was given directions by one
of the other partners in terms of clause 13.



Our law of Partnership is the English Law. Under the English Partnership' Act
of 1890 a partnership is the relation which subsists between persons carrying
on a business in common with a view to profit. A partner would then be a
person who has entered into this relation of partnership. The rights and
obligations of partners inter se, are generally regulated, to a certain
extent, by special agreement, the true meaning of which is to be ascertained
from the contents of the written instrument. The conduct of the parties is
also relevant, besides the written agreement, in order to ascertain the
relationship between the parties. Now, the ordinary principles applicable to
the proof of criminal charges would be applicable where a charge of breach of
trust is brought against a partner or employee. The burden is on the
prosecution to establish beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was an
employee and not a partner and that he received the money in the capacity of
an employee and not in the capacity of a partner. The benefit of any doubt on
any of these matters has to be resolved in favour of the accused.



Contribution towards the capital of a business is not essential to make a
person a partner. He may instead contribute his skill and experience. In this
case the accused did not contribute towards the capital. But the evidence
disclosed his activity in the management of the business.



Section 24(5) of the Partnership Act. declares that every partner may take
part in the management of the business. But it is competent for the parties to
agree that the management of the partnership affairs be conferred on one or
more of their numbers. The inclusion of clause 13 in P5 is therefore a
recognition by other partners of Nulair also as a partner.

#  

#  222



            There is the fact that the accused's share of the profits was a fixed sum, namely Rs. 2,000/‑ per year, and not in proportion to the profits of the business. In this connection, _Lindley_ says, under the sub‑head "Salaried" partner, "'In the case of junior partners, it is not unusual to express their share of the profits in the form of a fixed salary" (page 437).



A consideration of all the terms of the written agreement P5 as well as the
evidence relating to the conduct of the parties creates a doubt as to whether
the accused received the money he is alleged to have misappropriated in his
capacity as accountant or as a partner with limited rights. The Court of
Appeal was therefore right in acquitting the accused. This Appeal is
dismissed, but without costs.



**Wanasundera J:** ‑ I agree.



**Victor Perera J:** ‑ I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/27.html_  

