##  Perumal v. Dharmalingam - SLR - 26, Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 27; (1981) 1
Sri LR 26 (5 February 1981)

**26**

**PERUMAL  
v.  
DHARMALINGAM**

**SUPREME COURT.  
ISMAIL, J., SHARVANANDA, J. AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C. APPEAL No. 8/80-C.A. (S.C.) APPLICATION No. 1360/79  
D.C. COLOMBO No. 1765/ Spl.  
NOVEMBER 27 AND 28,1980.  
**  
_Companies (Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974, sections 2, 6-Contract of
partnership with person not a citizen of Sri Lanka-Whether contract prohibited
by Statute-is carrying on of such business rendered illegal?- Intention of
legislature as expressed in enactment- Construction so as to avoid injustice
and absurdity- Interpretation of Statutes.  
_  
The question that arose in this appeal was whether the provisions of section 2
of the Companies (Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974, rendered a
partnership between the plaintiff and the defendant illegal. The Court of
Appeal had held that in view of the said Law the partnership was deemed to
have ceased to exist on or after 1st January, 1975, which was the appointed
date in terms of section 2. The defendant in this action had filed objections
pleading, inter alia that the partnership between the parties was one
prohibited by section 2 as the plaintiff was not a citizen of Sri Lanka and
that accordingly the plaintiff could not have and maintain this action or
obtain any relief whatsoever on the basis of the deed of partnership between
the parties. The plaintiff's action had been for a declaration that the
partnership business stood dissolved from a certain date; for an order of
winding up, and appointment of a receiver and for an interim and permanent
injunction restraining the defendant from entering the premises where the
business was carried on.  
  
**Held (Wanasundera, J.** dissenting)  
  
The effect of section 2 has to be determined by examining the law as a whole
and the fundamental question is whether the statute means to prohibit the
contract. In such a case the contract would be invalid and no right of action
can arise out of the breach of the law. An examination of the scheme of the
law reveals that the object of the prohibition in section 2 was not to render
the carrying on of such business illegal and did not mean to forbid the
continued subsistance of companies which did not comply with the requirements
of section 2. The object of the prohibition was to make such refractory
companies liable to have their undertakings compulsorily acquired by means of
a vesting order made by the Minister under section 6 of the Law.  
  
**Per Wanasundera, J.** (dissenting)  
  
"The prohibition in the present case is in categorical terms and is the main
device for securing the objects intended by the Law. To assert that
transactions contravening these provisions are not illegal or invalid would be
to give the words containing this prohibition a meaning exactly opposite to
what it normally means. The main thrust of this legislation is to bring all
foreign companies within the control of the State as part of our national
policy. If the Law is so interpreted as to suggest that incorporation of such

**27**

companies under our law is not compelling, then such a view will have the
effect of frustrating the entire purpose of this legislation and rendering it
nugatory."  
  
**Cases referred to  
  
**_(1) Canada Sugar Refining Company v. R.,_ (1898) A. C. 735; 79 L. T. 146.  
  
_(2) Mellis v. Shirley Local Board,_ (1885) 16 Q. B. D. 446; 53 L.T.810; 2
T.L.R.360.  
  
_(3) Trans-African Bank v. Union Guarantee and Insurance,_ (1963) 2 S.. A.. L.
.R. 92.  
  
_(4) Cornellius v. Phillips,_ (1918) A.C.199; 118 L.T.228; 54 T.L.R.116.  
  
_(5) St. John Shipping Corporation v. Joseph Rank Ltd.,_ (1956) 3 A.E.R.683;
(1957)1 Q.B. 267; (1956) 3 W. L. R. 870.  
  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
C. Thiagalingam, Q. C., with H. L. de Silva, S. Mahenthiran and A.
Gnanathasan, for the plaintiff-appellant.  
  
K. N. Choksy, with K. Sivanathan and S. A. Parathalingam, for the defendant-
respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 5, 1981.  
**ISMAIL, J.  
**  
I have had the advantage of having read the conflicting judgments of my
brothers Sharvananda, J. and Wanasundera, J. I shall refer for the purpose of
the short order I propose to make in this case to certain provisions of Law
No. 19 of 1974\. The preamble to this Law reads:  
  
"A Law to prohibit companies from owning property or carrying on any
undertakings in Sri Lanka after a specified date unless they are incorporated
under the Companies Ordinance or are exempted companies and to enable the
acquisition on behalf of the Government of the whole or any part of the
undertakings of companies which are not so incorporated or exempted, for which
compensation is payable, to appoint a Tribunal for the assessment of such
compensation, and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto."  
  
Section 2(1) states that from the appointed date no company (a) shall have any
interest in any property in Sri Lanka whether as owner, co-owner, lessee,
mortgagee or otherwise or (b) shall carry on any undertaking in Sri Lanka,
unless such company is recognised as an "existing company", or is incorporated
under the principal enactment, or is an exempted company. Property which is
referred to in sub-section 2(1A), is defined in section 27 as movable or
immovable property but does not include shares in a

**28**

company or choses in action. Conceivably therefore companies which are not it
existing companies" or are not incorporated under the principal enactment or
is an exempted company would be free to continue to transact business in
shares in companies or in choses in action. Therefore the definition of
property does not seem to indicate that a blanket prohibition has been imposed
on the activities of companies that contravene the provisions of section 2, or
render activities of such companies after the appointed date illegal, but
seems to impose certain restrictions on the activities of such companies and
render such companies liable to be requisitioned in whole or with regard to
certain of their undertakings.  
  
The question that emerges for consideration is whether the provisions of
section 2 render companies which fall within the description of that section
illegal with effect from the appointed date or whether certain restrictions
are imposed on such companies.  
  
Section 3 (2) clearly contemplates the coming into existence and the
functioning of companies in contravention of section 2 after the appointed
date. If the purpose of section 2 is to render such companies which are not
incorporated etc., illegal with effect from the appointed date, I cannot see
how under section 3(2) of this law the Minister can be empowered to grant
exemption from time to time to such companies formed or established after the
appointed date. Under this section it is comprehended that even after the
appointed date companies in violation of the provisions of section 2 can come
into existence and function thereafter and could become exempted companies at
some future date. If the purpose of section 2 is to render companies in
violation of that section illegal as from the appointed date, then there can
be no instance under which section 3 (2) can come into operation. This section
would therefore be rendered meaningless and would be unenforceable.  
  
The only provisions in this Law providing some sanction consequent to
violation of the provisions of section 2 is section 6. Under this section the
Minister has the power to vest in the Government the whole or any part of the
undertakings of such companies. There is no other consequential penal or
punitary provision under this Law. This Law is silent with regard to what
happens to the balance part of such undertaking of such companies. There is no
other consequential penal or punitary provision under this Law. This Law is
silent with regard to what happens to the balance part of such undertaking of
such

**29**

companies. It is also to be noted that under section 6 the Minister is
empowered to exercise his Powers from time to time in respect of the whole or
any part of the undertaking of such companies. This provision seem to lend
force to the argument of the appellant's counsel, that the legislature
countenanced the business activities of such companies, and the only penalty
attached would be that such activities by those companies would render the
whole of their business or any part of it subject to a vesting order to vest
it in the government There are no other penal consequences with regard to the
rest of the business which are not subject to a vesting order or requisition.  
  
Section 9 is a section dealing with Payment Of compensation. Under this
section notice is to be given to any person who has any interest in any
business undertaking or part thereof immediately before the date on which such
undertaking or part is vested in the Government, and such person has to make a
claim for compensation payable under the law. Under the provisions of this law
therefore such person is deemed to have a perfectly legal interest in such
business undertaking, or part thereof even after the appointed date until the
time of the take-over by the Government.  
  
Therefore the scheme of claiming compensation under section 9 seems to
indicate that no illegality is attached to the contravention of the provisions
section 2 but only renders such companies which continue to function contrary
to the provisions of section 2 liable to be vested in the Government in whole
or in part.  
  
Part 1 of this Act is under the sub- heading "certain prohibitions on
companies after a specified date unless they are incorporated under the
principal enactment or are exempted companies."  
  
In view of my understanding of the provisions of sections 2(1), 3(2), 6 and 9
of this Law the use of the phrase "certain prohibitions" in the heading in
part 1 of this Act appears to have particular significance. Clearly what is
intended under this part is not a total ban of the activities, or rendering
illegal the functioning, of such companies after the appointed date but the
imposition of certain restrictions. I am of the opinion that the use of the
phrase "certain prohibitions" is clearly indicative of what the Legislature
had in mind when this law was promulgated. There was no complete prohibition
according to the sub-heading. Clearly

**30**

therefore it was not intended that companies which come within the description
in section 2 (1) should put up their shutters and close shop and cease all
activities. The various sections to which I have referred seem to indicate
that even after the appointed date if they carry on certain activities than
they would render the entirety or portion of their business liable to be
requisitioned by a vesting order in favour of the Government. It appears to me
that it is in that sense that the phrase "certain prohibitions" has been used
in the sub-heading under part 1.  
  
I find that my view on the interpretation of this Law coincides with the views
of Sharvananda, J. as set out in his judgment. I therefore agree with his
findings and order. I accordingly agree with the orders he has made in the
last paragraph of his judgment.  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
This appeal raises an important question as to the effect of certain
provisions of the Companies (Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974.  
  
The plaintiff-appellant filed this action against the defendant respondent on
the 29th day of January 1979 (a) for a declaration that the partnership
business known as 'Laxmi Jewelers' carried on by him and the respondent from
the 21st day of October 1974 stood dissolved with effect from 27th January
1979, (b) for an order to wind up the said business and the appointment of a
receiver for that purpose, and (c) for an interim and permanent injunction
restraining the defendant and his servants and agents from entering premises
No. 112 and 112/2, Sea Street, Colombo, where the said business was carried on
and carrying on the said partnership business or any other business in the
said premises. The plaintiff pleaded that the contract of partnership between
him and the defendant was reduced to writing by indenture of partnership No.
1389 dated 9th June 1978 and attested by D. N. Thurairajah & Co., Notaries
Public. He further stated that the capital of the said partnership business
was Rs. 60,000 that he had contributed an equal share as the defendant and
that the said premises No. 112, Sea Street, Colombo, was jointly purchased by
them to run the said partnership business. He also averred that the
understanding between the parties as to the said premises No. 112, Sea Street,
was reduced to notarial agreement No. 1319 dated 9th June 1978 and attested by
K. Sivanantham, N. P.  
  
The defendant-respondent filed objections admitting the

**31**

execution of the indenture of partnership No. 1389 and the agreement No. 1319
but claimed that the partnership between the parties was "expressly prohibited
by the provisions of section 2 of the Companies (Special Provisions) Law, No.
19 of 1974, read with the directions dated 18th December 1974 made by the
Minister of Foreign and Internal Trade under section 3 (1) of the Companies
(Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974, inasmuch as the plaintiff is not a
citizen of Sri Lanka" and that in the premises the said partnership was
illegal and of no force or avail in law and hence the plaintiff could not have
and maintain this action or obtain any relief whatsoever on the footing of the
said deed of partnership No. 1389.  
  
On 15th March 1979, the application for the issue of an interim injunction
alone was taken up for inquiry. After hearing the submissions of counsel for
both parties, the trial Judge held that the partnership business was illegal
and that no action could be based on such a contract; he therefore dismissed
the plaintiff's action. The plaintiff -appellant appealed against the
dismissal of the action and also moved the Court of Appeal in revision in
application No. 1360/79. The application in revision was heard by the Court of
Appeal. By its judgment dated 8th November 1979, the Court held:  
  
"(a) that the plaintiff cannot maintain the action in respect of the
partnership carried on after 1.1.75 in view of the provisions of the Companies
(Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974;  
  
(b) that the plaintiff can maintain the action in respect of the business
carried on between 21.10.74 and 31.12.74;  
  
(c) that as the partnership business was deemed to have ceased to exist on or
after 1.1.75, there was no point in issuing an interim injunction which would
relate only to the use of the premises in respect of which there was a
separate action D. C. Colombo 3199/Z;"  
  
and set aside the order of the trial Judge and remitted the case for trial in
respect of the partnership carried on from 21.10.74 to 31.12.74.  
  
The plaintiff -appellant has preferred this appeal against the said judgment
of the Court of Appeal.

**32**

The question in issue in this appeal is whether the provisions of section 2 of
the Companies (Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974 (hereinafter referred
to as the 'Law') render the partnership between the plaintiff and the
defendant illegal as from 1.1.75 as held by the Court of Appeal. The
determination of this question involves an examination of the scheme and
objects of the Law.  
  
"A statute must be read as a whole and the construction made of all the parts
together. The meaning of the statute and the intention of the legislature
enacting it can only be properly derived from a consideration of the whole
enactment and every part of it in order to arrive, if possible, at a
consistent plan. It is wrong to start with some a priori idea of the meaning
or intention and to try by construction to work that idea into the words of
the statute in question." (Odgers' Construction of Deeds and Statutes-5th
Edition at p. 237).  
  
As said by Lord Davey in Canada Sugar Refining Company v. R. (1) at 741 :  
  
"Every clause of a statute should be construed with reference to the context
and other clauses of the Act, so as, as far as possible, to make a consistent
enactment of the whole statute or a series of statutes relating to the subject
matter."  
  
Section 2 (1) of the Law provides as follows:  
  
"On and after.............. .........'the appointed date', no Company -  
  
(a) shall have an interest in any property in Sri Lanka whether as owner, co-
owner, lessee, mortgagee, or otherwise, or  
  
(b) shall carry on any undertaking in Sri Lanka, unless such Company is
recognised as an 'existing Company', or is incorporated under the principal
enactment, or is an exempted Company."  
  
Section 27 of the Law defines-  
  
(a) a 'Company' to include any agency house and any business registered under
the Business Names Ordinance;

**33**

(b) an 'Undertaking' in relation to a Company to mean the business carried on
by such Company and includes all the movable and immovable property and other
assets of such Company.  
  
To determine the true effect of section 2 of the Law, it is necessary to
examine the Law as a whole.  
  
The preamble to the Law reads as follows:  
  
"A Law to prohibit Companies from owning property or carrying on any
undertaking in Sri Lanka after a specified date, unless they are incorporated
under the Companies Ordinance or are exempted Companies and to enable the
acquisition on behalf of the Government of the whole or any part of the
undertaking of Companies which are not so incorporated or exempted, for which
compensation is payable, to appoint a Tribunal for the assessment of such
compensation and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto."  
  
Section 3:  
  
"(1) Before the appointed date, the Ministry may from time to time, with the
prior concurrence of the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance, issue a
written direction, in this part referred to as a 'direction of exemption',
exempting from the application of the provisions of section 2 any such Company
or class or category of Companies not incorporated under the principal
enact­ment as shall be specified in such direction. The Minister shall cause
notice of such direction to be published in the Gazette.  
  
(2) After the appointed date, the Minister may from time to time, with the
prior concurrence of the Minister in charge of the subject of Finance, issue a
direction of exemption exempting from the application of the provisions of
section 2 any such Company or class or category of Companies formed or
established after the appointed date as shall be specified in such direction.
The Minister shall cause notice of such direction to be published in the
Gazette.  
  
(3) The direction of exemption shall, for so long and so long only as it is in
force, be final and conclusive and

**34**

shall not be called in question in any Court or Tribunal.  
  
(4) A Company in respect of which or in respect of the class or category to
which it belongs, a direction of exemption is for the time being in force is
in this Law referred to as an 'exempted Company'."  
  
Section 4 confers power on the Minister to revoke a direction of exemption.  
  
Section 6 Part 11 :  
  
"(1) The Minister may from time to time by order published in the Gazette (in
this Part referred to as a "vesting order') vest in the Government with effect
from such date as shall be specified in the Order the whole or any part of the
undertaking of any such Company as shall be specified in the Order, being a
Company other than an exempted Company, which, on the appointed date, is not
incorporated under the principal enactment.  
  
(3) A vesting order under this Part shall have the effect of giving the
Government absolute title to the whole or part, as the case may be, of the
undertaking of any such Company to which such order applies as shall be
specified in such order with effect from such date as shall be specified
therein and free from all encumbrances."  
  
Section 7 provides for the appointment of a Competent Authority and section 8
provides for the Competent Authority to take possession of the whole or any
part of the undertaking vested in the Government by virtue of the operation of
a vesting order.  
  
Section 9:  
  
"Where the whole or any part of the undertaking of any company is vested in
the Government by virtue of the operation of a vesting order under this Part,
a Competent Authority shall, by notice published in the Gazette, direct every
person who had interest in such an undertaking or part thereof immediately
before the date on which such undertaking or part thereof was so vested, to
make within a period of two months reckoned from the date specified in the
notice, a written claim to the whole or any part of the compensation payable
under this Law in respect of such undertaking or part thereof together with
all

**35**

documents relied upon by him in support of his claim, and to specify in the
claim-  
  
(a) his name and address;  
  
(b) the nature of his interest in such undertaking or part thereof;  
  
(c) the particulars of his claim; and  
  
(d) how much of such compensation is claimed by him."  
  
Section 10:  
  
"(1) A Competent Authority shall refer to the Tribunal for determination the
amount of the compensation payable in respect of the whole or any part, as the
case may be, of the undertaking of any Company vested in the Government by
virtue of the operation of a vesting order under this Part, and shall transmit
to such Tribunal all claims made to such compensation, together with all
documents furnished by the claimants in support of their claims."  
  
Section 18:  
  
"Where a reference for an award as to compensation is made to the Tribunal,
the Tribunal shall, before making such award-  
  
(a) give every person who has made a claim to compensation an opportunity of
being heard either in person or by an agent authorised in that behalf and also
of adducing evidence in support of such claim."  
  
Section 19:  
  
"Where a reference for an award as to compensation is made to a Tribunal in
respect of the property of any Company which is vested in the Government, the
Tribunal shall ........................ make an award determining-  
  
(a) whether or not each person who has made a claim to compensation is a
person entitled to compensation, and, if so, the capacity in which he is
entitled;  
  
(b) the amount of the compensation payable in respect of such property; and

**36**

(c) the apportionment of the compensation among the persons entitled to
compensation:  
  
Provided however that where there is a dispute as to the persons entitled to
such compensation or as to the apportionment of such compensation among the
persons entitled to such compensation, the Tribunal shall defer making an
award and shall refer the dispute for decision to the District Court of
Colombo and shall, after such Court makes a decision on such dispute, make an
award in accordance with such decision. "  
  
Section 20 provides for the payment of compensation to the persons entitled
thereto.  
  
Section 21 provides for deductions from the amount of such compensation by way
of payment:  
  
(a) to the Commissioner of Inland Revenue any sum due from such Company as tax
or income from profits or as personal tax; and  
  
(b) to the Commissioner of Labour any sum due from such Company to any person
employed in any such under­taking.  
  
According to the scheme, all partners of the Company which carried on any
undertaking on and after the appointed date without being incorporated or
exempted are granted compensation for the undertaking on it being vested in
the Government and each partner will be awarded that share of compensation
which he, as partner, is entitled to.  
  
The business carried on in partnership between the plaintiff and the defendant
under the business name 'Laxmi Jewelers' was registered under the Business
Names Ordinance on 12th December, 1974. The Certificate of Registration shows
that the business was commenced on 21st October 1974 and that the plaintiff is
a non-national (an Indian) and the defendant a national of Sri Lanka.  
  
The Law was certified on 19th June, 1974, and although section 2 of the Law
states that the 'appointed date' was the 1st day of September. 1974, yet the
Minister, under the power vested in him

**37**

by section 2 (2) to alter that, altered it to 1st January, 1975 by his order
published in the Government Gazette Extraordinary No. 123/7 dated 8th August
1974. By virtue of the powers vested in him by section 3 (1) of the Law, the
Minister, with the concurrence of the Minister of Finance issued a direction
published in the Gazette No. 142/9 dated 18.12.74 exempting from the
application of the provisions of section 2 of the Law the class or category of
Companies and the Companies specified in the schedule thereto. The Schedule
specifies any partnership registered under the Business Names Ordinance, all
the partners of which are citizens of Sri Lanka. The defendant contends that
the exemption does not apply to the partnership in question, as the plaintiff
who is a partner is not a citizen of Sri Lanka.  
  
Mr. Thiagalingam for the plaintiff -appellant contended that the partnership
business that commenced on 21.10.74 was perfectly legal in its inception and
that the Law did not render the continued functioning of the partnership after
the appointed date illegal. He pointed to the fact that the word 'prohibit'
appears only in the preamble to the Law and in the caption of Part 1 of the
Law and not in the body of the Law and submitted that the penalty of
nullification did not attach for disobedience of the veto contained in section
2 of the Law. He argued that according to the scheme of the Law the only
consequence of carrying on the partnership business in breach of section 2 was
that the Company incurred the risk that the Minister might, by means of a
vesting order, vest in the Government, from time to time, the whole or any
part of the undertaking of the Company.  
  
On the other hand, Mr. Choksy for the defendant- respondent contended that the
Law placed an absolute prohibition on the Company carrying on business after
1.1.75 and also provided for the State taking 'over the undertaking of a
Company which infringed the provisions of section 2 and pay compensation. He
said that the prohibition contained in section 2 (1) (b) is express in terms
and that section 2 operated to make a partnership in which a non-national is a
partner ipso jure illegal after 1.1.75 (the appointed date). He submitted that
the object and policy of the Law was to keep business in the hands of
Ceylonese and in Companies incorporated in Ceylon, and to promote that object
the Law had forbidden transactions by Companies which are not so incorporated
unless there was a direction of exemption in terms of section 3 (1) and 3 (2)
of the Law.

**38**

A Court will not lend its assistance to enforce a contract, expressly or
impliedly, prohibited by a statute. The Fundamental question is whether the
statute means to prohibit the contract. The true effect and meaning of the
statute is the determining factor. If the statute means to prohibit the
contract, any contract infringing the prohibition is invalid, whether the
prohibition be for the purpose of revenue or otherwise, and no right of action
can arise out of the breach of the law. A contract which involves in its
performance, either directly or collaterally, the doing of something which
would be in contravention of a statute is invalid and unenforceable. Lord
Esher M. R. stated the rule as follows: "Although a statute contains no
express words making void a contract which it prohibits, yet, when it inflicts
a penalty for the breach of the prohibition, you must consider the whole Act
as well as the particular enactment in question and come to a decision, either
from the context of the subject-matter, whether the penalty is imposed with
intent merely to deter persons from entering into a contract, or for the
purpose of revenue, or whether it is intended that the contract shall not be
entered into so as to be valid in law". (Mellis v. Shirley Local Board (2) at
451). In the same case, at page 453, Bowen L. J. said: "We have to find out,
upon the construction of the Act, whether it was intended by the legislature
to prohibit the doing of a certain act altogether, or whether it was only
intended to say that, if the act was done, certain penalties should follow as
a consequence. If you can find out that the act is prohibited, then the
principle is that no man can recover in an action founded on that which is a
breach of the provision of the statute." In the case of Trans-African Bank v.
Union Guarantee and Insurance (3) at 103, Theron A. J. stated the principle
thus: "The general rule applicable to the construction of a statute is that
every transaction carried out in contravention of a statutory prohibition
should be considered null and void despite the absence of any express
declaration of nullity in the particular statute in question, unless it
appears from the wording of the statute or from a consideration of its object
and its scope that the legislature did not intend to render the prohibited
transaction invalid". Viscount Haldane in Cornellius v. Phillips (4) at 211
referred to the general rule and to the modification thereof by the context in
which the apparently prohibitory words are used : "So standing they (the words
which the legislature has used) are clear and they prohibit and therefore make
void any contract which contravenes them ... There might have been inserted in
the statute a special context which would have modified the application of the
general rule".

**39**

Thus, although a statute may in terms apparently prohibit an act or omission
and attach a penalty for any disobedience, it does not necessarily follow that
all transactions to which the penalty attaches are illegal; they would be
illegal if the statute is in fact prohibitory. But they are not so if on the
true construction of the statute the penalty is, as it were, the only sanction
for doing what the statute apparently prohibits. Before one can make out that
a contract is illegal under a statute, one must make out distinctly that the
statute has provided that it shall be so.  
  
The function of a Court is to give effect to the intention of the legislature
as expressed in the language of the enactment under consideration. If the
language is capable of bearing only one meaning, then the Court is bound to
apply that meaning even if to do so leads to injustice. If, however, the
language of the enactment is capable of two meanings, the court is free to
decide which is the meaning intended by the legislature, having regard to the
presumption against intending injustice or absurdity. "Whenever the language
of the legislature admits of two constructions and if construed in one way
would lead to obvious injustice, the Courts act upon the view that such a
result could not have been intended, unless the intention has been manifest in
express words." (Maxwell - 11th Edition at 193). On the general principle of
avoiding injustice and absurdity, a construction which enables a person to
defeat or impair the obligation of his contract by his own act, or otherwise
profit by his own wrong, should be avoided, unless it is the consequence of
the only reasonable meaning which fits the policy and object of the statute.
Generally the plea of illegality is an unattractive plea, especially where
fiduciary obligations are involved. A Court will be slow to imply statutory
prohibition of contracts unless the implication is quite clear.  
  
The language of section 2 (1) apparently prohibits any Company having an
interest in any property in Sri Lanka or carrying on any undertaking on and
after the appointed date unless it is incorporated or an exempted Company. If
this section alone is considered, isolated from the other provisions of the
scheme of the Law, the language of the section would tend to support the
contention of Mr. Choksy that a contract to carry on a partnership business in
contravention of the prohibition in section 2(1) would be illegal. A
partnership is illegal if formed for a purpose which is forbidden by statute,
although independently of the statute there

**40**

would be no illegality. And "a partnership is in every case dissolved by the
happening of any event which makes it unlawful for the business of the firm to
be carried on or for the members of the firm to carry it on in partnership".
(Section 34 of the Partnership Act). Thus, on Mr. Choksy's construction of
section 2, it would follow that it became illegal for the firm of Laxmi
Jewellers to carry on any business in Sri Lanka on and after 1.1.75. If the
agreement became illegal, the Court cannot decree its specific performance and
no action for an account can be maintained by the plaintiff against the
defendant in respect of the dealings and transactions of the illegal
partnership- the defendant could with impunity snap his fingers at the
plaintiff and enrich himself at plaintiff's expense, as no Court will enforce
a contract which is prohibited by statute or allow itself to be made the
instrument of enforcing obligations arising out of a contract or dealings and
transactions of the illegal partnership- the defendant could with impunity
snap his fingers at the plaintiff and enrich himself at plaintiff's expense,
as no Court will enforce a contract which is prohibited by statute or allow
itself to be made the instrument of enforcing obligations arising out of a
contract or transaction which is so prohibited.  
  
Ultimately, as Devlin, J. said in St. John Shipping Corporation v. Joseph Rank
Ltd. (5) at 690: "The fundamental question is whether the statute means to
prohibit the contract. A statute is to be construed in the ordinary way; one
must have regard to all the relevant considerations, and no single
consideration, however important, is conclusive." The true effect and meaning
of the statute read as a whole is the determining factor.  
  
In my view, though section 2 of the Law ex facie prohibits the carrying on of
business by the offending Company, yet, an examination of the scheme of the
Law tends to show that the object of such prohibition was not to render the
carrying on of such business illegal but to make such refractory Companies
liable to have their undertakings compulsorily acquired by means of a vesting
order made by the Minister under section 6 of the Law. The following analysis
of the several sections of the Law demonstrates that the legislature did not
intend to prohibit the Company functioning after the appointed date.  
  
if section 2 is taken at its face value as absolutely prohibiting such a
Company carrying on any undertaking after the appointed

**41**

date as contended for by Mr. Choksy, such a company cannot, in Law, be formed
or established to carry on any undertaking in Sri Lanka on and after the
appointed date, viz. 1.1.75. But section 3(2) of the Law provides for
exemption being granted by the Minister "from time to time" to "any such
Company or class or category of Companies formed or established after the
appointed date". This section envisages the coming into existence, after the
appointed date, of such Company in violation of the provisions of section 2
and its functioning thereafter with the prospect of it being made an exempted
Company at a future date. A partnership whose object is to carry on an
activity prohibited by any statute cannot be registered under the Business
Names Ordinance. The argument of illegality thus founders on this point.
Section 3 (2) of the Law militates against Mr. Choksy's contention of
illegality. It postulates a Company being formed after the appointed date
carrying on an undertaking in breach of section 2. It signifies that the
prohibition contained in section 2 does not stamp with illegality the
undertaking so conceived or carried on in breach of section 2.  
  
Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant contended that section 6 stipulates the
only penal consequence for any disobedience of the prohibition contained in
section 2\. This section empowers the Minister to vest from time to time, in
the Government the whole or any part of the undertaking of any defaulting
Company, namely a Company other than an exempted Company which on 1.1.75 is
not incorporated under the principal enactment. From the fact that the
Minister could exercise his power from time to time with respect to the whole
or any part of the undertaking of such a Company, it is manifest that the
legislature countenanced the business of the Company being carried on by such
Company until a vesting order or orders under the section are made in respect
of the whole of the undertaking. Under this section the undertaking can be
taken over in parts from time to time. Though one part be vested in the
Government, the rest of the fabric of the undertaking can continue to function
until the final vesting order, if any. This situation can be rationalised only
on the hypothesis that the prohibition against carrying on of the undertaking
did not render illegal the undertaking after the appointed date, viz. 1.1.75.  
  
Section 9 provides for notice being given to every person who had an interest
in such undertaking or part thereof immediately before the date on which such
undertaking or part thereof was

**42**

vested in the Government to make claims to the compensation payable under the
Law. This section thus recognizes every partner continuing to have a legally
valid interest in the undertaking of the partnership after the appointed date
and being entitled to compensation therefor. If such an undertaking was an
illegal undertaking as and from 1.1.75, it is inconceivable why the
legislature made provision for the payment of compensation to the persons who
carried on the undertaking in breach of such statutory prohibition. This
statutory recognition of the right to compensation repels the suggestion that
the Law intended to render illegal the carrying on of the undertaking in
breach of section 2. In terms of section 9 and the sections following, the
parties will be entitled to compensation in respect of the undertaking or part
thereof vested in the Government not on the value of the assets that existed
on 1.1.75 but on the assets existing at the time of the vesting. Suppose the
assets of the partnership on 1.1.75 was only Rs. 10,000 and if by the date on
which such undertaking had come to be vested, its assets had been augmented by
the parties to Rs. 100,000, the parties would be entitled to compensation in
the sum of Rs. 100,000 and that amount will be apportioned among the claimants
according to their respective shares. This payment of compensation and the
apportionment thereof cannot co-exist with the concept of illegality.  
  
According to Mr. Choksy the Law intended to prohibit non-nationals carrying on
business in Sri Lanka, except in the way prescribed by section 2 of the Law.
But section 2 deals only with agency houses and business registered under the
Business Names Ordinance (vide definition of 'Company' in section 27). It is
however relevant to note that the Business Names Ordinance does not require an
individual, whether a non-national or not, or a firm consisting of non-
nationals or not, carrying on business under a business name which consists of
their true full names to be registered. Section 2 of the Law thus does not
seek to bar non-nationals carrying on business in Sri Lanka under their true
full names. In view of this circumstance, one cannot spell out of the
provisions of the Law an intention to bar absolutely non-nationals carrying on
business in Sri Lanka.  
  
In my view, the scheme of compensation adopted by the Law repels the
contention of illegality -compensation is provided for on the basis of the
partner being entitled to same, that he has a

**43**

legal right thereto. It lends support to the assumption that a Company can
lawfully carry on its undertaking after the appointed date even though that
company does not comply with the requirements of section 2 of the Law. It
appears that the only penal consequence of such non-compliance is that such
Company runs the risk of a vesting order in terms of section 6 of the Law
being made in respect of the undertaking. Though section 2 detached from its
context may incline one to take the view that the Law prohibits the
partnership between the plaintiff and the defendant from carrying on business
on and after the appointed date, the other provisions of the Law militate
against such construction. It is a settled rule of construction that an Act
should be interpreted as to be consistent with itself and each and everyone of
its provisions should be given a meaning so as to lead to harmony and not to
mutual conflict or repugnance to each other. If the other construction that
the only consequence of the failure to comply with the requirement in section
2 is, as set out in the preamble "to enable the acquisition on behalf of the
Government of the whole or any part of the undertaking" of the defaulting
company is adopted, the scheme of the Law can be rationalised and the various
parts of the Law harmonised with each other. The latter construction of the
section is in accord with equity and has also the merit of avoiding absurdity
and injustice. The argument of illegality has thus to be rejected.  
  
In refutation of Mr. Thiagalingam's argument that section 2 of the Law served
only to identify the company whose undertaking could be vested in the
Government, Mr. Choksy referred us to section 2 of the Business Undertakings
(Acquisition) Act, No. 35 of 1971, which endows the Minister of Finance with
sweeping powers to acquire any business undertaking. He submitted that since
the Minister of Finance had, under the Act, such unfettered power to acquire
any business undertaking, there was no purpose in enacting section 6 of the
Law for the limited object of rendering the undertaking of Companies which
infringe section 2 to be liable to vesting in the government. He relevantly
pointed out that in view of the absolute power of acquisition of business
undertakings already existing under section 2 of the 1971 Act, section 2 of
the Law of 1974 could not have been enacted only to serve the subsidiary
purpose of identifying the Companies whose undertakings could be acquired
under section 6 of the Law. There would have been force in Mr. Choksy's
argument if the vesting order made by the Minister of Finance under section 2
of

**44**

the Act and by the Minister of Foreign and Internal trade under section 6 of
the Law have the same legal efficacy. An examination of these two sections
brings out a significant difference which invalidates the argument of Mr.
Choksy. Subsections (3), (4) and (5) of the Act make the validity of the
vesting order made under the Act dependent on the approval of the House of
Representatives. If the House refuses to approve the vesting order, the order
ceases to be valid. But section 6 of the Law constitutes the Minister the sole
authority for making vesting orders, and his exercise of the power is not
dependent on the approval of the House of Representatives or of any other
authority for its efficacy. In view of this fundamental difference in the
authority of the Minister to make operative vesting orders under the Act and
under the Law, the contention of Mr. Choksy fails.  
  
In my view the Law did not mean to forbid the continued subsistence of
companies which did not comply with the requirements of section 2 of the Law.
It has not rendered the business of Laxmi Jewellers carried on by the
plaintiff and the defendant in partnership illegal from and after 1.1.75. The
lower Courts have misconceived the nature of the prohibition contained in
section 2 (1) (b) of the Law. In my judgment, the plaintiff can have and
maintain this action on the basis that the partnership between him and the
defendant continued to subsist in spite of section 2 of the Law and was
dissolved only on 27th January 1979 by the notice of termination given by the
plaintiff.  
  
I accordingly set aside both the judgments of the District Court and of the
Court of Appeal and allow the appeal and direct interim injunction (on the
terms suggested in the District Court by counsel for the plaintiff) to issue
restraining both parties from carrying on any business in the premises
referred to in the plaint until proper accounting is completed and from doing
any act which will impede the winding up of the concern. The case is remitted
to the District Court for trial to be proceeded with without delay. In my view
this is eminently a case where a receiver should be appointed. The plaintiff-
appellant will be entitled to costs of the inquiry in the District Court and
to costs of the revision application in the Court of Appeal and to costs of
this appeal.

**45**

**WANASUNDERA, J.  
**  
This appeal raises questions that relate to the proper interpretation of an
important piece of legislation, namely, the Companies (Special Provisions)
Law, No. 19 of 1974. Its object was, as can be seen from the Preamble, to
bring under the control of the Government, business enterprises that were non-
national in nature, which contained a foreign element. Having regard to the
ramifications of internal and external trade and business, this was by no
means an easy task. The Legislature has sought to achieve this in the form of
a short enactment. The scheme as it appears from the Law is to impose a
blanket prohibition on the carrying on of such businesses or such businesses
owning property in this country and provides for the authorities to grant to
any company, class or category of Company exemption from the application of
the Law. The exemption orders contained in Gazette No. 142/9 dated 18th
December 1974 show that they are extensive in nature. This was necessary to
prevent the dislocation of the smooth conduct of trade and commerce. It does
not however detract from the effectiveness of the law which is to get a legal
control  
  
This law was enacted on the 19th of June 1974. Although section 2 fixes 1st
September 1974 as the "appointed date" for the coming into operation of the
Law, subsection (2) of this section empowers the Minister to alter this date.
This period of less than three months was apparently considered inadequate for
the purpose of bringing about the fundamental changes contemplated by the Law,
namely, changing the character of a business from one form to another.
Accordingly, the Minister pushed forward the operative date to the 1st of
January 1975, thereby giving persons adequate time to comply with the
provisions of the Law.  
  
The alleged partnership between the plaintiff and the defendant is a business
failing within the ambit of the law. Section 27 defines the expression
"Company" to include any agency house and any business registered under the
Business Names Registration Ordinance. The plaintiff is a non-national, while
the defendant is a citizen of this country. The plaintiff and the defendant
had commenced business on 21st October 1974 and had applied on 29th October
1974 for registration of the business under the

**46**

Business Names Registration Ordinance. The Certificate of Registration was
issued on 18th December 1974. The plaintiff claims that he has contributed a
half-share of the capital of Rs. 60,000 of the business and that premises No.
112, Sea Street Colombo, was jointly purchased by them for the purpose of the
business. It would be observed that all these transactions took place after
the law was passed by Parliament, though before the operative date, namely,
the extended date of 1st January 1975. Even after 1st January 1975, no effort
was made by these partners to comply with the provisions of the Law. The
partnership continued until 27th January 1979 in disregard of the Law, when
notice of the dissolution of the partnership was given by the defendant. Prior
to that, when the partnership was in existence, a formal deed of Partnership
No.1369 dated 9th June 1978 notarially executed had been signed by the
partners. Further, the partners had on a notarial agreement No. 1319 dated 9th
June 1978 set out their rights in respect of premises No. 112, Sea Street.  
  
Consequent on the termination of the partnership on 27th January 1979, the
plaintiff filed this action praying-  
  
(a) for a declaration that the partnership business known as "Laxmi Jewellers"
carried on by him and the defendant from 21st October 1974 stood dissolved;  
  
(b) for an order to wind up the said business and for the appointment of a
receiver; and  
  
(c) for an interim injunction and permanent injunction restraining the
defendant and his servants from entering premises No. 112 and No. 112/2, Sea
Street.  
  
In the objections filed by the defendant, it was averred that the partnership
was expressly prohibited by the provisions of section 2 of the Companies
(Special Provisions) Law, No. 19 of 1974, read with the direction of the
Minister dated 18th December 1974, and that the partnership was of no force or
avail in law.  
  
The District Court held an inquiry into the application for the issue of an
interim injunction. After hearing the parties the Court upheld this objection
that the partnership contravened the provisions of the Law and was accordingly
illegal. In the result, the District Court dismissed the plaintiff's action.

**47**

On appeal the Court of Appeal took the view that it was in agreement with the
District Court that a partnership which con­travenes the Law is illegal. The
court however held that this illegality operated only from 1st January 1975
and that an action can be maintained in respect of a partnership business
prior to that date. On this basis the Court of Appeal remitted the case to the
District Court to determine the rights of the parties on the basis of a valid
partnership that terminated on 31st December 1974. The plaintiff appeals from
that judgment.  
  
The plaintiff's main contention is that the partnership which commenced prior
to the coming into operation of the Law was valid and legal at its inception.
It continued to be valid thereafter notwithstanding the imposition of the new
Law. The only sanction for non-compliance with the provisions of the Law is
the risk that the business may be taken over by the Government. It does not
render the partnership illegal. Accordingly the plaintiff was entitled to
maintain this action in respect of the partnership business from its inception
in 1974 till the time of dissolution in 1979.  
  
My brother Sharvananda has shown agreement with this view and has in his
judgment referred to certain provisions in the Law which he states suggest
that construction. I regret that I find it difficult to subscribe to this
view.  
  
It seems to me that the whole object, purpose and the provisions of the Law,
fairly construed, point to an opposite conclusion. The object of this Law is
beyond dispute and spelled out in the clearest terms in the Preamble in the
following words:  
  
"A Law to prohibit Companies from owning property or carrying on any
undertakings in Sri Lanka after a specified date unless they are incorporated
under the Companies Ordinance or are exempted companies and to enable the
acquisition on behalf of the Government of the whole or any part of the
undertakings of companies which are not so incorporated or exempted, for which
compensation is payable, to appoint a Tribunal for the assessment of such
compensation, and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto."  
  
In brief, the object of the Law is-  
  
(a) to prohibit companies owning property or carrying on

**48**

business in Sri Lanka unless they are incorporated under the Companies
Ordinance.  
  
(b) in the event of such non-corporation and, for that reason only, a power is
given to the Government to acquire any such company which contravenes the Law.  
  
The absolute nature of the prohibition is also made explicit in the provisions
of section 2 which is pivotal to the whole Law. It reads-  
  
"2. (1) On and after the first day of September, 1974, in this law referred to
as the "appointed date", no company-  
  
(a) shall have an interest in any property in Sri Lanka, whether as owner, co-
owner, lessee, mortgagee, or otherwise, or  
  
(b) shall carry on any undertaking in Sri Lanka, unless such company is
recognised as an "existing company", or is incorporated under the principal
enactment, or is an exempted company."  
  
It is a well established principle of law that a Court will not assist a party
to enforce an agreement which is either expressly or impliedly prohibited by
statute. Statutes containing such prohibitions sometimes expressly state that
a contravention of such prohibition entails the nullification of the
transaction. Such words of nullification however are not always considered
necessary and such a consequence can, in a proper case, be inferred as a
result following from the illegality. The general rule is that a transaction
which is in contravention of a prohibition contained in a statute would be
considered null and void, although it does not expressly state so, unless it
can be inferred from a consideration of the whole Act that there was no
intention to render the prohibited transaction illegal.  
  
The prohibition in the present case is in categorical terms and is the main
device for securing the objects intended by the Law. To assert that
transactions contravening these provisions are not illegal or invalid would be
to give the words containing this prohibition a meaning exactly opposite to
what it normally means. The main thrust of this legislation is to bring all
foreign companies within the control of the State as part of our national
policy. If the Law is so interpreted as to suggest that incorporation of such
companies under our Law is not compelling, then such a view will

**49**

have the effect of frustrating the entire purpose of this legislation and
rendering it nugatory.  
  
It has been submitted that the only sanction for non-compliance is acquisition
by the Government of such a business. It was even suggested in the course of
argument that this Law merely enacted the machinery for acquisition of
business undertakings. A close examination of the relevant provisions shows
that these views are clearly untenable. Acquisition can take place only if a
Company fails to incorporate under our laws and in no other circumstance. It
will also be seen that such an acquisition or risk of acquisition is by no
means intended to be a sanction. It is hardly conceivable that the Government
would like to be saddled with the responsibility of taking over all companies
that fail to comply with the Law. The right of acquisition is clearly
discretionary. The Government may acquire any such undertaking or may decide
not to do so depending on the need for such a business, its viability, the
public and national interest involved and the available resources of the
Government. If we have regard to this Law in practical terms, the provisions
for acquisition can never operate as a sanction.  
  
Then the question has also been asked why provisions exist in the Law for the
payment of compensation in respect of a business that may be carried on
illegally after the operative date. I have examined those provisions and I
find nothing therein that indicate the payment of compensation on the basis of
an existing de jure Company. There must be numerous cases of persons who
continued to do business despite the provisions of this Law, parti­cularly
because it contains no criminal sanctions. The present case is one such
example. A law does not have a magical quality to enable it to prevent this
kind of action. We must therefore have regard to the fact that there would be
de facto transactions regardless of the legal provisions.  
  
My understanding of the position is that when there is such a de facto
business in existence, the law empowers the Government to acquire "the whole
or any part of the undertaking of any such company". The term 'undertaking'
has been defined "in relation to a Company to mean the business carried on by
such Company and includes all the movable and immovable property and other
assets of such Company". Such property would naturally be in the possession or
custody of a particular person or persons. The

**50**

acquisition would be from the possession or custody of such person or persons.
Compensation will have to be paid because it cannot be expected of any self-
respecting Government that it would resort to plunder and will not pay for
property which it takes from a person or persons. Where such property is
acquired, the Law requires that written claims should be called for from
"every person who had an interest in such an undertaking or part thereof
immediately before the date on which such undertaking or part thereof was so
vested", and a person is entitled to prefer claims indicating "the nature of
his interest in such undertaking or part thereof"-section 9. The operative
date for valuation is the date of vesting. The valuation would have to be done
not on the basis of a de jure partnership but on a de facto basis. It is also
to be expected that there could well be competing claims, especially in the
case of a de facto enterprise. Such claims have necessarily to be decided by a
court of law in the last resort and this is precisely what the Law envisages-
vide section 19. In a matter of such a nature, I have no doubt that a court
will resolve the matter on an equitable basis; but having regard to the
provisions of this Law, it is forbidden to do so on the basis of an existing
legal partnership.  
  
The fact that a person is deprived from claiming his rights on the basis of a
de jure transaction seems to me the true sanction in this Law. I, therefore,
see nothing in these provisions which has the effect of taking away the
equitable rights a person may have to rights, interests, or property of such a
de facto business, provided that they are claimed in a properly constituted
action.  
  
Finally it has been suggested that the provisions of section 3 appears to
contemplate the coming into existence of a company after the appointed date
and that this is strongly indicative of the fact that a company is enabled to
function legally even after the appointed date, though not incorporated under
our laws. I do not think that the bare coming into operation of such a company
is prohibited by section 2. As a matter of pure statutory construction, it
seems that for the prohibition in the Law to apply the existence of a company
is a pre-requisite and this view in no way contradicts the provisions of the
Law if a reasonable meaning has to be given to its language. Further, it would
be seen that what is prohibited is not the bare existence of the company, but
its activities and even such activities, it seems, are restricted to matters
within the confines of this country and not outside. It is also possible to
take

**51**

the view, if we were to interpret these provisions in a workable manner, that
they enable new companies to be established with the prior concurrence of the
Minister so that their establishment and exemption would be more or less
simultaneous. None of these provisions in my view are at variance with the
objects of the statute set out in the preamble, but are only consequential
thereto.  
  
For these reasons I am of view this appeal must fail. As I have already
indicated earlier, there is nothing in this Law to take away the equitable
rights inter se between parties to a transaction rendered void by this Law
provided they are claimed in a properly constituted action. This case should
in my view go back to the District Court for inquiry, only into those limited
matters indicated in the judgment of the Court of Appeal. But my brothers
however have taken a different view and accordingly their majority opinion
would be entitled to prevail.  
  
**_Appeal allowed.  
  
Interim injunction directed to issue._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/27.html_  

