##  Rear Admiral Dassanayake v. Chandrananda De Silva, Secretary, Ministry of
Defence and Others - SLR - 234, Vol 1 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 27; (2000) 1 Sri LR
234 (5 May 2000)

**234**

**REAR ADMIRAL DASSANAYAKE  
 V.  
CHANDRANANDA DE SILVA, SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF  
DEFENCE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
DHEERARATNE, J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC APPLICATION No. 262/98(FR)  
21st FEBRUARY, 2000.  
  
_Fundamental rights - Retirement of a Navy Officer - Navy Pensions and
Gratuities Code -Appeal by the officer to the President for redress - Failure
to make a fair consideration of the appeal -Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
_  
According to the Navy Pensions and Gratuities Code an officer holding the rank
of Rear Admiral has to retire on the expiry of three years, if he is not
promoted to the next higher rank within that period. However, the Code
provides that the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, in consultation with the
Commander of the Navy, may retain the services of an officer in any rank
beyond the period stipulated for that rank or beyond the age specified in
respect of that rank if, in the opinion of the President it is essential in
the interests of the Navy to do so. The past practice in the Navy shows that
such retention in the Navy had been effected by adjustment of the date of
appointment or seniority or extension of service in the rank. This includes
the appointment or the continuance of the officer as temporary instead of
confirming him.  
  
On 23.4.1994 the former Commander of the Navy recommended that the 2nd
respondent who later became the Commander and the petitioner who were both
confirmed Commodores and were 47 and 44 years of age respectively, be
appointed as temporary Rear Admirals with effect from 01.03.1994 and
01.04.1994 respectively, to enable them to serve beyond the period of three
years prescribed for the substantive post of Rear Admiral. The Commander
explained that due to the acute shortage of senior officers in the Navy, it
was necessary to retain them until other officers were mature enough to assume
duties in the senior appointments. Thereafter, the petitioner was promoted as
temporary Rear-Admiral on 01.04.1994. However, during the petitioners stay

**235**

in India for training, he had been confirmed in the rank of Rear Admiral
without his knowledge and with effect from 01.04.1995. After his return from
India in December, 1995 the petitioner sought clarification from the then
Commander, of the Navy regarding the same, as it would lead to premature
retirement. In reply, the Commander stated, contrary to his previous
recommendation, that such promotions and confirmations are made in the best
interests of the organisation.  
  
When the 2nd respondent became the Commander of the Navy the petitioner
requested him too to readjust his seniority but that also was of no avail. The
petitioner who was then Chief of Staff was the second in Command of the Navy.
The 2nd respondent was senior to the petitioner in the rank of Rear Admiral
only by one month. But the petitioner was now faced with the threat of
premature retirement before reaching the age of 55 years. He, therefore, made
an appeal dated 19.03.1997 to the President, through the 2nd respondent, in
terms of the Navy (Redress of Grievances) Regulations. As there was no
response to his appeal for about one year, he made two other communications to
the President, again through the 2nd respondent on 05.02.1998 and 14.03.1998.
It was only at that stage that the 2nd respondent forwarded the appeals to the
1st respondent (Secretary, Ministry of Defence) for submission to the
President. This he did by letter dated 13.03.1998 addressed to the President,
containing his observations, sent through the 1st respondent with a covering
letter dated 14.03.1998. In that letter the 2nd respondent failed to draw
attention to the Regulations and precedents relied upon by the petitioner. He
opined that there was no dearth of senior officers at all for higher
appointments. He thereby overlooked the recommendations made by his
predecessor in 1994. He also stated that if the petitioner was to be retained
in service after the date on which his retirement was due, the existing
regulations will have to be amended with the approval of Parliament. This was
a complete distortion of the actual legal position as set out in the Navy
Pensions and Gratuities Code.  
  
The 1st respondent concurred with the comments made by the 2nd respondent and
submitted the same to the President on 18.03.1998. Consequently, by letter
dated 27.03.1998 the 13t respondent informed the 2nd respondent that the
President had approved the appointment of the 3rd respondent as the Chief of
Staff with effect from 01.04.1998, on completion of the term of office of the
petitioner on that date.  
  
**Held:**  
  
The 1st and 2nd respondents violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner
guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution.

**236**

Per Wijetunge; J..  
  
"By various acts and omissions aforesaid the 2nd respondent effectively
deprived the petitioner of having his appeals for redress being fairly and
objectively considered by the President."  
  
Per Wijetunge; J..  
  
"The 1st respondent, having readily concurred with the comments made by the
2nd respondent in forwarding the appeals to the President, himself contributed
in no small measure towards the petitioner's appeals not receiving due
consideration by the President."  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
D. S. Wijesinghe, P. C. with J. C. Weliamuna and C. Samaranayake for
petitioner.  
  
R K. W. Goonesekera for 1st respondent.  
  
K. Sripavan, DSG for 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 05, 2000  
**WIJETUNGA,  J.  
**  
The petitioner, at the time of making this application, was the second in
command of the Navy and held the rank of Rear Admiral. He joined the Royal
Ceylon Navy as a Cadet Officer on 1.7.69 and was promoted to the rank of
Midshipman on l. 7. 70. Having followed the Sub-Lieutenant Technical Course
with the Indian Navy, he was promoted to the rank of Acting Sub-Lieutenant and
then as Sub-Lieutenant. He thereafter obtained the Ocean Navigation
Certificate and the Watch Keeping Certificate and was promoted to the rank of
Lieutenant of the Sri Lanka Navy on 28.4.74. He completed the Specialist
Navigation Course (Long-N) in India with a First Class Honours. In 1981,
having sat the selection examination for the staff course, he qualified for
the same and followed the Defence Services Staff Course at the Defence
Services Staff College in Wellington, India, from December 1981 - December
1982. At the same time he completed the Master's Degree in

**237**

Defence Studies at the University of Madras with Grade A Distinction. On
1.5.81 he was promoted temporarily to the rank of Lt. Commander and was
confirmed on 28.4.82. On 1.1.85 he was promoted to the rank of Commander and
thereafter on 1.1.88 to the rank of temporary Captain. He was confirmed in
that rank in 1989, with effect from the date of promotion as temporary
Captain. On 1.11.92 he was promoted as temporary Commodore and was confirmed
in that rank on 1.1.93. He was thereafter promoted as temporary Rear Admiral
on 1.4.94 and was confirmed in that rank on 1.4.95. The petitioner states that
he has had an unblemished record in the Navy.  
  
The petitioner was also awarded the post-graduate Diploma in International
Affairs (1983/84) by the Bandaranaike Centre for International Studies and
also followed a course in Professional Diplomacy, Diplomatic Procedure and
Institutions at the same Centre in 1988. He was appointed Deputy Harbour
Master of the Port of Kankesanturai by the Ports Authority in 1989, with the
concurrence of the Commander of the Navy.  
  
During his tenure of Office in the Navy, the petitioner states that he had
worked in almost all the ships and establishments in the Navy and earned high
commendations. Since 1983 he served mainly in the operational areas. He has
been the Acting Chief of Staff for about eleven months from December 1993,
during the absence of the 2nd respondent who was then the Chief of Staff. The
petitioner states that he and the 2nd respondent joined the Navy together and
the 2nd respondent was only one month senior to the petitioner in the rank of
Rear Admiral. He has served as Acting Commander of the Navy on three
occasions.  
  
In December 1994, the petitioner was sent to India to follow the National
Defence College Course, the highest professional course available to a service
officer, and returned to Sri Lanka in December 1995. In mid December 1995, he
was appointed Commander, Eastern Naval Area.

**238**

After he returned from India, the petitioner found that he had been confirmed
in the rank of Rear Admiral without his knowledge and contrary to the earlier
recommendation of the then Commander of the Navy dated 23.4.94. When the then
Commander of the Navy recommended to the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, the
promotions of the 2nd respondent as well as of the petitioner, who were both
Commodores at the time, as temporary Rear Admirals, he stated inter alia as
follows:  
  
"From the past records it is noted that officers have not been promoted to the
temporary rank of Rear Admiral. However at present Commodore Tissera is 47
years (date of birth - 11 March 1947) and Commodore Dassanayake is 44 years
(date of birth - 14 April 1950) of age and if they are promoted to the
substantive rank of Rear Admiral they will have to leave the service on
completion of the maximum period in rank which is 3 years. Due to the acute
shortage of senior officers in the Navy, it is necessary to retain them until
other officers are senior and mature enough to assume duties in the senior
appointments.  
  
Having taken into consideration the facts enumerated above, the criteria at
quoted References B and C and that of other senior Executive officers and also
the ranks of officers holding such appointments in sister forces, it is
proposed to promote both Commodore Tissera and Commodore Dassanayake to the
rank of Temporary Rear Admiral with effect from the dates indicated against
their names:  
  
"Commodore H. C. A. C. Tissera - 1 March 1994  
  
Commodore D. K. Dassanayake - 1 April 1994."  
  
According to the Navy Pensions and Gratuities Code, 1981, published in Gazette
Extraordinary No. 654/10 of 20.3.91 as regulations made by the President under
Section 161 of the Navy Act, as amended by Gazette Extraordinary

**239**

No. 704/7 of 3.3.92, an officer holding the substantive rank of Rear Admiral
has to retire on the expiry of three years, if he is not promoted to the next
higher substantive rank within that period.  
  
However, regulation 3(2) (a) thereof provides that "notwithstanding the
provisions of paragraph (1), the Secretary, Ministry of Defence in
consultation with the Commander of the Navy, may retain the services of an
officer in any rank beyond the period stipulated for that rank in that
paragraph or beyond the age specified in respect of that rank in that
paragraph if, in the opinion of the President it is essential in the interests
of the Navy to do so."  
  
The petitioner states that in the Navy, if an officer is promoted to the rank
of Commander and above, it may either be a temporary promotion or a confirmed
promotion. If a promotion is so made without an officer completing the period
in the respective ranks, the promotion is normally given as temporary rank
until such time as he completes the period in the previous rank, in order to
prevent premature retirement of efficient officers. He has cited the instances
of Commodore A. H. A. de Silva and Commodore H. A. Silva, who both held office
as Chief of Staff, whose seniority in the ranks of Commodore and Captain were
adjusted in order to serve in the Navy upto the time the then Commander
completed his tenure of office and each of them thereafter became Commander of
the Navy. If not for the said adjustment of seniority, the petitioner states
that the aforesaid officers could not have become Commanders of the Navy and
would have had to retire prematurely after they held the appointment of Chief
of Staff. The petitioner further states that at no stage had a Rear Admiral of
the Navy been retired prior to the age of retirement due to time in rank and
he therefore had the expectation that his seniority would be adjusted in such
a manner as to retain him in the Navy until his retirement at 55 years of age.

**240**

When the petitioner came to know that he had been confirmed in the rank of
Rear Admiral while he was away in India for training, he sought clarification
from the then Commander of the Navy regarding the same, as it would lead to
premature retirement. In reply, the then Commander stated that such promotions
and confirmations are made only in the best interests of the organization.  
  
It is ironical that the self-same Commander had, just one year previously, at
the stage when he recommended the promotion of the 2nd respondent and the
petitioner for promotion as Temporary Rear Admirals, stated that if they were
promoted to the substantive rank of Rear Admiral they would have to leave the
service on completion of the maximum period in rank which is three years and
had in that context adverted to the acute shortage of senior officers in the
Navy and the necessity to retain them until other officers are senior and
mature enough to assume duties in the senior appointments.  
  
When the 2nd respondent became the Commander of the Navy, the petitioner
requested him too to readjust his seniority but that also was of no avail. He
therefore submitted an appeal dated 19.3.97 to the President, by way of
redress of grievances ('ROG'), in terms of the Navy (Redress of Grievance
Regulations, (in my view very properly through the appropriate channel, the
2nd respondent). Having had no response thereto for about one year, he
addressed two further communications to the President, again through the 2nd
respondent, on 5.2.98 and 14.3.98, respectively. He also sought an audience
with the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, through the 2nd respondent, by letter
dated 3.3.98, regarding this matter. He received no response to any of these
communications.  
  
On 27.3.98, the petitioner received the information copy of a letter of even
date addressed to the Commander of the Navy by the Secretary, Ministry of
Defence stating inter alia that the President, the Commander-in-Chief, has
been pleased to approve the appointment of Rear Admiral D. W. Sandagiri (the
3rd respondent) as the Chief of Staff with effect from 1.4.98,

**241**

on completion of the term of office of the petitioner on that date. The
petitioner states that he was shocked to receive this letter as no final
decision had been made by the President on his ROG. He therefore submitted a
further appeal to the President dated 29.3.98, through the 2nd respondent,
requesting a very early interview, for which too he did not receive even an
acknowledgement.  
  
The petitioner states that he was 47 years of age by 1.4.98 and was the
youngest and only officer in the Navy to have been retired at that age as
Chief of Staff. It is also relevant to note that the President had previously
appoint of the petitioner as Acting Commander of the Navy on three occasions.  
  
It is against this background that the petitioner has complained to this Court
of alleged infringement of Article 12(1) of the Constitution and obtained
leave to proceed.  
  
The 2nd respondent's response to the petitioner's affidavit dated 24.4.98 is
contained in his affidavit dated 30.3.99. It must however be mentioned that
the petitioner had by then submitted two further affidavits to Court dated
10.6.98 and 24.7.98 respectively, with annexures, of which the 2nd respondent
has responded only to part of the affidavit dated 24.7.98.  
  
Answering paragraph 5 of the original affidavit, the 2nd respondent only
admits that he is one month senior to the petitioner in the rank of Rear
Admiral and that the petitioner was appointed as Acting Chief of Staff in
December, 1993, during his absence for about 11 months. But he is silent as to
whether they joined the Navy together.  
  
The 2nd respondent has admitted only the documents referred to in some of the
paragraphs of the petitioner's affidavit, to which I shall refer now. As he
has admitted the bio-data of the petitioner contained in the document P.3, he
thereby admits the entire service record of the petitioner as set out in his-
affidavit. So also, by his admission of P.1,

**242**

P.2, P.4, PA P.6, P.7, P.8 and P.9, he has admitted the qualifications
obtained, appointments held, appreciations and commendations received by the
petitioner as set out therein. P.10 being the document dated 23.4.94 whereby
the then Commander of the Navy recommended the 2nd respondent as well as the
petitioner for promotion as temporary Rear Admirals, the reasons therefor,
which have been adverted to earlier in this judgment, are acknowledged.  
  
By P.12 dated 7.3.97 addressed to and admittedly received by the 2nd
respondent, the petitioner as Chief of Staff deals with the confirmation in
rank inter alia of the 3rd respondent and thereby alerts the 2nd respondent to
the ill effects of such confirmation, stating that "in case the above officers
are confirmed in their present rank, without allowing them to complete their
maximum time in the previous substantive rank (emphasis added, they may have
to leave the service prematurely though there is enough time ahead till they
reach the age of 55 years." This position being true of the petitioner's
complaint too, it lends credence to the petitioner's assertion that the
practice was to allow officers to complete their maximum period in the
previous substantive rank, thus readjusting their seniority and preventing
premature retirement.  
  
In paragraph 12 of his affidavit, the petitioner has made specific reference
to two officers who were Chiefs of Staff at the relevant time, who were
retained in service after adjusting their seniority. As the 2nd respondent
denies the averments contained in the said paragraph, it is necessary to deal
with the matter in some detail.  
  
As regards the first named officer, Commodore A. H. A. de Silva, it is the
petitioner's position that he was Chief of Staff and his seniority in the
ranks of Commodore and Captain were adjusted in order to serve in the Navy
upto the time the then Commander completed his tenure of office. He thus
became the Commander of the Navy, which appointment he held till his
retirement at the age of 55 years.

**243**

The 2nd respondent denies the averments contained in the said paragraph and
states that "Commodore A. H. A. Silva was promoted to the rank of Commodore
with effect from 04.02.78 and his services were extended for a period of 2
years with effect from 4.2.82 by His Excellency the then President."  
  
If the 2nd respondent chose to deny the petitioner's averments in paragraph 12
of his petition, he should equally have dealt with the petitioner's averments
in paragraph 2(a) of his affidavit dated 24.7.98 where he stated inter alia
that "all previous Chiefs of Staff who were below the age of 55 years and who
were to complete maximum time in Rank were retained in the Navy after
adjusting their respective seniority as well as granting extensions in rank. I
annex hereto marked P. 33 a schedule prepared by me giving the details of all
the Chiefs of Staff who served the Navy after 1971." In this schedule, the
petitioner has clearly brought out the following particulars - that A. H. A.
de Silva was initially promoted Commodore on 5.5.78, then was back dated to
4.2.78, again the seniority as Commodore was post dated to 4.2.79, appointed
Chief of Staff on 1.6.79, given an extension of time in rank of one year with
effect from 4.2.83 and retired at the age of 55 years as Commander of the
Navy.  
  
The truth of these averments is to a great extent borne out by the 2nd
respondent's own averments aforementioned where he concedes that this officer
was promoted Commodore on 4.2.78 and his services were extended for a period
of two years with effect from 4.2.82. Even on his own admission, it is the
extension granted that enabled him to be in service until 4.2.84. As the
petitioner states that this officer was born in 1931, he still had time to be
the Commander of the Navy before reaching the age of retirement - 55 years.
But, the 2nd respondent has remained silent in regard to the petitioner's
claim that Commodore A. H. A. de Silva retired as Commander of the Navy.
Surely, as the incumbent Commander of the Navy, it was his bounden duty to
candidly inform the Court whether or not Commodore de Silva retired as
Commander of the Navy;

**244**

more so as the petitioner had displayed a high degree of candour and
professionalism in submitting this material to Court. As the 2nd respondent
had dealt with some of the averments in the petitioner's affidavit dated
24.7.98, he had no excuse whatsoever for with holding this information from
Court. The irresistible inference therefore is that the 2nd respondent
attempted to mislead the Court by presenting a garbled version of what
actually took place. In any event, he has conceded that an extension was in
fact granted to this officer.  
  
As regards the petitioner's averment in paragraph 12 of his affidavit dated
24.4.98 that Commodore H. A. Silva too was Chief of Staff and his seniority in
the ranks of Commodore and Captain were adjusted in order to serve in the Navy
upto the time the then Commander completed his tenure of office and he thus
became the Commander of the Navy, which appointment he held till his
retirement in November, 1991, even beyond the age of 55 years, the 2nd
respondent has responded as follows:  
  
"Commodore H. A. Silva was promoted to the substantive rank of Commodore on
1.6.80. However, the substantive rank of Commodore had been converted as
temporary from the same date and confirmed in the substantive rank with effect
from 1.1.83. Commodore H. A. Silva functioned as the Commander of the Navy for
a period of 04 years 11 months and 30 days."  
  
This is precisely what the petitioner stated in P. 33, the schedule annexed to
his affidavit dated 24.7.98, where he dealt more fully with the adjustments of
seniority of Commodore H. A. Silva. His original assertion in paragraph 12 of
the first affidavit too is borne out by the 2nd respondent's response quoted
above. Yet, the 2nd respondent chose to deny paragraph 12 of the petitioner's
affidavit dated 24.4.98. This was indeed a puerile attempt on his part to
cloud the issue and perhaps bury his head, ostrich like, in the sand. The
Court must in no uncertain terms condemn the manner in which the

**245**

2nd respondent dealt with these matters in his affidavit, particularly as he
holds the very responsible position of head of the Sri Lanka Navy.  
  
The 2nd respondent's affidavit is replete with this type of vague, evasive and
misleading averments, which are too numerous to be dealt with in detail. For
instance, in paragraph 9 of his affidavit, the petitioner states that -  
  
"according to the aforesaid Code, in terms of clause 3(2) thereof, the
Secretary, Defence in consultation with the Commander of the Navy, may retain
the services of an officer in any rank beyond the period stipulated for that
rank above, if in the opinion of the President it is essential in the
interests of the Navy to do so."  
  
This is almost a verbatim reproduction of Regulation 3(2) (a) of the Navy
Pensions and Gratuities Code, 1981. But, for reasons best known to him, the
2nd respondent denies this paragraph and goes on to state that -  
  
"in terms of Clause 3(2) of P. 11, the Secretary, Ministry of Defence, in
consultation with the Commander of the Navy, may retain the services of an
officer in any rank beyond the period stipulated for that rank, if in the
opinion of Her Excellency the President, it is essential in the interest of
the Navy to do so."  
  
I cannot see any reason in logic or in law for this type of denial of an
averment in an affidavit, and worse still, for a meaningless attempt to
paraphrase such averments. Rather than resorting to verbal acrobatics and
wasting the time of Court, the 2nd respondent could well have gracefully
admitted such of the averments in the petitioner's affidavit as should have
been admitted and dealt with the others which had to be denied.  
  
With the aforementioned provision staring him in the face, the 2nd respondent
responds to paragraph 15 of the petitioner's

**246**

affidavit by stating that "there is no provision in law to readjust seniority
of the Petitioner in order to facilitate him to serve in the Navy." The
complaint of the petitioner was that by reason of being confirmed in the rank
of Rear Admiral in 1995, he was to retire from the Navy prematurely, before
reaching the age of 55 years. The 2nd respondent was well aware that, under
Clause 3(2) (a) of the Navy Pensions and Gratuities Code, the petitioner's
services could have been retained beyond the period stipulated for that rank
or even beyond the age specified in respect of that rank. He was equally
aware, as shown by his own admission referred to earlier, that there were
instances where such readjustments had been made to retain senior officers
beyond the stipulated periods.  
  
In his appeal to the President dated 5.2.98, submitted by the petitioner
through the 2nd respondent, he had specifically referred to the case of former
Chief of Staff, Commodore H. A. Silva as being similar to his, where seniority
had been readjusted thus enabling Commodore Silva to remain in service until
the then Commander of the Navy relinquished duties on 1.11.96, citing the same
as a precedent. Viewed in this light, the above averment of the 2nd respondent
is not merely incorrect, but false to his knowledge.  
  
I shall now turn to the fate of the appeals made by the petitioner to the
President, through the 2nd respondent, byway of redress of grievances. The
first such appeal was submitted on. 19.3.97. Regulation 2 of the Navy (Redress
of Grievances) Regulations provides inter alia that "where an officer
is............. aggrieved by any action of the Commander of the Navy, either
in respect of his appeal or in respect of any other matter, he may make a
written appeal to His Excellency the President". This, therefore, is a right
conferred on officers such as the petitioner. Accordingly, on such an appeal
being submitted to the 2nd respondent for onward transmission to the
President, the 2nd respondent was duty bound to forward the same without undue
delay. But, the 2nd respondent held on to the petitioner's appeal for almost
one full year without making his observations and submitting the same to the
President.

**247**

In the meantime, the petitioner had made a further appeal to the President
dated 3.2.98, through the 2nd respondent, requesting that redress be granted
to him in a reasonable and fair manner. This was followed by a similarly
addressed further communication dated 14.3.98 drawing attention to the fact
that he would be denied the opportunity of serving the Navy after 1.4.98, at
the age of 47 years, while being the Chief of Staff, unless a very early
decision is made regarding this matter. He further stated there that "as this
is an official matter of grave concern with regard to my career, and as the
time is running short, I am sure that Your Excellency would agree that the
best way to represent matters in this regard, under the present circumstances,
would be by Your Excellency giving me an audience".  
  
It is only at this stage that the 2nd respondent thought it fit to forward the
petitioner's several appeals to the 1st respondent, for submission to the
President. This he did by letter dated 13.3.98 addressed to the President,
containing his observations, sent through the 1st respondent with a covering
letter dated 14.3.98.  
  
In paragraph 7 of that letter, the 2nd respondent made the following
observations:  
  
"In consideration of the totality of the material it is my view that back
dating of the date of confirmation to suit individuals and to circumvent
provisions of law is a wholly unacceptable practice in any institution. If
Rear Admiral Dassanayake is to be retained in service after the date on which
his retirement is due, the existing Regulations will have to be amended with
the approval of Parliament. Embarking on such a course of action would not be
advisable as it would affect all ranks in the Army, Navy and Air Force and
would be contrary to procedure that has been accepted and followed in all
three Services for over four decades and other countries."

**248**

Though the 2nd respondent was undoubtedly entitled to express his views in
this regard, he was equally obliged to present the facts to the President in a
fair and objective manner. There was no question whatsoever of circumventing
provisions of law, as alleged by him. Nor was there a need to amend the
existing Regulations with the approval of Parliament. On the contrary, there
was a total failure on the 2nd respondent's part to draw the attention of the
President to the provisions of Regulation 3(2) (a) of the Navy Pensions and
Gratuities Code, 1981, (already quoted earlier in this judgment), which would
enable the 1st respondent, in consultation with the 2nd respondent, to retain
the services of the petitioner not only beyond the period stipulated for the
rank of Rear Admiral, but even beyond the age specified in respect of that
rank, if in the opinion of the President it was essential in the interests of
the Navy to do so.  
  
The 2nd respondent thereby misrepresented facts with a view to misleading the
President.  
  
Furthermore, the 2nd respondent deliberately omitted to make reference to the
precedents cited by the petitioner as regards previous instances where
officers who held the rank of Chief of Staff were retained in service beyond
the aforementioned periods.  
  
Instead, he referred to the fact that "at present there are four Rear Admirals
and six Commodores" and opined that "accordingly there is no dearth of senior
officers at all and all these officers are professionally competent and have
been groomed for the higher appointment of the Chief of Staff'.  
  
Never did it occur to the 2nd respondent to mention to the President that as
recently as in 1994 when his predecessor in office had recommended him as well
as the petitioner for promotion as temporary Rear Admirals, he made the
observation that "due to the acute shortage of senior officers in the Navy, it
is necessary to retain them until other officers are senior and mature enough
to assume duties in the senior appointments."

**249**

He even lost sight of the fact that admittedly he was only one month senior to
the petitioner in the rank of Rear Admiral (though the petitioner was more
than three years his junior in age), from which rank he was elevated to that
of Vice Admiral. and Commander of the Navy, while the petitioner remained just
one step below as Chief of Staff.  
  
The 2nd respondent has offered no explanation whatsoever in regard to the
inordinate delay of about one year in submitting the petitioner's appeal for
redress to the President. By reason of such delay, the President had barely
two weeks to consider the petitioner's appeal, before he was due to retire,
While the Court does not wish to speculate on the motive behind the delay,
suffice it to say that such delay was totally unwarranted.  
  
The 1st respondent states in his affidavit dated 5.4.99 that the 2nd
respondent did not recommend the request made by the petitioner for the
reasons stated in his comments dated '13.3.98, that he concurred with the
comments made by the 2nd respondent and submitted the same to the President on
18.3.98. He further states that "after careful consideration of the comments
made by the 2nd respondent and the observations made by me, Her Excellency the
President on 23.3.98 rejected the request made by the petitioner by P.15" \-
(i. e. appeal dated 19.3.97).  
  
As pointed out earlier in this judgment, the comments made by the 2nd
respondent when submitting the appeals made by the petitioner to the President
were not a fair, impartial, or accurate presentation of the facts.
Furthermore, there was wilful suppression of material facts such as the
precedents cited by the petitioner in support of his request for readjustment
of seniority, which could well have tilted the scales in his favour. Even the
relevant legal provisions were artfully withheld from the President and the
impression was created that what the petitioner sought was not permitted by
law and was thus an attempt to circumvent the law for his benefit. The 2nd
respondent even went so far as to state that

**250**

if the petitioner is to be retained in service after the date on which his
retirement is due, the existing Regulations will have to be amended with the
approval of Parliament. This was a complete distortion of the actual legal
position as set out in the Navy Pensions and Gratuities Code. By the various
acts and omissions aforementioned, the 2nd respondent effectively deprived the
petitioner of having his appeals for redress being fairly and objectively
considered by the President.  
  
The 1st respondent, having readily concurred with the comments made by the 2nd
respondent in forwarding the appeals to the President, himself contributed in
no small measure towards the petitioner's appeals not receiving due
consideration by the President.  
  
For the reasons aforesaid, I hold and declare that the 1st and 2nd respondents
have violated the fundamental rights of the petitioner guaranteed by Article
12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
Having regard to the unfair, unjust and discriminatory treatment meted out to
the petitioner, I award the petitioner a sum of Rs. 500,000/- as compensation,
to be paid by the State.  
  
As the 2nd respondent was the prime architect of the violation of the
petitioner's fundamental rights, and was largely responsible for the
petitioner having to seek relief from this Court. I further direct the 2nd
respondent to personally pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 50,000/- as costs.  
  
The compensation as well as the costs should be paid before 30.6.2000.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J**. - I agree  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** \- I agree  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/27.html_  

