##  Jeevakaran v. Ratnasiri Wickremanayake and Others - SLR - 351, Vol 1 of
1997 [1997] LKSC 27; (1997) 1 Sri LR 351 (1 January 1997)

351

**JEEVAKARAN**

**v.**

## **RATNASIRI WICKREMANAYAKE AND OTHERS**



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

DR. GUNAWARDANA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 623/96

JANUARY 28, 1997.



_Fundamental Rights ‑ Curtailment of Public holidays ‑ Section 4 of the
Holidays Act, No_. _19 of 1971 ‑ Effect on freedom of worship and right to
equality ‑ Articles 14(1)(e) and 12(1) of the Constitution._



The Holidays Act, No. 19 of 1971 declared every full moon poya day and Sunday
to be a public holiday. In addition, certain days specified in the 1st
Schedule were also made public holidays. Section 4 gave the Minister the power
to amend or vary the 1st Schedule. In view of the fact that an excessive
number of public holidays affected the productivity of the country, the
Government decided on the recommendation of a committee to eliminate holidays
for Maha Sivarathri, Hadji, National Heroes Day and Bandaranaike Commemoration
Day. However, in response to subsequent representations the Government
declared Maha Sivarathri and Hadji as "Special Holidays for the followers of
Hinduism and Islam respectively".



**Held:**



1\. The decision of the Government did not infringe the petitioners right to
freedom of worship under Article 14(1)(e) of the Constitution. The essence of
the freedom of worship is that the State (or even a private employer) must not
prohibit or interfere with the citizen's practice of his religion, but is not
bound to provide facilities for such practice.



2\. There is also no infringement of the petitioner's right to equality under
Article 12(1) of the Constitution. Given its role and responsibilities in
managing the national economy, the decision to reduce the number of holidays
was legitimate. The Government is entitled to take into consideration a
variety of matters in determining public holidays. The discretion is not
fettered by some rigid principle.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_S. N. Vijithsinghe_ with _Anton Punethanayagam_ for petitioner.



_Kolitha Dharmawardana, D._ S. G. for respondents.



_Cur. adv. vult.  
 _

352



February 24, 1997.  


**FERNANDO, J.**



Under the Holidays Act, No. 17 of 1965, Sundays had ceased to be public
holidays and the four Poya days were the weekly holidays. The Holidays Act,
No. 19 of 1971, repealed that Act, and declared every full moon Poya day and
every Sunday to be a public holiday. In addition the following 14 days
specified in the 1st Schedule were also made public holidays:



The Tamil Thai‑Pongal Day

Milad‑un‑Nabi (Holy Prophet's Birthday)

National Day

Maha Sivarathri Day

The Day Prior to the Sinhala and Tamil New Year's Day

The Sinhala and Tamil New Year's Day

Good Friday

May Day

The Day following the Wesak Full Moon Poya Day

National Heroes Day

Id‑UI‑Fitr (Ramazan Festival)

Id‑UI‑Allah (Haj Festival Day)

Deepawali Festival Day

Christmas Day



Section 4 gave the Minister the power to amend or vary the 1st Schedule.



**Facts**



The 3rd respondent, Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration, issued
a notice dated 6.8.96 setting out the public holidays approved by the 1st
respondent, the Minister, for 1997‑23 in number, including the 12 full moon
Poya days. These did not include Maha Sivarathri and Hadji. Claiming that this
was in violation of their fundamental rights, the petitioner in this
application, and the petitioner in SC Application No 624/96, sought the
restoration of Maha Sivarathri and Hadji as public holidays.



It is not in dispute that from 1971 to 1996 Maha Sivarathri and Hadji had been
public holidays although not mercantile holidays.

353  


 According to the 3rd respondent, representations had been made to the
Government by the Ceylon National Chamber of Industries that the number of
public holidays were excessive and that this affected the productivity of the
country, thus reducing its competitive advantage. That Chamber urged that two
special bank holidays on 30th June and 31st December be eliminated, as well as
the following five holidays, all of which were not mercantile holidays:



Maha Sivarathri

Ramazan Festival

Good Friday

Hadji Festival

Deepawali



The 3rd respondent averred that it was upon the recommendations of a committee
appointed to consider the matter that the Government decided to curtail the
number of public holidays, by eliminating holidays for Maha Sivarathri, Hadji,
National Heroes Day and Bandaranaike Commemoration Day. That was done by the
notice dated 6.8.96. Whether that constituted a proper exercise of the powers
conferred by section 4 was not argued.



However, consequent upon representations made by various persons and
organisations, the Government later declared Maha Sivarathri and Hadji as
"special holidays for the followers of Hinduism and Islam respectively".



In his application the petitioner stated that "from childhood onwards up to
the years 1996, he could observe Maha Sivarathri day, fasting, watch night
praying and following religious recitals [rituals?] since that day had been
declared a public holiday." In his written submissions the petitioner added
that "on the Maha Sivarathri, bathing, fasting, watch night praying is
observed with hour‑to‑hour mass before the holy fire to redeem the sins
committed by the individual before the Hindu Gods, [which] are part of the
religion for which a holiday is needed"; that "... religion and religious
practices obtained by both doctrine and tradition have played a large part in
the lives of our people, so much so that it has become difficult to say what
is religion and what is religious practice, as they are both intermixed.
Sometimes religious practice is taken by the bulk of our people as religious
faith"; that this was applicable to Maha Sivarathri

**354  
 **

 day observances; and that accordingly "it is important to have a public
holiday to manifest (his) religion or belief" on that day.



**CONTENTIONS**



The petitioner contended that "his religious consciousness and belief is going
to be imminently infringed/is infringed by the executive or administrative
actions of the respondents since Maha Sivarathri is not going to be a public
holiday so that the petitioner would not be able to observe these religious
recitals [rituals ?]". He further claimed that "different religious groups
normally get together to observe the manifestation of the religion or belief
of the other since that day is a public holiday", and that "this is essential
in order to promote interreligious harmony for a country wounded by war". He
alleged the violation of Articles 10 and 14(1)(e).



The petitioner's next contention was that the sudden denial of the holiday was
"against the legitimate expectations of the petitioner and is totally
unilateral, unreasonable, arbitrary, unjustified, without proper procedure,
_ultra vires,_ capricious, wrong classification, not for any good reason but
for some collateral purpose and thus denies the equal opportunity and violates
the rights guaranteed under Article 12(1) of the Constitution"; and that the
"Hindu religion is professed by [a] small minority compared to the total
population and not declaring Maha Sivarathri as a holiday and reducing the
holidays only from minority religions amounts to a violation of the rights
guaranteed by Article 12(2) of the Constitution".



Leave to proceed was sought in respect of the alleged infringe­ment of
Articles 10, 12(1), 12(2) and 14(1)(e), but was granted only in respect of
Articles 12(1) an 14(1)(e).



**FREEDOM OF WORSHIP: ARTICLE 14(1)(e)**



The petitioner's contention that the withdrawal of the Maha Sivarathri public
holiday infringed his fundamental right of freedom of worship is untenable.
Although his affidavit does not satisfy me on that point, I will nevertheless
assume that the religious observances, practices, rites and rituals (which I
will collectively refer to as "religious observances") which he described
could not be duly performed on that day unless some part of the normal working
hours

**355  
 **

was also used. If the State, or any employer for that matter, does not grant a
holiday on a day of religious significance does it mean that an employee's
freedom of worship is impaired? To answer that question in the affirmative
would be to blur the distinction between **not facilitating** the exercise of
a fundamental right, and **infringing** it. In my view, the obligation created
by Article 14(1)(e) is to allow the citizen to practice his religion, but not
to give him additional facilities or privileges which would make it easier for
him to do so. While the State must not prevent or impede religious
observances, it need not go further, and provide a holiday or other facilities
for such observances. An employee has various leave entitlements which are
intended for his personal, family, social and other needs, and this he may use
for religious observances on days which are not holidays; while the
unreasonable denial of such leave may well amount to an infringement of
Article 14(1)(e), the refusal of holidays, privileges and concessions would
not: thus while Article 14(1)(e) may compel the grant of leave requested by an
employee in order to perform his religious observances at a distant shrine or
place of worship, the refusal by the State to provide facilities (such as a
paid holiday, free transport, or travelling and subsistence allowances) to
make those observances easier or more convenient would not constitute an
infringement. To take another example, while that Article might entitle
Christians to obtain and use wine for the rite of communion, in which event
the prohibition of such use would be an infringement, yet that Article
certainly does not compel the State to provide wine free for use by Christians
for that purpose. The essence of the freedom of worship is that the State (or
even a private employer) must not prohibit or interfere with the citizen's
practice of his religion, but is not bound to extend patronage or provide
facilities for such practice. The position is no different in regard to other
freedoms; while the freedom of speech may entitle a citizen to publish a
newspaper or to operate a radio station, it does not entitle him to a grant of
State land or funds for his enterprise; and the freedom of associations may
entitle citizens to establish a company, society or union, but not to demand
from the State a building for its activities.



The contrary view will result in absurdity. We find in Sri Lanka today public
holidays of significance to the followers of four world religions ‑ Buddhism,
Hinduism, Christianity and Islam; and I have no doubt

**356  
 **

that devout citizens, from among these, will be able to identify many other
days of religious significance, on which the performance of religious
observances are most desirable, and would be greatly facilitated by the grant
of paid holidays. Likewise, Sri Lanka adherents of other religions, however
small in number, will be able to identify days of significance to themselves,
and will make the same plea, claiming that otherwise their freedom of worship
will be impaired. If that is accepted there will be many more holidays than
working days, and we will then need, not a Holidays Act, but an Act to
identify and declare the few remaining working days. Religion is essentially a
private matter, and Article 14(1)(e) does not entitle a citizen to State
patronage for the practice of his religion. Of course, if the State does grant
patronage to one religion (except as permitted by Article 9), the question of
equal treatment may arise under Article 12, and to that I will refer later.



The petitioner's contention must fail on the facts in any event, because even
if Article 14(1)(e) did require a holiday for Maha Sivarathri the Government
had already granted Hindus a special holiday on that day.



These conclusions make it unnecessary to consider the petitioner's other
contentions, but since they were pressed with some vehemence, I will deal with
them briefly.



Learned Counsel submitted that because Maha Sivarathri was not a holiday for
persons of other religions, such persons could not join with the petitioner in
the performance of his religious observances on that day. Stressing the words
"by himself _or in association with others " _in Article 14(1)(e), he argued
that "others" included persons of other religions; that it was the practice in
many places for persons of other religions to join with Hindus in religious
observances on Maha Sivarathri day; that it was only such inter‑religious
practices which could bring about racial and religious amity in a multi‑racial
and multi‑religious nation, and thus heal the wounds of war; and that ****
this Court should adopt a liberal interpretation to achieve such a result.



That approach to interpretation does not commend itself to me. The
jurisdiction of this Court is defined in the Constitutions, and

**357  
 **

cannot be expanded, directly or indirectly, by the Court under the guise of
interpretation to give effect to policies and practices which it considers
conducive to nationally desirable objectives, whether political, economic,
religious, cultural, social or otherwise. Article 14(1)(e) cannot be given an
artificial or extended meaning, which its language, considered in the context
of the Constitution as a whole, does not permit, for a collateral purpose of
that kind.



The phrase stressed by learned Counsel only gives effect to the "community"
aspect of religion and religious freedom: although religion is a "private"
matter _vis ‑a‑vis _the State, yet the practice of religion has always had a
"community" dimension as well, because religious observances are often
performed together with co­-religionists. The freedom which the petitioner has
is "in public or in private, to manifest _his_ religion or belief in worship,
observance, practice and teaching"; and that he has the right to do both by
himself, and "in association with others". The lack of a public holiday will
not impair his ability to do so "by himself"; and it will not affect the
manifestation of _" **his** " _religion or belief in association with his co
-religionists. As for persons of **_other_** __ religions, the petitioner has
failed to establish how or why their non‑participation in his religious
observances, would affect the manifestation of _" **his** " _religion or
belief. I am not prepared to presume, in the absence of clear pleadings and
proof, that the petitioner cannot properly perform his religious observances
on Maha Sivarathri Day without the participation of such others. Further, even
if it be true that others customarily do participate therein, there is nothing
to show that this is for anything other than social reasons: there is no
suggestion that this was on account of anybody's religious beliefs. And even
if I were to assume that the participation of others was for religious
reasons, _yet_ that would be only to manifest **_their_** religion or belief ‑
not the petitioner's. And so their non‑participation, at best, could affect
only **_their_** __ religion or belief, and cannot give rise to a cause of
compliant by the petitioner that **_his_** __ own freedom of worship was
impaired.



**RIGHT TO EQUALITY; ARTICLE 12(1)**



The Government was faced with a situation in which there were a large number
of non‑working days: Saturdays and Sundays, 12 full moon Poya days, and 15
public holidays, totalling 131 days (not taking

**358  
 **

into account that some of these would overlap). Assuming an average annual
leave entitlement of 42 days, this meant, that an employee would work for just
over half the year. Given its role and responsibilities in managing the
national economy, it was legitimate and justifiable for the Government to form
the opinion that the number of holidays should be reduced by four. And,
indeed, the impact of that reduction was softened by granting two special
holidays. Even without such special holidays, in my view, it was within the
discretion of the Government to have made an even more drastic reduction, on
the lines of the recommendation of the Ceylon National Chamber of Industries.



It is quite clear, therefore, that the Government did not intend to
discriminate against followers of Hinduism and Islam. The question then is,
was there nevertheless unequal treatment _vis ‑a‑vis_ followers of other
religions whose holidays were not reduced?



In determining public holidays it is not religion and religious significance
alone that must be taken into account. Thus in today's world it can hardly be
said that Sunday is a public holiday, solely or mainly, because of its
significance to Christians. The demands of international finance, trade and
business now make it imperative that the weekly holiday, so necessary for the
health and well‑being of employees, should be Sunday and not any other day.
Holidays are also granted on days which are of national or general
significance ‑such as National Day, May Day, and Sinhala and Tamil New Year.
Days of religious significance constitute a third category, in regard to which
the Government has a discretion. It cannot be said that that discretion is
fettered by some rigid principle ‑ as, for instance, that such holidays should
be granted on the basis of religious proportionality, or that each religion
must have the same number of holidays as every other religion, or that only
religions which have more than a specified number of followers should be taken
into account. However, some consideration of all these factors would be
relevant.



It is the Holidays Act which has declared Sundays and the full moon Poya days
to be public holidays, and this Court has no jurisdiction to review statutory
provisions. Consequently, any question of unequal treatment arises in a
limited context: there were eleven public holidays of religious significance,
three for Hindus (Thai‑

**359  
 **

Pongal Maha Sivarathri, and Deepavali), **** three for Muslims (Holy Prophet's
Birthday, Ramazan Festival, and Hadji Festival Day), two for Christians (Good
Friday and Christmas Day) and one for Buddhists (the day following Wesak).



Learned Counsel for the Petitioner argued that the two days in question were
holidays by virtue of the statute, and that it was only by a statutory
amendment that they could be eliminated. But that contention overlooks the
power conferred on the Minister, by section 4, to vary the 1st Schedule. He
also submitted that equal treatment required that a similar reduction be made
from the holidays enjoyed by the majority. If, and to the extent that,
followers of Hinduism and Islam needed a holiday on the two days in question,
that need was satisfied by the grant of special holidays. However I prefer to
base my decision on this point on the fact that the Government was entitled to
take a variety of matters into **** consideration in determining public
holidays, and the material adduced by the petitioner is quite insufficient to
show that the elimination of these two holidays was unreasonable, arbitrary,
capricious or for an improper purpose. Article 12(1) has not been infringed.



**ORDER**



The petitioner's application therefore **** fails. I make no order for costs.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**DR.** **GUNAWARDANA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/27.html_  

