##  Priyangani v. Nanayakkara and Others - SLR - 399, Vol 1 of 1996 [1996]
LKSC 27; (1996) 1 Sri LR 399 (30 August 1996)

**399**

**PRIYANGANI  
****v** **.  
NANAYAKKARA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 3398/95.  
AUGUST 21, 1996.

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Sudden and arbitrary transfer‑Constitution, Article 12
(1) ‑ Service at difficult school ‑ Re‑transfer to difficult school._ __

Petitioner, a Primary school teacher completed a five year period at a school
classified as a difficult school and applied for and obtained a transfer to a
school close to her husband's home in February 1995. On 29.06.95 she received
a letter dated 13.06.95 issued by the 2nd Respondent the Director of Education
of the Puttalam Zone of the North Western Province (NWP) transferring her back
to the old difficult school with immediate effect. Also no travelling expenses
were to be paid. Transfers within the NWP were governed by a Circular dated
18.03.95 (the Transfer Circular) sent by the 1st Respondent the Provincial
Director of Education of the NWP to all Principals in the Province. By a
Circular issued by the 1st Respondent in March 1995 captioned "Selection of
Excess Teachers" 1st Respondent directed all Principals in the Province to
identify excess teachers. In yet another Circular captioned "Transfer of
Excess Teachers" dated 04.05.95

**400**

the 1st Respondent stated that teachers who had already completed "difficult"
service' should not be named as excess teachers.

**Held:**

(1) There was no justification for treating the Petitioner as not having
served in a difficult" school or otherwise disregarding that service because
her parents' home was in the vicinity of the 'difficult' school.

(2) The Court is not concerned with contractual rights but with safeguards
based on the Rule of Law which Article 12 provided against arbitrary and
unreasonable exercise of discretionary powers.

**_Per_ Fernando, J.:**

"Discretionary powers can never be treated as absolute and unfettered ‑ unless
there is compelling language; when reposed in public functionaries such powers
are held in trust, to be used for the benefit of the public, and for the
purpose for which they have been conferred ‑ not at the whim and fancy of
officials, for political advantage or personal gain. Education, as the
Transfer Circular emphasises, concerns the child; the power to transfer
teachers exists to promote the education of the child; a fair and reasonable
system of teacher transfers, implemented according to established principles
and criteria, will promote the education of the child; and the absence of such
a system will undermine good education".

(3) The primary teachers, from whom one or more had to be identified as
excess, constituted a class. Whether mandatory or not there were established
guidelines for the identification of excess teachers. It was only fair and
reasonable, but necessary ‑ if equal treatment and fair play were to be
ensured ‑ that there should be guidelines, dealing with matters such as those
to be exempted, and the order of priority for selection from among the rest.
The selection of a teacher who was exempted by those guidelines was clearly
arbitrary and unreasonable.

(4) The Petitioner's right to equality was violated: she was identified as
excess, although exempted, while others who apparently were not exempt, were
not identified as excess.

**_Per_ Fernando, J.** ****

"... powers have been exercised with scant regard for the rights of the
individual, and so I cannot but recall that "it is excellent to have giant's

**401**

power, but it is tyrannous to use it like a giant" (Measure for Measure 11,ii,
107) especially when the ultimate victim is the nation's children".

**APPLICATION** for relief in respect of violation of fundamental rights
guaranteed by Article 12 of the Constitution.

_N.M. Idroos_ for Petitioner.

_Y. J. W Wijayatilleke, S. S. C. for_ the 1st to 5th and 7th Respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_ _._

August 30, 1996.

**FERNANDO, J.**

The Petitioner is a Primary School Teacher who joined the service in January
1990. She complains that her fundamental right under Article 12(1) has been
violated by reason of a sudden and arbitrary transfer. She served at
Kottucachchiya MV ("KMV"), which was classified as a "difficult" school. She
later married from Anamaduwa and moved to her husband's home. Having completed
five years service at KMV, she requested and obtained a transfer to Anamaduwa
Adarsha Kanishta Vidyalaya ("AAKV") with effect from February 1995. On 29.6.95
she received a letter dated 13.6.95 issued by the 2nd Respondent, the Director
of Education of the Puttalam Zone of the North Western Province (NWP),
transferring her back to KMV with immediate effect. No reason was given and
she was told that travelling expenses would not be paid.

Transfers within the NWP are governed by a Circular dated 18.3.95 ("the
Transfer Circular") sent by the 1st Respondent, the Provincial Director of
Education of the NWP, to all Principals in the Province. This Circular recited
that it had been formulated by the NWP Teacher Transfer Board in order to
fulfil the need for a more systematic transfer procedure, after giving due
consideration to the Establishments Code, National Policy, pronouncements and
circulars, by the Ministry, the Education Services Committee, and the
Governor.

In respect of the transfer of excess teachers, the following is a summary of
the relevant provisions of the Transfer Circular:

**402**

Paragraph 2: No teacher transfer should be made in a manner prejudicial to the
educational needs of the students. Since frequent transfers in the course of
the year are a hindrance to the educational activities of the students,
transfers on application should only be at the beginning of the year. Except
upon transfers of excess teachers, on no account should a transfer be effected
without a suitable replacement. An application for a transfer by a new teacher
should only be made after at least four years in a "difficult" school, or
three years in a "very difficult" school, or in the area to which that school
belongs.

However the Provincial Director of Education has the power to make any
transfer on account of the exigencies of the service or discipline. The
Director of Education in charge of the Zone may make such transfers with the
prior approval of the Provincial Director of Education, or in case of
emergency, with his covering approval.

Paragraphs 7 and 8: The following criteria were proposed in regard to the
selection (identification) of "excess" teachers:

Except at their own request, teachers should not be identified as "excess" if
they are over 53 years of age; or are handicapped; or are ill and have been
undergoing continuous medical treatment for a long time; or have over three
years of "very difficult" service in the zone or outside; or four years of
"difficult" service; etc.

After excluding the foregoing, "excess" teachers should be identified in the
following order of priority: those who have no "difficult" service; those
having less than one year of "difficult" service; those having less than two
years of such service; and less than four years of such service. Further,
within each of these categories, the order of priority was: unmarried males,
unmarried females, married males, and married females.

That Circular went on to make other provisions to cover situations in which
all the teachers considered had over three/four years of "difficult" service.

**403**

By a circular issued by the 1st Respondent in March 1995, captioned "Selection
of Excess Teachers", the 1st Respondent directed all Principals in the
Province to identify excess teachers. He directed that this should be done
strictly according to the criteria laid down in paragraph 7 of the Transfer
Circular, and impartially without regard to their personal likes or dislikes.
In yet another circular captioned "Transfer of Excess Teachers" dated
04.05.95, the 1st Respondent drew attention to the Transfer Circular and
stated that teachers who had already completed "difficult" service should not
be named as excess teachers. Thus in respect of AAKV, it was the 5th
Respondent, as the Principal, who had the authority and the duty to identify
excess teachers.

It appears that after receiving the circular dated 4.5.95 the 5th Respondent
by letter dated 5.6.95 had named the Petitioner and another teacher as excess
teachers. (The other teacher also filed a fundamental rights application and
this Court held that in any event she was not liable to be transferred as
being an excess teacher, since she had already served for seven years in an
"difficult" school, for the guidelines required teachers who had served in
such schools not to be designated as excess teachers; holding that she had
been transferred arbitrarily in violation of Article 12(1), the transfer was
cancelled, and the 1st Respondent was directed to pay Rs.5,000/‑ as
compensation and Rs.2,000/‑ as costs: SC 339A/95 SCM 29.3.96). By letter dated
8.6.95; the 2nd Respondent requested the 1st Respondent for permis­sion to
transfer the Petitioner to KMV. This was received on 13.6.95; and on the same
day the 1st Respondent granted permission, and the 2nd Respondent issued
transfer orders to the Petitioner.

The Petitioner's case is that in determining her to be an excess teacher, the
provisions of the Transfer Circular were violated. The Petitioner contends
that because she had previously served five years in a "difficult" school,
when it had to be determined which teachers were excess, paragraph 7 of the
Transfer Circular required that she be excluded from consideration.

The Respondent's reply that although KMV was, technically, a "difficult"
school, yet for the Petitioner it was not: because during her period of
service in that school, she was living in her parental home which was in close
proximity to the school; that in any event KMV had

**404**

been taken off the list of "difficult" schools by January 1994 (relying on an
assertion in the 1st Respondent's affidavit, unsupported by any document);
that paragraph 2 of the Transfer Circular conferred on the 2nd Respondent the
power to transfer a teacher on account of the exigencies of service
notwithstanding other provisions of that Circular; that the impugned transfer
was on account of the exigencies of service, and was therefore valid; that
this power was not subject to paragraphs 7 and 8, but that even if it was,
these provisions were not mandatory but "only guidelines"; and that disregard
of these guidelines could not constitute a violation of fundamental rights.

We were not referred to any provision in the Transfer Circular, or any other
rule or regulation, suggesting that a school designated as "difficult" would
cease to be so in relation to a particular teacher, if for the time being she
was resident in the vicinity. Nor was it suggested that difficulty in securing
accommodation was the only criterion for determining whether a school was
"difficult". I hold that there was no justification for treating the
Petitioner as not having served in a "difficult" school, or otherwise
disregarding that service.

As for the assertion that KMV had ceased to be "difficult" in Janu­ary 1994,
all that need be said is that the Petitioner had served there for four years
prior to that ‑ when, admittedly, it was "difficult", and that the Respondents
failed to produce the relevant official order, circular or other document
which would have recorded any such decision, if there was one, that it was no
longer "difficult". On the evidence placed before us, KMV was, during the
entirety of the relevant period from 1990 to January 1995, a "difficult"
school. (I must note that two de­grees of "difficulty" appear to be recognised
‑ "difficult" and "very difficult"; while it is not clear how "difficult" KMV
was, there is no doubt that it was at least "difficult", and that is
sufficient for the purposes of this case).

It is unnecessary to decide whether paragraphs 7 and 8 of the Transfer
Circular embodied mere "guidelines", or mandatory requirements. We are not
concerned with contractual rights, but with the safeguards based on the Rule
**** of Law which Article 12 provide against the arbitrary and unreasonable
exercise of discretionary powers. Discretionary powers can never be treated as
absolute and unfettered-

**405**

unless there is compelling language; when reposed in public functionaries,
such powers are held in trust, to be used for the benefit of the public, and
for the purpose for which they have been conferred  not at the whim and fancy
of officials, for political advantage or personal gain. Education, as the
Transfer Circular emphasises, concerns the child; the power to transfer
teachers exists to promote the education of the child; a fair and reasonable
system of teacher transfers, implemented according to established principles
and criteria, will promote the education of the child; and the absence of such
a system will undermine good education.

The primary teachers, from among whom one or more had to be identified as
excess, constituted a class. Whether mandatory or not, there were established
guidelines for the identification of excess teachers. It was not only fair and
reasonable, but necessary ‑ if equal treatment and fair play were to be
ensured ‑ that there should be guidelines, dealing with matters such as those
to be exempted, and the order of priority for selection from among the rest.
The selection of a teacher who was exempted by those guidelines was clearly
arbitrary and un­reasonable. Selection should have been from among the others,
and even if all the others had also been found to be exempt ‑ and that is not
the Respondent's case ‑ nevertheless the Petitioner should not have been
selected, and the other procedure laid down in paragraph 8 of the Transfer
Circular should have been followed. The Petitioner's right to equality was
therefore violated ‑ she was identified as excess, although exempted, while
others who apparently were not exempt, were not identified as excess.

Learned Senior State Counsel contended that disregard of para­graph 7 was
immaterial, because paragraph 2 of the Transfer Circular superseded paras 7
and 8; because, he claimed, it was an exemption not only to the preceding part
of paragraph 2, but to the entirety of the Transfer Circular. I cannot presume
that the NWP Teacher Transfer Board took so much trouble to prescribe such
detailed guidelines, with the intention that they could so lightly be ignored.
The last provision of paragraph 2 appears to be only an exception to its
preceding provisions. However, it is unnecessary to decide that question,
because paragraph 2 does not deal with the powers of the Principal, and the
decision impugned in this case depends wholly on the validity of the

**406**

5th Respondent's act. When he was called upon to identify excess teachers, the
Transfer Circular required him to apply paragraphs 7 and 8; and, indeed, that
is what he was specifically asked to do, by the Circulars sent in March and
May 1995\. Even assuming that the 1st and/or the 2nd Respondent was entitled
to ignore paragraphs 7 and 9, the 5th Respondent, as Principal, could not
ignore them. His decision was therefore flawed. The 2nd Respondent did not
take an independent decision, after examining the facts; instead he simply
adopted the Principal's decision. It was therefore vitiated by that same flaw.
Likewise the 1st Respondent gave approval without independent consideration.
The entire process was thus flawed. Even if the 1st Respondent or 2nd
Respondent could have ignored paragraphs 7 and 8 ‑ which I doubt ‑ they would
have had to ascertain the facts (in regard to the service record and relevant
personal circumstances of each teacher) and determine, on a rational basis,
which teachers were excess; it was not claimed that anything of that kind had
been done.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner commented on other unsatisfactory features
of the entire process; the rapidity with which it was done; no reasons were
stated, and no notice was given; payment of travelling expenses was denied;
and the lack of date stamps or folio numbers on some of the documents
allegedly produced from the official files. It is unnecessary to probe those
matters because, anyway, the impugned decision cannot stand for other and more
substantial reasons.

Learned Senior State Counsel submitted that the Petitioner had not been
treated unfairly, because the Respondents had transferred her from KMV to AAKV
at her own request, and therefore sending her back to where her parental home
was, did not prejudice her. This is irrelevant. The Petitioner was entitled to
ask for a transfer, after five years in a "difficult" school. Having given her
that transfer, it was not open, four months later, to claim that transferring
her to AAKV was some sort of favour. That transfer did not in any way justify
or mitigate the subsequent transfer.

I hold that the Petitioner's fundamental right under Article 12(1) has been
violated by the 1st, 2nd and 5th Respondents, and quash the transfer order
dated 13.6.95. The Petitioner will be entitled to resume

**407**

work at AAKV immediately. She is entitled to compensation. In assessing the
compensation, I must note that malice or other improper motives have not been
proved. However, powers have been exercised with scant regard for the rights
of the individual, and so I cannot but recall that "it is excellent to have a
giant's power, but it is tyrannous to use it like a giant" _(Measure for
Measure,_ II,ii,107) especially when the ultimate victim is the nation's
children. It was not argued that the Provincial Administration, rather than
the State, was liable. Accordingly I direct the State to pay the Petitioner
compensation in a sum of Rs.15,000/‑. I further direct the 1st, 2nd and 5th
Respondents to pay her a sum of Rs.6,000/‑ as costs (at the rate of Rs.2,000/‑
each).

**DHEERARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_**Order of transfer dated 13.6.95 quashed.**_

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/27.html_  

