##  Young Men'S Buddhist Association v. Azeez and Another - SLR - 237, Vol 1
of 1995 [1995] LKSC 27; (1995) 1 Sri LR 237 (21 August 1995)

**237**

**THE YOUNG MEN'S BUDDHIST ASSOCIATION**   **  
v.**   **  
AZEEZ AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.,  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
RAMANATHAN, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 100/94

C.A. NO-643/81F  
D.C. KURUNEGALA NO. 4508/L

_Computation of time - Judgment delivered on a day other than the clay
originally fixed - Civil strife - Knowledge of date from newspaper report -
Lex non cogit ad impossibilia -Actus curiae neminem gravabit._

Where the judgment to appeal from which leave is sought was delivered on a day
other than that originally fixed owing to civil strife, knowledge of the date
of delivery, of judgment cannot be attributed to the exact date of a newspaper
report of the judgment. Reasonable time for verification of the report should
be allowed. In view of all the facts, including conditions of civil unrest
which prevailed in the country and the fact that the judgment was delivered on
a date other than the date which the court had fixed for delivery of judgment
no lapse, fault or delay

238

can be attributed to the plaintiff - appellant in filing the application for
leave to appeal. late, The principle lex non cogit ad, impossibilia would
apply in addition to the principle actus curiae neminem gravabit.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. State Graphite Corporation v. Fernando (1982) 2 Sri L. R. 590._  
_2\. United Plantation Workers' Union v. Superintendent Craig Estate 74 N.L.R.
499._

**PRELIMINARY** objection to entertainment of Appeal.

_A. K. Premadasa, P.C. with S. C. B. Walgampaya for appellant._  
_Faisz Musthapha, P.C. With G. L Geethananda for respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

August 21, 1995.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

This is an appeal to this Court with leave granted by the Court of Appeal. At
the hearing of the appeal Mr. Musthapha, President's Counsel for the
defendants-respondents raised a preliminary objection that the order of the
Court of Appeal granting leave to appeal is invalid and without jurisdiction
in that the application for leave to appeal was out of time. He submitted that
the application had been made after the expiry of the time for appeal.

In terms of Rule 21(1) of the Supreme Court Rules 1978 then in force, an
application for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court had to be made within 14
days of the judgment from which leave to appeal was sought.

The, plaintiff-appellant sued the defendants-respondents for a declaration of
title to the premises in suit and for ejectment and damages. The defendants-
respondents claimed that they were carrying on business in partnership under
the name and style of "Abdulla & Brothers"; and that they were tenants of the
premises. It was their position that the tenancy existed from 1940; rent
receipts had always been issued by the plaintiff-appellant in the name of the
partnership hence there was a tenancy with the partners for the time being.

239

The District Judge held that in the absence of clear evidence, there was no
tenancy, particularly for the reason that there cannot be a contract of
tenancy with a partnership, which is not a legal person. Accordingly, the
Court gave judgment for the plaintiff-appellant. This was reversed in appeal.
The Court of Appeal held that the contract of tenancy was with the individual
partners, for the time being. The Court allowed the appeal, set aside the
judgment of the trial Court and dismissed the plaintiff's action.

The appeal had been argued on 02.06.89 and judgment was reserved for 04.08.89
on which day, it was not delivered due to conditions of civil unrest. An
Emergency had been proclaimed on 20.06.89. It is not seriously argued that the
period that followed was not subject to disruption of normal civil life. In
this background the judgment was delivered only on 25.08.89, in the absence of
parties or their Counsel. The Court of Appeal record does not show that the
date of the delivery of judgment was notified to the parties or, their
registered Attorneys, though it is possible that it might have appeared in the
list for that day.

The plaintiff-appellant (the Y.M.B.A., Kurunegala) states that it became aware
of the judgment from a report in the "Ceylon Daily News" of 06/10/89 whereupon
they took steps to seek leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. The application
for leave was filed on 25.10.89.

Mr. Musthapha submits that even if time for leave to appeal has to be computed
from 06.10.89 when the plaintiff-respondent became aware of the judgment,
admittedly, the application for leave had been filed after, 14 days from this
date as well in that it has been filed on 25.10.89 when it should have been
filed on 20.10.89. Hence the said application was invalid and the Court of
Appeal had no jurisdiction to entertain it.

The Court of Appeal considered the objection and allowed leave to appeal on
the basis that the delay was "not unreasonable". Mr. Musthapha submits that
the. Court adopted a wrong principle in entertaining the application, which
was in breach of the mandatory time limit for appeal. He relied on State
_Graphite Corporation v._

240

_Fernando_ (1) as authority for the right of a party to object to an appeal on
the ground that the order of the Court of Appeal granting leave to appeal is
invalid. In that case this Court rejected the objection for the reason that
leave had been validly granted.

Mr. A. K. Premadasa, President's Counsel for the defendants respondents
submitted that once the "Court of Appeal grants leave to appeal, this Court
cannot hold that such leave was wrongly granted. In any event, he submitted
that in view of the unsettled conditions in the country the Court of Appeal
"was justified in excusing the delay. In view of the decision in the State
Graphite corporation case (Supra) I cannot agree with the first submission
made by Counsel. But the second submission made by him deserves consideration.

There is no doubt that the period of 14-days prescribed by Rule 21(1) is
mandatory time would normally run from the date of the judgement 25.08.89 Any
delay has to justified by The application of the principle " _lex non cogit ad
impossibilia_ " The principle "actus curies _neminem gravabit_ " also appears
to be applicable. I am of the view that in the instant case time began to run
after the plaintiff-appellant became aware of the judgement on seeing a news
report.

In United Plantation Workers' Union v. Superintendent Craig Estates (2) it was
held that the day on which the order of a Labour Tribunal is made (after
giving the parties notice of the particular day on which its order or decision
will be made) will determine the commencement of the appealable period of 14
days specified in s.31D(3)of the Industrial Disputes Act .In the absence of
such notice no time will run against a patty adversly affected by the order
till notice such order is given to him by the Secretary of the Tribunal ,as
required by Regulation 33 of industrial Disputes Regulations 1958 and an
appeal (filed within 14 days of such notice given by the Secretary) will
nevertheless be heard in accordance the principle "actus curiae neminem
gravabit".

Mr. Musthapha submits-that even assuming that in this case time run from
06.10.89 when the plaintiff-appellant became aware of the judgement from a
newspaper report, the application for Leave is out of

241

time as it was filed after 14 days from that date. I do not think that in such
a case we can be so strict in considering the excuse for the delay, as in the
case of an appeal from a Labour Tribunal order where the aggrieved party
officially receives a copy of the order from the Secretary of the tribunal.

Mr. Musthapha relies on the fact that the plaintiff-appellant had knowledge of
the judgment on 06.10.89 from a newspaper report. But a newspaper report is
not authentic. The plaintiff-appellant had to come down to Colombo and verify
it. He also had to obtain a certified copy of the judgment. This has to be
done on a working day. It is observed that the 7th and the 8th of October,
1989 immediately following the day on which the plaintiff-appellant read a
bout the judgment in a newspaper, are a Saturday and a Sunday. Those days,
must be excluded, in considering the excuse for the delay.

I am of the view that taking into consideration all the facts, including
conditions of civil unrest which prevailed in the country and the fact that he
judgment was delivered on a date other than, the date which the Court had
fixed for delivery of judgment, no lapse, fault or delay can be attributed to
the plaintiff-appellant in filling the application for leave to appeal on
25.10.95; hence the principle "lex non cogit ad impossibilia" would apply, in
addition to the principle actus curiae neminem gravabit"

For the foregoing reasons, the preliminary objection is rejected and the
appeal is set down for hearing on the merits. Costs will abide the final
decision of this case.

**G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.

  
**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Preliminary objections rejected._  
_Appeal set down for hearing._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/27.html_  

