##  Thiranagama v. Madihahewa, Commissioner-General of Labour and Others - SLR
- 238, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 27; (2003) 1 Sri LR 238 (27 September 2002)

**238**

**THIRANAGAMA** ****

**v.** ****

**MADIHAHEWA, COMMISSIONER-GENERAL OF LABOUR** ****

**AND OTHERS** ****

** **

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J., AND

WEERASURIYA, J.

SC (FR) APPLICATION No. 28/2002

27 SEPTEMBER, 2002.

_Fundamental Rights - Appointment of Labour Officer on results of a Limited
Competitive Examination - Reliance on irrational criteria in making
appointments -Article 12(1) of the Constitution._ __

239

The petitioner was an Inspector of Internal Trade, Grade II, in the Public
Service. He was permitted to sit a Limited Competitive Examination and
inter­viewed for selection as a Labour Officer in 1999. He obtained 115 marks.
Whilst the 10th, 11th and 12th respondents who also obtained 115 marks were
appointed as Labour Officers, Class II, the petitioner was not given an
appoint­ment. 13th to 25th respondents who had scored lesser marks were also
given appointments as Labour Officers. Class II. In 1994 also, one
Wickremanayake and in 1997 one Wijesinghe who were Inspectors of Internal
Trade had been appointed as Labour Officers on the results of a Limited
Competitive Examination.

The petitioner had the qualifications stipulated by the scheme of recruitment
in that he was a confirmed officer with 5 years of service and a graduate of a
rec­ognized university.

The Commissioner-General of Labour (the first respondent) urged that
accord­ing to the scheme of recruitment applicable to the petitioner, he had
to be an employee in the clerical or "allied grades" of the public service and
that only Inspectors of Trade, Grade I were within the expression "allied
grades", but not the petitioner who was a grade II officer. The evidence
showed that in the Sinhala version of the scheme in 1994, 1997 and the current
scheme which was used, the expression "allied grade" which appeared in the
English version was not there. Instead the Sinhala version referred to
parallel grade,

**Held :**

(1)          It was neither rational nor in accordance with the Sinhala
version of the scheme to have taken the view that Inspectors of Trade, Grade
II, were not employees in the clerical or "allied grades" in the Public
Service and that the petitioner was not eligible for appointment as a Labour
Officer.  


(2)          The petitioner's rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution
had been infringed.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_A.H.H. Perera_ for petitioner.

_Nihal Jayawardena,_ Senior State Counsel for Attorney General.

# Cur. adv. vult

**240**

February 11, 2003

**EDUSSURIYA, J.**

The Petitioner joined the Public Service as an Inspector of Internal Trade,
Grade II on 15/11/1991 and at the dates relevant to this application held the
same post.

The Petitioner states that pursuant to a notice published in Gazette No. 1144
dated 04/08/2002 (Document A) relating to a Competitive Examination to be held
for the recruitment of Labour Officers he applied to sit the Limited
Competitive Examination as he was qualified in terms of paragraph 3 (iv) (b)
of the notice.

Although the 9th Respondent Commissioner-General of Examination at first
rejected the Petitioner's application, on appeal the 9th Respondent permitted
the Petitioner to sit the examination. The Petitioner then sat the Limited
Competitive Examination on 21/01/2001, and that he was thereafter called for
an interview is not disputed. However on 24/12/2001 he had come to know that
he had not been selected for appointment although he had been ranked 84 with a
score of 115 marks, although the 10th, 11th and 12th Respondents who were of
equal rank with 115 marks had been appointed Labour Officers Class II.

The Petitioner complains that 13th to 25th Respondents who had scored lesser
marks than he had, also received appointments as Labour Officers Class II. On
inquiring (from the 1st Respondent) he had come to know that he had not been
appointed as he was not an officer who fell within the meaning of the term
Allied Grade as set out in Gazette Notification dated 04/08/2000.

The Petitioner states that in 1994 one K.P.A.S. Wickremanayake, and 1997 one
D.L.J. Wijesinghe who were Inspectors in the Department of Internal Trade had
been appointed Labour Officers on the results of the Limited Competitive
Examination.

The 1st Respondent by his affidavit of 14/05/2002 has stated that only
officers who were in confirmed permanent employment in the clerical or allied
grades in the Public Service or the Provincial Public Service for a period of
10 years or more were qualified for

241



recruitment and that upon request by the Secretary to the Ministry of Labour,
the Director of Establishment had clarified what was meant by Allied Services
and also referred to Gazette Notification dated 12/03/1999 (1R 2(a)). However,
the Gazette Notification call­ing for appointments in this instance required 5
years of service.

The 8th Respondent by his affidavit stated that in terms of the Gazette
Notification of 12/03/1999, Grade I Inspectors of Internal Trade and Commerce
were eligible but that the Petitioner being a Grade II Inspector was not
eligible.

Therefore the position taken up by the 1st and 8th Respondents is that the
Petitioner was not eligible to sit the Limited Competitive Examination
according to the latest recruitment proce­dure. It is also the position of the
1st Respondent that K.P.A.S. Wickremanayake and D.L.J. Wijesinghe were
appointed in accor­dance with the recruitment procedure that was in force at
the time they were appointed Labour Officers and that the present recruit­ment
was carried out in accordance with the new procedure intro­duced in 2000, and
that according to that recruitment procedure 1R1 of 4/5/2000, the Petitioner
was neither in the clerical service nor was he in an allied grade because only
Inspectors of Internal Trade Grade I fell within the term "allied grades" and
not Inspectors of Internal Trade Grade II.

Under paragraph 3 (iv)(b) candidates who completed 5 years of service in the
Government Service or the Local Government Service in a Clerical or Allied
Grade up to closing date of application and have been confirmed in service and
pos­sess a Degree from a recognized University are eligible to sit the Limited
Competitive Examination. The Petitioner holds a Degree from the University of
Colombo and has completed 5 years of ser­vice as an Inspector of Internal
Trade and has been confirmed in service. The only question to be decided is
whether he, an Inspector of Internal Trade belongs to a Grade which is Allied
to the Clerical Service.

It must be mentioned at the very outset that paragraph 5 II (b) of the Sinhala
Gazette of 4/8/2000 1R1 refers to those who are in Government Service or Local
Government Service in a clerical or parallel grade, and not Allied Grade as
set out in the English

242

Gazette of the same date. The Sinhala words used are "

The English Gazette Notification of 02/04/1993 calling for appointments for
posts of Labour Officers referred to "Government Clerical Service or Parallel
Service" and not Allied Service. So that, although the words "Allied Service"
are used in the English Gazette Notification in response to which the
Petitioner applied, in the Sinhala Gazette Notification the words used were as
did the Sinhala Gazette Notification of 02/04/1993 when Wickremanayake and
Wijesinghe who were Grade II Inspectors of Internal Trade were recruited as
Labour Officers.

Further, the Director of Establishment in his letter 1R2 of 3/1/2002 refers to
Parallel Grades.

Therefore Allied Grade must be understood to mean a Parallel Grade. Apart from
stating in his affidavit that Wickremanayake and Wijesinghe who were
Inspectors of Internal Trade as at the date of their recruitment as Labour
Officers were recruited according to the procedure pre­vailing at that time,
no other reasons have been given.



If an Inspector of Internal Trade Grade II fell within a grade parallel to
Clerks, Typists, Stenographers, Book Keepers, Store Keepers, Shroffs and
Interpreters in 1993 and 1997, I fail to see how it can be now said that an
Inspector of Internal Trade drawing the same salary (and in this case a
graduate confirmed in service and having 5 years of service) does not fall
within that category or class of persons.



In this connection I may also refer to the Gazette Notification dated 25th May
2001 (Exhibit I filed with the Counter Affidavit of the Petitioner) calling
for applications to Class II, Grade II of the Sri Lanka Administrative Service
in the North-East Province, 25th August 2001 at a salary of Rs.
97,500-15X2700-Rs. 138,000/-which is much higher than the salary scale of a
Labour Officer to which post the Petitioner applied in this instance, sets out
that Labour Officers as well as Inspectors of Internal Trade confirmed in
service with 5 years of service and a degree from a recognized University are
eligible to apply. So that an Inspector of Internal Trade was treated as being
on par with a Labour Officer.

243

In the face of all this material I cannot see how the Respondents could even
have sought to justify the position they have taken up.

In the cirumstances, I hold that the Petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed
under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution of this country has been violated and
direct the Public Service Commission and 1st Respondent to appoint the
Petitioner as a Labour Officer, Grade II in the Department of Labour on the
same terms and conditions as those Public Officers who were appointed Labour
Officers, Grade II with effect from 26th November 2001 with back wages,
allowances in excess of what he received during the said period from 26th
November 2001 and also direct the payment of compensation by the State and
costs in a sum of Rs. 50,000 within three months of today.

**FERNANDO, J.** **** \- I agree.

**WEERASURIYA, J.** - I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/27.html_  

