##  R.F. De Mel and Another v. Imaduwa, Labour Officer and Another - SLR -
308, Vol 1 of 2003 [2001] LKSC 28; (2003) 1 Sri LR 308 (3 April 2001)

308

R. F. DE MEL AND ANOTHER **  
v.** ****

**                  **** IMADUWA, LABOUR OFFICER AND ANOTHER** ****

SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA, C.J.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., AND

YAPA, J.

S.C. APPEAL CASE NO. 65/2001

H.C. (M.C.) APPEAL NO. 705/97

M.C. COLOMBO (FORT) CASE NO. 29798

28 NOVEMBER 2002 AND 14 JANUARY AND 3 FEBRUARY, 2003

_Industrial Dispute - Non compliance with an order of the Labour Tribunal
-Prosecution of the employer_ \- _Industrial Dispute Act, sections 40 and 43
-False representation by prosecutor to Magistrate that the Labour Tribunal_
_order had been complied with - Workman's right to representation in such
pro­_ _ceedings_ \- _Employer's duty to comply with order of Labour Tribunal._

309

The 2nd respondent ("the workman") had been employed by the appellant ("the
employer") for 22 years. He had been litigating for 14 years for enforce­ment
of an order by the Labour Tribunal for reinstatement and back wages. On
8.6.1988 he complained to the Labour Tribunal that the employer had
wrong­fully terminated his services. On 26.6.1991, parties settled the dispute
before the Tribunal, the employer agreeing to reinstate the workman, without a
break in service, with effect from 1.7.1991, and to pay six months back wages
at the rate of Rs. 1200/- per month. Although the workman reported for work on
1.7.1991 and after the receipt of the formal order of the Tribunal dated
4.7.1991 the employer failed to reinstate him or to pay back wages.
Consequently, the 1st respondent ("the Labour Officer") prosecuted the
employer before the Magistrate under section 40(1 )(e) read with section
43(1), (2) and (4) of the Industrial Disputes Act.



On 8.6.1994, the Magistrate discharged the employer on a report by the Labour
Officer that the settlement order had been complied with. The workman
appearing by counsel denied any compliance but the Magistrate ruled that the
workman had no right of representation. On an appeal by the workman the High
Court set aside the order of the Magistrate and directed an adjudication
before another Magistrate. At the fresh inquiry the Magistrate held that the
employer had failed to comply with the Order of the Labour Tribunal and
ordered reinstatement of the workman with effect from 15.1.1997 and to pay him
back wages at the rate of Rs. 1250/- per month from 1.7.1991.



The evidence showed that the employer had attempted to "settle" the dispute by
depositing Rs. 55,000/- with the Assistant Commissioner of Labour. The workman
who was represented by a lawyer demanded an additional sum of Rs. 30,000/-.

**Held :**  


1.                     Although the format order of the Labour Tribunal incorporating the set­tlement was dated 4.7.1991, the employer had undertaken to reinstate the workman with effect from 1.7.1991 and to pay back wages for six months. The employer had failed to comply with that settlement.  


2.                     A reference in the charge to the failure to comply with the order dated 4.7.1991 was not raised as an objection at the prosecution and it did not cause prejudice to the employer. Hence that defect was curable under sec­tion 166 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act. It was not an objection that could be raised at the stage of the appeal.  


3.                     In the absence of an order made by the Court, the employer was not enti­tled to settle the dispute by unilaterally depositing money with the Assistant Commissioner of Labour.  


4.          There is no basis to vary the decision of the High Court and the Magistrate made in the fresh case.

310

5\. _(Obiter)_ In any event, a sum of Rs. 55,000/- was highly inadequate as
compensation to a workman who had put in 22 year of service and dis­missed
from work for no apparent reason.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court

_Harsha Soza_ for appellants

_Sanath Weerasinghe_ for 2nd respondent (workman)

_Viveka Siriwardene, De Silva,_ State Counsel for 1st respondent (the Labour
Officer)

 Cur. adv. vult





April 01,2003

** **

**HECTOR YAPA, J.** ****

** **

The aggrieved party-respondent (hereinafter after referred to as the workman)
was employed as a pump attendant at the petrol filling station run by the
accused appellants (hereinafter referred to as the appellants) under the name
C.F. de Mel & Sons, No. 161, Parsons Road, Colombo 2. On 8th June 1988 the
workman filed an application in the Labour Tribunal alleging that his services
were wrongfully terminated by the appellants and sought reinstatement with
back wages. When this application came up for inquiry on 28.06.1991 before the
Labour Tribunal the parties sought to settle the dispute. The terms of
settlement were that the appellants agreed to reinstate the workman without a
break in service with effect from 01.07.1991 and to pay him six months back
wages at the rate of Rs. 1,250/- per month. The settlement order was entered
accordingly by the Labour Tribunal. (Vide P4).



In terms of the settlement order the workman had reported for work on
01.07.1991, but the appellants had requested him to report for work upon the
receipt of the settlement order. However, at the request of the workman a
letter was issued by the appellants stating that he reported for work on
01.07.1991 and that he should report for work only after the receipt of the
settlement order. (Vide P7). The workman took up the position that after the
receipt of the settlement order he reported for work on several occasions, but
he was not



311



 given work. Thereafter he had complained to the Commissioner of Labour that
the settlement order had not been complied with. Accordingly, the proceedings
were instituted in the Magistrate's Court of Colombo (Fort) against the
appellants by the complainant respon­dent in terms of section 40 (1) (q), an
offence punishable in Terms of section 43 (1) (2) & (4) of the Industrial
Disputes Act, No. 43 of 1950 as amended.



When the said case filed against the appellants came up for inquiry before the
learned Magistrate on 14.07.1993, time had been obtained by the appellants
stating that a settlement was possible. However, the parties had not been able
to reach a settlement. Thereafter it would appear that on 13.10.1993 the
Magistrate had ordered that all documents and other evidence relating to the
charge be submitted to Court. Surprisingly when the case came up for inquiry
before the Magistrate on 08.06.1994, the Labour Officer purporting to act on
behalf of the Commissioner of Labour informed the Magistrate that the
settlement order, meaning the settlement reached on 28.06.1991 had been
complied with. At that stage the counsel who appeared for the workman had
indicat­ed to Court that there had been no such compliance with the said
order. The learned Magistrate however disallowed the intervention of the
workman or his counsel stating that the case had been insti­tuted by the
Commissioner of Labour and therefore they had no right of representation in
the case. Accordingly on 08.06.1994 the Magistrate having accepted the
statement of the Labour Officer that there had been compliance with the
settlement order discharged the appellants.



Thereafter, the workman moved the High Court, Colombo in revision against the
said order of discharge. The learned High Court Judge after hearing the
revision application by her order dated 01.03.1995 set aside the said order of
discharge dated 03.06.1994, stating that the failure to do so would result in
a mis­carriage of justice. She also remitted the case for re-adjudication
before another Magistrate. The new Magistrate after inquiry by his order dated
31.12.1996 held that the appellants have deliberately failed to comply with
the said settlement order of the Labour Tribunal dated 28.06.1991 and directed
the appellants to reinstate the workman with effect from 15.01.1997 and to pay
him his back-

312



wages at the rate of Rs. 1250/- per month from 01.07.1991. The appellants
appealed to the High Court against the said order dated 31.12.1996 and the
learned High Court Judge after hearing the appeal by his order dated
03.04.2001 dismissed the said appeal.



The appellants who were aggrieved by the said order of the High Court Judge
moved for special leave to appeal and this Court granted leave to appeal on
the question "has the aggrieved party respondent (workman) by his conduct
frustrated the efforts of the accused appellants petitioners (appellants) in
complying with the order of the Labour Tribunal?"



At the hearing, learned counsel for the appellants submitted that the workman
had not reported for work in terms of the settle­ment order even though he had
been specifically requested to do so. Besides the appellants had given in
writing on 01.07.1991 (P7) that they would comply with the said settlement
order once the said order of the Labour Tribunal was received. However, the
counsel argued that the workman had not taken any action in this regard to
resume work after the receipt of the settlement order. Further it was pointed
out that after the receipt of the settlement order a letter dated 23.07.1991
had been written to the workman requesting him to report for work (vide V3)
and in addition the failure of the work­man to report for work was even
brought to the notice of the Commissioner of Labour on 07.02.1992 (vide V5).
Learned coun­sel therefore contended that the workman had deliberately
frustrat­ed the endeavour of the appellants to comply with the said
settle­ment order of the Labour Tribunal.



It is very clear from the settlement entered into by the parties before the
Labour Tribunal on 28.06.1991, that the appellants had to comply with two
conditions. First the appellants had to reinstate the workman without a break
in service with effect from 01.07.1991. Secondly they had to pay six months
back wages at the rate of Rs. 1250.00 per month. Therefore as submitted by
learned counsel for the workman, when he (workman) reported for work on
01.07.1991 it was incumbent on the part of the appellants to reinstate the
work­man by giving him employment. The request they made to the workman to
report for work after the receipt of the settlement order was an additional
condition that was not there in the settlement entered into by the parties
before the Labour Tribunal on

313



28,06.1991. In other words what the appellants had done by plac­ing this
additional condition on the workman was to dodge the issue of reinstatement by
giving the excuse that they should wait until the settlement order was
received. This was not the way to give effect to a settlement entered into by
the appellants before the President of the Labour Tribunal. Besides the date
for reinstatement of the workman was clear and unambiguous. Further it would
appear that on 28.06.1991, the appellants agreed to reinstate the workman on
01.07.1991, knowing very well that the settlement order would not reach the
parties by 01.07.1991 and it is now a known fact that the President of the
Labour Tribunal had signed the settlement order only on 04.07.1991. It is well
to remember that in view of the set­tlement entered into by the parties on
28.06.1991, the workman had to be reinstated on 01.07.1991, on his reporting
for work. There was no requirement for the workman to meet the appellants
there­after begging for his job, even though from the available evidence it is
very-clear that the workman had done so. Hence, the conduct of the appellants
in this instance was a clear violation of the settle­ment entered into by the
parties on 28.06.1991. Further, the posi­tion taken up by the appellants at
the hearing, that they waited for the settlement order to be sure of its
contents is an unacceptable proposition, in view of their undertaking before
the Labour Tribunal to reinstate the workman on 01.07.1991.



The only reasonable explanation for their failure to reinstate the workman on
01.07.1991 and even thereafter appears to be that they were not genuinely
interested in reinstating the workman despite their undertaking. This
conclusion finds support from the evidence of the workman who stated that even
after the receipt of the settlement order his request for reinstatement was
refused by the appellant. It was thereafter that the workman had complained to
the Bambalapitiya Police on 22.07.1991 (vide P8) and to the Commissioner of
Labour on 23.07.1991 and 13.08.1991 (vide P 11 & P 12) against the appellants.



Much has been said on behalf of the appellants about the failure of the
workman to mention in his police complaint that he met the appellants seeking
reinstatement after the receipt of the settlement order. It is to be noted
that the Police complaint had been made by the workman on 22.07.1991 for his
future protection.

314



Further he has stated there that no inquiry was necessary Therefore the
failure to mention in the Police statement the dates he met the appellants
seeking reinstatement after 01.07.1991 would not matter. The workman had given
evidence that he met the appellants several times after 01.07.1991 and that he
did not receive the alleged letter dated 23.07.1991 (V3) sent by the
appel­lants requesting him to report for work. Appellants had failed to prove
the sending of his letter (V3) under registered cover. But it is important to
note that, consequent to the two complaints made to the Commissioner of
Labour, (P11 & P12) he had taken action to prosecute the appellants.



Another submission made on behalf of the appellants was that, having regard to
the acceptance of Rs. 55,000/- from the appellants by the Labour Department on
01.10.1993, the com­plainant respondent had no right to proceed with this
prosecution against the appellants. The tenor of this argument was that this
sum of Rs. 55,000/- was deposited with the Assistant Commissioner of Labour in
full and final settlement of this case with the workman and therefore while
this sum of Rs. 55,000/- was retained by the Commissioner of Labour, he was
precluded from prosecuting the appellants. It is to be noted here that this
deposit of Rs. 55,000/- by the appellants with the Assistant Commissioner of
Labour on 01.10.1993 was not made consequent to any order of Court. Further it
would appear from the proceedings that the work­man was consistently
requesting for reinstatement. But for some unknown reason the appellants were
taking the initiative of sug­gesting a pecuniary settlement as an alternative
to reinstatement. This position is made clear from the proceedings before the
Magistrate's Court on 14.07.1993. After the plaint had been filed and when the
case was taken up on 14.07.1993 the appellants made an application to the
Magistrate and sought three months time stating that a settlement was
possible. If the appellants were interested in reinstating the workman they
could have indicated to court even on that day. But they were keen to pay some
money in lieu of reinstatement. However no settlement was possible as the
compensation offered by the appellant was not acceptable to the workman. From
the evidence of the Labour Officer Herath, this position is made very clear.
It was the evidence of this witness



315

  
Herath that on 02.09.1993 appellants and the workman failed to reach a
settlement. However thereafter the appellants had sent a sum of Rs. 55,000/-
to the Assistant Commissioner of Labour, Colombo South on 01.10.1993. As a
result he (witness Herath) summoned the workman, on 07.10.1993 and discussed
with him a possible settlement. At that stage the workman who was repre­sented
by a lawyer wanted a payment of Rs. 30,000/- in addition to the Rs. 55,000/-
that was offered by the appellants. Any way the Labour Officer Herath in his
evidence clearly stated that at no stage he had requested the appellants to
deposit a sum of Rs. 55,000/-with the Labour Department. His inquiry notes
marked P14 corrob­orate this position. Therefore the payment of Rs, 55,000/-
was a unilateral act on the part of the appellants without any direction from
the Labour Department. Hence the argument that a sum of Rs. 55,000/- had been
deposited with the Commissioner of Labour in settlement of this case and the
Commissioner of Labour was pre­cluded from prosecuting the appellants has no
substance or merit. Further it is also appropriate to mention here that at
every stage the workman was demanding reinstatement. However when the
appel­lants were trying to force a pecuniary settlement on the workman, he had
to respond and therefore he demanded two years salary i.e. Rs. 30,000/- and
Rs. 55,000/- offered by the appellants. Surely a sum of Rs. 55,000/- was
highly inadequate as compensation to a workman who had put in 22 years of
service and dismissed from work for no apparent reason. It is not out of place
to mention here the fact that the material available in this case discloses a
sad tale of a workman who had been harassed by the appellants at every turn
since his dismissal. He had been litigating for 14 long years. To say that the
workman was motivated by a desire to extract as much money as he could from
the appellants would be a comment very unjustifiable in the circumstances of
this case.



The counsel for the appellants also made the submission that the charge
against the appellants in the Magistrate's Court was defective in that it
referred to an order dated 04.07.1991 which had to be implemented on
01.07.1991. Regard to this objection learned counsel for the workman submitted
that this objection was never taken up before the Magistrate's Court. It has
been raised here for the first time. Any objection to a charge should be taken
first before the original court and not at a later stage. Hence it was
contended

316



that the appellants were precluded from raising this objection to the charge
at this stage. It is seen that the main allegation in the charge against the
appellants was their failure to reinstate the workman on 01,07.1991. Further
that in terms of the settlement before the Labour Tribunal on 28.06.1991, the
appellants had agreed to rein­state the workman on 01.07.1991. However, the
formal order incor­porating the terms of settlement was signed by the
President of the Labour Tribunal on 04.07.1991 and therefore reference had to
be made to the said order in the charge. What the appellants had to do was to
reinstate the workman on 01.07.1991 in terms of the set­tlement entered into
on 28.06.1991. The reference to the order dated 04.07.1991 in the charge did
not in any way mislead or prej­udiced the appellants as they knew very well
the terms of settle­ment entered into on 28.06.1991. It may be observed that
section 166 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979 requires
that an error or defect in the charge to be material, the accused had to be
misled by such error or omission. The defect referred to in the charge in this
instance was not a material error so as to cause any prejudice to the
appellants resulting in a failure of justice. The charge the appellants had to
meet was very clear to them, so that they took no objection to it in the
Magistrate's Court. Hence, there appears to be no merit in this objection,
which has been taken up so late in the day.



In view of the material referred to above, it is very clear from the conduct
of the appellants that they had refused to reinstate the workman on 01.07.1991
or even thereafter. Under these circum­stances the question of law namely, has
the aggrieved party respondent (workman) by his conduct frustrated the affords
of the accused appellants petitioners (appellants) in complying with the order
of the Labour Tribunal has to be answered in the negative.



Therefore in my view there is no basis to vary the decision of the learned
High Court Judge and the Magistrate. Accordingly the appeal is dismissed with
costs.

**S.N. SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** -                I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/28.html_  

