##  Liyanapathirana and Another v. Peoples Bank and Others - SLR - 358, Vol 1
of 1993 [1991] LKSC 28; (1993) 1 Sri LR 358 (4 October 1991)

**358**

**LIYANAPATHIRANA AND ANOTHER  
v.** **  
PEOPLES BANK AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
RAMANATHAN, J. AND  
PERERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 143/91.  
SEPTEMBER 09 AND MARCH 11, 1993.

_     Fundamental Rights - Scheme of Promotion - Differentiation by reference
to classes - Article 12(1) of the Constitution._

The petitioners were employees of the first respondent Bank in the clerical
grade. On the basis of Staff Circular No. 216/88 certain promotions numbering
228 were made. Later by administration Circular No. 15/90 dated 09.03.90
promotions on ethnic rations were provided for and on this basis 29 promotions
were made. If these 29 employees were promoted on the basis of Circular 216/88
446 employees in all including the two petitioners would have qualified for
promotion. But the two petitioners did not have recourse to their legal remedy
at that time (although the Supreme Court had pronounced that promotions on
ethnic rations contavened Article 12(1) and (2)).

Thereafter Circular No. 4005191 dated 5.9.91 was issued calling for
applications for promotion to Grade 111, Class 2 from officers who had
completed one year of service after confirmation in Grade III, Class 3. While
the 29 officers who had been promoted on the ethnic ratio could have satisfied
this condition, the petitioners were not qualified.

**Held**

The petitioners had ceased to be in the same class as the 29 promoted
employees. Differentiation by reference to the classes to which the employees
belonged and service therein is neither irrational nor unintelligible. There
is no violation of Article 12(1).

359

**Case referred to**

_1\. Ramupillai v. Minister of Public Administration, (1991) 1 Sri LR 11._

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights on the
ground of discrimination.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera with Lakshman Perera and J. C. Weliamuna for
petitioners._  
_  
A. S. M. Perera, D.C.G. for respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

April 01, 1993.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

In 1988 the two Petitioners were employees of the 1st Respondent in the
Clerical Grade. By Staff Circular No. 216/88, applications were invited, from
employees in the Clerical and Stenographers Grade, for promotions for 228
vacancies in Grade III class 3 (which were Staff Grade posts); of these
vacancies, 30% (68) were to be filled on seniority, and the balance 70% (160)
on merit, on the results of a written job test or competitive examination. On
22.5.88 that written examination was held, and the results were released on
31.1.89; letters of appointment dated 23.2.90 were issued to the first 160 in
order of merit, according to the marks obtained; these promotions were
effective from 22.5.88, and are not in any way questioned by the Petitioners.

Public Administration Circular No. 15/90 dated 9.3.90 was then issued,
providing for promotions on ethnic ratios; on that basis letters of
appointment dated 21.5.90 were issued to 29 others (17 Tamil and 12 Muslim
employees), making supernumerary appointments; had additional or supernumerary
appointments been made on the basis of merit alone, as disclosed by the marks
obtained, another 466 employees (including the two Petitioners) should also
have been promoted. However these 29 promotions were not challenged by the
Petitioners or anyone else, either immediately or in early 1991 after the
decision in _Ramupillai v. Minister of Public Administration_ (1), (which held
that promotions on ethnic ratios were contrary to Article 12 (1) and (2). The
Petitioners do not claim that they should now be promoted to Grade III class
3.

360

Thereafter by the 1st Respondent's Circular No. 4005/91 dated 5.9.91
applications were called, from officers in Grade III class 3, for promotions
for 280 vacancies in Grade III class 2; of these vacancies, 30% (84) were to
be filled on seniority, and the balance 70% (196) on merit, on the results of
a written competitive examination. In respect of the latter category, various
alternative qualifications were prescribed, but one essential condition was
that candidates should have completed one year of service after confirmation
in Grade III class 3. Obviously, the Petitioners and the rest of the aforesaid
466 employees did not satisfy, and could not have satisfied, that condition.

The Petitioners then made this application under Article 126 on 4.10.91; their
case is that the 29 employees promoted to Grade III class 3, on ethnic ratios
in accordance with the invalid Public Administration Circular, constituted one
class together with the aforesaid 466 employees who should have been treated
equally and promoted at the same time; that the 1st Respondent should have,
administratively, treated them as belonging to one class, although no
application had been made under Article 126 for a judicial decision to that
effect; that consequently their lack of one essential qualification was due to
no lapse or default on their part; that such ineligibility was the result of
discrimination in violation of Article 12(1); and that their exclusion from
the category of persons eligible to apply for promotion in terms of Circular
No. 4005/91 was also in violation of Article 12(1). On that basis, the
Petitioners prayed for a declaration, and for an order directing the 1st
Respondent to consider the Petitioners as being eligible for promotion to
Grade III class 2.

After this matter was argued on 9.9.92, it was referred to the Commissioner
for the Elimination of Discrimination and Monitoring of Human Rights, for
mediation and conciliation, but the parties were unable to arrive at a
settlement. It seems to me that the 1st Respondent ought to have taken
whatever action was possible to remedy the injustices caused by the
unconstitutional promotion of 29 employees by reference to ethnic quotas.
However, the Petitioners themselves did not have recourse to their legal
remedy to vindicate their fundamental right. Consequently, the factual
position now is that since May 1990 the Petitioners (and the rest of the
aforesaid 466 employees) had ceased to be in the same class as these 29
employees.

361

Thus, when Circular No. 4005/91 was issued more than one year later, there
were two distinct classes, and not one class. The 29 employees in Grade III
class 3 probably had by then one year of confirmed service in Grade III class
3, while the Petitioners did not. Differentiation by reference to the classes
to which they belonged, and service therein, was neither irrational nor
unintelligible. There has been no violation of Article 12 (1).

The Petitioners' application has therefore to be dismissed, but, in all the
circumstances, without costs.

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.

  
**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/28.html_  

