##  Musthapa Thamby Lebbe v. Ruwanpathirana - SLR - 186, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988]
LKSC 28; (1988) 1 Sri LR 186 (7 March 1988)

**

186

MUSTHAPA THAMBY LEBBE  
v.  
RUWANPATHIRANA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
RANASINGHE C.J., TAMBIAH J. AND SENEVIRATNE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 17/86.  
CA/LA (SC) No: 3/86.  
C.A. APPEAL No. 95/81(F).  
D. C. GAMPOLA 709/L.  
MARCH 07, 1988.

_

Landlord and tenant-Nuisance and deterioration' of premises by acts of neglect
or default of the tenant-Demolition of bucket latrine and replacement by
construction of a water-sealed latrine-Soakage pit built partly on rented
premises and partly on premises of adjoining owner-S. 22 (1) (d) of Rent Act
No. 7 of 1972.

_

To obtain ejectment on the ground of deterioration of the premises as
contemplated in s. 22(1)(d) of the Rent Act the acts complained of must cause
some damage to the premises let and thereby worsen its condition. Demolition
of the bucket' latrine and construction of a water-sealed latrine cannot be
said to cause a deterioration of the condition of the premises let. What-the
tenant did was to effect a useful improvement which would serve a useful
purpose and this rendered the property more valuable.

**

Cases referred to :

**_

1 W: A.: S. de Silva v. L. Gooneratne Modem Law Reports Vol. 1 p. 6

2\. De Alwis v. Wijewardena (1958) ;59 NLR 36.

3\. De Zoysa v. De Silva (1972) 73 NLR 576.

_**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal reported in [1986] 1 Sri LR
201.

**187**

_

P. A, D. Samarasekera P.C. with Faisz Musthapa P.C. and G. L. Geethanmda for
plaintiff-appellant-appellant.

lkram Mohamed with W Rajapakse and.' Miss. Janaki de ` Silva for defendant-
respondent-respondent.

_

The plaintiff-appellant sought to eject the defendant-respondent from premises
bearing Assessment No. 3, Hill Road, Nawalapitiya, on the two- grounds set out
in s. 22(1)(d) of the Rent Act, No. 7 of 1972, vii, that the tenant had been
guilty of conduct which is, a nuisance to the adjoining occupier and that the
condition of the premises has, in the opinion of the Court, deteriorated owing
to acts committed by or to the neglect or default of the tenant.

It was common ground that a bucket latrine was part of the rented premises and
that the defendant-respondent had, without the prior approval of the
plaintiff-appellant, demolished the bucket latrine and .constructed in its
place a water-sealed latrine at his own expense. The soakage pit of the new
latrine was constructed partly on the rented premises and partly on the
premises of the adjoining owner.

The learned trial Judge held against the plaintiff-appellant and dismissed his
action, and the Court of Appeal tog affirmed the findings of the learned trial
Judge and dismissed the appeal but set aside the compensation awarded to the
defendant-respondent for constructing the new latrine.

At the hearing before us, learned President's Counsel for the plaintiff-
appellant confined his submissions to the second ground of ejectment only.

Learned President's Counsel submitted to us that the tenant took the house on
rent with the bucket latrine, and cited a passage from Wille's "Landlord and
Tenant in South Africa", (4th Edn. p. 228)

"It is the duty of the tenant to take proper care of the leased property, to
use, it for the purpose for which it was let and for no

**188**

other purpose, and, on the termination of the lease, to restore the property
to the landlord in the same condition in' which it 'was delivered to him,
reasonable wear and tear excepted. It follows that the tenant must not abandon
or neglect the property, or misuse, injure: or alter it in any way, and a
fortiori he may not destroy it, or appropriate the substance of the property."

Learned President's Counsel invited us to view this ground set out in s. 22(1)
(d) in the light of the above common law obligation of the lessee, and viewed
in that light, he submitted, that if a tenant demolishes any part of the
rented premises without the permission of the landlord, the very act of
demolition tantamounted to deterioration of the premises within the meaning of
s. 22(1) (d) of the Rent Act" of 1972.

Leaned President's Counsel further submitted that if such interpretation was
of given, the tenant would have a free hand, without the permission of the
landlord, to replace the cement floor by a teak floor, the brick` walls by
marble' walls and even to demolish the entire structure and build a new modern
luxury house, and soon.

As regards' this last submission, these are extreme hypothetical situations
that do not call for a decision in this case: For the moment, I need only say
this. If such a generous tenant could be found, the landlord must consider
himself very fortunate and in the words- of Shakespeare I would advise the
landlord to "grapple him to: his soul with hoops of steel".-

In W. A. S. de Silva v. L. Gooneratne, (1) the landlord `sought to eject his
tenant on the ground that "wilful damage" was caused to the premises by the
tenant within the meaning of s. 12A (1) (d) of the Rent Act as amended by Acts
Nos. -10" of 1961 and 12 of 1966\. The tenant had removed the round tiles from
the roof of the' premises and replaced them with galvanised sheets.  -

Learned Counsel for the landlord in that case submitted, as in this case, that
the landlord was entitled to have his roof in the condition in which it was
let out to the tenant ; that the very act of removing the round tiles without
the permission of the landlord constituted "wilful damage'' within the meaning
of the section and the fact that later the roof was covered with galvanized
sheets was immaterial:

**189**

Rejecting this submission Udalagama, J. went on to consider whether the act
complained of constituted. "wilful damage" to the premises let Udalagama J.
said (p.9)-

"The argument; of Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant that the removal ;of the
tiles without the permission of the landlord, constituted "wilful, damage" and
the fact that later the roof was covered With galvanized- sheets, was
immaterial, does not in our view stand to reason. If for' example, instead of
replacing the tiles with galvanized sheets, some of the damaged tiles were
removed and replaced with good tiles of similar shape and quality; could it be
said that he removal of the damaged tiles, constituted "wilful damage"?, Or
where a damaged door is removed and a new one is put in its place or the, same
door is repaired and put back, could it be said that he act-of removal of the
door constituted "wilful damage to the premises? The only penalty that would
attach in such an event, is that the tenant will not be able to recover the
cost of, the repairs, if no notice had been given to the plaintiff, before the
repairs were effected............ The act complained of has not changed the
nature or character of the property let in any manner. If at all in our view,
it has enhanced the purpose for which it was let."

In De Alwis v. Wijewardena (2), the ejectment of the tenant was sought under
the proviso (d) to s. 13 (1) of the Rent Act 6f-1 948-a ground identical with
that in this case. The evidence disclosed that substantial damage was caused
to the floor upstairs due to the acts and' neglect of the tenant` and of
persons lodging with her. The damage was the result of a 'Jaffna hearth" being
used at that place. The wooden floor was scorched over an area of about 2' x
2' and was burnt right through in one place in this area. Gunasekera J. said,
(p. 39)-

"There was permanent and substantial change for the worse in the condition of
the floor boards. In the learned Commissioner's opinion, this change amounted
to a deterioration of the condition of the dwelling house. I am unable to say
that there was -no basis for that view"

In De Zoysa v. De: Silva (3), an action for ejectment on the same ground, the
tenant deliberately demolished the boundary wall. of the premises: without the
landlord's consent: Thamotheram, J: said:

**190**

"There is evidence that in addition to the damage to the. boundary wall, there
was some damage to the premises by the demolition, such as the exposure of a
drain pipe, erosion of the earth and the weakening of the portion of the
boundary, wall which also served as a retention wall. There is no doubt that a
boundary wall is part of the premises. I cannot say that the learned
Commissioner was wrong in holding on the above facts that there had been
deterioration (made worse) of the premises by the demolition of the boundary
wall."

These last two cases, therefore, establish- that to successfully maintain an
action for ejectment on this ground, the acts complained of must cause some
damage to the premises let and thereby worsen its condition.

The Rent Laws were intended to benefit the tenant and to put the tenant in a
much more' secure position in regard to his tenancy. The landlord's common law
rights have now been curtailed. The tenancy cannot now be determined by the
landlord merely giving a proper notice to quit. Ejectment can only-be sought
on grounds specified in the statute.

The short point we have to decide in this case is whether the demolition of
the bucket-latrine and the construction of a water-sealed latrine by the
defendant-respondent caused a deterioration of the condition of the premises
let. Under the. Rent Act of 1972, there is provision for an increase of rent
where the landlord has incurred expenditure "on the improvement or structural
alteration of the premises" (s. 5 (b)). There is a similar provision in the
corresponding English. Statute Dealing with the matter, Megarry in his "Rent
Acts' (10th Edn., Vol. 1; p. 327) cites the following as "Improvements". The
term 'improvements' has been held to include matters such as replacing a
detached earth closet by a built-on water closet, substituting an efficient
sanitary system for an antiquated system etc."

"A necessary improvement is -one which is necessary, for the protection or
preservation of the leased property. The other forms of. improvements are
divided by authorities into Useful improvements, namely, those which improve
the property or add to its value, and luxurious improvements, such as
statutary."

(Wille, Landlord and Tenant in South Africa", 4th Edn. p. 265).

**191**

It seems to me that what the defendant-respondent has done was to effect a
useful improvement which would serve a 'useful purpose and has rendered the
property snore valuable. If this was so, I fail to understand, how the acts
complained of could have caused` a deterioration of the condition of the
premises let; on the contrary, the new water-sealed latrine has' improved the
condition, of the premises let and enhanced its value. The question whether
this was constructed with or without the consent of the, landlord can only
affect the tenant's claim for compensation for the improvement made.

I fail to see how a construction; which, if made by the landlord, would amount
to an improvement, could, on the other hand, if made by the tenant, cause a
deterioration of the premises:

I have no difficulty in holding that the acts complained of, far from causing-
a deterioration (i.e. worsening) of the, condition of the premises let;
had-.improved the condition of the premises.

I affirm the finding of the Court of Appeal on the matter and dismiss the
appeal with costs.

**

RANASINGHE, C.J**., - I agree.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J**. - I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/28.html_  

