##  Gracia Catherine v. Wijegunawardene - SLR - 190, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986] LKSC
28; (1986) 2 Sri LR 190 (7 May 1986)

**

190

GRACIA CATHERINE  
V.  
WIJEGUNAWARDENE

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C. J., COLIN-THOME, J. AND ATUKORALE, J.  
S.C. No. 5/85.  
C.A. No. 271/77(F).  
D.C. GAMPAHA 18663/D.  
SEPTEMBER 3, 4 AND 5. 1985.

_

Matrimonial actions-Customary marriage-Marriage according to Roman Catholic.
Rites in Church without registration under the General Marriages Ordinance
(Marriage Registration Ordinance)-is it equivalent to marriage according to
Roman Catholic custom?-S 34 of the General Marriages Ordinance (Marriage
Registration Ordinance).

_

A marriage solemnised according to the rules, customs rites and ceremonies of
the Roman Catholic Church may serve two purposes-(1) to satisfy the
requirements of s, 34 (1) of the Marriage Registration Ordinance as
preliminary to registration. of the marriage under s.34(2) and (3), and (2)
since these rules, customs, rites and ceremonies of the church have been
absorbed into the web of catholic customary marriage, to constitute a
customary marriage.'

A marriage solemnised according, to the customs, rites and ceremonies of the
Roman Catholic Church has legal validity irrespective of legal registration
thereof and, is regarded as a, lawful marriage on the basis of it being a
customary marriage recognised in law.

Although the plaintiff was a Buddhist, he intended to marry in the Church, got
permission from the Catholic Bishop to marry the defendant and voluntarily
chose to go through the catholic ceremonies and subsequently lived with the
defendant as husband and wife. He is therefore bound by the marriage which
took place according to the customary rites, of the church. The onus was on
the plaintiff to show that the requisites of a Catholic customary marriage
were not performed and this burden he has failed to discharge.

**

Cases referred to :

** _(!) Gunaretne v. Punchihamy-(1912) 15 NLR 501.

(2) Sopia Hamine v. Appuhamy-(1922) 23 NLR 353.

(3) Aronegary v Vaigalie-(1881) 2 NLR 322 P. C.

(4) Thiagaraja v. Kurukkal-(1923) 25 NLR 69

(5) Poopalaratnam v. Sabapathy-(1921) 2 C.L. Rec. 210.

(6) Chellappah v. Kandasamy-(1915) C.W.R. 104.

(7) Thiagarajah v. Karthigesu-(1966) 69 NLR 73.

(8) Nicholas de Silva v. Shaik Ali-(1895) 1 NLR 229.

_

**191**

**

APPEAL** from the judgment of the Appeal Court reported in [1984] 2 SLR 381.

_

Jacolyn Seneviratne with G. G. Arulpragasam, Lakshman Perera and Demeyan de
Silva _ for defendant-appellant.

_

Dr. Colvin R. de Silva with D. R. P Gunatillake and Miss Saumya de Silva _ for
plaintiff-respondent.

May 7, 1986. **  
SHARVANANDA, C. J.

** ****

By his plaint dated 21.11.1975, the plaintiff-respondent instituted this
action against the defendant-appellant praying for a declaration that there
was no marriage between him and the defendant and/or that the marriage is null
and void or, in the alternative, for a decree for divorce-vinculo matrimonii
dissolving the marriage with the defendant, on the ground of her constructive
malicious desertion. By his amended plaint dated 27.3.1976, the plaintiff
stated that although, it was thought that the defendant and plaintiff were
married on the 13th August 1973, at the St. Anthony's Church, Kongodamulla,
there was no such marriage in fact or, in law. The defendant filed answer on
the 2nd April 1976, denying the allegations in the plaint and stated that she
was the legally married wife of the plaintiff and that the marriage between
her and the plaintiff was effected on the 13th August, 1973, at the
Kongodamulla St. Anthony's Roman Catholic Church by Rev. Batepola. This
defendant further stated that all the activities in connection with the
ceremony were performed in a simple way because the defendant's father was ill
at the time of this marriage. But the defendant expressly stated that "all
those rites were performed according to custom and procedure".

When the case was taken up for trial on 29th June, 1976, both parties admitted
that "there is no valid marriage registration under the Registration of
Marriages (General) Ordinance". The case proceeded to trial on the following
issues:

(1) As no marriage under the General Marriages Ordinance has taken place
between the plaintiff and the defendant, can the ``plaintiff obtain a
declaration that there was no marriage between the plaintiff and defendant?

(2) Did the defendant conduct herself in the way set out in paragraphs 10 to 1
5 of the amended plaint?

**192**

(3) If the answer to issue No. 2 is "yes", was the defendant in fact and/in
law guilty of constructive malicious desertion?

(4) If so, can the plaintiff obtain a judgment for divorce?

(5) Was there a customary marriage and a marriage of repute between the
plaintiff and the defendant in this case?

(6) Was the defendant in this case, maliciously deserted by the plaintiff on
or about the 13th of July 1975?

(7) If issues No. 4 and 5 are decided in the defendant's favour, should this
case of the plaintiff be dismissed?

(8) As no marriage has been registered under the General Marriages Ordinance,
is the defendant lawfully entitled to raise issue No. 5?

By his judgment dated 23rd September 1977, the trial Judge answered issues 1,
2 and 3 in the negative and issues 5, 6, 7 and 8 in the affirmative. In
relation to issue 4, the District Judge said that it did not arise in view of
his answer to issue 3. The trial Judge accordingly dismissed the plaintiff's
action with costs. The plaintiff preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal.
By its judgment dated 29.8.84, that court allowed the appeal on the ground
that the defendant had failed to establish a customary marriage and hence the
plaintiff was entitled to a declaration that the marriage between the
plaintiff and defendant was null and void. Counsel for the plaintiff did not
canvass the findings of the trial Judge that it was the plaintiff who
maliciously deserted the defendant on the 13th July 1975. The defendant-
appellant has filed this appeal against the said judgment of the Court of
Appeal.

The plaintiff is a Buddhist and the defendant is a Roman Catholic. In his
evidence the plaintiff stated that he was intending to marry the defendant at
the Kachcheri, but as the defendant said that they must marry at the church,
he agreed, and accordingly got permission to marry from the priest at Gampaha.
He gave notice of marriage at the Registry Office, Gampaha and on the 13th
August 1973, he along with the defendant, her mother, aunt and sister-in-law
went to Kongodamulla St. Anthony's Church. He went to the church at about 7.00
p. m. and they had some prayer, a ring was put on to the defendant's finger
and they said something in English and Sinhalese, which he could not
understand. He said that everything was over at

**193**

about 8.30-8.45 p.m. The trial judge has rejected the evidence of the
plaintiff that the ceremony took place between 7.00 and 8.00 p.m. in the
evening and has held that

"at the Church Rev. Batepola held a ceremony according to the customs of the
Catholic Church and solemnized a marriage between plaintiff and defendant".

According to the plaintiff, both he and the defendant came back to Gampaha and
went to live at a house at Sri Bodhi Road. At this house he and the defendant
started living as husband and wife; the friends and relatives of both parties
accepted them as husband and wife; the two of them lived together and accepted
each other as husband and wife. These facts are admitted by both plaintiff and
defendant. In cross-examination the plaintiff admitted that he accepted the
defendant to be his legal wife, after the marriage at Kongodamulla church on
13th August 1973, and it was with that idea the two of them lived together and
during this period they moved about in public with that idea in mind and he
showed the world that the defendant was his lawful wife.

After the plaintiff and the defendant had so lived together as husband and
wife for two years, the plaintiff wanted to divorce the defendant. For that
purpose the plaintiff tried to obtain the marriage certificate. When he tried
to obtain a marriage certificate he was informed that the marriage between him
and the defendant had not been registered under the General Marriages
Ordinance. Hence arises the prayer of the plaintiff for a declaration that the
marriage between the plaintiff and the defendant is void or that no marriage
had taken place between the two of them.

The defendant's position is that though no marriage has been registered under
the General Marriages Ordinance in fact a customary marriage was performed at
the church and hence, the plaintiff could not maintain this action for a
declaration that there was no marriage between him and the defendant. The
relevant question arises whether there was a customary marriage countenanced
in law between the plaintiff and defendant.

In this case it is common ground that notice of marriage in terms of section
24 of the General Marriages Ordinance was given. It is manifest therefore that
the parties intended to get married under the General Marriages Ordinance. But
the plaintiff contends that certain indispensable formalities prescribed by
the General Marriages

**194**

Ordinance had not been observed, namely that the marriage was not solemnized
in church between 6.00 a.m. and 6.00 p.m. as prescribed by section 34(l) of
the Ordinance and that the marriage was not registered as required by the
Ordinance. The certificate of marriage which alone gives the Minister of the
church the authority to solemnize the marriage was never issued and hence the
Minister was not empowered to register the marriage.

The trial judge has accepted the evidence of Rev. Batepola, in preference to
the evidence of the plaintiff and has held that the marriage was solemnized at
about 4.00 or 4.30 in the evening. This finding of fact is well based and the
plaintiff's challenge to the validity of the marriage on the allegation that
the marriage rites were performed after the prescribed time stands rejected.

This finding cannot be faulted. But as regards registration I agree with the
counsel for the plaintiff that it is only on the production of the certificate
of the Registrar that a Minister of the church can solemnize a marriage. Since
there was no such certificate Rev. Batepola had no authority under the
Ordinance to register the marriage. It is accepted by the parties that in the
circumstances the marriage could not have been lawfully registered by Rev.
Batepola.

The case has-then to be decided on the basis that there had been no valid
registration of marriage between the parties under the General Marriages
Ordinance. But then, is registration essential to the validity of marriage?
Section 41 of the General Marriages Ordinance provides

"The entry made by the Registrar in his marriage register under sections 34,
35 and 40 shall constitute the registration of the marriage and shall be the
best evidence thereof before all courts and in all proceedings in which it may
be necessary to give evidence of the marriage."

This Ordinance does not exclude other recognised forms of marriage and a
customary marriage may, therefore, be proved and established. Marriage has
been defined to mean any marriage save and except marriages contracted under
and by virtue of the Kandyan Marriages Ordinance of 1870 or of the Kandyan
Marriages and Divorce Act and except marriages contracted between persons
professing Islam (section 64).

**195**

A customary marriage is a marriage coming within this definition, though not
one under the provisions of the Ordinance as to form and registration.

Regulation 9 of 1822 attempted to introduce as a part, not merely of the
evidence but of the constitution of marriage-a stringent system of
registration and enacted that no marriage contracted after the 1st August of
that year should be valid unless it was registered. The next enactment No. 6
of 1847 was intended to restrict valid marriage to such as should be
solemnized either by a Christian minister or by a Marriage Registrar. But he
6th section which again provided that unregistered marriages should be invalid
was never proclaimed. The law of 1822 still remained in force. It was however
provided by section 3 of the Ordinance No. 6 of 1847 that past marriages
rendered invalid by not being registered in conformity with Regulation. 9 of
1822 were to be deemed good and valid, except where the parties to any such
marriage or either of them, not being Mohamedans; shall during the lifetime of
both parties have contracted a valid marriage. The effect of this clause was
to validate all customary marriages contracted prior to 1847. Section 2 of
this Ordinance declared valid past marriages solemnized by Christian
Ministers. It specifically enacted that-

"all Marriages which have been heretofore bona fide solemnized within this
Island between parties legally competent to marry by Ministers of the
Christian religion ordained ...... either by licence or after the publication
of banns and, according to the rites of the religious communities to which
such Ministers shall have belonged, shall be deemed and taken to have been a
good and valid marriage in law. "'

As to subsequent marriages, the law of 1822 continued to apply. The next
Ordinance was No. 13 of 1863 which came into operation by proclamation on
1.3.1867. In the ordinance of 1863 the provision of the earlier Ordinance
which made registration essential to the validity of the marriage was omitted.
Section 15 of Ordinance No. 2 of 1895 enacted that no marriage should be valid
unless it was duly solemnized by a Minister or Registrar and was registered in
the manner and form prescribed by the Ordinance. The only exception was made
in favour of Hindus-Tamils not domiciled in Ceylon. This section 15 was
repealed by Ordinance No. 10 of 1896, and it has not been reintroduced into
the present Marriages Registration Ordinance No. 19 of 1907. The present legal
position is that while registration is

**196**

essential for the validity of a marriage under the Kandyan Marriages Ordinance
of 1870, it is open to persons other than Kandyans to contract a marriage
according to native rites and customs. Vide -  Gunaratne v. Punchihamy (1),
Sopia Hamine v. Appuhamy (2)Aronegary v. Vaigahe (3), 2 N.L.R. 322, P. C.,
ajah v. Kurukkal (4), Poopalaratnam v. Sabapathy (5).

In Chellappah v. Kandasamy (6) where two persons, Tamils of Jaffna having
given the Registrar of Marriages notice of their intention to marry,
solemnized their marriage according to Hindu rites but owing to certain
disputes refused to proceed to registration, it was held that the customary
form of marriage according to Hindu rites constituted a valid marriage
independently of registration.

Where marriage has to be established by proof of performance of customs or
ceremonies, case law shows that the relevant customs and ceremonies vary
according to the race, caste, religion or social status of the parties. If it
is shown by the custom of the caste or religion or district that certain form
is considered as constituting a marriage, then the adoption of that form with
the intention of thereby completing the marriage union is sufficient in law to
constitute marriage. When the fact of celebration of the marriage is
established it will be presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary,
that all the forms and ceremonies necessary to constitute a valid customary
marriage have been gone through. Where there is a marriage in fact, there
would be a presumption in favour of there being a marriage in law.

In Aronegary v. Vaigalie, (supra) it was held by the Privy Council that where
it is proved that parties have gone through a form of marriage and thereby
shown an intention to be married, persons who claim by virtue of the marriage
were not bound to prove that all necessary ceremonies had been performed. In
Thiagarajah v. Carthigesu (7), the question in issue was whether a marriage
was celebrated according to customs and the evidence showed that the parties
had neither cohabited for a single day nor even lived together under the same
roof, and it was held that in such a case there is no presumption in favour of
their marriage and that in such a case, proof of marriage depends solely on
the evidence to the effect that a valid ceremony of marriage was actually
performed. By parity of reasoning it would thus appear that where parties have
lived together as husband and wife following upon

**197**

performance of certain rites and ceremonies associated with marriage, the
burden of proving that the appropriate marriage customs and the fact that the
required ceremony were not performed would lie heavily on those who deny the
validity of the marriage. In this case since the plaintiff has admitted that
after the marriage ceremony at Kongodamulla, both he and the defendant had
lived together openly as husband and wife and had been accepted by the public
to be husband and wife, the onus will lie on him to show that it is invalid
because certain vital ceremonies had not been gone through. The Court of
Appeal has on the admitted facts of this case erred in casting the burden of
proof on the defendant to show what are the essential requisites of a Catholic
marriage, and that the marriage between her and the plaintiff conformed to
those requisites. The onus was on the plaintiff, in view of these admissions
referred to above, to show that the essential requisites of a Catholic
customary marriage were not performed. He has failed to lead any evidence on
these matters to discharge the burden that rested on him.

In Nicholas de Silva v. Shaik Ah (8) a Divisional Bench of the Supreme Court
held that a marriage of two members of the Catholic church solemnized by a
minister of the church, at a Roman Catholic church, did not become null and
void for want of registration, but was valid in law. The oral evidence in that
case "proved the ceremony to have been a christian one". This case establishes
that a marriage performed in a Catholic church according to customary Catholic
rites is a lawful marriage, even though there is no registration of the
marriage according to law. The religious rites may owe their origin to the
canon law but thereby we are not importing the canon law into our
jurisprudence. The religious rites and ceremonies of the church are relevant
because they have come to be the customary rites and ceremonies according to
which the catholics solemnize their marriages. Thus they have as such acquired
legal significance.

The trial Judge has accepted the evidence of Rev. Batepola and has held that
it is crystal clear that the marriage has been solemnized according to the
Roman Catholic customs. He finds that "it has been proved in this case that
the marriage between the plaintiff and the defendant has been solemnized at a
Roman Catholic church according to the customs of the Roman Catholic church
before a Roman Catholic priest". Rev. Batepola who officiated at the marriage
of the parties, testified that he performed the marriage inside the church
between

**198**

4.00 and 4.30 p.m. and that he took about 35 minutes for the ceremony and that
he explained to the parties what he was doing. In cross examination by counsel
for the plaintiff he stated as follows

"Q. During this period, how many marriages were you concerned with?

A. About 1,000 marriages.

Q. You have a very good understanding of the ceremonies held in connection
with marriages?

A. I know.

Q. How many kinds of church marriages are there?

A. There is only one method in the church.

Q. What is that method?

A. To effect it according to the rules of the Catholic church, according to
law.

Q. In your church, is there a marriage called customary marriage?

A. The marriage is performed under the law of the church.

Q. Is there something called customary marriage?

A. It is done according to the rules of the church.

Q. If the man is not a Catholic, can the two parties come to the church and
get the blessings of the church?

A. It can be done with the authority of the church.

Q. By the "authority of the church" do you mean the authority of the Bishop?

A. Yes.

In re-examination the witness clarified the position as follows:

A. "If both are Christians we get them to marry according to the law of the
church, if they are a non-Christian and a Christian we marry them after
obtaining the authority of the church. According to the religious rites of the
church the same thing is done in both cases. If it is a case of the non-
Christian and a Christian only, we obtain the authority of the church."

**199**

The witness further stated that the plaintiff (a Buddhist) and the defendant
(a Catholic) applied for permission to the Catholic church to get married and
the two of them got the permission from the church. It is to be noted that
during a searching cross-examination of Rev. Batepola apart from a single
question that he told the plaintiff only that f e blessed the ring, not a
single suggestion was made that any ceremony or rite necessary for the
solemnization of the marriage was not performed. Rev. Batepola quite
categorically said that the wedding took place according to the customs and
the laws of the Catholic church. The Court of Appeal has held that

"' .................. this does not render it a customary marriage
............ If indeed there is a Roman Catholic customary marriage, there
should be evidence of what are the essential requisites of such marriage
............... The evidence only proves that a ceremony took place according
to the rules, customs and rites of the Catholic church, in terms of section
34(1). It does not prove that a customary marriage took place. It seems to me
that the learned District Judge has equated the celebration of a marriage
according to the rules, customs and rites of the church, with marriage
celebrated according to customary rites and has thus confused one with the
other."

With all respect to that court, I cannot agree with that court's comments and
conclusion. The defendant's case is that the customs and rites of the Catholic
church represent the customary rites and ceremonies essential for a Catholic
customary marriage, and that the solemnization of a marriage according to the
said customs and rites of the church satisfies the requirements of a customary
marriage of the Roman Catholics. The rules and customs of the Roman Catholic
church do not have any independent authority to validate a marriage. They are
relevant only because the Roman Catholics have adopted them as part of their
customary ceremonies regulating their marriage. A marriage solemnized
according to the rules, customs, rites and ceremonies of the church may thus
serve two purposes-one to satisfy the requirements of section 34(1) of the
Marriage (General) Ordinance as preliminary to registration of the marriage
under Section 34(2-3) and secondly since these rules, customs, rites and
ceremonies of the church have been absorbed into the web of Catholic customary
marriage, to constitute a customary marriage. It is to be noted that section 2
of the Ordinance No. 6 of 1847, quoted supra,

**200**

recognised marriages solemnized according to Christian rites and gave legal
validity to Christian marriages solemnized by a Minister of Christian religion
according to the rites of the religious communities to which such Minister
belonged without such marriage being registered according to law. Thus a
marriage solemnized according to the customs, rites and ceremonies of the
Catholic church has legal validity irrespective of legal registration thereof
and is regarded as a lawful marriage on the basis of it being a customary
marriage recognised in law.

In my view, the trial judge acted under no confusion when he accepted the
sufficiency of the marriage ceremonies conducted by Rev. Batepola at the
church on 13.08.1973 in accordance with the rites of the church to satisfy the
requirements of a customary marriage of Roman Catholics.

It was said that the plaintiff is a Buddhist and hence could not have adopted
a Catholic customary marriage. But, the evidence shows that he intended to
marry the defendant at the Kongodamulla Church, got the permission of the
Catholic Bishop to marry the defendant as required by the church and
voluntarily chose to go through the Catholic ceremonies, with a full
appreciation that he was marrying according to catholic rites. Having elected
voluntarily to marry the defendant who is a Catholic according to the
customary rites of the Catholics, he is bound by the marriage which took place
according to those rites. Further he subsequently lived with the defendant as
husband and wife on the basis of the validity of the marriage that took place
between him and the defendant on 13th August 1973. His conduct manifested a
recognition of the existence and validity of the marriage; he had approbated
the marriage which he is seeking to get rid of, it is most inequitable and
contrary to public policy that he should be permitted to challenge it with
effect.

I allow the appeal and set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and
affirm the judgment of the District Court and dismiss the plaintiff's action
with costs in all the courts.

**

COLIN-THOME, J.** \- I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/28.html_  

