##  Mohamed Shums and Another v. Attorney General - SLR - 576, Vol 2 of 1982
[1982] LKSC 28; (1982) 2 Sri LR 576 (7 July 1982)

# 576

**  MOHAMED SHUMS AND ANOTHER**

**v.**

**ATTORNEY ‑GENERAL**

SUPREME COURT

WANASUNDERA, J., VICTOR PERERA, J., AND COLIN‑THOME, J.

S.C.43/81.

C.A. 631/75(F).

D.C. ‑ COLOMBO 2796/Z

JULY 7, 1982.



    Customs Ordinance, sections 44, 57, 125 and 130 ‑ Seizure of goods in exporters stores ‑ Goods marked and labelled for export ‑ What constitutes an attempt.



**577**

**  **

'The plaintiffs who are exporters of Ceylon Produce obtained a licence from
the Controller of Exports to export 50 long tons of mixed sesame seed.



The plaintiffs had informed the Customs authorities in the specification form
that they intended to export the goods in 800 bags carrying the full weight of
112,000 lbs. Therefore each of the 800 bags had to carry 140 lbs. of sesame
seed.



On 16.2.73 the plaintiffs despatched to the Wharf 400 bags of sesame seed
which were put on board a vessel.



On 19.2.73 the plaintiffs despatched 160 bags of sesame seed. At the gates it
was discovered by Customs Officers that the bags contained 168 lbs. each and
not 140 lbs. The bags already on board were also found to contain 168 lbs.
each. Thus as a result there were in the Port 560 bags carrying 94080 lbs. of
sesame seed. The Customs Officers suspecting that the plaintiffs were planning
to export more than the permitted amount raided the stores of the plaintiff
and took into custody 110 bags of sesame seed marked 168 lbs. and labelled
"Noor Singapore". Taking these bags into account the total weight of mixed
sesame seed was 112,560 lbs. Consequent to this seizure the plaintiff was sent
a letter by the Principal Collector of Customs on 21.2.73 requesting him "to
show cause why he should not be dealt with for being concerned in attempting
to export or take out of Sri Lanka restricted goods......in contravention of
the Customs Ordinance read with the Exchange Control Act."



After the inquiry the plaintiff was fined Rs. 41,463.29 and the goods were
forfeited. On appeal to the Principal Collector the forfeiture was mitigated
and fine the reduced. The District Court and Court of Appeal held against the
plaintiff. The plaintiff appealed to the Supreme Court.



# Held ‑



Having regard to all the circumstances of the case there was a serious doubt
whether it would be desirable and safe to regard the facts as constituting an
attempt.



**Case referred to:**



(1) _Attorney ‑General v. Nagamany 40 C.L.W. 86._



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_S.C. Crossette Thambiah_ with _K. Thevarajah_ for the plaintiffs‑appellants.



_Suri Ratnapala,_ State Counsel _,_ for the defendant‑respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

August 9, 1982.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.**



This is an appeal from the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated 12th May 1981
dismissing an appeal from the judgment and decree entered by the District
Court of Colombo. The plaintiffs‑appellants had obtained a licence to export
50 long tons of mixed sesame seed



# 578



from the Controller of Imports and Exports and they had taken 560 bags
containing 94080 lbs. to the Wharf for shipment. in February 1973 the
Principal Collector of Customs had made order forfeiting the said goods as
well as a further 110 bags containing 18480 lbs. which had been in the Stores
of the plaintiffs‑appellants and also a sum of Rs. 25,000/‑. The
plaintiffs‑appellants having furnished the necessary security filed this
action on 18th April 1973 against the Attorney‑General for a declaration that
they were entitled to the said goods and to have the forfeiture annulled. The
District Judge by his judgment dated 30th October 1975 held that the
plaintiffs­appellants had attempted to export 560 1bs, in excess of the 50
long tons authorised and dismissed the plaintiffs‑appellants' action with
costs. The Court of Appeal holding that the plaintiffs‑appellants had not
given a satisfactory explanation to the Collector of Customs in terms of
Section 57 of the Customs Ordinance, dismissed the appeal with costs.



Before dealing with the matters that have been urged before us at the hearing
of this appeal, it will be necessary to set out the facts which had admittedly
been established in this case in order to decide whether sections 44, 57 and
130 of the Customs Ordinance (Chap.235) have been correctly considered and
applied.



The plaintiffs‑appellants were exporters of Ceylon Produce carrying on
business under the name, style and firm of "Westway Trades and, Industries".
They had contracted with Messrs Nomanbhoy & Sons, Singapore, to export 50 long
tons or 112000 lbs. of white and black mixed sesame seed and had obtained a
letter of credit dated 5.1.73 for the full value thereof (P1). Thereafter they
made an application for a licence in terms of the Imports and Exports
(Control) Act No. 1 of 1969 on 12.3.73 (P6) and obtained the same. In that
application, the goods were correctly described as mixed white and black
sesame, seed, the quantity was stated to be 50 long tons and the F.O.B., value
was stated to be Rs.82,515/80. The column 12 in regard to the number of
packages was left blank. In the form P2 column 16 which had to be completed by
the Exporter before the shipment , the number of packages was stated to be 800
bags. Column 17 in P2 had to be completed by the Customs Officer after
shipment. This column has been left incomplete. The Export Entry document P3
is dated 15.2.73. In it had been entered the name of the Vessel in which
sesame seed were to be exported as the 'Maldive Exporters', the description of
goods is given as 800 bags of mixed sesame seed, stated to be duty free and
total quantity is given as 50 long tons or 112,000 lbs.



**579**



In the Specification Form dated 15.2.73 (P3) the plaintiffs­appellants had
informed the Principal Collector of Customs that they intended to export the
goods in 800 bags of seed for the full weight of 112,000 lbs. and for the
value of Rs. 82515/80. These two documents, the Export Entry Form and the
Specification Form had been filled up on 15.2.73 before the goods for export
had been actually brought into the Wharf. Therefore it is clear that the
appellants had intended to have the full consignment in 800 bags and in that
event each bag if filled equally would have contained 140 lbs. In point of
fact it was only on the 16.2.73 that the plaintiffs‑appellants had despatched
400 bags in five lorries supported by Cart Chits P8 ‑ P12 to the Wharf. These
chits have been signed and sealed by the Customs. These bags had been
permitted to be put on board the Vessel. On 19.2.73 the plaintiffs‑appellants
had despatched 160 bags in two lorries supported by Cart Chits P13 ‑P18 also
to the Wharf. On 19.2.73 a Customs Officer had examined the bags which were
being transported to the Wharf on that day at the gate and he had noticed that
the nett weight of each bag was marked 168 lbs. The bags on board the ship too
were examined thereafter and these bags too had each marked 168 lbs. The
plain­tiffs‑appellants had so far sent only 560 bags, but the total weight had
not exceeded 50 long tons or 112,000 1bs, it was actually 94080 lbs.



Acting on that basis that each bag should contain 140 1bs, even before the
rest of the consignment sufficient to complete the 112,000 1bs was brought
into the Wharf or even attempted to be brought in, the Customs Officers seized
the bags on board and in the Wharf. They then proceeded to the Stores of the
plaintiffs‑appellants at Old Moor Street, Colombo, which it was conceded were
quite a distance away from the Customs Warehouse. The witness A. K. Nagam,
Asst. Preventive Officer who gave evidence for the defendant‑respondent stated
that he went to the plaintiffs‑appellants' Stores at 7.15 p.m. on 19.2.73 for
two reasons, one to see if the 1st plaintiff­-appellant was there and secondly
to see if there were bags with sesame seed there. As the place was closed he
placed a guard and went back. He returned at 8 a.m. on the following day with
two other officers. But before he went to the Stores he went to meet the 1st
plaintiff‑appellant at his residence at Stace Road, Colombo, and accompanied
the 1st plaintiff‑appellant to the Stores at Old Moor Street, Colombo. He
found a whole heap of sesame seed on the ground and there were several bags
containing sesame seed, actually 161 bags in all, stacked on some planks one
over the other. Of the



# 580



161 bags, 110 bags were marked 168 1bs and labelled "Noor Singapore" and the
51 bags contained 144 1bs white sesame seed but had not been labelled. All the
161 bags were removed to the Customs Office and thereafter 51 bags containing
white sesame seed were returned as they contained no label. Thereafter
inquiries proceeded in regard to an alleged violation of the conditions of the
permit as each of the 560 bags brought into the Wharf by the
plaintiffs‑appellants and the 110 bags brought into the Wharf by the Customs
Officers contained 168 1bs making a total of 112,560 1bs, 560 1bs more than
the amount allowed to be exported.



On 21.2.73 the Principal Collector of Customs sent a letter (p19) to the
plaintiffs‑appellants in the following terms: ‑



"You are requested to show cause as to why you should not be dealt with for
being concerned in attempting to export or take out of Sri Lanka restricted
goods to wit, Tons 8‑7‑2‑00 (approximately) of sesame seed valued at Rs.
13,821/43 cts. in contravention of Sections 44, 57, 125 and 130 of the Customs
Ordinance (Chap.235) read with Exchange Control Act.



An inquiry was held on the 21st and 22nd February, 1973, and on 24. 2. 73 the
letter P20 was sent to the plaintiffs‑appellants as follows: ‑



"Attempted export of 670 bags

_sesame seed ex. ‑Maldive Exporters"_



Reference the inquiry held by me on the 21st and 22nd of February 1973, in the
abovementioned case, I have to inform you that the following, viz.



670 bags sesame seed,

Lorry No. CY 7211,

Lorry No.22 Sri 493



are declared forfeit in terms of Sections 44, 57 and 125 of the Customs
Ordinance, Chap.235.



I also elect that you further forfeit a sum of Rupees Forty One Thousand Four
Hundred and Sixty Four and Cents Twenty Nine (Rs.41,464/29) being treble the
value of the excess quantity (viz. Tons 8‑7‑2‑00 approximately) of sesame seed
in terms of section 130 of the Customs Ordinance, Chap.235.



You are requested to remit this sum within two weeks from the date of receipt
of this letter."



**581**

**  **

The plaintiffs‑appellants by a letter dated 27th February 1973 (P21) made
representations against this order to the Principal Collector of Customs in
which they stated that "they were at all times ready and willing to make the
necessary corrections in the Bill of Entry". In response to their appeal they
received a letter dated 15.3.73 that the forfeiture of the lorries was
mitigated to a payment of Rs. 1000/­- for each lorry and the sum of
Rs.41,464/29 was mitigated to a sum of Rs. 25,000/‑.



According to the proved facts on 19.2.73 the stage contemplated in section 57
of the Customs Ordinance had not been reached, when, the Customs Officers
sought to initiate action against the plaintiffs‑appellants. On a careful
analysis of the provisions of section 57, there is a chain of events following
one after another. A person exporting goods shall deliver a Bill of Entry of
such goods on a specified form giving all the necessary particulars required
therein to the Collector of Customs. If such a Bill is not delivered, the
exporter is liable to a penalty of Rs. 50/‑. After the payment of any dues or
duties, the exporter shall deliver two or more copies of such Bill. The Bill
of Entry shall be _signed by the Collector of Customs_ or the person
authorised by him to do so.



It is only after the Bill is so signed that it operates as a warrant to the
proper officer for the _examination and delivery_ of such goods for shipment.
If the goods do not agree with the particulars in the Bill of Entry the
Collector of Customs could then call for an explanation. In the absence of an
explanation to the satisfaction of the Collector of Customs, the goods shall
be forfeited under section 57. Section 58 provides that the Collector of
Customs on an application made to him, could permit the exportation of the
goods prior to the presentation of the Bill of Entry without affecting the
penalties the exporter would have become liable to for any misdescription or
undervaluation in the application. The mandate for the examination and
delivery of the goods obviously could operate only after the goods are brought
into the Wharf by the exporter on his own and before the shipment.



In the instant case the Bill of Entry (P3) dated 15.2.73 was prepared in
anticipation of the packaging and transport to the Wharf. A part of the
consignment of goods was taken to the Wharf on the 15th February 1973 and a
further consignment was taken on the 19th February 1973. But before the
plaintiffs‑appellants attempted to do or did anything further to bring to the
Wharf any further goods



# 582



from their stores if they had intended to have these too exported in this
Vessel the Customs Officers transported and brought into the Wharf 161 bags.
This latter exercise was not a voluntary act of the plaintiffs‑appellants. It
is therefore clear the plaintiffs‑appellants had not attempted even to
transport the 161 bags or additional 110 bags seized even if they had planned
or intended to have them included in that consignment for export. To my mind
the Customs Officers in their enthusiasm had rushed to procure whatever sesame
seeds that were in bags in the plaintiffs‑appellants' stores on suspicion
before the plaintiffs‑appellants had time to act in any particular way they
may have contemplated. Clearly this action of the Customs Officers was not
warranted by section 57 of the Customs Ordinance or even if warranted was
premature and no imputation could be made of a guilty intention on the part of
the plaintiffs‑appellants.



The Attorney‑General also relied on section 44 of the Customs Ordinance which
reads as follows:



"If any person exports or attempts to export or take out of Ceylon any goods
enumerated in the table of prohibitions and restrictions in the Schedule B, in
contravention of the prohibitions and restrictions contained in such table in
respect thereof, such goods shall be forfeited and shall be destroyed or
disposed of as the Principal Collector of Customs may direct."



This section clearly deals with a person who exports or attempts to export
goods the exportation of which are prohibited or are restricted. The sesame
seeds do not come within the exports prohibited in Schedule B but would come
within the terms of goods the exportation of which are restricted in that a
licence had to be obtained from the Controller of Imports and Exports. The
word export' has been held to mean 'carried out of the Port' (in the case of
_Attorney General v. Nagamany_ (1)). An 'attempt to export' must therefore
also mean an attempt to take the goods out of the Port. In this case there has
been no such attempt at least in the case of the 110 bags which were
discovered stacked away in the plaintiffs‑appellants' Stores and which were
not even in the process of being transported to the Port. As remarked by
Gratiaen, J. in the said case, "the Customs Official is concerned on such
occasion only with the fact of exportation, and he need not seek to probe the
dark and mysterious workings of a smuggler's mind". It is relevant to note
that in the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, Chap.236, which was enacted



**  583**

**  **

to be read and construed with the Customs Ordinance (Section 5) the word
exportation' was defined as follows:



" exportation' with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means
the carrying and taking out of Ceylon or causing to be carried or taken out of
Ceylon, whether by sea or by air."



As regards what is an 'attempt', the courts have not yet succeeded in
formulating an abstract test that is entirely satisfactory and which could
distinguish with precision a preparation from an attempt. The principles laid
down in the older cases are being questioned in the more recent cases and it
is still early to say which of the many theories referred to in these
judgments would ultimately prevail. Coming back to the instant case, the
Customs authorities, upon a search of the plaintiffs‑appellants' private
store, discovered 110 bags of mixed sesame seed bearing the export marks, 61
bags of white' sesame seed bearing no marks and a large quantity of sesame
seed in a heap. State Counsel stated categorically that he was making no
suggestion that apart from the technical violation involved (an excess of 560
1bs in a shipment of 112,000 1bs) there was any devious plan to effect some
large scale fraud or deception. The effect of the plaintiffs admission to
which undue weight appears to have been given, was that the 110 bags too would
have been despatched in the normal course. As to whether the matter stood at
the stage of a preparation or had ripened into the stage of attempt is not an
easy question to answer. This is undoubtedly a marginal case. However, having
regard to all the circumstances, balancing both the rights of the citizen: and
the rights of the State, I entertain a serious doubt whether it would be
desirable and safe to regard the facts of this case as constituting an
attempt.



I accordingly set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal and of the
District Court and direct that judgment be entered for the
plaintiffs‑appellants without costs.



**WANASUNDERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J.** ‑ I agree.



Appeal allowed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/28.html_  

