##  Trade Exchange (Ceylon) Ltd v. Asian Hotels Corporation Ltd - SLR - 67,
Vol 1 of 1981 [1981] LKSC 28; (1981) 1 Sri LR 67 (26 February 1981)

**67**

**TRADE EXCHANGE (CEYLON) LTD.  
v.  
ASIAN HOTELS CORPORATION LTD.**

**SUPREME COURT.  
SAMARAKOON, C. J., SAMERAWICKRAME, J. AND SHARVANANDA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL 10 OF 1980-C.A. APPLICATION 1539/79.  
FEBRUARY 9 AND 10, 1981.  
**  
_Writ of certiorari-Application under Article 140 of the Constitution-Whether
Public Company incorporated under the Companies Ordinance can be a public
body-Whether decision of such a body amenable to certiorari.  
_  
The petitioner had since April, 1975, been carrying on business at Hotel Lanka
Oberoi owned by the respondent. For this purpose it had been granted a
licence, the last licence expiring on 15th July, 1979. Thereafter the
petitioner was refused a licence to run its shop. The respondent was a company
incorporated under the Companies Ordinance. The petitioner applied to the
Court of Appeal for a writ of certiorari to quash the decision of the
respondent refusing to grant it a licence on the grounds, inter alia, that
this decision was reached in violation of the principles of natural justice
and that the respondent had failed to act fairly and was actuated by mala
fides and bias. The Court of Appeal dismissed the petitioner's application.
The petitioner appealed to the Supreme Court.  
  
It was submitted on behalf of the petitioner that the respondent-company was
in fact a body performing functions of public nature, inasmuch as, inter alia,
the majority of the issued share capital was drawn from public funds; the
majority of the directors were nominated by the Minister of Trade; and the
respondent-company was designated as a "department or statutory institution"
under the purview of the Minister of Trade. It was accordingly submitted that
the respondent-company had all the requisite characteristics of a Public body
so as to make it amenable to the writ.  
  
**Held  
**  
The respondent was a public commercial company incorporated under the
Companies Ordinance and the fact that most of the capital was contributed by
the Government or that shares were controlled by the Government did not make
it an agent of the Government. The incorporated Company was recognized by the
law as a juristic person separate and distinct from its members and was an
independent body-corporate carrying on commercial activities. Its decisions,
made in the course of its business, cannot be reviewed by a superior court by
way of writ and the petitioner's application must therefore fail.  
  
**Cases referred to  
**_  
(1) R. v. Fulham Rent Tribunal, 1951 (1) All E. R. 482.  
  
(2) R. v. National Joint Councils for Dental Technicians ex p. Neate, (1953) 1
Q.B. 704; (1953) 2 W. L. R. 342; (1953) 1 All E. R. 327._

**68**

_(3) R. v. Criminal Injuries Commission ex P. Lain, (1967) 2 All   E.R. 770;
(1967) 2 Q.B. 864; (1967) 3 W.L.R, 348.  
  
(4) R. v. Electricity Commissioners, (1924) 1 K.B. 171; 130 L.T. 164; 93
L.J.K.B.390.  
  
(5) Ridge v. Baldwin, (1963) 2 All E. R. 66; (1963) 1 Q. B. 539; (1963) 2 W.
L. R. 935; (1964) A. C. 40.  
  
(6) Saloman v. Saloman & Co., (1897) A. C. 22; (1895-9) A// E. R. Rep. 33; 75
L. T. 426; 13 T.L.R. 46.  
  
(7) Macaura v. Northern Assurance Co., (1925) A.C. 619; (1925) All E.R. Rep.
51.  
  
(8) Short v. Treasury Commissioners, (1947) 1 K.B. 116; (1947) 2 All E.R. 298,  
_  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
H. L. de Silva, with E. D. Wickramanayake and D. S. Wijesinghe, for the
petitioner-appellant.  
  
K. N. Choksy, with Ronald Perera, for the respondent-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 26, 1981.  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
This is an appeal from the order of the Court of Appeal dismissing with costs
the petitioner's application for the issue of a writ of certiorari.  
  
The petitioner is a company registered under the Companies Ordinance carrying
on business, inter alia, in the production, sale and export of batiks,
handlooms and other textiles and was also engaged in the business of tailoring
garments.  
  
The respondent is a public company incorporated under the provisions of the
Companies Law with an issued share-capital of 1,400,000 shares, each of Rs. 10
value, of which 1,325,314 shares is held by the Co-operative Wholesale
Establishment, a wholly state-owned undertaking incorporated by statute (Cap.
126), 600 shares by the Treasury and 74,086 shares held by members of the
public, the total number of shareholders on 10.3.79 being 502. The main object
for which the respondent- company was established is to carry on hotel
business and other business connected therewith.  
  
The respondent is the owner of the Hotel Lanka Oberoi, which is one of the
largest luxury hotels in the country. Pursuant to its objects, the respondent
on rent rooms and accommodation in the Hotel Lanka Oberoi for shops catering
to residents

**69**

and visitors to the said hotel. Since the commencement of the hotel in about
April 1975, the petitioner has been granted by the respondent the privilege
and licence to carry on a shop for the sale of batiks for a period of one year
at a time at shop No. 8 situated at and forming part of the hotel, on a
monthly rental of Rs. 8,064. Likewise, seven other shops which did business in
the sale of batik were granted similar licences. The petitioner's licence had
been renewed annually by the respondent. According to clause 24 of the
agreement between the parties, the option to renew the licence was reserved to
the respondent. The last licence granted to the petitioner which was due to
expire on 15.4.79 was extended by the respondent from 15.4.79 to 15.7.79. On
14.6.79, the respondent called for applications for the issue of licences to
operate the said shops, stating however that it reserved the right to accept
or reject the applications received by it without assigning any reasons.
Although the petitioner duly tendered an application for shop space at the
specified rates and complied with the other preliminary conditions stipulated
by the respondent, the respondent, without assigning any reason whatsoever,
rejected the petitioner's application, but accepted similar applications of
the other licence-holders for batik shops in the hotel premises. The
petitioner in its application for writ complains that it had been arbitrarily
refused a licence to run a shop for the sale of batiks in the respondent's
premises because of political discrimination, as three of its Directors have
been supporters of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, and also because of personal
hostility towards its Managing- Director by a director of the respondent-
company. The petitioner contends that the decision of the respondent not to
grant a new licence and/or renew the existing licence to it is null and void
for the reasons that the decision was reached in violation of the principles
of natural justice, in that the petitioner was not given any opportunity of
being heard prior to such decision and that the respondent had failed to act
fairly towards the petitioner and was actuated by mala-fides and bias against
the petitioner.  
  
The respondent, while denying the allegations of mala-fides and unfairness
made by the petitioner, pleaded in limine against the maintainability of this
application for the issue of a writ of certiorari against it on the ground
that it is not a 'public authority'. It submits that the question of renewal
of the grant of a licence to run a shop at Hotel Lanka Oberoi, of which it is
the proprietor, is a matter for the sole decision of its Board of Directors
and that such a decision is entirely within the discretion

**70**

of the Board and cannot be reviewed by a writ of certiorari. The respondent
contended that in declining to grant the tenancy of its shop to the
petitioner, it was not deciding on the legal rights of the petitioner.  
  
An important aspect of prerogative remedies is that they belong exclusively to
public law, their primary object being to make the machinery of Government
work properly rather than to enforce private rights. An application for the
prerogative remedy of a writ of certiorari is a proceeding calling some public
authority to show legal justification for its action and to account for
exceeding or abusing its power. "A public authority may be described as a
person or administrative body entrusted with functions to perform for the
benefit of the public and not for private profit."-Halsbury's Laws of England,
4th Edition, Vol. 1, paragraph 6 at p. 9. As Lord Devlin said in R. v. Fulham
Rent Tribunal (1) at 488:  
  
"Orders of certiorari and prohibition are concerned principally with public
order, it being part of the duty of the High Court to see that inferior Courts
confine themselves to their own limited sphere".  
  
Lord Goddard, C.J. in R. v. National Joint Councils for Dental Technicians ex.
p. Neate (2) at 707 defined the ambits of the writs as follows:  
  
 "The bodies to which in modern times the remedies of these prerogative writs
have been applied have ail been statutory bodies on whom Parliament has
conferred statutory powers and duties which, when exercised, may lead to the
detriment of thee subjects who may have to submit to their jurisdiction".  
  
As Professor Wade In his book on Administrative Law, 4th Edition, at p. 529
stated: "Consequently the existence of statutory power may be treated as the
touchstone, though the Court has recently admitted one exception in R, v.
Criminal Injuries Compensation Board ex p. Lain...  "(3) and summed up the law
as at p. 540: "Certiorari and prohibition are designed to prevent the excess
and abuse of power by public authorities. The powers of public authoÂ­rities
are conferred by statute in almost all cases. So that it is usually safe to
assume that statutory power is in question "Originally, certiorari and
prohibition lay to control the functions of inferior courts, namely, judicial
functions. But the notion of

**71**

what is 'a Court' and a 'judicial function' has undergone great revolution, so
that today these remedies have grown to be comprehensive remedies for the
control of all kinds of administrative as well as judicial acts. They have
developed to be recognized today as general remedies for the control of
administrative decisions affecting rights.  
  
The classic definition of these orders is that of Atkin, L.J. in R. v.
Electricity Commissioners (4) at 205, when he said:  
  
"They lie wherever any body of persons having legal authority to determine
questions affecting the rights of the subjects, and having the duty to act
judicially, acts in excess of their legal authority".  
  
This definition has been authoritatively interpreted and applied by the House
of Lords in the leading case of Ridge v. Baldwin (5). The duty to act
judicially, referred to by Atkin, L.J. need not be some requirement additional
to the authority to determine the dispute; if the judicial element may be
inferred from the nature of the power conferred over citizens, then that is
enough to make certiorari available. Lord Parker, C.J. in R. v. Criminal
Injuries Commission ex. p. Lain (3), at 777 and 778 clarified the present
scope of the remedy.  
  
"The exact limits of the ancient remedy by way of certiorari have never been
and ought not to be specifically defined. They have varied from time to time,
being extended to meet varying conditions. At one time the writ only went to
an inferior Court. Later its ambit was extended to statutory tribunals
determining a is inter-partes. Later, again, it extended to cases where there
was no is in the strict sense of the word, but where immediate or subsequent
rights of citizens were affected. The only constant limits throughout were
that the body concerned was under a duty to act judicially and that it was
performing a public duty. Private and domestic tribunals have always been
outside the scope of certiorari, since their authority is derived solely from
contract, that is from the agreement of the parties concerned. Finally it is
to be observed that the remedy by order of certiorari has now been extended to
cases in which the decision of an administrative officer is arrived at only if
the inquiry or process is of a judicial or quasi-judicial character. In such a
case, this Court has jurisdiction to supervise that process........We have, as
it seems to me, reached the position

**72**

when the ambit of certiorari can be said to cover every case in which a body
of persons of a public, as opposed to a purely private or domestic character,
has to determine matters affecting subjects, provided always that it has a
duty to act judicially."  
  
In Lain's case, the Compensation Board was established for the purpose of
awarding compensation to victims of criminal injury out of monies voted by
Parliament. The basic feature of the Board was that it was wholly non
-statutory: it was set up administratively and made what in law were ex gratia
payments out of the funds put at its disposal by Parliament. But the published
scheme contained rules for the Board's determination of claims, and these
rules were debated in Parliament and amended by the Home Secretary. The rules
were therefore administrative instructions from the Home Secretary to the
Board, made in the exercise of the prerogative and not under any statutory
authority. Lord Parker, C.J. justified the issue of the writ against the Board
on the ground:  
  
"Moreover, the Board, though set up under the prerogative and not by statute,
had in fact the recognition of Parliament in debate and Parliament provided
the money to satisfy the Board's awards ... The Board are, as counsel for the
Board said-  
  
 a servant of the Crown charged by the Crown by executive instructions with
the duty of distributing the bounty of the Crown'.  
  
The Board are clearly therefore performing public duties."  
  
It is thus clear law that the orders of certiorari and prohibition will issue
to a tribunal only if its functions are of a public and not merely of a
private nature.  
  
Confronted with the indisputable fact that the respondent is a company
incorporated under the Companies Act established to carry on hotel business
for the benefit of its shareholders and not a statutory corporation, counsel
for the petitioner made valiant efforts to approximate the company to a body
created by statute and submitted that the respondent is in fact a body
performing functions of a public nature. He pointed to the following facts and
features in the administration of the respondent Company in support of his
submission:

**73**

 Out of a total issued share-capital of Rs. 14 million, only 5.35% is held by
private individuals, and the balance 94.65% is drawn from public funds. The
majority of the Directors are nominees of the Co-operative Wholesale
Establishment, a public corporation, and are nominated by the Minister of
Trade. The Hotel Lanka Oberoi is a medium for the development of the tourist
industry, which is a function of the Government. In the allocation of subjects
and functions under the Constitution of the Democratic Socialist Republic of
Sri Lanka (1978), His Excellency the President has assigned to the Minister of
State as a "Department or statutory institution" under his purview the Asian
Hotels Corporation Ltd. and as one of his subjects and functions the
construction and management of Lanka Oberoi Hotel. SuppleÂ­mentary estimates
for the construction of additional rooms to the hotel at a cost of Rs. 23.3
million have been tabled by the Minister of Finance in Parliament. A further
Supplementary Estimate for Rs. 9.9 million for completing extensions to the
hotel in time for the Conference of Non-Aligned Nations held in Colombo had
been the subject of a debate in Parliament, as evidenced by the Hansards of
6.4.76 and 22.4.76. The sum of Rs. 36,200,000 voted for expenditure by the
respondent- company on Hotel Lanka Oberoi extensions appears in the Estimates
of Government expenditure on development projects (P.26). The Auditor-General
in his report for the year 1976 (P.27) has commented that "Contributions made
by the Government towards the capital of the various Government- sponsored
Corporations as at December 31,1976, amounted to Rs. 5,993,752,384 as compared
with Rs. 4,593,633,841 as at December 31, 1975, showing an increase of Rs.
1,400,118,543; the major increase was observed in respect of the following
Corporations: River Valleys Development Board, the Ceylon Cement Corporation,
Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, Ceylon Electricity Board, Asian Hotels
Corporation Ltd. (in respect of which the increase was Rs. 80,112,000) and a
number of other corporations. Approximately 95% of the share-capital of the
respondent- company was held by the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment,
which was a Government Corporation incorporated by Statute.  
  
Counsel for the petitioner invited the Court to hold that, having regard to
the foregoing facts and circumstances, the respondent had all the requisite
characteristics of a public body as to make it amenable to the writ. The Court
of Appeal has held that "this formidable catalogue of features could leave no
room for doubt

**74**

that the Asian Hotels Corporation Ltd. is a public body". In my view, this
conclusion is not tenable in law.  
  
The fundamental attribute of an incorporated company is that the company is a
legal entity distinct from its shareholders. The constitution, powers and
functions of a company incorporated under the Companies Ordinance are provided
for and regulated by its Memorandum and Articles of Association. An
incorporated company has a separate existence and the law recognizes it as a
juristic person, separate and distinct from its members. This new personality
emerges from the moment of its incorporation, and from that date the persons
subscribing to its Memorandum of Association and others joining it as members
are regarded as a body incorporate or a corporation aggregate when the new
person begins to function as an entity. Saloman v. Saloman (6). Its rights and
obligations are different from those of its shareholders. Action taken against
it does not directly effect its shareholders. The company in holding its
property and carrying on its business is not an agent or trustee of its
shareholders. It is the beneficial owner of its own property. A shareholder
has no legal or equitable interest in the company's property such as can be
insured. Macaura v. Northern Assurance Co. (7) -as the property of the company
is not in law the property of its shareholders. The mere fact that 95% of its
share-capital was contributed by the Government or the fact that 95% of shares
were held by a Government corporation like the Co-operative Wholesale
Establishment does not make any difference. The company and its shareholders
being as aforesaid, distinct entities, that the fact that the Government or a
Government corporation holds all its shares or 95% of its shares does not make
the respondent -company an agent of the Government. As Lord MacNaghten stated
in Saloman v. Saloman (6) at 51 :  
  
"The company is at law a different person altogether from the subscriber... ;
and though it may be that after incorporation the business is precisely the
same as it was before and some persons are Managers, and the same hands
receive the payments, the company is in law not the agent of the subscribers
or trustees for them. Nor are the subscribers, as members, liable in any shape
or form, except to the extent and in the manner provided by the Companies
Act."  
  
"Shareholders are not in the eyes of the law part-owners of the

**75**

undertaking. The undertaking is something different from the totality of the
shareholdings." -per Evershed, L.J. in Short v. Treasury Commissioners (8) at
122. Thus, an incorporated company is not the alias, agent, trustee or nominee
of its members.  
  
It is true that in this case, the Government, through the Co-operative
Wholesale Establishment, having contributed a major portion of the share-
capital, enjoys extensive powers in the conduct of the company. But these
powers are derived from the fact of majority- share -holding and the operation
of the rule of the majority which governs corporate membership rights and not
by reason of the company being the agent of the Government. The company is not
in law subject to any Ministerial directions. The presence of private
shareholders, though they constitute a minority only, militates against the
company being identified with the Government. The minority shareholders too
have a voice in the administration of the company's enterprise and are
entitled to elect directors, and if the majority shareholders, viz. the Co-
operative Wholesale Establishment, act in oppression of the minority, the
latter may petition the Court to wind up the company on the ground that it is
just and equitable to do so. The company is a commercial corporation geared to
make profits. If it should make losses and is unable to pay its debts, its
property is liable to execution and liable to be wound up at the suit of a
creditor. In the eye of the law, the respondent is its own master and is
answerable as fully as any other person or company incorporated under the
provisions of the Companies Ordinance. The burden of Mr. de Silva's submission
was that the respondentÂ­ company was subordinate and subservient to the
Government by reason of the C. W. E.'s shareholding and by reason of the large
loans granted by the Government to the company and that it was a mere
instrument of the Government and was therefore identified with it. The
opposing argument was that the circumstance that the Government as main
shareholder and creditor is interested in the solvency and administration of
the respondent- company does not have the effect of changing its fundamental
character of being a business organization with an independent juristic
personality, standing outside the ordinary framework of the Central or Local
Government.  
  
Counsel for the petitioner sought to found his submission that the respondent
is a 'public authority' amenable to the supervisory jurisdiction of this
Court, on the ground that His Excellency the

**76**

President had assigned the Asian Hotels Corporation Ltd. (i.e. the respondent)
as a department, subject and function of the Minister of State. The fact that
His Excellency had done so cannot transmute the business concern of the nature
of Asian Hotels Corporation Ltd. into a department or organ of the State.
Since the State had invested in the respondent-company large amounts of money,
it has an interest and say in the affairs of the respondentÂ­ company, but that
is an interest and say qua shareholder and creditor and not referable to those
of the Executive Government over its agent. The assignment of the Asian Hotels
Corporation Ltd. to the Minister of State as one of his subjects and functions
signifies only that the particular Minister was to overlook such interest on
behalf of the State and not that the Corporation has become a department of
the State, or that the property of the company is the property of the State,
or the Co-operative Wholesale Establishment.  
  
In my view, Mr. de Silva's contentions cannot be sustained. The respondent is
an independent body-corporate carrying on commercial activities. It is not
performing any Government functions and is not an agent, department or organ
of the Executive Government. Hence, the writ jurisdiction of a superior Court
cannot be availed to question the respondent's decision as to how it is to
conduct its business, with whom it should have business relationship, and who
should be its tenants or licencees of its premises.  
  
The activities of private persons, whether natural or juristic, are outside
the bounds of administrative law. A public commercial company like the
respondent, incorporated under the Companies Ordinance in which the Government
or a Government-sponsored Corporation holds shares, controlling or otherwise,
is not a public body whose decisions, made in the course of its business, can
be reviewed by this Court by way of writ.  
  
For the above reasons, the preliminary objection of the respondent is upheld.
In view of this conclusion, it is not necessary to examine the other
objections raised by Mr. Choksy.  
  
The order of the Court of Appeal refusing the petitioner's application for
writ is affirmed and the appeal is dismissed with costs.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.-l** agree.  
  
**SAMERAWICKRAME, J.-I** agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/28.html_  

