##  Sirimawathie Fernando v. Wickremaratne, Officer In Charge, Police Station,
Dehiwela and Others - SLR - 259, Vol 1 of 2001 [2000] LKSC 28; (2001) 1 Sri LR
259 (23 February 2000)

**259**

**SIRIMAWATHIE FERNANDO  
v.  
WICKREMARATNE, OFFICER IN CHARGE,  
POLICE STATION, DEHIWELA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
WEERASEKERA, J. AND  
ISMAIL, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 255/98  
7TH DECEMBER, 1999  
  
_Fundamental rights - Lease of municipal market stalls - Forcible eviction of
the lessee from a shop - Liability of the Mayor and police officers - Articles
11, 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.  
  
_The petitioners' sister was the lessee of shop No. 2 Dehiwala Market
belonging to the Dehiwala - Mt. Lavinia Municipal Council. The lessee was
carrying on a grocery business in the premises. As the lessee was old and
feeble, the petitioner assisted her to continue with the business. The 5th
respondent the Mayor of the Council is said to have decided to build a new
shopping area, and after the construction of new stalls on one side, a number
of shop keepers including the petitioner were called upon to shift their
business "temporarily" to new premises and to demolish the existing stalls
where they were carrying on business. A number of shop keepers including the
petitioner and her sister were not agreeable to this request. Instead, the
petitioner's sister and four others filed a writ application in the Court of
Appeal; and on 17.3.98 the court issued an ex parte stay order restraining the
5th respondent and the 6th respondent (Municipal Engineer) from ejecting the
five petitioners in that case. Each of the petitioners obtained copies of that
Order which was also notified to the 5th and 6th respondents by the Registrar,
Court of Appeal by express telegram on 17.3.98. It was however not clear
whether the telegram reached Dehiwala on the 17th, 18th or 19th.  
  
On 18.3.98 employees of the Municipal Council led by one Ramyapala claiming to
act on the order of the Mayor visited the market with about twelve police
officers including the 1st respondent (O.I.C.). The 2nd respondent Sergeant
Silva ordered the Council employees to fix barbed wire to the entrance of
shops, including shop No. 2. The petitioner objected producing a certified
copy of the stay order. The 1st respondent crumpled it and threw it away
saying that he was there to carry out the Mayor's Order. The petitioner was
abused and arrested by the 2nd and 3rd

**260**

respondents in the presence of the 1st respondent and taken to the Police
Station in a jeep. She was assaulted whilst in the jeep and sustained injuries
which required medical treatment.  
  
**Held :  
  
**1\. There was no lawful order by the 5th respondent for the ejectment of the
petitioner's sister or the petitioner.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"It may well be that the 5th respondent was motivated by the desire to
complete the shopping area. But there was no suggestion that the petitioner's
sister was under a legal obligation to vacate her shop, even temporarily, even
if she was, that would have been a civil dispute. The 5th respondent should
have resorted to his legal remedies, and there was no justification for
setting the police in motion."  
  
2\. The fundamental rights of the petitioner under Articles 11, 13(1) and
13(2) have been violated by the 1st and 5th respondents.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Upul Jayasuriya_ with _R. Radhakrishnan_ for petitioner.  
  
_Jayalath Hissella_ for 1st to 3rd respondents.  
  
_Mrs. B.J. Tillekeratne, S.S.C_. for 4th, 7th respondents.  
  
_W. Dayaratne_ for 5th and 6th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 23, 2000.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
  
**The Petitioner complains that on 18.03.98 the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 5th and 6th
Respondents infringed her fundamental rights under Articles 11, 12(1) and
13(1), while evicting her from her sister's shop at the Dehiwela market.

**261**

The Petitioner averred that in or about 1967 her sister Mrs. K. B. Fernando
had been given possession of shop No. 2, Market Place (small), Galle Road,
Dehiwela, by the Dehiwela-Mount Lavinia Municipal Council; and that ever since
then her sister had been carrying on a grocery business in those premises. The
5th and 6th Respondents (the Mayor and the Municipal Engineer, respectively,
of that Council), denied those averments, pleading that they were unaware of
them. However, in Court of Appeal Application No. 209/98 filed by Mrs. K.B.
Fernando and four other Petitioners, the 5th Respondent had submitted an
affidavit admitting:  
  
" **. . .** the fact that I have leased out the said stalls to the Petitioners
in 1967 but further states that the Municipal Council have entered into an
agreement with the Petitioners in respect of the said transaction only in 1969
**. . .** "  
  
It is clear therefore, that Mrs. K.B. Fernando entered into possession of the
shop, and remained in possession, lawfully.  
  
According to the Petitioner, because her sister was old and feeble, she was
assisting her sister to continue with the business.  
  
The affidavits of the 5th and 6th Respondents were virtually identical. They
stated that after the 5th Respondent became Mayor he decided to build a new
shopping area for pavement hawkers"; that after the construction of the new
market complex side "the shop keepers including the Petitioner were requested
to shift their businesses to the left side", and that out of thirteen
"traders", including the Petitioner, who were carrying on business on the
right side, eight had no objection to temporarily shifting from their stalls,
and to the demolition thereof. This version shows that the Petitioner and her
sister - whether she was a lessee, a pavement hawker, a shopkeeper, or a
trader, or otherwise-had not agreed to vacate the premises.  
  
The Petitioner averred that the 5th Respondent by letter dated 8.10.97 [not
produced] "made an order ejecting her

**262**

sister **. . .** with immediate effect from her present place of business for
the purported reason of building a new shopping area for pavement hawkers." In
reply the 5th and 6th Respondents did not deny that such a letter had not been
sent and admitted that the Petitioner had been requested to remove the goods
from the premises. They further stated that "some of the Municipal Council
officers went to the market place only on 11.3.1998 to inform the vendors that
the Municipal Council want them to vacate the premises temporarily **. . .**
until the construction of their side [the right side] is complete."  
  
Thus it was not the Respondents' case that the Petitioner's sister's
possession had become wrongful or unlawful. Nevertheless, from 8.10.97 upto
11.3.98 the 5th Respondent, and perhaps the Council, had been endeavouring to
get the Petitioner's sister, and those holding under her, to leave the
premises, at least temporarily. That they were unwilling to do.  
  
It was in that background that the Petitioner's sister and four others filed
CA Application No. 209/98 for writs of Certiorari, Prohibition and Mandamus.
On 17.3.98 the Court issued an ex parte stay order restraining the 5th and 6th
Respondents from ejecting the five petitioners in that case; and directed the
Registrar to notify the Respondents of that order by telegram and to issue
Counsel for the five Petitioners a certified copy of that order. The
Petitioner pleaded that copies of that order were given to all five
Petitioners that same day, and in proof of that fact she produced a photocopy
which bears the Court of Appeal date stamp "17 MAR 1998."  
  
The Petitioner also maintained that the Registrar did notify the 5th and 6th
Respondents by express telegram on 17.3.98, and annexed a copy of the receipt
issued by the Colombo Courts Post Office. In reply, each of them merely
stated:  
  
" **. . .** I have received a copy of the stay order issued by the Court of
Appeal only on 19.3.98 **. . .** In proof of the same I annex the document
marked R1 **. . .** "

**263**

R 1 was a photocopy of the telegram. The original was never produced, not even
at the hearing on 7.12.99 when we called for it. That photocopy shows the
Municipal Engineer's date stamp clearly, as "19.3.98"; it also has the Sri
Lanka Telecom Dehiwela date stamp, in which, unfortunately,. the date is not
clear. Hence we do not know whether the telegram actually reached Dehiwela on
the 17th, or the 18th, or the 19th. It was the Respondents' duty to have
produced the original telegram which was in their custody, and since they
failed to do so it would not be fair to assume that it was received only on
the 19th.  
  
I now come to. the events of 18.3.98. The Petitioner stated that at about
10.00 a.m. the other shopkeepers and she learnt that the Mayor was taking
steps to eject them and to fix barbed wire right across the entrance to their
shops. She claimed that they then contacted their Attorneys-at-Law, one of
whom informed the 6th Respondent by telephone of the stay order issued the
previous day: but in the absence of an affidavit from that Attorney-at-Law,
that is only hearsay, and I cannot accept that allegation.  
  
The Petitioner's position is that at 1.30 p.m. there came to the market some
employees of the Council, led by one Ramyapala, a supervisor, in a vehicle
belonging to the Council, as well as a group of about twelve Police Officers
from the Dehiwela Police in two jeeps. The Police party included the 1st
Respondent (the Officer-in-Charge) and the 2nd Respondent, Sergeant Silva, who
ordered the Council employees to fix barbed wire to the entrance of the shops,
including shop No. 2. The Petitioner objected, producing a certified copy of
the stay order. Without listening to her or perusing the document, the 1st
Respondent crumpled it and threw it away, saying in Sinhala:  
  
"We are not bothered or bound [by] any Court order; we have come here to carry
out an order made by the Mayor of this area. Therefore take all your things
and get out of this place before we thrash and kick you'll out of this place."

**264**

The Petitioner claimed that she was abused in obscene language by the 2nd and
3rd Respondents; assaulted by the 2nd Respondent, and dragged to the Police
jeep; and pushed on to the floor of the jeep. The 1st Respondent was watching
all this. Thereafter, while being taken to the Police station the 2nd
Respondent laid his booted foot on her hip, and assaulted and abused her when
she attempted to get up. She was released on Police bail at 6.30 p.m., and
obtained treatment at the Kalubowila Hospital, where she was found to have
"multiple abrasions."  
  
Thus her case is that she was arrested, not merely without valid reasons but
in defiance of a Court order which protected her right to remain in possession
of the shop; that she was assaulted and humiliated in the process; and that
despite knowledge of the Court order she was unnecessarily and unreasonably
taken to the Police station and kept there for several hours.  
  
I must now turn to the Respondents' version. In so far as the Police are
concerned, while the 1st and 2nd Respondents deny the Petitioner's account,
they contradict each other in several material aspects.  
  
According to the Information Book extracts, at 13.00 on 18.3.98 one J.M.
Ramyapala requested Police assistance to implement a special order of the
Mayor to eject the occupants of some old shops at the Dehiwela market; and
Ramyapala was produced before the 1st Respondent, and his statement was
recorded. He stated that he had been ordered by the Mayor, both orally and in
writing, to effect such ejectment. He requested Police assistance for such
ejectment and to erect a barbed-wire fence. He added that on a previous
occasion a similar attempt (with the Mayor) with Police assistance, had been
unsuccessful, and had been temporarily stayed, after a discussion with a local
opposition politician.

**265**

It seems to me that the 1st Respondent and other police officers have much too
readily accepted Ramyapala's assertion that the Mayor had made an order for
the ejectment of the Petitioner. They neither insisted on the production of
that order, nor even attempted to verify from the Mayor whether he had made
such an order. No such order has been produced in these proceedings. Further,
whether such order was lawful does not seem to have troubled them at all. It
is therefore probable that there was in fact no official or lawful order for
the ejectment of the Petitioner's sister or herself.  
  
Without verification, and with otherwise commendable promptitude, at 13.10.
S.I. Silva, and some other officers, proceeded in a Police jeep to the market,
in accordance with an order from the 1st Respondent, in order to preserve the
peace while Ramyapala carried out his task. At 13.15 the 1st Respondent
received a message from S.I. Silva that there had been some obstruction, and
at 13.20 he too set out for the market, with some more officers, in his
official vehicle. The 2nd Respondent was on duty elsewhere; he heard about a
disturbance at 13.15, and promptly came to the scene at 13.35. In his
affidavit he said:  
  
" **. . .** there was a lady sleeping on the ground with her face upward in
manner of obstructing the duties of the officers and shouting and using filth
against the said officers.  
  
I heard that the persons obstructed the duties of the police and the Municipal
officers in say [sic] that there was stay order against the sealing of
premises and therefore the 1st respondent unhesitatingly demanded the
production of the stay order to support their rights of [sic] the premises to
so obstruct, and in failing to produce any such document the 1st respondent
ordered the arrest of the petitioner and remove her to Dehiwala Police station
and advised the Municipal officers to carry on their duties.

**266**

I specifically deny the production of any stay order by the petitioner staying
the sealing of the premises **. . .** " I emphasis added throughout]  
  
According to the 2nd Respondent's notes, the 1st Respondent ordered him to
arrest the Petitioner, which he did at 13.45; he put her into a Police jeep,
and handed her over to the 1st Respondent.  
  
This is what the 1st Respondent said in his affidavit:  
  
" **. . .** at no time during my presence of the scene of the incident, I was
shown by the petitioner or any body else, an order from the Court of Appeal
staying the ejectment until one Susil Chandrasiri Fernando who came by 3.15
p.m. and produced a certified copy of an order issued by the Court of Appeal
in pursuance of which I forthwith ordered to stop any act contravening the
stay order and returned to the police station.  
  
By the time the said order of the Court of Appeal was produced to me, the
petitioner had been arrested and removed to the police station for conducting
herself in a manner amounting to a breach of peace and also amounting to
obstruction to carry out the official duties of Municipality and Police
officers.  
  
**. . .** until the certified copy of the said stay order was produced to me
by the said Susil Chandrasiri Fernando, I was not aware of the existence of
any application made to the Court of Appeal **. . .** nor any stay order
issued by Their Lordships of the Court of Appeal **. . .  
**  
**. . .** I directed the 2nd respondent to arrest the petitioner and removed
her to the police station without knowing that there was a stay order issued
by the Court of Appeal."  
  
There is no note or entry among the Information Book extracts produced to the
effect that the Petitioner was brought

**267**

to the Police station before 3.30 p.m., or by any officer other than the 1st
Respondent.  
  
The entry made by the 1st Respondent upon his return to the station at 3.30
p.m. records that it was he who arrested the Petitioner and handed her over to
the Reserve. It states that a certified copy of the stay order was produced by
Susil Fernando at 3.15 p.m. \- which must therefore have been at the scene,
and before the Petitioner was brought to the station. It does not state that
that copy was returned, and therefore - if the 1st Respondent is truthful - it
must have remained in his possession.  
  
These affidavits and entries establish that the Petitioner did refer (in the
presence of the 1st Respondent) to the fact that the Court of Appeal had
issued a stay order, in support of her right to undisturbed possession; that a
copy of that order was produced at the scene (and not later, at the Police
station); that the Petitioner was taken away from the scene only after that
document had been handed over to the 1st Respondent, and that was in defiance
of the Court order; and that she was brought to the station only at 3.30 p.m.  
  
The 1st Respondent's claim, in his affidavit, that by the time the stay order
was produced [i.e. at 3.15 p.m.] the Petitioner had been arrested and removed
to the Police Station is flatly contradicted by his own entry made at 3.30
p.m. Further, the Petitioner made a very serious allegation that he had
crumpled and thrown away the certified copy of the stay order. If his story
was true, that could have been rebutted, simply and conclusively, by the
production of the document which he claimed that Susil Fernando handed to him:
his failure to produce it makes the Petitioner's version more probable than
his.  
  
I have therefore no hesitation in accepting the Petitioner's affidavit in
preference to those of the Police Respondents.  
  
But even if I were to accept the Respondents' version, the inevitable
conclusion is that, from and after 3.15 p.m., the 1st

**268**

Respondent deprived the Petitioner of her liberty by failing to release her
immediately upon the production of the stay order, and, instead, by bringing
her, quite unnecessarily, to the Police station. And this despite his claim
that he had ordered the Municipal employees "to stop any act contravening the
stay order."  
  
In passing, I must note without comment the contrast between the ready
acceptance by the Police of Ramyapala's claim of an alleged Mayoral directive
to eject an ordinary citizen, and their summary refusal to delay such
ejectment, even for a little while, in order to verify that citizen's plea
that her right to possession was protected by a Court order.  
  
I hold that the 1st Respondent together with other Police officers assisted
Ramyapala and other Municipal employees in their endeavours to eject the
Petitioner from, and/or to prevent her having access to, her sister's shop No.
2; that they made no attempt to verify whether there was a lawful order for
ejectment, that the Petitioner did assert her rights under a stay order issued
by the Court of Appeal, and in all probability tendered a certified copy of
that order - which the 1st Respondent ignored; that the 1st Respondent either
arrested her, or ordered her arrest, without the least effort to verify her
claim; and that despite the production of the stay order he brought her, in
custody, to the Police station at 3.30 p.m., and needlessly kept her there for
another three hours. I accept her evidence that she had been subjected to
degrading treatment both at the time of arrest and while being taken to the
Police station. All this happened in the presence of the 1st Respondent and
with his acquiescence if not approval. The Petitioner, however, is not
consistent as to whether it was the 2nd Respondent Sergeant Silva or another
officer S.I. Silva who ill-treated her, and I am therefore unable to come to a
definite conclusion as to who was directly responsible for that treatment.  
  
I turn to the responsibility of the 5th and 6th Respondents. It is not
established that they knew of the stay order. Both Respondents stated:

**269**

" **. . .** the vendors including the petitioner have not agreed [to vacate
the premises] **. . .** and therefore the Respondents have complained to the
Officer-in-Charge of Dehiwela- Mt. Lavinia Police station and according to the
said complaint the police went to the market place on 18.13.1998 **. . .**
only to inform the vendors to shift to the other side of the market place
temporarily."  
  
The Police did not produce any such complaint, and it may be that the 5th
Respondent made an oral complaint. If indeed a complaint was made, that shows
that Ramyapala acted with the prior approval of the 5th Respondent. It may
well be that the 5th Respondent was motivated by the desire to complete the
shopping area. But there was no suggestion that the Petitioner's sister was
under a legal obligation to vacate her shop, even temporarily: even if she
was, that would have been a civil dispute. The 5th Respondent should have
resorted to his legal remedies, and there was no justification for setting the
Police in motion. He is therefore personally liable for the illegal acts of
the Police.  
  
I hold that the fundamental rights of the Petitioner under Articles 11, 13(1)
and 13(2) have been violated by the 11 and 5th Respondents, and award her a
sum of Rs. 60,000 as compensation and costs. There is no reason why the State
or the Municipal Council should be ordered to pay this sum. I direct the 1st
Respondent personally to pay a sum of Rs. 30,000 and the 5th Respondent
personally to pay a sum of Rs. 30,000, before 30th April 2000.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/28.html_  

