##  Manol Fernado and Another v. Jayaratne, D.M., Minister of Agriculture and
Lands and Others - SLR - 112, Vol 1 of 2000 [1999] LKSC 28; (2000) 1 Sri LR
112 (8 November 1999)

**112**

**MANEL FERNADO AND ANOTHER  
v.  
D .M. JAYARATNE, MINISTER OF  
AGRICULTURE AND LANDS AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA. J. AND  
GUNASEKARA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 797/97  
20th AGUST, 1999  
  
_Fundamental rights - Land acquisition - Sections 2 and 38, proviso (a) of the
Land Acquisition Act - Arbitrary and unreasonable decision to acquire land
-Article 12 of the Constitution -Pre-conditions for a valid notice under
section 2 of the Act.  
  
_The 2nd petitioner, a Ceylon Tamil married to a Sinhala lady had purchased a
land (which contained a house and small rubber plantation) at Horana. The 1st
respondent purported to acquire that land under section 38 proviso (a) of the
Land Acquisition Act. The 2nd petitioner received a letter dated 12.9.1997
from the 3rd respondent (Assistant Divisional Secretary) that the land had
been acquired and that he should hand over possession on 18.9.1997.  
  
The order of acquisition was preceded by a notice purporting to be under
section 2 of the Act and exihibited on the land, stating that the land was
required for a public purpose. The notice did not set out the nature of the
public purpose. However, the 3rd respondent's affidavit to the court claimed
that the land was required for establishing a Govi Sevana Centre. According to
the available evidence the acquisition had in fact been engineered by the 2nd
respondent (Gramasevaka) who had been harassing the 2nd petitioner alleging
that he was a terrorist. The 2nd respondent had also visited the 2nd
petitioner's house with police officers. Due to such harassment the 2nd
petitioner was compelled to take up residence elsewhere and to advertise the
land for sale. But the 4th respondent, (Govi Niyamaka/Secretary Sri Lanka
Freedom Party) waylaid prospective buyers and told them to refrain from
purchasing the house as there were plans to acquire the property.  
  
Thereafter, the 2nd respondent, with the approved of the 5th respondent (the
SLFP M.P. for the area) set in motion acquisition proceedings by the
publication of the section 2 notice. The said proceedings were completed
notwithstanding an appeal by the Prime Minister against the acquisition

**113**

and a recommendation by the Commissioner of Agrarian Services, after an
inquiry, that the acquisition should be abandoned.  
  
In the meantime, on 28.01.1997 the 2nd petitioner entered into an agreement
with the 1st petitioner to sell the land to the 1st petitioner. The 3rd
respondent averred that such sale after the notice under section 2 had been
exhibited contravened section 4A of the Act.  
  
**Held:**  
  
1\. In fact the petitioner's land was not required for a public purpose, hence
the acquisition was unlawful, arbitrary and unreasonable.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
`The statutory power given in order to enable the state to acquire land needed
for a public purpose cannot be used for any other purpose. That would be a
gross abuse of power, particularly in this case, where the owner's wish to
dispose of his land had been brought about by unlawful and improper harassment
on account of race".  
  
2\. The 1st to 5th respondents infringed the fundamental rights of the 2nd
petitioner, who was the owner at the relevant time, under Articles 12 (1) and
(2).  
  
3\. The order under section 38, proviso (a) was also unlawful, arbitrary and
unreasonable and that the 1st and 3rd respondents thereby infringed the
fundamental rights of the petitioner under Article 12(l).  
  
4\. The notice under section 2 was invalid and the provisions of section 4A
were inapplicable for the reason that  
  
(a) a section 2 notice must state the public purpose - although exceptions may
perhaps be implied in regard to purpose involving national security and the
like.  
  
Per Fernando J.  
  
"In my view the scheme of the Act requires a disclosure of the public purpose,
and its objects cannot be fully achieved without such disclosure"  
  
(b) The section 2 notice sent to the 2nd petitioner was in Sinhala only
despite the provisions of section 2 (2) and the fact that he was a Tamil.
Section 2 (2) requires the notice to be in the Sinhala, Tamil and English
languages. That amounts to noncompliance with a material statutory provision.

**114**

(c) In view of the fact that the petitioners land had already been determined
to be suitable for acquisition it was section 4 and not section 2 which should
have been resorted to.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
Manohara de Silva for the petitioners;  
  
S. Rajaratnam, SSC, for the 1st to 3rd, 5th and 6th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 8, 1999  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The two Petitioners complain about the acquisition of an 80 perch allotment of
land. They claim that the decision of the 1st Respondent, the Minister of
Agriculture and Lands, to acquire that land, and the acquisition itself, were
unlawful, arbitrary, capricious and mala fide; that the Respondents' attempt
to take possession of that land, under the proviso (a) to section 38 of the
Land Acquisition Act, was also unlawful, arbitrary, capricious and mala fide;
and that their fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2) have
thereby been violated.  
  
The Petitioners case was set out in detail in an affidavit filed by them. The
only counter-affidavit was by the 3rd Respondent, the Assistant Divisional
Secretary, Horana. The Petitioners stated that the 2nd Petitioner is a Ceylon
Tamil from Balangoda married to a Sinhala lady. The 2nd Petitioner purchased
that land (which contains a substantial house as well as a small rubber
plantation) in September 1995 for Rs. 500,000. He raised the purchase price by
using his lifelong savings, by pawning jewellery, and by obtaining loans. In
October 1995 the 2nd Petitioner and the members of his family went into
occupation. A few weeks thereafter the 2nd Respondent, the Grama Sevaka of
Henagama, with a team of Police officers from the Horana Police Station came
to the house and checked all their identity cards; the 2nd Respondent informed
the 2nd Petitioner that he suspected that the 2nd Petitioner was

**115**

a terrorist; and one of the Police officers said that in the event of a
soldier or Police officer being killed in action and his body being brought to
the village, the first house that would be burnt would be the 2nd
Petitioner's. Thereafter the 2nd Respondent came with Police officers on many
occasions and harassed the 2nd Petitioner and the members of his family,
making allegations that they were terrorists. On one occasion, when there was
a visitor in the house, the 2nd Respondent had come with Police officers and
stated, in the presence of the visitor, that any person, other than the
members of the household, could enter the premises only with prior permission
from the Police or himself. Humiliated, the visitor went away. All this
compelled the 2nd Petitioner to take up residence elsewhere, although he
continued to come to the house regularly to look after his rubber plantation
and other cultivations. But as he was prevented, as aforesaid, from enjoying
his property, he could not repay the loans he had taken, and he was therefore
compelled to advertise the land for sale on 14.7.96 in the Sunday newspapers.  
  
The 2nd Respondent did not file an affidavit denying any of those allegations.
The 3rd Respondent merely said that he was unaware of those averments. I
therefore accept those averments.  
  
The 2nd Petitioner did not allege that the aforesaid conduct constituted an
infringement of his freedom of choosing his residence within Sri Lanka.  
  
**THE DECISION TO ACQUIRE  
**  
The Petitioner's affidavit went on to state that some of the prospective
buyers complained that the 4t'' Respondent, the Govi Nlyamake of Henagama
(Division 609A):  
  
"had waylaid them and said to refrain from purchasing the house as there were
plans to acquire this property. At that time there were no plans whatsoever to
acquire this property but the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents connived and
instigated a conspiracy to request the Government to acquire this property. A
few days thereafter the 3rd Respondent sent letter dated 19.7.96 ["P6"] to

**116**

the 5th Respondent who is the member of Parliament and S.L.F.P. organiser of
the area [requesting] his recommendation for acquisition."  
  
The 4th Respondent did not file an affidavit denying the allegations against
him. Apart from a general denial in his affidavit, even the 3rd Respondent did
not specifically deny those allegations. His response was that:  
  
".. a request was made by the Grama Sevaka Division [sic] of 609A, Henagama,
to acquire the land in question... for the purpose of establishing a Govi
Sevana Centre .... I annex hereto a communication dated 19.7.96 from the
Samurdhi Govi Niyamake in respect of this matter marked as "3R1". Following
this request which is for a public purpose, the 5th Respondent's
recommendation was sought for the proposed acquisition by letter dated 19th J
my 1996 ("P6"). At the same time, the Commissioner of Agrarian Services too
was notified of the request made by the Govi Niyamake, Henagama. (I annex
hereto a copy of the said letter marked as "3R2".)..... the Commissioner of
Agrarian Services directed that the land be inspected by an officer attached
to the Department of Agrarian Services, Kalutara, who has forwarded his report
dated 6th August 1996 [a copy marked "3R3" was produced].  
  
Following this direction, the 2nd Petitioner was sent a notice under section 2
of the Land Acquisition Act ("P 11 A" and "P1 1B")......" [emphasis added]  
  
It is clear that "Samurdhi Govi Niyamake" and "Govi Niyamake" refer to one and
the same person - the 4th Respondent. It was he who wrote "3R1 " of 19.7.96 to
the Divisional Secretary, and when the 3rd Respondent wrote "P6" the same day
to the 5th Respondent, it was to him that a copy was sent.  
  
The reference to "Grama Sevaka Division of 609A, Henagama'' is clearly a
mistake for "Grama Sevaka of Division 609A, Henagama" \- and that was the 2nd
Respondent.

**117**

The 3rd Respondent was not truthful in claiming that, when the 5th
Respondent's recommendation was sought, "at the same time" the Commissioner
was notified of the request for acquisition. On the contrary, the Commissioner
was informed only later, by letter "3R2" dated 6.8.96. and indeed, by that
letter he was not informed of any request for acquisition, but of the 5th
Respondent's approval of the acquisition (upon the 4th Respondent's
representation that the land and premises were suitable for a Govi Sevana
Centre). His views were not sought, and he was simply told to submit a
proposal for the acquisition, through the Secretary of his Ministry, to the
Secretary, Ministry of Lands. It also cannot be true that the report submitted
on 6.8.96 was upon the direction of the Commissioner. No such direction was
produced. In any event since the Commissioner was only informed by "3R2" dated
6.8.96 (which he would not in the ordinary course have received until after
6.8.96), there was no time for him to have made any direction which could have
resulted in an inspection report dated 6.8.96.  
  
It was not disputed at the hearing that the question whether the Petitioners'
land was required and was suitable for a Govi Sevana Centre was a matter for
the Commissioner. However, the available evidence shows that there was no
request originating from the Commissioner, or with his knowledge or approval,
and that he gave no direction for the inspection of the land.  
  
Because of rumours that their land was to be acquired, the 2nd Petitioner's
wife appealed to the Divisional Secretary, Horana, on 17.10.96. The reply came
from the 3rd Respondent who stated that a request for acquisition received by
him, had been submitted to the 5th Respondent, whose approval had been
obtained; and that thereafter the preliminary proposal for acquisition had
been prepared, and had been sent to the Commissioner for submission to the
Secretary, Ministry of Lands. It was not suggested that it was the
Commissioner who had initiated or prepared that proposal

**118**

On 29.10.95, the 2nd Petitioner's wife submitted an appeal to the 1st
Respondent, in which she made a brief reference to the 2nd Respondent's
conduct. She also appealed to the 5th Respondent. She received no replies.  
  
Thereafter a notice dated 2.11.96, purporting to be under section 2 of the
Land Acquisition Act, was exhibited on the land. I will deal later with the
several issues which arise in relation to that notice.  
  
The factual position immediately prior to the issue of the section 2 notice
was as follows. The 2nd Respondent had made the 2nd Petitioner's occupation of
the premises difficult, if not impossible; the 4th Respondent had then
obstructed his efforts to sell his property. Thereupon, without any
consideration by the Commissioner of Agrarian Services ("the Commissioner") of
the need for a Govi Sevana Centre, or of the suitability of the Petitioner's
land for such a Centre, without a request from him, and without even informing
him, the 3rd Respondent had sought and obtained the 5th Respondent's approval
for the acquisition; and only thereafter a proposal for acquisition had been
prepared, and sent to the Commissioner, not for his approval but simply for
transmission to the relevant Ministry. Not only did the 3rd and 4th
Respondents act with remarkable speed - within days of the 2nd Petitioner
advertising his property for sale - but both of them described the house as
being unoccupied, without even a hint as to the circumstances in which the 2nd
Petitioner had been forced to leave the premises,. There in no evidence that
the Commissioner had decided that any land in the area - let alone the 2nd
Petitioner's land - was needed for a Govi Sevana Centre or any other public
purpose.  
  
The 3rd Respondent by letter dated 20.11.96 forwarded to the 2' Petitioner a
copy of the section 2 notice; both the letter and the copy of the notice were
in Sinhala, although the 2nd Petitioner was a Tamil. Since the 2nd
Petitioner's wife had not received a response to her appeals, the 2nd
Petitioner's mother appealed to the Hon. Prime Minister, who thereupon wrote
to, the 1' Respondent a letter dated 7.1.97 which speaks for itself:

**119**

"Acquisition of land at Henegama Village  
in Horana Divisional Secretary s Division

I have received an appeal from a dear friend of mine, Mrs. Polly Murugesu of
33C, Aponso Avenue, Dehiwela, requesting me to intervene on her behalf in what
she alleges [is] discrimination and victimization.  
  
Her son had bought a house situated within the Horana Divisional Secretary's
Division. Your Ministry has issued a notice under section 2 of the Land
Acquisition Act (Chapter 460) to acquire this house which the Grama Seva
Niladhari of Horana 609 Grama Seva Niladhari Division has misrepresented as
abandoned.  
  
I am attaching a copy of the notice under section 2.  
  
I am personally aware that Mrs. Murugesu had very difficult times during the
disturbances in 1983. They had to leave Colombo and for sometime they were in
Jaffna. They bought this house recently as houses in Colombo were beyond their
reach. However, they were unable to live in Horana as people there were
hostile to them. I believe that it is a crime to acquire this house which they
are now planning to dispose of. I reliably understand that the residents of
Horana have chased away people who have come to purchase the house informing
that this house is to be acquired.  
  
I certainly [indecipherable] you to take very urgent action on this matter and
stop forthwith any acquisition proceedings, lest it will be misconstrued as an
act of communal discrimination."  
  
It appears that the Hon. Prime Minister wrote another letter dated 5.3.97 to
the 1st Respondent, but that has not been produced.  
  
By letter dated 18.4.97 the Assistant Commissioner of Agrarian Services,
Kalutara, informed the 2nd Petitioner's wife

**120**

that the Commissioner had directed him to inquire into her objections to the
acquisition. The 2nd petitioner averred that he and his wife attended the
inquiry on 2.5.97; that they received a good hearing; and that the Assistant
Commissioner informed the 2nd Petitioner that he would not recommend the
acquisition as it would be unreasonable to acquire that property. The 3rd
Respondent had no personal knowledge thereof and could not have controverted
those averments. On the contrary, he stated that the Commissioner "has
recommended to suspend the acquisition after inquiry", and produced the
Commissioner's letter dated 23.10.97 ("3R6") to the Secretary, Ministry of
Lands. In that letter the Commissioner confirmed that after inquiry into the
acquisition of the land for the Govi Sevana Centre, the Assistant Commissioner
had recommended against acquisition: thus in May itself the 1st Respondent
must have known that the acquisition had not been recommended. The
Commissioner also requested that the acquisition proceedings be suspended in
accordance with section 50 of the Land Acquisition Act (which in fact provides
for the abandonment of acquisition proceedings before the publication of an
order under section 38).  
  
Thus the pleadings and the letter "3R6" establish, beyond any reasonable
doubt, that at no stage between October 1995 and October 1997 did the
Commissioner propose or approve of the acquisition of the Petitioners' land
for a Govi Sevana Centre; and that the Assistant Commissioner did inform the
tad Petitioner, at the conclusion of the inquiry held on 2.5.97, that he would
not recommend the acquisition. Nevertheless, the 1st Respondent wrote to the
Hon. Prime Minister a letter dated 14.5.97 stating that, pursuant to the
request of the Commissioner, a notice under section 2 had been issued on
2.11.96. Not a single document emanating from the Commissioner has been
produced which suggests that he had ever proposed or requested that
acquisition, or viewed it with any favour whatsoever. On the contrary, the
evidence is overwhelming that the only proposal or request for acquisition was
by the 3rd and 4th Respondents. The 1st Respondent further

**121**

stated that the acquisition had been temporarily stayed at the request of
Minister S. Thondaman, but that the 5th Respondent, upon inquiry, had said to
go ahead, and that because the Hon. Prime Minister by letter dated 5.3.97
(which has not been produced) had requested that the acquisition be stopped,
reference had again been made to the 5th Respondent who had wanted the
acquisition to be proceeded with. In conclusion, the 1st Respondent stated
that upon the recommendation of the Member of Parliament for the area in which
the land was situated the land would be acquired.  
  
The 3rd Respondent stated in his affidavit that the Hon. Prime Minister's
letter dated 7.1.97 was referred to the 5th Respondent for his observations,
"but the 5th Respondent Minister directed that the acquisition proceedings
should continue."  
  
I hold that the 1st Respondent had no material on which, objectively, it could
reasonably have been concluded that the Petitioners' land was required for the
stated public purpose of a Govi Sevana Centre; that he did not bona fide think
that it was so required; and that he had misinformed the Hon. Prime Minister
that the Commissioner had made a request for such acquisition. Further,
although no formal order had been made under section 4 of the Land Acquisition
Act, an inquiry was held into the 2nd Petitioners objections to the
acquisition, after which the inquiring officer (the Assistant Commissioner)
had made a recommendation (which the Commissioner had subsequently approved),
that the land should not be acquired: and that the 1st Respondent ignored or
failed to consider. On the other hand, he placed undue reliance on the 5th
Respondent's recommendation which failed to take account of the relevant
factors. I hold that in fact the Petitioners' land was not required for a
public purpose, and that the acquisition was unlawful, arbitrary and
unreasonable.  
  
It is necessary to consider whether the fact that the 2nd Petitioner had
decided in July 1996 to sell the property makes

**122**

any difference: Can it be said that if an owner wishes to sell his property,
he cannot object if the State thereafter decides to acquire it? If, in the
case of a willing seller, an acquisition would result in the payment of the
market value of the land acquired with the same promptitude and convenience as
upon a private sale, it might seem unduly technical to invalidate such an
acquisition. But two questions arise.  
  
First, was the 2nd Petitioner in the position of a willing seller, likely to
receive prompt payment of the market value? Considering the circumstances
which compelled him to decide to sell his property it is impossible to treat
the 2nd Petitioner as a willing seller. Further, acquisition proceedings are
known to involve delay, technicalities and expense, and seldom result in the
prompt payment of market value or market rates of interest and that is perhaps
why the Hon. Prime Minister remarked that "it is a crime to acquire this house
which they are now planning to dispose of."  
  
Second, does the Land Acquisition Act authorize the acquisition of a land,
which is not in fact required for a public purpose, simply because the owner
wishes to dispose of it? The statutory power given in order to enable the
State to acquire land needed for a public purpose cannot be used for any other
purpose. That would be a gross abuse of power, particularly in this case,
where the owner's wish to dispose of his land had been brought about by
unlawful and improper harassment on account of race.  
  
In my view, the Petitioners' allegation that the 2nd, 3rd and 4th Respondents
connived and conspired to procure the acquisition of this property has been
established . Their conduct resulted in the 5th Respondent's recommendation
and the 1st Respondent's decision to acquire.  
  
I hold that the 1st to 5th Respondents have infringed the fundamental rights
of the 2nd Petitioner, who was the owner at the relevant time, under Articles
12(I) and (2).

**123**

**THE ORDER UNDER SECTION 38 PROVISO (a)  
**  
The 1st Respondent's letter dated 14.5.97 was not copied to the 2nd Petitioner
or his wife. In the circumstances, I accept the 2nd Petitioner's statement
that he "did not proceed with any legal or administrative action as (he had
been) assured that the acquisition was not to be proceeded with." However, on
12.9.97 he received a letter (in Sinhala) dated 10.9.97 from the 3rd
Respondent ;that the land had been acquired under the proviso (a) to section
38 of the Land Acquisition Act, and that he should hand over possession on
18.9.97. The 2nd Petitioner's mother, Mrs. Polly Murugesu, died on 15.9.97,
and the 2nd Petitioner informed the 3rd Respondent by telegram (which the 3rd
Respondent admitted) that he would not be able to attend due to his mother's
funeral.  
  
In the meantime, the 1st Petitioner had come into the picture. Being unable to
repay the loans taken by him, the 2nd Petitioner had entered into an
Agreement, dated 28.1.97, to sell the land to the 1st Petitioner; and the Deed
of Transfer was executed on 14.9.97.  
  
According to the 1st Petitioner, when the 3rd Respondent came to take
possession on 18.9.97, she asked for his identity card. He refused to show it,
and went away after inspecting the premises. Thereafter she was arrested and
produced before the Horana Magistrate on a charge of obstructing a public
officer under section 183 of the Penal Code. Replying to the 1st Petitioner's
allegations, the 3rd Respondent did not deny that he had refused to show his
identity card, and did not say in what way the 1st Petitioner had obstructed
him.  
  
The 3rd Respondent also averred that the 2nd Petitioner has contravened
section 4A of the Act by selling the land after notices under section 2 had
been issued and exhibited, and that makes it necessary to determine the
validity of the section 2 notice.  
  
By September 1997, the Assistant Commissioner's inquiry had been concluded.
The 3rd Respondent did not claim

**124**

that he (or other relevant officers) did not know recommendations had been
made. He did not state what circumstances made it urgent to take immediate
possession of the land.  
  
Apart from that, an order under proviso (a) can only be made after a notice
under section 2, or section 4, has been exhibited. In this case, for the
reasons set out below, I hold that there was no valid section 2 notice.  
  
Accordingly, I hold that the order under section 38, proviso (a), and the
attempt to take possession were also unlawful, arbitrary and unreasonable; and
that the 1st and 3rd Respondents have thereby infringed the fundamental rights
of the Petitioners under Article 12

(1).  
  
**THE SECTION 2 NOTICE  
**  
Sections 2, 4 and 4A of the Act provide as follows:  
  
" 2(1) Where the Minister decides that land in any area is needed for any
public purpose, he may direct the acquiring officer of the district in which
that area lies to cause a notice in accordance with subsection (2) to be
exhibited in some conspicuous places in the area.  
  
2(2) The notice referred to in subsection (1) shall be in the Sinhala, Tamil
and English languages and shall state that land in the area specified in the
notice is required for a public purpose and that all or any of the acts
authorized by subsection (3) may be done on any land in that area in order to
investigate the suitability of that land for that public purpose.  
  
2(3) After a notice under subsection (2) is exhibited ............... [an
authorized officer] may enter any land in that area ... and ... (f) do all
other acts necessary to ascertain whether that land is suitable for the public
purpose for which land in that area is required. . ."

**125**

" 4(1) where the Minister considers that a particular land is suitable for a
public purpose, . . . he shall direct the acquiring officers of the district
... to cause a notice in accordance with subsection (3) to be given to the
owner or owners of that land and to be exhibited in some conspicuous places on
or near that land ...  
  
4(2) The Minister may issue a direction under the preceding provisions of this
section notwithstanding that no notice has been exhibited as provided by
section 2 ...  
  
4(3) The notice referred to in subsection (1) shall -  
  
(a) be in the Sinhala, Tamil and English languages; . . .  
  
(b) ...  
  
(c) state that the Government intends to acquire that land or servitude for a
public purpose, and that written objections to the intended acquisition may be
made ....  
  
(d). . ."  
  
" 4A(1) where a notice has been issued or exhibited in respect of any land
under section 2 or section 4, no owner of that land shall, during the period
of twelve months after the date of issue or exhibition of such notice -  
  
(a) sell or otherwise dispose of that land; or ...  
  
(b ).....  
  
4A(2) Any sale or other disposal of land in contravention of the provisions of
subsection (1) (a) of this section shall be null and void. "  
The first question is whether the public purpose should be disclosed in the
section 2 and section 4 notices.  
  
The minister cannot order the issue of a section 2 notice unless he has a
public purpose in mind. Is there any valid reason why he should withhold this
from the owners who may be affected?

**126**

Section (2)2 required the notice to state that one or more acts may be done
"in order to investigate the suitability of that land for that public
purpose": obviously, "that" public purpose cannot be an undisclosed one. This
implies that the purpose must be disclosed. From a practical point of view, if
an officer acting under section 2(3) (fl does not know the public purpose, he
cannot fulfil his duty of ascertaining whether any particular land is suitable
for that purpose.  
  
Likewise, the object of section 4(3) is to enable the owner to submit his
objections: which would legitimately include an objection that his land is not
suitable for the public purpose which the state has in mind, or that there are
other and more suitable lands. That object would be defeated, and there would
be no meaningful inquiry into objections, unless the public purpose is
disclosed. If the public purpose has to be disclosed at that stage, there is
no valid  reason why it should not be revealed at the section 2 stage.  
  
In my view, the scheme of the Act requires a disclosure of the public purpose,
and its objects cannot be fully achieved without such disclosure. A section 2
notice must state the public purpose - although exceptions may perhaps be
implied in regard to purposes involving national security and the like.  
  
The second matter is that the section 2 notice sent to the 2nd Petitioner was
in Sinhala, despite the provisions of section 2(2), although he was a Tamil
(of also Article 22(2) (c)) of the Constitution. That amounts to non-
compliance with a material statutory provision.  
  
Finally, the purpose of section 2 is to ascertain whether land in any area,
and if so which land, is suitable for a public purpose. If without resort to
that provision a particular land has already been identified, then it is
section 4 (and not section 2) which should be resorted to. In this instance,
the 2nd Petitioner's land had already been determined to be suitable, and
there was no purpose in issuing a section 2 notice.

**127**

The language of the section 2 notice issued in this case clearly disclosed
that it was no more than a pretext. Besides non - disclosure of the alleged
public purpose, it stated that "land in the area described below is required
for a public purpose". The "area" described was just the 2nd Petitioner's
property. The notice went on to authorize an officer "to enter any land in the
aforesaid area (i.e. any land within the 2nd Petitioner's property!), and "to
ascertain whether that land is suitable for the public purpose for which land
in that area is required". By the time that notice was issued, the 2nd
Petitioner's land already had been identified for acquisition, and if that had
been validly done, what should have been issued was a notice under section 4.
The issue of a section 2 notice instead was a pretext.  
  
I therefore hold that the section 2 notice was a nullity and the provisions of
section 4A were inapplicable. The fact that the 2nd petitioner transferred the
land to the 1st Petitioner did not in any way affect the formers right to
relief in respect of the decision to acquire and the section 38 notice or the
latter's right to relief in respect of the attempt to take possession.  
  
**RELIEF  
**  
I award the 2nd Petitioner a sum of Rs. 50,000 as compensation, and the
Petitioners jointly a sum of Rs. 15,000 as costs, both payable by the State
within one month.  
  
**WADYGIDAOUTUTA. J.** \- I agree.  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J**. - I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/28.html_  

