##  Bennett Rathnayake v. The Sri Lanka Rupavahini Corporation and Others -
SLR - 93, Vol 2 of 1999 [1998] LKSC 28; (1999) 2 Sri LR 93 (11 June 1998)

**93**

**BENNETT RATHNAYAKE  
v.  
THE SRI LANKA RUPAVAHINI CORPORATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNAWARDANA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. (FR) 867/96  
FEBRUARY 18, 25 AND MAY 26 1998

_Fundamental rights - Rejection of telefilm offered for telecasting - Absence
of fair and objective procedure for selecting films - Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution._

The petitioner produced a Sinhala telefilm entitled ''Makara Vjithaya' at a
cost, he said, of Rs. 2.3 million. The 1st respondent Corporation refused to
telecast the petitioner's telefilm during 'prime time" for telefilms of that
type, viz between 8.30 pm and 9.00 pm on Mondays, Tuesdays and Thursdays. The
telefilm was reviewed on three occasions by different boards. On each occasion
the decision was adverse to the petitioner. But he was not told who the
members of the board were, how they had been appointed, what procedure they
would follow, what criteria they would apply, what their views were about the
film and the reasons for the decision.

**Held :**

The statutory powers which the 1st respondent has are not absolute,
unfettered, or unreviewable; they are held in trust for the benefit of the
public, and they cannot be exercised arbitrarily or capriciously or
unreasonably. The airwaves are public property and the State is under an
obligation to ensure that they are used for the benefit of the public, for
which purpose the 1st respondent was obliged to establish and implement a fair
and objective procedure to determine whether a telefilm submitted to it was
suitable for screening, and if so the time of screening. This obligation has
been violated in breach of the petitioner's fundamental rights under Article
12 (1) of the Constitution.

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. FCC_ (1969) 395 US 367.

2. _Secretary, Ministry of Information v. Cricket Association of Bengal AIR_ 1995 SC 1236, 1282, 1306.

94

3. _Fernando v. SLBC_ (1996) 1 Sri LR. 157.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Sanjeewa Jayawardena_ for petitioner.

_Kolitha Dharmawardena,_ DSG with _N. Pulle,_ SC for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

June 11, 1998.  
  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The petitioner produced a Sinhala telefilm entitled "Makara Vijithaya",
consisting of 22 episodes, at a cost, he says, of Rs. 2.3 million. He
complains that the refusal by the 1st respondent, the Sri Lanka Rupavahini
Corporation, to telecast his telefilm during "prime time" for telefilms of
that type (which is between 8.30 pm and 9.00 pm on Mondays, Tuesdays, and
Thursdays) was in violation of his fundamental rights under Articles 12 (1)
and 14 (1) (a).

The relief which the petitioner asked for in his petition included
declarations that the refusal of prime time for his telefilm was a nullity,
and that the Board of the 1st respondent had no right to decide on its
suitability for telecast during prime time, as well as a direction that it be
telecast on prime time. However, learned counsel for the petitioner, in the
course of his oral submissions, acknowledged that this would require the Court
to determine, on the merits, whether the telefilm was suitable for telecast
during prime time: that is not the function of this Court. He asked, instead,
for a declaration that the procedure leading up to the refusal of prime time
was in violation of Article 12 (1), for want of a fair and objective selection
procedure, including criteria announced in advance, for compensation, and for
directions to the 1st respondent to prescribe and publish the criteria for
selection of teledramas for telecast during prime time, and to set up an
independent and competent review panel to determine whether telefilms
(including "Makara Vijithaya") met those criteria.

95

It is not in dispute that the petitioner had been producing telefilms since
1985; that the 1st respondent had accepted and telecast five telefilms
produced by him between 1986 and 1995, two of which had over fifteen episodes;
that he had the backing of a suitable sponsor for "Makara Vijithaya", who
would meet the 1st respondent's fees and charges for telecast during prime
time; and that on 3.1.96 the petitioner had duly submitted that telefilm for
review, paying the 1st respondent the required review fee of Rs. 500 per
episode.

The telefilm was first reviewed on or about 16.1.96, by three persons ("the
preview board"). According to the affidavit dated 26.8.97 of the 2nd
respondent, the Director-General of the 1st respondent, the "preview board"
for a teledrama consists of three persons, and is appointed by the Board of
Directors of the 1st respondent, "from among University lecturers, artists,
dramatists, and musicians, etc."; he did not say who selected the three
persons who constituted the preview board for "Makara Vijithaya": whether it
was the Board or some one else. The petitioner was not officially informed of
the result; and he says that on 23.1.96 he asked the 13th respondent, the
Director (Programs), who then called for the file; and it transpired that the
telefilm had been rejected for telecast unless edited.

The petitioner submitted an appeal to the 13th respondent the very same day.
The telefilm was thereupon submitted for review to "the appeal board",
consisting of another three persons, who should have been named, according to
the 2nd respondent, by the Director General. Here again he did not say who had
named them. By letter dated 29.1.96, the 13th respondent informed the
petitioner that it had been approved for telecast outside prime time.

By letter dated 31.1.96 the petitioner again appealed, this time to the 2nd
respondent, the Director-General. Not having received a reply, he complained
to the Telemakers' Guild - an association of telefilm producers formed in
December, 1993. Eighteen out of the twenty-one members of the executive
committee viewed the telefilm, and agreed that there was no reason to disallow
it. By letter dated 25.2.96 the Guild protested to the 8th respondent, the
Chairman, stating that after two long discussions (obviously, those of 30.8.95
and 18.9.95, to which

96

I will refer later) agreement had been reached as to the basis on which the
suitability of a telefilm should be determined, and that the rejection of
"Makara Vijithaya" was unjust and unreasonable. After several phone calls to
the 13th respondent, says the petitioner, the 13th respondent told him, on
20.3.96, that the telefilm had not yet been submitted for review to a higher
body. He then met the 2nd respondent, who said he had no time to speak to the
petitioner, whereupon the petitioner immediately wrote him a letter dated
20.3.96 complaining of shabby treatment. By letter P21 dated 22.3.96, the 13th
respondent informed the petitioner that "the higher appeal board" had approved
the telefilm for telecast outside prime time. It is the respondents' case that
a panel of two persons, consisting of the 5th respondent, a director of the
1st respondent, and the 6th respondent, Mr. EMG Edirisinghe, had viewed the
telefilm on or about 9.3.96, but the 2nd respondent did not say who had
appointed them.

In all three instances, the petitioner had not been told who the members of
the board were, how they had been appointed, what procedure they would follow,
what criteria they would apply, what their views were about "Makara
Vijithaya", and the reasons for their decision.

When he received P21 of 22.3.96, the petitioner wrote three letters, all dated
25.3.96. The first was P24 to the Minister of Media and Tourism complaining
that he had been unfairly treated by the 1st respondent. He said that about
one week thereafter - probably after the 2nd respondent had become aware that
he had complained to the Minister - the 2nd respondent sent him P25 dated
26.3.96, claiming that the usual procedure was for a three-tiered process of
review: review (preview?) board, appeal board, and higher appeal board; that
the Telemakers' Guild had agreed to this, and that persons nominated by the
Guild had also been appointed to those boards. The Secretary to the Ministry
by letter dated 30.4.96 called for a full report from the 8th respondent. No
report was sent.

The second was P22 to the 2nd respondent asking for the reasons for refusing
prime time for "Makara Vijithaya". It was only six weeks later - after the
Secretary to the Ministry had called for a full report - that the petitioner
received a belated reply from the 2nd

97

respondent giving reasons. The petitioner's averment that that reply had been
antedated to 8.4.96 and was received only on 15.5.96 (in an envelope
postmarked 13.5.96), was not denied by the 2nd respondent in his affidavit.

The third was P23 to the 13th respondent asking him to specify the time-belt
allotted for telecast of "Makara Vijithaya". That was never done, despite a
reminder on 6.5.96.

In support of his affidavit, the 2nd respondent produced a memorandum (2R2)
dated 4.9.95 from the Secretary of the 1st respondent Board to the Deputy
Director-General, General Programs (DDG (GP)), which reproduced the following
extract from the minutes of the Board meeting of 18.8.95:

" **. . .** It is stated [in the DDG (GP)'s memorandum) that at present these
teledramas are previewed by a panel of three members from the preview board in
the first instance, and if rejected the producer can appeal **. . .** It is
then previewed by a separate panel of three members. It has been reported that
**. . .** [if again rejected] some producers thereafter seek **. . .** to
bring pressure on the SLRC officials to accept the teledrama for telecast **.
. .** the DDG (GP) has proposed appointing a Supreme Appeal Board to make a
final decision.

The Corporation **. . .** decided that each teledrama brought by outside
producers should be previewed as follows:

In the first instance: | A panel of three members from the  
---|---  
  | Preview Board, nominated by the  
  | DDG (GP)  
  |  
If an appeal is made | A further panel of three members from the  
by the producer: | Preview Board, nominated by the DG  
  |  
If a further appeal | The Members of Corporation reserve the  
is made by | the right to appoint a third panel for a final  
producer: | decision if it feels necessary only.  
  
98

  |  Members for this panel will be appointed  
---|---  
  |  by the Corporation and include a Member  
  |  of the Corporation."  
  
There is a handwritten minute on 2R2 the significance of which became clear
only later:

"DDG (GP)

This decision has to be reviewed according to the discussions we had with
'TELENISA'."

"TELE NI SA" is the English transliteration of the acronym for the name of the
Guild in Sinhala.

The 2nd respondent did not produce the Board minute and "the DDG (GP)'s
memorandum".

As already noted, no report was sent to the Secretary. The Telemakers' Guild
then wrote to the Minister on 7.6.96, whereupon, the petitioner says, "a
certain Mrs. Sumana Perera telephoned him and asked [for] another copy of
Makara Vijithaya to be viewed by Ministry officials designated by the Hon.
Minister"; he complied. The petitioner sent a letter of demand to the 1st
respondent which, he says, he withdrew when the Secretary informed him that it
was an impediment to the Ministry taking action. Thereafter, the Secretary
informed him that:

"the Hon. Minister had named three officers to view MAKARA VIJITHAYA and to
forward their recommendations. This the Rupavahini authorities had however
objected to.

The Hon. Minister had then named 10 persons and had requested the Rupavahini
authorities to select three from among themselves and allow them to view
MAKARA VIJITHAYA and make their recommendations. This too had been resisted by
the Rupavahini authorities and it had counter-offered to have the film viewed
by its Board of Directors to which suggestion the Hon. Minister had finally
agreed and conveyed his agreement on 16.8.96 [by P29]."

99

In his affidavit the 2nd respondent denied those averments. He made no mention
of any Ministerial proposals, and did not produce the relevant correspondence.
He only produced the 8th respondent's letter dated 9.8.96 to the Secretary,
which said that it was better if the final decision was taken by the Board of
the 1st respondent. However, that letter made reference to the "additional
names suggested by the Minister", and thus supported the petitioner's version.

But even the Minister's letter of 16.8.96 did not result in prompt action. The
petitioner again complained to the Minister on 1.10.96; that complaint was
forwarded to the 8th respondent, the Chairman, on 9.10.96. It was only then
that the Chairman submitted a report dated 12.10.96 stating that the telefilm
had been viewed by five out of the seven members of the Board, who were
unanimously of the view that "Makara Vijithaya" was not suitable for telecast
at any time whatsoever. That was not copied to the petitioner, and was only
produced in these proceedings.

By letter dated 1.11.96 the Secretary informed the petitioner that after
viewing the telefilm the Board of Directors had submitted a report to the
Minister that the telefilm was suitable for telecast outside prime time.

No explanation has been offered for this discrepancy between the report and
the Secretary's letter.

Another curious circumstance is that the 5th respondent, who had previously
concluded (as a member of the higher appeal board) that the telefilm could be
telecast outside prime time, changed his mind when he viewed it in the company
of his fellow-Board members. For that he has offered no explanation up to now.

During the initial stages of the hearing, the learned Deputy Solicitor-General
submitted that although the Telemakers' Guild had proposed (in the course of
the two discussions held on 30.8.95 and 18.9.95) that their nominees should be
appointed to one or another of the review boards, yet the 1st respondent had
not agreed. Accordingly, he submitted, their nominees had not been appointed
to any of the three review boards.

100

In the course of the hearing on the second day (24.2.98), it appeared that
there were serious inconsistencies, if not contradictions, in the respondents'
position, as to several issues:

1\. Whether there had been any agreement with the Telemakers' Guild as to the
procedure for review of telefilms, and particularly as to Guild representation
on any review body; and, if so, whether such agreement had been approved by
the Board of the 1st respondent;

2\. The review procedure established by the 1st respondent;

3\. Whether there had been any breach of such agreement (if any) and/or of
such established procedure, in relation to 'Makara Vijithaya';

4\. Whether the Minister had made proposals as alleged by the petitioner, and
if so whether the Board had considered them.

It appeared to us that the 1st respondent, its Chairman and Directors, and the
2nd respondent had not made a full and accurate disclosure of the facts and
the documents relevant to those issues. Accordingly, on 9.3.98 the registrar
communicated our order to the 1st respondent to produce the following
documents:

(i) All Board minutes and Board papers pertaining to (a) the applications and
appeals made by the petitioner for the selection of the telefilm "Makara
Vijithaya" for telecast, (b) the appointment of panels for review of that
telefilm, and (c) the decisions taken by those panels.

(ii) All letters of appointment issued to (a) the members of the "Preview
Board" referred to in the Board minute of 18.8.95, and (b) to the members of
the three panels which reviewed "Makara Vijithaya".

(iii) All Board minutes and Board papers pertaining to (a) the discussions
held on 30.8.95 and 18.9.95 between the SLRC

101

and the Telemakers' Guild as to the procedure for the review and selection of
telefilms for telecast, and (b) the procedures laid down for the selection of
telefilms for telecast. (This should include Memorandom of DDG (GP), and Board
minute of 18.8.95.)

(iv) The minutes of the discussion held on held on 18.9.95.

(v) All Board minutes and Board papers pertaining to (a), the correspondence
with the Minister of Media & Tourism regarding the telecast of that telefilm,
and (b) the decision that it should be viewed by all the members of the Board,
as well as the decision of the Board taken after such viewing.

(vi) All correspondence with the Ministry of Media and Tourism regarding the
said telefilm during the period March to November, 1996 (Ministry reference
MTA/M/RC and MTA/ M/RC/52).

The respondents' registered Attorney-at-law, by motion dated 26.3.98, tendered
the "available documents". Only two Board minutes were furnished: Minute No.
528.03.01 of 13.9.96 (which recorded that the 8th respondent informed the
Corporation that he had been directed by the Minister that the members of the
Corporation should preview the telefilm, and that the members had decided to
accede to the request made by the Ministry), and Minute No. 529.06.06 (fixing
the date for such preview). Three letters from the Ministry (two dated June,
1996 and one dated 31.7.96) were produced. It is clear from the third that
there was another letter of the same date: but that was withheld. The Ministry
letters refer to certain proposals made by the Minister, substantially as
averred by the petitioner (although he was mistaken as to minor details), They
show that the 2nd respondent's denial in that respect was false. Further, no
Board minute or Board paper was produced to show that the Minister's proposals
were ever put to the Board; they have been rejected by the 8th respondent,
whose position (as stated in his letter dated 9.8.96) was that the final
decision should be by the Board. In his reply dated 16.8.96 the Secretary
merely informed the 8th respondent that the Minister approved that course

102

of action. The 8th respondent's statement to the Board that he had been
directed by the Minister that the Board should preview the telefilm is
therefore in the teeth of the documentary evidence.

The motion went on to state:

"We are unable to forward the following documents **. . .** as such documents
[have] never been in existence **. . .** "

Among the documents listed as non-existent were Board minutes and Board papers
pertaining to (a) the applications and appeals made by the petitioner for the
selection of the telefilm "Makara Vijithaya" for telecast, (b) the appointment
of panels for review of that telefilm, and (c) the discussions held on 30.8.95
and 18.9.95 between the SLRC and the Telemakers' Guild as to the procedure for
the review and selection of telefilms for telecast.

Further, despite specific mention in 2R2 of "the DDG (GP)'s memorandum" and
the Board minute of 18.8.95, no excuse was offered for the failure to produce
them. The respondents seemed to want the Court to believe that they too were
non-existent.

The motion purported to explain that the practice in appointing review panels
was "contacting the members of the panel on telephone in order to schedule a
date and a time convenient to members"; it was not explained who determined
which members to contact, and in which order; and, in particular, which
members to summon if perchance more than three were available. Time was
requested to forward the letters of appointment issued to members of the
preview board referred to in the Board minute of 18.8.95. The suggestion
appeared to be that a pool of members was appointed by the Board, but panels
were constituted most informally, leaving no trace of their appointment.
Despite the lapse of two months before the next date of hearing, all that was
forthcoming were two letters of appointment to the "supreme appeal board",
issued on 2.8.96 and 1.11.96 - which were plainly irrelevant as they were
issued after the dates material to this case.

103

At the resumed hearing on 26.5.98 we drew the attention of the learned Deputy
Solicitor-General to the available evidence as to the agreed procedure for
appointing panels: the 1st respondent's minutes of a discussion (held on
14.12.94) between the 8th respondent (and other officials) and the Telemakers'
Guild, recorded an agreement that the three-member review board would include
one member from among four nominees of the Guild; a letter dated 9.3.95 from
the 13th respondent to the petitioner, conveying the decision of the review
board regarding another telefilm, stated that it was an independent board; and
the minutes of further discussions between the 8th respondent (and other
officials) and the Telemakers' Guild, on 30.8.95 and 18.9.95 showed that the
Guild had proposed that instead of nominating representatives to the review
board, it would nominate to the appeal board. It is true that the Gulid's
minutes recorded agreement, while the 1st respondent's minutes showed only a
proposal, but nevertheless both sets of minutes proceed on the basis that
there had previously been agreement as to Guild representation on the review
board. Both sets of minutes recorded the five names proposed by the Guild. We
pointed out that since the 2nd respondent's letter P25 of 26.3.96 stated that
persons nominated by the Guild had been on all the boards, the truth appeared
to be that the two discussions did result in an agreement.

The learned Deputy Solicitor-General, who was obviously labouring under the
disadvantage of incomplete instructions, made inconsistent submissions on that
issue. First he tried to maintain that there was no agreement about
nomination, but only a proposal. Faced with the agreement of 14.12.94 and the
letter P25 of 26.3.96, he then argued that the statements and agreements by
the Chairman and the Director-General did not reflect actual Corporation
policy, and stated that in fact no Guild nominees were appointed to any of the
boards. Later he argued that the agreement was to nominate to a pool from
which the 1st respondent would appoint the panels, there being no assurance
that a Guild nominee would be included in every panel. We pointed out that the
"DDG (GP)'s memorandum" and the Board minute of 18.8.95 (both referred to in
2R2) would have resolved the issue beyond doubt. Finally, he submitted that
even if a Guild nominee had been included in a panel of three, that would have
made no difference as

104

the other two would have constituted a majority. That was tantamount to an
admission that if there was no unanimity, those two would invariably agree
with each other, and disagree with the Guild nominee! Comment as to a
procedure whose result can be thus predicted is superfluous.

During the morning session on 26.5.98, the learned Deputy Solicitor-General
requested a further opportunity to trace the missing documents, and to produce
them during the afternoon session. At about 2.30 pm copies of two memoranda
and several Board minutes were tendered. Those documents reveal the falsity of
the respondents' position, but they also explain why they were suppressed.

The "DDG (GP)'s memorandum" was dated 17.8.95. It stated:

" **. . .** we suggest that a supreme appeal board should be named consisting
of one Corporation Board Member, one member from TV Producers' Association,
and one member from SLRC Preview Panel **. . .** "

When the DDG (GP) received 2132 of 4.9.95, the endorsement which I have quoted
earlier was made. The further memorandum dated 15.9.95 which he then submitted
was produced. That sought approval to appoint a "supreme appeal board", and
listed the same five names which the Telemakers' Guild had suggested on
30.8.95.

The Board minutes of 17.11.95 were produced. The 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and
12th respondents, and one other director who is not a respondent, were
present. The following decision was taken in respect of the "supreme appeal
board" :

" **. . .** the list of names forwarded by the Tele-makers' Guild was tabled.
Members nominated Prof. J. B. Dissanayake too as a panel member, and it was
decided that for each teledrama that is forwarded to the supreme appeal board
for a decision, such appeal board will comprise two members from the following
panel and one Member of the Corporation **. . .** "

105

The five Guild nominees and Prof. J. B. Dissanayake were approved.

According to the Board minutes of 27.2.96, the Board purported to add four
more names, without reference to the Guild; Mr. EMG Edirisinghe was one. Those
minutes were confirmed on 8.3.96. The respondents did not produce any Board
decision constituting the two-member panel for the "supreme appeal board"
which dealt with "Makara Vijithaya"; however, on 9.3.96 Mr. EMG Edirisinghe
participated as a member of that board. When asked who nominated that board,
the learned Deputy Solicitor-General, after inquiring from Corporation
officers present in Court, stated that it was a Deputy Director-General. If
the petitioner's appeal of 31.1.96 had been taken up promptly, the board would
have included two from the panel approved on 17.11.95. It is unfortunate, to
put it mildly, that delaying consideration of the appeal until after 8.3.96,
resulted in the exclusion of all six nominees approved on 17.11.95, and in the
inclusion of another whose appointment was confirmed just the day before. The
usurpation by an official of the Board's power of appointing the "supreme
appeal board", and the resulting inclusion of someone put on the panel long
after the appeal was filed, undermines the fairness and impartiality of the
process.

The Board minutes of 18.8.95, 1.9.95 and 15.9.95 were also produced. These
showed that the discussions with the Guild were considered by the Board with a
view to implementation, and that DDG (GP) had submitted a memorandum
containing the names proposed for the preview board - although the motion
dated 26.3.98 stated that Board minutes pertaining to those subjects were non-
existent. They also showed that prescribing criteria for selection was a
matter under consideration by the Board, and have presumably been finalised by
now.

No Board minute was produced to establish that the 8th respondent's report
dated 12.10.96 was ever considered by the Board.

It has been necessary to refer to the facts in some detail as the 1st
respondent and its directors and officials have throughout failed

106

to disclose the facts fully and accurately, in relation to the review of the
petitioner's telefilm, the Ministerial proposals, the respondents' pleadings,
and the order of this Court for the production of documents; and they
persisted in misrepresenting facts and suppressing documents until it became
clear that the Court would draw the appropriate presumptions. Their conduct
resulted in the length and expense of these proceedings being increased. The
question also arises whether the respondents' registered Attorney-at-law
exercised due care and diligence - as, for instance, by calling for and
checking at least the Minute books - before making the sweeping statement,
likely to mislead the Court, that many of the documents called for had never
been in existence.

I hold that there had been an agreement with the Telemakers' Guild; that had
been considered and given effect to by the Board; that in terms of that
agreement and the procedure established by the Board the "supreme appeal
board" had to consist of three persons nominated by the Board; that two had to
be from the panel approved on 17.11.95; that even assuming the expansion of
the panel on 27.2.96 was proper, the spirit of the agreement with the Guild
was that at least one had to be from among its nominees; that the Board could
not secretly resile from that agreement; and that in any event the two-member
panel was not duly constituted as it was nominated by someone other than the
Board. The respondents have also failed to show that the members of the
preview board and the appeal board had been duly appointed. All the procedural
safeguards have thus been disregarded. Further, despite having participated in
the decision of 17.11.95, the 8th respondent (Chairman) and the 5th, 7th, 9th
and 12th respondents not only acquiesced in the violation of their own
established procedure, but they purported to review the telefilm themselves,
thereby usurping the functions of the independent "supreme appeal board". And
in addition to those violations of their own rules, there are unexplained
circumstances, which taint the Board's proceedings: the 5th respondent changed
his mind, thereby falling in line with his colleagues, without explanation,
and the Board's decision as conveyed to the petitioner by the Secretary was
different to that communicated in the 8th respondent's report dated 12.10.96.

107

The question in this case is whether Article 12 (1) entitles the petitioner to
the protection of a fair and objective procedure for selection of telefilms
for telecast, according to clear and specific guidelines and criteria
prescribed in advance. Looked at purely from a financial angle, persons who
spend money on producing films risk serious loss if their films are not
telecast. Apart from that, the refusal to telecast films which - considered
from a cultural or artistic point of view - deserve to be telecast, prejudices
both producers and viewers. Uncertainty as to procedure and criteria tends to
result in a denial of the equal protection of the law.

The statutory powers which the 1st respondent has are, like most statutory
powers, not absolute, unfettered, or unreviewable; they are held in trust for
the benefit of the public; and they cannot be exercised arbitrarily, or
capriciously, or unreasonably. The powers which a statutory body, such as the
1st respondent, has in respect of television and broadcasting are much greater
than in the case of other media, such as the print media - because the
frequencies available for television and broadcasting are so limited that only
a handful of persons can be allowed the privilege of operating on them, and
those who have that privilege are subject to a correspondingly greater
obligation to be sensitive to the rights and interests of the public. The
airwaves are public property and the State is under an obligation to ensure
that they are used for the benefit of the public ( _cf. Red Lion Broadcasting
Co. v. FCC_ (1) and Secretary, _Ministry of Information v. Cricket Association
of Bengal_ (2) both of which I cited in _Fernando v. SLBC_ (3). In the Cricket
Association of Bengal case, the Supreme Court of India directed the Central
Government to take "immediate steps to establish an independent autonomous
public authority representative of all sections and interests in society to
control and regulate the use of the airwaves".

I hold that the powers conferred on the 1st respondent (and its directors and
officials) in respect of telecasting on the airwaves were held in trust for
the public, and had to be exercised for the benefit of the public, for which
purpose it was obliged to establish and implement a fair and objective
procedure to determine whether a telefilm submitted to it was suitable for
screening, and if so the time of screening. That obligation has been seriously
violated.

106

I, therefore, grant the petitioner a declaration that his fundamental right
under Article 12 (1) has been infringed by the 1st, 2nd, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th.
and 12th respondents; I quash the decision of the Board of the 1st respondent
in respect of "Makara Vjithaya"; and I direct the 1st respondent to submit
that telefilm for final review - after specifying the applicable criteria - by
the "supreme appeal board" constituted in accordance with the Board decision
of 18.8.95, as amended by the Board decision of 17.11.95 (which were the
decisions in force at the time of the petitioner's appeal), within one month
from today, without any further fee being levied from ,the petitioner.

The petitioner has alleged the infringement of Article 14 (1) (a) as well. The
order we make today makes it unnecessary to consider that plea. In any event,
the petitioner could have sought to have his telefilm telecast on one of the
other television channels, and the refusal by the 1st respondent of prime time
for one telefilm does not mean that future telefilms will be similarly
treated.

I have given anxious consideration to the question of other relief. (a)
Clearly, the petitioner has suffered considerable financial loss - having
borrowed Rs. 2,145,000 from the People's Bank on which interest continues to
accrue at 24% p.a., according to the Bank's letter dated 14.10.96. That loss
was aggravated by the delay of the respondents to deal with his appeals, and
to consider the Minister's proposals, expeditiously; as well as their
unsatisfactory pleadings and evasive response to the order of this Court for
production of documents. Thus a final decision which he should have got in
February, 1996, he will not get until about 28 months later, in July, 1998\.
At the same time, the petitioner took over six months, time to amend his
pleadings. I think it fair to hold the respondents responsible for 20 months,
delay. (b) At the same time, the petitioner could have mitigated his loss if
the telefilm had been telecast outside prime time - but the respondents denied
him that opportunity by not replying to his query as to the available time-
belt. (c) Further, the conduct of the respondents, as noted above, shows that
the infringement was not unintentional. Despite ample time for consideration,
they acted deliberately in cavalier disregard of their own rules. That calls
for enhancement of compensation. (d) On the other hand, we cannot

109

assume that the telefilm, properly reviewed, would definitely, or even
probably, have been approved for prime time telecast: that is nothing more
than a mere possibility. However, the petitioner's right to the equal
protection of the law, by means of a fair procedure, has been infringed. (e)
Learned counsel for the petitioner stated that the telefilm is still in good
condition available for telecast, and has not become out of date; I,
therefore, do not think that the cost of producing the telefilm should be
taken into account, although accruing interest must.

Taking all that into consideration, I award the petitioner equitable
compensation in a sum of Rs. 1,000,000, payable by the 1st respondent on or
before 30.6.98, with further interest calculated at the rate of 24% p.a. in
the event of delay.

As for costs, it was the conduct of the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th and 12th
respondents which resulted in the infringement, and contributed to increasing
the expense and the delay in this case. The 2nd and the 8th respondents were
more to blame than the others. I, therefore, order the 2nd and 8th respondents
personally to pay a sum of Rs. 7,500 each, and the 5th, 7th, 9th and 12th
respondents personally to pay a sum of Rs. 2,500 each, as costs to the
petitioner. The petitioner will thus receive in all a sum of Rs. 25,000 as
costs.

I further direct the 1st respondent to give publicity, in all three languages
on its own television channel, to the procedure and criteria for the selection
of telefilms for telecast during prime time and outside, distinguishing as
necessary between different types of telefilms: it shall telecast full
particulars at a convenient time between 7.00 pm and 9.00 pm at least once
every month from July to December, 1998, and thereafter whenever the procedure
or criteria are amended.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** \- I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/28.html_  

