##  Tennakoon, Assistant Superintendent of Police v. De Silva, T.P.F.,
Inspector General of Police and Others - SLR - 16, Vol 1 of 1997 [1996] LKSC
28; (1997) 1 Sri LR 16 (22 August 1996)

**16**

**TENNAKOON,**

**ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE** ****

**v.** ****

# T P. F DE SILVA, INSPECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE

# AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.

S.C. APPLICATION NO. 192/95

AUGUST 22, 1996.



_Fundamental Rights - Article 12(1) 55 and 126 of the Constitution - Transfer
of Public Officers - Norms mandated by the Fundamental Rights._



The petitioner is an Assistant Superintendent of Police. Having served at
Kayts - an operational area for ten months, he was transferred to Kurunegala
on 1.10.94 and from there to Matale on 25.01.95 and was attached to the
Dambulla Division. On 20.05.95 by a Police message, the 1st respondent. The
Inspector General of Police transferred him to Anuradhapura, without giving
any reason. Nor was there any vacancy at Anuradhapura for the petitioner's
grade. The petitioner alleged that his transfer was instigated by the
OIC/Galewela, a

**17**



Sub Inspector of Police against whom the petitioner had taken action for
serious acts of misconduct. The O.I.C. had connived with the 3rd respondent,
Member of Parliament for Dambulla who had complained to the Senior
Superintendent of Police Matale and the Deputy Inspector General of the range
that the petitioner was conducting his duties with a political bias due to his
close family ties with the United National Party. However, the I.G.P. stated
that he was not personally aware of those complaints but transferred the
petitioner after discussions with the S.S.P. Matale as problems had arisen of
a working relationship between the M.P. and the petitioner. The I.G.P. added
that the petitioner was not transferred on disciplinary grounds but to prevent
a situation prejudicial to the exercise of police functions.



**Held:** (Anandacoomaraswamy, J. Dissenting)



(1) In terms of Article 55(5) of the Constitution, the powers of appointment,
transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control vested in the executive are
subject to the fundamental rights jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.



(2) Whilst the Court will not usurp the 1st respondent's discretion in regard
to transfers, the Court cannot accept his subjective assertion as to the "lack
of a working relationship" or "in the interests of the service" \- for that
would be to abdicate the duty to examine whether the 1st respondent's conduct
fell short of the norms mandated by the fundamental rights.



(3) The 1st respondent did not act on the basis of facts; instead of forming
an independent opinion, he simply adopted the opinion, also unsupported by
facts, of his subordinates; hence the transfer was unreasonable and arbitrary
and infringed the petitioner's rights under Article 12(1).





**Cases referred to:**

** **

  1. _Senanayake v. Mahindasoma,_ S.C. 41/96 S.C. Minutes 14th October, 1996. _  
 _

  2. _Faiz v. Attorney-General_ (1995) 1 Sri L. R. 372. _  
 _

  3. _Wickramabandu v. Herath_ (1990) 2 Sri L.R. 348, 365, 391   


  4. _R. v. Civil Service Appeal Board ex P. Cunningham_ (1991) 4 ALL ER 310.   


  5. _Jayatilaka v Pathirana,_ S.C. 656/95 S.C. Minutes 25th October 1996.  


**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_Chula Bandara_ with _D.K. Dhanapata_ for petitioner.

_ _

_Nihal Jayasinghe, D.S.G._ for 1st, 2nd and 4th respondents.

_ _

_Mohan Peiris_ with _Jayantha Fernando_ for 3rd respondent _._ _  
 _

_Cur adv. vult.  
 _

**18**



October 30, 1995.  


**FERNANDO, J.**

** **

The petitioner is an Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP). Having served
at Kayts, an operational area for ten months, he was transferred to Kurunegala
on 1.10.94, and from there to Matale on 25.1.95, where he was serving in the
Dambulla Division under the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Matale. By
a police message received on 20.5.95 at 15.35 he was told that the then
Inspector-General of Police, the 1st respondent, had transferred him to
Anuradhapura. No reason or explanation was given. That message directed the
DIG, Anuradhapura, to give him a suitable assignment, and the DIG, Matale, to
make acting arrangements at Dambulla until a suitable replacement was sent.



The petitioner immediately appealed to the 1st Respondent by letter dated
23.5.95 (PB), requesting that the transfer be varied:  


"Prior to my departure to Kayts there had been transfer orders for 05 A.S.P.'s
and all of them got their transfer orders cancelled except myself. I was at
Kayts for a period of 10 months.



02\. When I was transferred to Dambulla I tried to get it cancelled owing (to)
my personal difficulties. When I interviewed IG Police he informed me that I
was transferred to Dambulla on a request of Mr. Monti Gopallawa.



03\. I took over Dambulla District If there were several complaints of
assaults against OIC/Galewela, SI Saman Sigera. I made inquiries into the
allegations and proposed SSP/Matale to transfer OIC/Galewela.



04\. There was an arrangement G.S.S. of Area to go on a protest march against
OIC/Galewela as he too had assaulted G.S./Galewela. On receipt of the
information I met AGA/Galewela and settled the issue.



I request my transfer order to Anuradhapura may be varied to Kuliyapitiya
division please."

**19**



Having received no response, the petitioner went to Anuradhapura on 4.6.95,
and was told by the SSP, Anuradhapura, that he was not expecting the
petitioner as the 1st respondent had previously transferred two officers to
fill the two vacancies in his division, and that although there were no
vacancies for the petitioner's grade he would be accommodated as an additional
ASP in the

Kebithigollewa Division - which is also considered an operational area.



In his petition dated 19.6.95 the petitioner claims that the transfer was in
violation of his fundamental right under Article 12(1). Leave to proceed was
granted on 22.6.95 but no interim order was made. While this application was
pending, he was again transferred on 1.2.96 to Colombo, and thereafter on
15.7.96 to Tangalle - but the 1st respondent agreed to stay that transfer.



It is not in dispute that the 1st respondent had, by virtue of delegation, the
power to transfer the petitioner. The only question is whether the way in
which he exercised his undoubted discretion infringed Article 12(1).



## SUBMISSIONS



The petitioner's position is that at Dambulla he had been performing and
discharging his functions and duties, as a police officer, efficiently and
correctly; that for this he incurred the displeasure of the 3rd respondent, a
Member of Parliament, who therefore got him transferred; that was the only
reason why the 1st respondent transferred him; and that was arbitrary and
unreasonable. In his petition the petitioner had disclosed the fact that his
wife's father and two brothers had been, and were, engaged in political
activity in the North-Western Province, on behalf of the United National Party
(UNP).



The 3rd respondent's contention is that the petitioner was not performing his
duties without bias, but was indulging in political activity due to his close
family ties with the UNP; that as a result he could not get the co-operation
of any subordinate officer in his division; that the 3rd respondent's
complaints to the petitioner's

**20**



immediate superiors the DIG, Matale (the 2nd respondent), and the SSP, Matale,
- had no effect; that as a Member of Parliament he had the responsibility to
ensure that State officials conduct themselves in a fit and proper manner and
to bring to the notice of the administration any misconduct by them; and that
accordingly he made a request to the 1st and 2nd respondents to transfer the
petitioner in order to prevent a confrontation between the petitioner and
those members of the public who were supportive of the Government. Mr. Mohan
Peiris urged on his behalf that in any event he could not be held responsible
for any infringement by the 1st respondent as he had only exercised his right
to make representations to the 1st and 2nd respondents, and had not directed
either of them to transfer the petitioner.



The learned DSG pointed out that the 1st respondent had denied that he acted
upon the 3rd respondent's request. The 1st respondent had said nothing in his
affidavit about the petitioner's wife's UNP connections. He submitted if such
serious allegations had been brought to the 1st respondent's notice, the 1st
respondent would certainly have inquired into the matter. The transfer was not
for disciplinary reasons. It was only because there was no satisfactory
working relationship between the 3rd respondent and the petitioner, and that
made it undesirable to keep him because that conflict might have developed
into a situation prejudicial to the exercise of police functions in that area.
When it was pointed out that the 1st respondent had failed to say how, and on
what material, he had concluded that there was such a lack of harmony, or who
was responsible for it, the learned DSG maintained that it was unnecessary for
the 1st respondent to furnish any such material.



## FACTS



In support of his contention, the petitioner annexed copies of his letter
dated 23.5.95 (P8), and of another, more detailed, letter dated 14.6.95 (P7)
which he wrote to the 1st respondent (with copies to the President, the Prime
Minister, and the Deputy Minister of Defence) in which he said:

**21**



" ... I had the unpleasant task of inquiring into the (atrocities) of this OIC
of Galewela.



1\. An **assault** on RPC Rohana by SI Sigera OIC Galewela on 14.12.94 which I
inquired and submitted my report accordingly by outward No. D. S. 724/94
refers.



2\. A complaint of **bribery** amounting to Rs. 44,000/- made by one S.M.I.A.
Fareed against OIC Galewela and two others of Galewela Police Station. A
report was submitted by my outward No. 223195 to be referred to the Bribery
Commissioner.



3\. A complaint of **unlawful arrest, assault** and **party rape** on Mrs. D.
Hewavitharana 18.4.95 which was inquired into by me personally and all
evidence recorded, which was incriminative against SI Sigera OIC Galewela. The
victim was examined by DMO Matale. I had fixed an identification parade
against SI Sigera and the P.CC concerned for (18.5.95?). My interim report was
submitted by outward No. D.S. 254/95 as I was on orders of immediate transfer.



4\. An **assault** on Stanley Wijeratne, the Grama Seva Niladhari of Galewela
by Sl Sigera OIC Galewela on 14.05.95 in broad daylight in the Galewela town
which resulted in the fracture of the wrist of the Grama Seva Niladhari which
resulted in his hospitalisation.



These allegations against SI Sigera, OIC Galewela were for corrupt practices,
discreditable conduct which would bring disrepute to the good name of the
police service. Most of the complaints were offences which fall within the
Penal Code where the SI has to be charged in courts and under the Bribery Act.
Hence I suggested that he be transferred out immediately as he could interfere
with the witnesses or tamper with evidence.



The inquiries into the allegations against this SI are incomplete and the SI
is sensing that it would end up in his interdiction, had



**22**



swiftly in connivance with the Hon. MP for Dambulla by giving a wrong
impression that I am involved in anti-Government activities. A copy of the
telegram sent by Hon. MP to IG Police is attached herewith as proof. The irony
of the whole issue was the immediate unjustifiable transfer meted out to me
out of Dambulla instead of initiating disciplinary action against S1 Sigera,
OIC Galewela.  


However I earnestly request that if there is any such allegation against me to
have this inquired into by the NIB or the SIU in fairness to justice I implore
your goodself to have the inquiries mentioned by me against Sl Sigera, OIC,
Galewela concluded by a Senior officer and bring him to book.



In the meanwhile the SI should be transferred out of Galewela and placed on
interdiction as it is undesirable for him to continue to function in office.



My final appeal to your goodself is to transfer me to a District close to
Kurunegala Division ... as my wife is a Principal of a School in Hettipola and
my daughter is being educated in Kurunegala."



In paragraphs 12 and 13 of his affidavit he referred to those matters again,
stating that he had submitted reports in respect of all four investigations:
three to the SSP, Matale, and the fourth to the Bribery Commissioner. In
paragraphs 10 and 18 he referred to his letters P7 and P8, and said:



"10\. I state that if there are allegations of this nature against me, it is
the duty of the 1st and 2nd respondents to inquire into the allegations and
ascertain whether there was any truth in it and, if so, take disciplinary
action against me. Without holding an inquiry, to transfer me on the request
of the 3rd respondent, is contrary to the principles of natural justice.



18\. I state that my appeals to the first respondent made on 23.5.1995 and
14.6.1995 requesting him to reconsider his

**23**



decision and to cancel the transfer has not received any response from the 1st
respondent ..."





The Petitioner also annexed to his petition copies of three telegrams handed
in by the 3rd respondent at Dambulla at 12.40 on 19.5.95. The first was to the
Deputy Minister of Defence. Having referred to previous requests made to him
for the immediate transfer of the petitioner because the petitioner was
criticising the Government and having disputes with officers loyal to the
Government, the 3rd respondent asked that ASP Sumanabandara be appointed as
ASP Dambulla, and the 3rd respondent transferred out. The other two telegrams
were to the 1st respondent and the DIG, Matale, alleging that the 3rd
respondent was discharging his duties in a way which caused disputes with the
Galewela Police and requesting his immediate transfer. None of the telegrams
give any particulars in support of the allegations they contain.



I must observe that, as to the ground for the requested transfer, the first
telegram significantly differs from the other two: it alleges misconduct with
a political favour while the other two mention problems with subordinates and
that tends to confirm the petitioner's claim that he was conducting inquiries
against his subordinates at Galewela.



In the 1st respondent's affidavit, filed on 17.10.95 (after obtaining three
extensions, which would have given him quite enough time to obtain all
necessary clarifications and information) there is a general denial of all the
averments in the petitioner's affidavit, except those which are specifically
admitted. This is what he then said:



"6.Answering paragraphs 4,6,7,8,9,11,18 and 20, I state that the 3rd
respondent ... by telegrams P4, P5 and P6 complained that the petitioner is
unable to enlist the co-operation of subordinate officers in his division and
sought his transfer out of the Division. **P4, P5 and P6 never reached me for
my personal attention.** However, I was aware through discussions with SSP,
Matale, that **problems had arisen of a working relationship** between

**24**



the 3rd respondent and the petitioner. I state that I therefore considered the
exigencies of this emerging situation and felt that if any officer **is unable
to work in harmony with the elected members of Parliament** it would not be
desirable for such officer to be retained in that Division. I felt that this
conflict might develop into a situation that might be prejudicial and
detrimental to the exercise of police functions in the area and in an effort
to resolve this situation, I transferred the petitioner in the first instance
to Anuradhapura Division. I state that I was not influenced by malice **or
other considerations** nor to mete out any unequal treatment to the petitioner
since often police officers have been transferred out of a particular area
where they are unable to work in harmony with the elected members of
Parliament. Such transfers are being effected in the interest of the police
officers themselves and of the Department in general.



7.Answering paragraph 10, I state that the transfer order was made for the
reasons set out at para 6 above, and not on grounds of proven misconduct.



8.Answering paragraphs 12 and 13, I state that the investigation into
complaints set out therein has nothing to do with the petitioner's transfer:
No reports in respect of these inquiries were forwarded to me by SSP, Matale."
(emphasis added)



In paragraph 9 he stated that the petitioner was not transferred at the
request of the 3rd respondent, and that the petitioner, being in a
transferable service, has no fundamental right to be at a station of his
choice. While wholeheartedly agreeing that he had no such fundamental right,
it is sufficient to recall that Article 55 (5) of the Constitution makes it
plain beyond any manner of doubt that the powers of appointment, **transfer**
, dismissal and disciplinary control vested in the Executive, even when
delegated, are subject to the fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court.
Thus the 1st respondent's power to transfer the petitioner is subject, inter
alia, to Article 12, and this Court has not merely the power but the duty to  


**25**



examine whether the 1st respondent exercised his discretion in conformity with
Article 12(1).



I must now refer to the circumstances in which the 3rd respondent filed his
affidavit. The petitioner had made him a party alleging that he had influenced
and incited the 1st and 2nd respondents to transfer the petitioner "in an
informal manner". He prayed for a declaration that his fundamental right had
been infringed "by the respondents", and in the context of his pleadings that
included the 3rd respondent. On the first date of hearing the 3rd respondent
was absent and unrepresented; the others were represented and asked for
further time to file objections. The Court granted the respondents three weeks
time for objections and fixed the hearing for 16.11.95. Although not required
to do so, the Court directed that the 3rd respondent be given notice of the
date of hearing. However, he neither filed objections nor appeared on that
day. On 16.11.95 the hearing was postponed for 2.2.96.



On 2.2.96 Mr. Mohan Peiris informed the Court that the 3rd respondent had
filed objections, and moved that they be accepted. Counsel for the petitioner
said that he had received a copy, but objected to their acceptance. It was
found, however, that the objections were not in the record. Nevertheless, at
the hearing Mr. Peiris was permitted to rely on those objections.



The motion dated 30.1.96 of the 3rd respondent's Attorney-at-Law stated:



"The 3rd respondent ... has been cited without any relief claimed against him.
In the circumstances the 3rd respondent did not think it necessary to file a
response. However, when the 3rd respondent through an abundance of caution
referred this matter to Counsel, [he] was advised that it would be appropriate
and prudent to file a response, notwithstanding that no relief has been
claimed against him."

**  
26**



In his affidavit, after a general denial, the 3rd respondent stated:



"3\. I state that I admit having sent documents marked P4, P5 and P6. I
further state that prior to making the request for the transfer of the
petitioner, I have on several occasions complained to the Senior
Superintendent of Police, Matale and Deputy Inspector General of Police of the
range, that the petitioner was not conducting his duties without bias and was
indulging in political activity due to his close family ties with the United
National Party and that as a result of which neither can enlist the
(cooperation) of any subordinate officer in his division.



I state that I, on several occasions told the petitioner that I will not
interfere with his police duties but that he should not let his political
views pervade the decisions taken by him in the maintenance of law and order.
Notwithstanding personal requests by me, I had a number of complaints which I
personally inquired into and found that the petitioner was motivated by
political reasons in a number of investigations under his supervision.



I state that since my personal requests and the requests made the petitioner's
immediate superiors had no effect on the petitioner, I informed the 1st and
2nd respondents of this situation and finally requested that the transfer of
the petitioner out of Matale District be considered as a matter of urgency, as
such a move would be in everybody's interest.



I state that I have no personal malice or illwill towards the petitioner and
that I only made a request of the 1st and 2nd respondents, to consider having
the petitioner transferred as I genuinely belived that the petitioner was
indulging in more than Police work, on account of his political affiliations
as averred in paragraph 16 of the petitioner's affidavit. I state as a Member
of Parliament for the area I have a responsibility to ensure that state

**27**



officials conduct themselves in a fit and proper manner and to bring to the
notice of the administration any misconduct by the said officials. I therefore
state that the complaints made by me of the petitioner, was to bring his
conduct to the notice of his superiors, as I wanted to prevent a situation
where there would have been a confrontation between the petitioner and those
members of the public who are supportive of the Government..."



## FINDINGS

** **

The 3rd respondent did not deny that the petitioner had been investigating
four serious complaints against the OIC and other officers of the Galewela
Police. Although he said he had repeatedly complained to the petitioner's
superiors, he did not say when he complained, and did not produce copies of
his complaints; nor did the other respondents produce any note or record of
any such complaints. Assuming that he did make complaints, it is therefore
difficult to conclude that they were official complaints, or were regarded as
such. Further, the substance of his complaints was that the petitioner was
guilty of misconduct, in that he was indulging in political activity and let
his political views pervade the decisions taken by him in the performance of
his duties; and although the 3rd respondent claimed that he had inquired into
a number of such complaints, and found them to be justified, yet he gave no
particulars whatsoever. In the absence of any supporting material, it is not
possible for this Court to conclude that those serious allegations were true,
or even that there was ground for them. The learned DSG submitted that such
serious allegations would have been inquired into if they had been brought to
the notice of the IGP. If any such complaints had been made to the DIG,
Matale, or the SSP, Matale they should have acted in the same way.



But even assuming the truth of the 3rd respondent's version that l did bring
these serious allegations of misconduct to the notice of the

**28**



2nd respondent and/or the SSP, Matale, yet the averments in the 1st
respondent's affidavit, and the submissions made on his behalf, are to the
effect that no such allegations of misconduct were brought to his notice by
the 2nd respondent or the SSP, Matale. It seems therefore, that whatever the
3rd respondent might have told those two officers, neither of them took action
on his complaints or conveyed them to the 1st respondent. All that the SSP,
Matale, appears to have done was to tell the 1st respondent that "problems had
arisen of a working relationship between the 3rd respondent and the
petitioner".



Hence the allegations set out in the 3rd respondent's affidavit cannot be
relied on to explain or justify the 1st respondent's conduct. The petitioner's
affidavit, and the documents annexed, raised many questions. Apart from the
frequency of his transfers, resulting in two periods of service in operational
areas, and his transfer to a place where he was, seemingly, not needed,
without a replacement at his former station, the petitioner made out a strong
case that he had investigated four serious offences: assaults on a RPC and
another public officer, bribery, and rape. Further, the complaints were all
the more serious because they were against police officers charged with the
duty of upholding law and order. The DIG, Matale, who was the 2nd respondent,
filed no affidavit, either to deny or to explain. The 1st respondent did not
tender an affidavit, or even a report, from the SSP, Matale. The fact that the
petitioner's immediate superiors did not venture to deny what he said gives
rise to the legitimate inference that what he said was supported by the
records available to them. Had there really been four such serious complaints,
the most recent on 14.5.95, and a threatened protest march? Had the petitioner
actually submitted four reports? Had the 1st respondent received the letters
P7 and P8, and if so why did he not reply? what had happened to these
investigations - had they been stifled, or duly pursued and found not to
warrant further action? The 1st respondent had certainly a case to meet.

**29**



There is, of course, his general denial. That might have been quite sufficient
to rebut averments, which were vague or general or lacking in particularity,
or which dealt with incidental matters. But here the Petitioner's averments
were specific, detailed, grave, and directly relevant to the facts in issue;
further, the suspects were police officers, and the alleged victims included
not only "ordinary" members of the public but a RPC and a public officer; and
the incidents were intrinsically relevant to harmony between the police, and
the public and public officers; the Petitioner claimed support from his
official reports, three of which, it must be stressed, were made **before**
the impugned transfer order; the 3rd respondent did not deny that the
petitioner had conducted those investigations; and finally, not only did his
superiors not deny his version, either to the 1st respondent or to this Court,
but they appear to have refrained from conveying to the 1st respondent the
counter-allegations made against him. While the 1st respondent chose to
explain, to some extent, the three telegrams (of which only one was sent to
him), in sharp contrast he said nothing direct about the letters P7 and P8. As
for the reports, he may well have told the truth when he said that no reports
were **forwarded** to him by SSP, Matale, but he did not go on to say either
that SSP, Matale, had not told him **orally** about them during their
discussions, or that there were no such reports. Considering that he took more
than three months time to prepare his affidavit; it is difficult to accept
that he made no attempt to check on the existence of those reports from the
official files in Matale and Dambulla, and on the status of the
investigations. In the absence of a clear statement by the 1st respondent,
supported by relevant documents, the available evidence confirms the truth of
the petitioner's version as to the complaints, investigations and reports.



I must now turn to the three telegrams. The simple question which the 1st
respondent had to clarify was whether the telegram which the 3rd respondent
had sent to him on 19.5.95 reached him before he made the transfer order the
next day; and thereby influenced his decision. But without saying directly
whether, and when, he received that telegram, he referred generally to the
telegrams - all three telegrams - and says they never reached him "for his
personal attention". Is it that his telegram reached his office, but was not
brought to his notice before he made the transfer order? Or that it

**30**



reached his office only after? Or that it never reached his office? Although
his affidavit is inexcusably vague, I will nevertheless assume in his favour
that he became aware of the telegrams only after he had ordered the transfer;
and knew only later that the 3rd respondent had complained about the
petitioner, so that, as he says in his affidavit, the transfer was not at the
request of the 3rd respondent.  


As already noted the 1st respondent does not say that he took into
consideration that the petitioner's in-laws were involved in UNP politics.
Indeed, he asserts that there was no other consideration which influenced him,
except that mentioned in paragraph 6.  


Thus according to the 1st respondent, the only reason why he ordered the
transfer of the petitioner was because "'problems had arisen of a working
relationship between the 3rd respondent and the petitioner"; it was not that
problems "might" arise, but that they had arisen. But what those problems
were, he did not say; nor did he say that the SSP, Matale, told him. Hence the
only material before this Court is that the SSP, Matale, made the 1st
respondent aware that certain unspecified problems had arisen which created an
unsatisfactory working relationship between the 3rd respondent and the
petitioner. This was a conclusion reached by the SSP, Matale, and not by the
1st respondent independently. We have not been told whether the SSP, Matale,
had become aware of those "problems" through his own personal knowledge, or
through official records or reports, or on hearsay; and while it is known that
the 3rd respondent had complained to him, the evidence does not suggest that
these were anything more than allegations of a general nature. In the absence
of an affidavit, or even an official report, from the SSP, Matale, it is not
possible for this Court to determine whether he is worthy of credit, and, if
so, whether there was a reasonable basis for the conclusion which he conveyed
to the 1st respondent. To sum up, then, the 1st respondent's position is that
he was not aware, from any source whatsoever, of the facts which gave rise to
the unsatisfactory working relationship between the 3rd respondent and the
petitioner.



Thus the issue for decision becomes narrowed down to this: is this Court
bound, or even entitled, to accept the 1st respondent's subjective assertion
as to the lack of a satisfactory working

**31**



relationship especially where that is only the unverified and unsupported
conclusion of his subordinate? In my opinion, however wide the 1st
respondent's discretion, he cannot simply say that he ordered a transfer
"because of the exigencies of service", or "for disciplinary reasons", or "in
the interests of the service", or "because of the lack of a harmonious working
relationship", and expect this Court blindly to accept that assertion. While
it is true that Article 126 does not authorise this Court to usurp the 1st
respondent's discretion in regard to transfers, yet it does not allow this
Court to accept a mere assertion of that sort - for that would be to abdicate
its duty to examine whether the 1st respondent's conduct fell short of the
norms mandated by the fundamental rights, and thus indirectly to invent a new
official immunity Senanayake v. Mahindasoma (1). Let me add that, of course,
different considerations would apply where national security is involved.  


It is necessary to scrutinize more closely that particular ground for the
exercise of a constitutional power or discretion to transfer: the lack of a
satisfactory working relationship between a police (or indeed any public)
officer, and an elected Member of Parliament. Many disturbing questions arise.
Should the IGP act where this is in relation to any elected MP, whether from
the party in power or in the opposition? How should he act if there is a good
relationship with one group and an unsatisfactory one with an opposing group?
Or a good working relationship with an elected MP and the converse with a
Provincial Councillor in the same area? Would not any such principle become
necessarily applicable to relations with other persons and groups - police
officers vis-a-vis other public officers, or judicial officers, or ethnic or
religious groups?



If a police officer may, with impunity, be transferred on that ground (without
any need to consider the reasons for it) what signals would that give,
firstly, to the transferred officer as to how he should perform his duties in
his new station, and secondly, to his replacement? To act according to law in
the public interest, or to avoid an unsatisfactory working relationship at all
costs? As, for instance, by giving in to an unlawful request either to stifle
an investigation into or a prosecution for an offence, or to pursue a
frivolous and vexatious charge? The power to transfer exists in order to
ensure an efficient service to the public, but without imposing an unfair
burden on individual public

**32**



officers. Transfer on the ground of unsatisfactory working relationship will
not only be unfair to the individual but will promote inefficiency and
injustice.



These are not fanciful considerations as Faiz v. Attorney-General(2). If there
been no fundamental rights application, the IGP would have been faced with a
situation in which there was "harmony" between police officers and two Members
of Parliament as well as a Provincial Councillor, and "disharmony" between an
efficient wild life ranger and both police and politicians. Should the IGP
have refrained from transferring (let alone disciplining) the police officers,
and should the Public Service Commission, instead, have transferred the wild
life ranger - on the principle that there was no satisfactory working
relationship between him and the police (and/or the politicians) which was so
necessary for his duties? Had the Public Service Commission transferred the
wild life ranger, would his successor have been inclined to perform his duties
efficiently, honestly and impartially? A mere lack of a satisfactory working
relationship is therefore no justification for transfer, although the reason
for such disharmony might be. The law reports do not suggest that the
situation in Faiz v Attorney-General (Supra) was unique; or was the first of
its kind; or the last.  


In another context, in Wickramabandu v Herath(3), a Bench of five Judges
referred to the need to scrutinize the reasons for a detention order issued by
the Secretary, Defence and held a detention to be unlawful.



As to the failure to give reasons for administrative decisions, Wade's
observations - in the context of judicial review - apply with even greater
force in our fundamental rights jurisdiction, especially the equal protection
of the law:



". . . . there is a strong case to be made for the giving of reasons as an
essential element of administrative justice . . . . Unless the citizen can
discover the reason behind the decision, he may be unable to tell whether it
is reviewable or not, **and so he may be deprived of the protection of the
law**. A right to reasons is therefore an indispensable part of a sound system
of judicial review. Natural justice may provide the best rubric for it, since
the

**33**



giving of reasons is required by the ordinary man's sense of justice. It is
also a healthy discipline for all who exercise power over others .... Although
there is no general rule of law requiring the giving of reasons, an
administrative authority may be unable to show that it has acted lawfully
unless it explains itself." (Administrative Law, 7th ed, pp 542-543)  


Among the cases he cites is R. v. Civil Service Appeal Board, ex p.
Cunningham(4), which was an application for judicial review of a decision
assessing compensation for the unfair dismissal of a prison officer. It was
held that:



". . . . the board should have given outline reasons sufficient to show that
they were directing their mind and thereby indirectly showing not whether
their decision was right or wrong, which is a matter solely for them, but
whether their decision was lawful. Any other conclusion would reduce the board
to the status of a freewheeling palm tree .... The board's objection to giving
reasons ... is that this would tend to militate against informality and would
lead to an undesirable reliance upon a body of precedent. I find this totally
unconvincing. The evidence shows that those who advise applicants and
departments do so frequently and must be well aware of the board's previous
decisions and of the circumstances in which they were made. There must
therefore already be a body of precedent. If the board have no regard to their
previous decisions, they must be acting inconsistently and be failing to do
justice as between applicants. This I am loathe to believe . . . . fairness
requires a tribunal such as the board to give sufficient reasons for its
decision to enable the parties to know the issues to which it addressed its
mind and that it acted lawfully." (pp 319-320)



I hold that to justify a transfer of a public officer on the ground of the
lack of a satisfactory working relationship with another person, a wholly
subjective opinion, or a mere assertion to that effect, is quite insufficient.
First, it is not at all enough to show that there are disagreements or
disputes or **a mere lack of harmony** between them: the problem must relate
to their **working** relationship. An act done by one person which impinges on
the official duties of a public officer may create such disharmony, but that
does not mean that

**34  
 **

there is an unsatisfactory **working** relationship between them. A working
relationship is that which exists between superior and subordinate, or
colleague and colleague, in one workplace; or even between two persons in
different departments, institutions or services, when the public interest
requires that they work together. Nothing has been said in the pleadings or in
the submissions to satisfy this Court that any working relationship was
required between the 3rd respondent and the petitioner. The only material
placed before the Court - apart from vague allegations \- is that the
petitioner was investigating certain offences. If at all he was required to
have a working relationship with any one in regard to those investigations,
Chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act suggests that it was with the
Magistrate's Court. The 3rd respondent had, indeed, the right to complain
about the petitioner to his superior, but that has nothing to do with working
relationships.



Let me assume, however, that such a working relationship was required, in the
public interest. A bare assertion that it was unsatisfactory is not enough.
The Court must ascertain whether there were grounds for that opinion, and, if
there were, it must examine those grounds; upon such an examination the Court
is not entitled to substitute its own opinion, simply because it disagrees
with the 1st respondent; and it can only intervene if that opinion is found to
be arbitrary, capricious, unreasonable, or discriminatory (or otherwise
violative of fundamental rights).



Where there are grounds for holding that there is such a breakdown, in general
a transfer of an officer would be neither lawful nor proper, unless he was
culpably responsible for the breakdown. It is only exceptionally that the
exigencies of service might justify an officer who was in no way to blame, and
who was merely performing his duties. There may be bona fide disagreements
between two officers, which disrupt the work of a workplace and which make it
desirable, in the interest of the public and the service, that one be
transferred. The officer concerned would, no doubt, be given an appropriate
explanation. The case of Jayatilaka v. Pathirana(5), is an illustration of a
situation in which an officer not to blame was validly transferred, the other
person involved not being within the disciplinary control of the appointing
authority.

**35**



The contrary view would undermine the independence and integrity of the public
service. It would encourage disharmony resulting from acts of interference by
outsiders with the due performance of official duties (whether by public
officers, judicial officers or others) to be regarded as an unsatisfactory
working relationship, and entitle, or perhaps compel, the Public Service
Commission, the Judicial Service Commission or other disciplinary authority,
to transfer duty-conscious officers. It seems to me that the policy of the law
is to discourage such acts; and, indeed, they seem to be contrary to sections
180, 183 and 186 of the Penal Code. The first illustration to section 180
suggests that such representations should be scrutinized:



"A informs the Inspector-General of Police that Z, a police officer, has been
guilty of neglect of duty or misconduct, knowing such information to be false,
and knowing it to be likely that the information will cause the Inspector-
General to dismiss Z. A has committed the offence defined in this section."  


Article 55 of the Constitution does not permit "exigencies of service", "lack
of a satisfactory working relationship", and the like, to be used as gambits
to move public officers around, as if they were just pawns on a chessboard.



I hold that the need for a working relationship between the 3rd respondent and
the petitioner, in relation to the petitioner's duties, has not been
established; that the evidence shows that the reason any lack of harmony is
not due to any lapse by the petitioner, but arose from the performance of his
duties, in regard to which no impropriety - though alleged - had been proved;
that the 1st respondent does not claim to have acted on the basis of facts,
and instead of forming an independent opinion, he simply adopted the opinion,
also unsupported by facts, of his subordinate; and that there is no reason to
treat this case as being an exception. I therefore hold that the transfer was
unreasonable and arbitrary.



## LIABILITY OF THIRD RESPONDENT



Mr. Peiris submitted that the 3rd respondent would not be liable for an
infringement by the 1st respondent because his conduct did not

**36**



amount to "executive or administrative" action and he only made
representations about the petitioner's conduct. I entirely agree that any
person, whether he is a private citizen or holds public office, is entitled to
bring the alleged misconduct of a public officer to the notice of the
disciplinary authority. One of the protections which the law affords to a
public officer is that if such representations are false, and were made with
the knowledge and intention specified in section 180 of the Penal Code, the
penalties provided in that section will apply; as a corollary, it follows that
such representations must be made officially, and not privately or secretly,
and that they must be in writing or duly recorded.



If those safeguards are not observed, the power to scrutinize a transfer
order, whether on appeal to the Public Service Commission or under Article
126, will become nugatory.



In Faiz v. Attorney-General (Supra) this court held that:



". . . when an infringement by an executive officer, by executive or
administrative action, is directly and effectively the consequence of the act
of a private individual (whether by reason of instigation, connivance,
participation or otherwise) such individual is also responsible for the
executive or administrative action and the infringement caused thereby." (p.
383)



The 3rd respondent did make representations, to the Deputy Minister, the IGP,
the DIG, Matale, and the SSP, Matale, and he did so in order to get the
petitioner transferred. But on the one hand, the 1st respondent's position is
that he ordered the transfer simply because there was a lack of harmony (and
that there was a lack of harmony is not in dispute); and the evidence is that
the reason for that lack of harmony was neither brought to his notice, nor
concerned him in the least. On the other hand, there is no proof that, at the
material time, there had been brought to the 1st respondent's attention,
either the 3rd respondent's telegrams or any of the other complaints which the
3rd respondent had made to the Deputy Minister, the DIG, Matale, and/or the
SSP, Matale. Thus it has not been proved that the infringement was effectively
caused by the 3rd respondent's representations.

## 37

##  

## ORDER



I hold that the petitioner's fundamental right under Article 12(l) had been
infringed by the 1st respondent.



Counsel for the petitioner stated at the hearing that he was pursuing this
application primarily to vindicate the principle involved, and that he was no
longer insisting upon reinstatement at Dambulla.



Accordingly I refrain from quashing the impugned transfer order, and direct
the State to pay the petitioner a sum of Rs. 40,000/- as compensation and
costs.

** **

**WIJETUNGA, J. -** I agree.



Application allowed.



**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.** **(Dissenting)**



I have read the Judgment of my Brother Honble Fernando, J with whom my Brother
Honourable Wijetunge, J agreed. I regret I am unable to agree with them and I
give below my reasons.



This is an Application for a declaration that the petitioner's Fundamental
Right guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the Constitution has been infringed by
the respondents; to suspend the transfer of the petitioner until the final
determination of this Application and for compensation in a sum of Rs.
250,000/-.



The facts relevant to this application are briefly as follows:



The petitioner is a citizen of Sri Lanka and has been an Officer of the Police
Department for the last 18 Years. He joined the Police Department on
15.10.1976 as a Sub-Inspector of Police and has served the Department of
Police as an Inspector and also as a Chief Inspector, before he was promoted
to the rank of Assistant Superintendent of Police with effect from 05.11.1993
along with another 1.16 Police Officers, and was posted to Kayts Police
Division.



The petitioner, after serving his Six Months period in a terrorist area, was
transferred back to Kurunegala Police Division with effect



**38**



from 01.10.1994 and, thereafter, to Matale Police Division with effect from
25.01.1995 as an Assistant Superintendent of Police, Dambulla Division Il by
the 1st respondent.



The petitioner was again transferred from Dambulla to Anuradhapura Police
Division with immediate effect by the 2nd respondent, Deputy Inspector-General
of Police, Matale on the instructions of the 1st respondent, without
replacement.



As there was no response for his appeal against transfer he reported for work
at the Office of the Deputy Inspector-General of Police of Anuradhapura on
04.06.1995.



When the petitioner met the Senior Superintendent of Police, he was informed
that the S. S. P, did not expect the petitioner to come into Anuradhapura
Division as the 1st respondent had transferred two Officers earlier to fill in
two vacancies in his Division. The S. S. P., also informed that though there
were no vacancies for the petitioner's grade, he would be accommodated as an
Additional Assistant Superintendent of Police and was assigned to work as an
Additional A. S. P., in the Kebitigollewa District.



The petitioner alleges that the transfer order is arbitrary and made not on
grounds of exigencies of services or on disciplinary grounds or on his
request, but at the instigation of the 3rd respondent who is a Member of
Parliament for Matale District, for the reasons that the petitioner was
critical of the Government and had many confrontations with Officers who are
loyal to the Government and with Officers of the Galewala Police. No inquiry
was held into the allegations levelled against the petitioner although he
requested the 1st respondent to hold an inquiry into the allegations levelled
against him. He complained that the transfer order without an inquiry is
contrary to the principles of natural justice. He also averred that one Saman
Sigera a young Sub-Inspector of Police had been brought from the Southern
Division on a Special request of the 3rd respondent and made Officer in Charge
of the Galewala Police Station, contrary to the norms of the Police Department
to appoint a Senior Inspector of Police in charge of a Grade A2 Police
Station. This Galewala Police Station comes under the supervision of the
Assistant Superintendent of Police, Dambulla II, and therefore he had

**39**



to investigate into several. complaints made by several persons against his
subordinate Officer the above mentioned Saman Sigera the Officer in charge of
Galewala Police. He had inquired into these complaints and submitted an
Interim report to the Senior Superintendent of Police Matale and had
recommended that the Officer in Charge of Galewala Police be transferred out
of Galewala with immediate effect., but the petitioner was transferred out of
Dambulla Division to Anuradhapura Division, which transfer according to the
petitioner was to stop the investigations against the Officer in Charge of
Galewala Police. It is the case for the petitioner that the 3rd respondent had
been influenced by the Officer in Charge of Galewala Police to request the 1st
and 2nd respondents and the Honourable Deputy Minister of Defence to transfer
the petitioner out of Matale Division on arbitrary and discriminatory grounds.
The 3rd respondent without hesitation accepted Sub-Inspector of Police Saman
Sigera's version as the petitioner's wife hails from a family in which three
members are closely involved in the United National Party. The petitioner's
Father-in-Law was a Member of Parliament for Panduwas Nuwara Electorate from
1977 to 1988 and is the present Chairman of the Panduwas Nuwara Pradeshiya
Sabah. One brother in-law is the present Chief Minister of the North Western
Province and the other is the present United National Party Organiser for
Panduwas Nuwara and a former Member of Parliament for Kurunegala District from
1991 to 1994.



The case for the respondents is that the 3rd respondent complained that the
petitioner was unable to enlist the co-operation of subordinate officers in
his Division and sought his transfer. The respondents submit that problems had
arisen of a working relationship between the 3rd respondent and the
petitioner. The 1st respondent therefore considered the exigencies of this
emerging situation and felt that if an officer was unable to work in harmony
with the elected Members of Parliament it would not be desirable for such
officer to be retained in that Division. It was felt that this conflict might
develop into a situation that might be prejudicial and detrimental to the
exercise of Police function in the area and in an effort to resolve this
situation the petitioner was transferred in the first-instance to Anuradhapura
Division. The respondents were not influenced by malice or other consideration
nor it was the intention to meet out any

**40**



unequal treatment to the petitioner. Often Police Officers have been
transferred out of a particular area where they were unable to work in harmony
with the elected Members of Parliament. Such transfers were effected in the
interest of the Police Officers themselves and of the Department in general.
It is the submissions of the respondents that the petitioner is in a
transferable service and that he has no Fundamental Right to be at a station
of his choice. The respondent also states that the transfer was not on grounds
of proven misconduct nor the transfer to Anuradhapura District was intended to
post the petitioner to a designated operational area within the Anuradhapura
District. The respondents submit that they have acted in good faith and
according to Law and deny that the petitioner's Fundamental Rights had been
violated by them.



The 1st respondent frankly admitted that there was a complaint by the 3rd
respondent, but he took an independent decision to transfer the petitioner in
his own interest and in the interest of the Department and that he was not
transferred because of the request of the 3rd respondent. The 1st respondent
took the responsibility for his action to transfer the petitioner. As the 1st
respondent has taken the responsibility for his action there is no need for a
separate objection by way of affidavit from the other respondents.



The petitioner is in a transferable service and he has no Fundamental Right to
be at a station of his choice. The transfer was effected on the ground of
exigencies of service and not on disciplinary grounds or at the petitioner's
request. Exigency has arisen at the petitioner's Station in Dambulla Division
and therefore the petitioner was transferred out. It is irrelevant to say that
there was no exigency at Anuradhapura for a transfer to Anuradhapura.



A transfer order to an Officer in a transferable service cannot give rise to
an infringement of Fundamental Right except when the order comes frequently,
maliciously or unreasonably, with a view to harass an Officer. In the instant
case the Inspector-General of Police, the 1st respondent to whom the power to
transfer his Officers is delegated has given reason for the transfer, although
the reason may not be palatable to all. Instances are not uncommon both in
Public Service

**41**



and even in Judicial Service that Officers are transferred out of a station
when there is "Friction" in the area where they serve, irrespective of the
truth or falsity of the allegations against the Officers. It is no reason that
if an Officer is transferred out while in the process of investigating into
offences, it will inhibit new officers taking over his duties. In such an
event no officer can be transferred out as he will always be in the course of
his duties investigating into offences.



After this application was filed the petitioner filed a further petition dated
22nd July, 1996 for a limited purpose of obtaining an interim order to suspend
the transfer of the petitioner to Tangalle until the final determination of
the original application. The original application was heard on 22nd August,
1996. In the subsequent petition the petitioner averred that on 01.02.1996 the
petitioner was transferred from Kebitigollewa to Colombo Range and on
11.06.1996 he was transferred from Colombo Range to Transport Division and on
15.07.1996 he was transferred from Transport Division to Tangalle. He further
averred that for One Year and Ten Months from 01.01.1994 to 15.07.1996 the
petitioner had been transferred to Eight (8) Divisions.



This subsequent transfers of course is prima facie an infringement of
Fundamental Right, but the respondents were never called upon to file
objections to this second petition and therefore no adjudication can be made
on this issue.



For these reasons I am of opinion that the petitioner's original application
had to be dismissed. Accordingly I dismiss the application without costs.



_Application dismissed.  
 _

_By majority decision Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/28.html_  

