##  Abeygunasekera v. Setunga and Others - SLR - 62, Vol 1 of 1997 [1995] LKSC
28; (1997) 1 Sri LR 62 (8 June 1995)

62

ABEYGUNASEKERA

v.

SETUNGA AND OTHERS



  
SUPREME COURT.

G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J.

S.C. REFERENCE NO. 1/94.

C.A. APPEAL NO. 18/92 (PHC).

H.C. COLOMBO NO. 22/91 (REV)

M.C. MT. LAVINIA NO. 68192.  
MAY 26, 1995.



Jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to hear appeals from orders of a
Provincial High Court made in the exercise of its Revisionary Jurisdiction -
Article 154P (3) (b), 154P (6) and 138(1) of the Constitution- Section 74(2)
of the Primary Courts' Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.



The following questions were referred to the Supreme Court for determination
in terms of Article 125(1) of the Constitution.



1\. Does the Court of Appeal have an appellate jurisdiction in terms of
Article 138(1) of the Constitution as amended by the 13th Amendment in respect
of a decision of the Provincial High Court made in the exercise of its
Revisionary Jurisdiction?



2\. Does a party aggrieved by a decision of the Provincial High Court given in
respect of a matter coming within Part VII of the Primary Courts' Procedure
Act, have a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in terms of Article 154P(6)
of the Constitution as amended by the 13th Amendment read with Section 74(2)
of the Primary Courts Procedure Act?



**Held:**

** **

(i) The Appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138(1)
read with Article 154P(6) of the Constitution is not limited to correcting
errors committed by the High Court only in respect of Orders given by way of
appeal. The Court of Appeal has jurisdiction to hear an appeal against a
decision of the High Court whether given by way of Appeal or Revision.



(ii) Section 74(2) of the Act No. 44 of 1979 plainly prohibits an appeal from
the decision of the Primary Court Judge. Such prohibition cannot affect the
right of appeal to the Court of Appeal against a decision of the High Court.

The questions referred to are answered as follows:



1\. Yes

  
2\. Yes

**63**



**Per Kulatunga, J.,**



"There is no warrant for dissecting Article 138(1) into two parts and holding
that the powers of Appeal and Revision given by the Second Part are limited to
decisions given in the exercise of the original jurisdiction of the High
Court. The entire article should be read as a whole."



**_Cases referred to:_**

**_ _**

1 _. Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam_ (1993) 2 Sri L.R. 355.

_ _

Reference to the Supreme Court under Article 125(1) of the Constitution.

_ _

_J. W. Subasinghe P.C._ with _D. R. P. Goonetilake_ and _Manohara de Silva_
for appellants.

_ _

_S. Mahenthiran_ with _Sampath Welgampola_ for appellant in C.A. 1/93 (PHC).

_ _

_Nihal Jayamanne_ with _Prasantha de Silva, Ms Noorania Amerasinghe_ and _Ms.
Vasana Perera_ for 1st respondent.

_ _

Other respondents absent and unrepresented.

_Cur. adv. vult._



June 8, 1995.  


**KULATUNGA, J.**

** **

A dispute affecting land (between the Party of the 1st Part and the Party of
the 2nd Part, hereinafter referred to as the "appellant" and the "1st
respondent", respectively) was referred to the Magistrate's Court of Mt.
Lavinia under Section 66 of the Primary Courts' Procedure Act No. 44 of 1979.
After inquiry, the Magistrate (acting in his capacity of a Primary Court
Judge) made order in terms of Section 68 of the Act directing the appellant to
be restored to possession. That order was set aside by the High Court of the
Western Province acting in revision on an application made by the 1st
respondent. The appellant being aggrieved by the judgment of the High Court,
appealed to the Court of Appeal.



At the hearing of the appeal a preliminary objection was raised that the Court
of Appeal has no jurisdiction to entertain the appeal as the same is in
respect of an order made in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction of
the High Court. A question was also raised as to whether in the light of
Section 74(2) of Act No. 44 of 1979 the appellant is entitled to appeal to the
Court of Appeal. The Court of

**64**



Appeal acting under Article 125(1) of the Constitution, referred the following
questions to this Court for determination.



(1) Does the Court of Appeal have an appellate jurisdiction in terms of
Article 138(1) of the Constitution as amended by the 13th amendment in respect
of a decision of the Provincial High Court made in the exercise of its
revisionary jurisdiction?



(2) Does a party aggrieved by a decision of the Provincial High Court given in
respect of a matter coming within part VII of the Primary Courts Procedure
Act, have a right of appeal to the Court of Appeal in terms of Article 154P(6)
of the Constitution as amended by the 13th amendment read with Section 74(2)
of the Primary Courts' Procedure Act.



Learned Counsel for the 1st respondent submitted that on a proper construction
of the relevant provisions, the Court of Appeal cannot entertain the appeal;
and the appellant's remedy is possibly by way oâ‚¬ revision to the Court of
Appeal. In the alternative he submitted that the decision in Gunaratne v
Thambinayagam (1) is wrong when it held that Section 9 of Act No. 19 of 1990
does not permit direct appeals to the Supreme Court from orders made in the
exercise of revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of a Province; and that
it is the Supreme Court which has the jurisdiction to entertain an appeal from
the impugned judgment. On the second question, Counsel submitted that Section
74(2) of Act No. 44 of 1979 provides that "an appeal shall not lie against any
determination or order under this part"; that the right of appeal under
Article 154P(6) is subject to law; hence Section 74(2) should be interpreted
as prohibiting any appeal to any Court, including the Court of Appeal. Counsel
argued that this interpretation will give effect to the intention of the
Legislature which is to avoid protracted litigation in respect of orders made
by a Primary Court Judge which are of an interim nature.



Learned Counsel for the appellant and Mr. Mahenthiran who was heard (in terms
of Article ' 34(3) of the Constitution) in view of the fact that he appears
for the appellant in a similar case C.A. No. 1/93 (PHC) submitted that in
Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam (Supra) this Court was concerned with the
interpretation of Section 9 of Act No. 19/1990; hence that decision has no
application here. In the matter before us, there is no justification for
eroding the appellate jurisdiction

**65**



of the Court of Appeal under Article 138(1) to entertain appeals lodged in the
exercise of the right of appeal granted by Article 154P(6). Counsel also
submitted that Section 74(2) only precludes an appeal from an order of the
Primary Court Judge and it would not touch the power of the Court of Appeal to
entertain an appeal from the judgment of the High Court.



In order to determine the questions referred to this Court, we have to
interpret the provisions of Article 154P (3) (b), Article 154 (P) (6) and
Article 138(1) of the Constitution. These Articles are reproduced below.



A. 154 P (3) -  


"Every such High Court shall -



(a) ....................

  
(b) notwithstanding anything in Article 138 and subject to any law, exercise,
appellate and revisionary jurisdiction in respect of convictions, sentences
and orders entered or imposed by Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts within
the Province".

  
A. 154 P (6) -



"Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and any law, any person
aggrieved by a final order, judgment or sentence of any such Court in the
exercise of its jurisdiction under paragraph (3) (b) . . . . . ., may appeal
therefrom to the Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138".

  
A. 138 (1) -



"The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise subject to the provisions of the
Constitution or of any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of
all errors in fact or in law which shall be committed by the High Court in the
exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction or by any Court of First
Instance, Tribunal or other institution and sole and exclusive cognizance, by
way of appeal, revision and restitution in integrum, of all causes, suits,
actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such High Court, Court of
First Instance, Tribunal or other institution may have taken cognizance".

**66**



In Gunaratne v. Thambinayagam (Supra) the question that came up for
consideration was whether the right of direct appeal to the Supreme Court
provided by S.9 of Act No. 19 of 1990 is limited to orders made by the High
Court in the exercise of its "appellate jurisdiction" in the narrow sense and
excluded appeals from orders made in the exercise of its "revisionary
jurisdiction". It was held that S.9 would not confer a right of appeal in
respect of revisionary orders of the High Court. In so deciding, this Court
had regard inter alia, to the following considerations:



(a) The power of revision is an extraordinary power distinct from the
appellate jurisdiction of the Court.  


(b) The right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly created and
granted by statute.

  
(c) Section 9 refers to orders made in the exercise of the appellate
jurisdiction of the High Court. In contrast S.31DD(1) of the Industrial
Disputes Act as amended by Act No. 32 of 1990 (which also provides for direct
appeals to the Supreme Court) provides for an appeal from any final order of a
High Court, in the exercise of the **appellate jurisdiction** or its
**revisionary jurisdiction** , vested in it by law, in relation to an order of
a Labour Tribunal.



It is thus clear that the expression "appellate jurisdiction" in S.9 of Act
No. 19 of 1990 has a restricted meaning. If so, this Court cannot enlarge the
right of appeal granted by that section. It is a matter for Parliament. As
such, I am unable to agree that the case of Gunarathe v. Thambinayagam (Supra)
has been wrongly decided. In the instant case, we are not concerned with the
question whether a statutory right of appeal granted by ordinary law is
subject to any limitation. The question here is whether the appellate
jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal under Article 138(1) of the Constitution
to entertain appeals made in terms of Article 154P(6) is restricted and
excludes the power to entertain appeals from revisionary orders of the High
Court. If it is so restricted then, it also means that the right of appeal
granted by Article 154P(6) is restricted by Article 138(1).



Conceptually, the expression "appellate jurisdiction" includes powers in
appeal and on revision. From the time of the Administration



**67**



of Justice Law No. 44 of 1973 it also includes restitution in integrum. See
Sections 36 and 37 of the Courts Ordinance (Cap.6), Sections 11 and 354 of the
A.J. L. and Articles 138, 139 and 145 of the Constitution. Prior to the 13th
amendment when only the Courts of First Instance, Tribunals and other
institutions were subject to the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal, there was no question that the Court of Appeal was empowered to
exercise its jurisdiction "by way of appeal, revision and restitution in
integrum". Under the 13th amendment the High Court of a Province which is
vested with powers of appeal as well as revision is not a Court of First
Instance. Hence, by a consequential amendment to Article 138(1), that Court
also has been made subject to the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of
Appeal. The amendment provides inter alia that "the Court of Appeal shall have
and exercise ... an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all errors
... which shall be committed by the High Court, in the exercise of its
appellate or original jurisdiction".



The power to review the orders of Magistrate's Courts and Primary Courts by
way of appeal and revision is conferred on High Courts by Article 154P (3)
(b). Section 3 of Act No. 19 of 1993 extended this power to orders of Labour
Tribunals and orders made under Sections 5 and 9 of the Agrarian Services Act.
Had these provisions conferred appellate jurisdiction on the High Court to be
exercised by way of appeal and revision, the questions of interpretation of
the kind which have arisen from time to time may not have arisen. However, the
use of the expression "appellate and revisionary jurisdiction" has given rise
to such questions. Whenever such questions arise as to the meaning of a
particular provision, the Court has to interpret the statute and determine its
meaning on the basis of the intention of Parliament or the supposed intention
of Parliament, having regard to the language of the statute and relevant rules
of interpretation. As stated in Bindra's "Interpretation of Statutes" 7th Ed.
p.945:



"It is the duty of the Court to determine in what particular meaning or
particular shade of meaning the word or expression was used by the
Constitution makers, and in discharging the duty the Court will take into
account the context in which it occurs, the subject to serve which it was
used, its collocation the general congruity with the concept or object it was
intended to articulate and a host of other considerations. Above all, the
Court will avoid repugnancy with accepted norms of justice and reason".

**68**



In the case before us, Article 154P (3) (b) conferred "appellate and
revisionary" jurisdiction on the High Court. Article 154P (6) provides that
any person aggrieved by a decision of the High Court **in the exercise of its
jurisdiction** inter alia, under paragraph (3) (b) may appeal therefrom to the
Court of Appeal in accordance with Article 138. Thus Article 154(P) (6) itself
has not limited the right of appeal given by it to orders made by the High
Court by way of appeal. However, that Article refers back to Article 138 which
spells out the jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal and the manner of its
exercise.



Learned counsel for the list respondent relies upon the wording of the first
part of Article 138(1) to argue that the right of appeal given by Article
154(p) (6) is limited to correcting errors committed by the High Court in
deciding appeals. This argument is based on the use of the words "appellate
jurisdiction for the correction of all errors ... committed by the High Court
in the exercise of its appellate or original jurisdiction". Counsel next cites
the second part of Article 138(1) which gives the Court "sole and exclusive
cognizance by way of appeal, revision and restitutio in integrum of all
causes, suits actions, prosecutions, matters and things of which such High
Court, Court of First Instance, Tribunals or other institution may have taken
cognizance". He argues that by this part the Court of Appeal is given
appellate and revisionary jurisdiction only with regard to orders made by the
High Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction.



In my opinion there is no justification for the suggested construction of
Article 138(1). In using the expression "appellate or original jurisdiction"
Parliament intended to refer to the appellate jurisdiction of the High Court
as opposed to its original jurisdiction. These words were not used to limit
the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal to correct the errors
committed by the High Court only in respect of decisions given by way of
appeal. This is the interpretation which is most agreeable to justice and
reason.



Secondly, there is no warrant for dissecting Article 138(1) into two parts and
holding that the powers of appeal and revision given by the second part are
limited to decisions given in the exercise of the original jurisdiction of the
High Court. The entire Article should be read as a whole. The second part is
complementary to the first part and proceeds to give the Court sole and
exclusive cognizance over

**69**



all the matters referred to in that Article and to spell out the manner of
exercise of the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. The second part
refers to "such High Court" viz. the High Court having appellate and original
jurisdiction. Accordingly, I hold that the Court of Appeal has jurisdiction to
hear an appeal against a decision of the High Court whether given by way of
appeal or on revision.



There is also no merit in the submission that Section 74(2) of Act No. 44 of
1979 is a bar to an appeal to the Court of Appeal from the judgment of the
High Court. That section plainly prohibits an appeal from a decision of the
Primary Court Judge. Such prohibition cannot affect the right of appeal to the
Court of Appeal against a decision of the High Court. It is true that the
right of appeal given by Article 154(P) (6) is subject to any law. However,
having regard to its plain meaning, Section 74(2) cannot be invoked to deprive
the appellant's right of appeal to the Court of Appeal. On the other hand, in
the absence of clear and express provision, it is in the interest of justice
that such right should be upheld rather than denied lest erroneous decisions
of the High Court will be immune from scrutiny by a Superior Court.



For the foregoing reasons, the questions referred to this court have to be
answered as follows:

  
1\. Yes.  
  
2\. Yes.



The appellant will be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 750/- payable by the
1st respondent.



**G. P S. DE SILVA, C. J.** \- I agree.

** **

**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



_Questions referred answered._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/28.html_  

