##  Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne, Deputy Bribery Commissioner and Others (No.
1) - SLR - 290, Vol 3 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 28; (1994) 3 Sri LR 290 (28 April
1994)

290

  
HETTIARACHCHI  

**v.  **

**SENEVIRATNE,**

**DEPUTY BRIBERY COMMISSIONER AND OTHERS (NO. 1)**  



SUPREME COURT

M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

P. R. P PERERA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION 127/94

APRIL 28, 1994.



Fundamental Rights - Application for leave to proceed - Appointment of Bribery
Commissioner by Cabinet - Circulars laying down procedures for recruitment to
and promotion in the public service - Article 158 of the Constitution.

_ _

**Held:**

** **

Under Article 158 of the Constitution, the Cabinet is expressly empowered to
exercise the power of appointment notwithstanding prior delegation of the
power of appointment to the Public Service Commission.



Although the Cabinet has laid down national policy for recruitment to and
promotion to the public service in a series of circulars, these are addressed
to Secretaries to Ministries, Chief Secretaries to Provincial Councils and
various other officials of public authorities. They have not been expressly
made applicable to the Cabinet itself; and in fact some of the provisions of
the circulars seem to be quite inappropriate in relation to appointments by
the Cabinet.



There is no authority suggesting that the delegating authority is necessarily
bound by the conditions which it imposes upon, the delegate. The circulars are
not, as a matter of law, applicable to or binding on the Cabinet.



# Case referred to

** **

Silva. v. Attorney General (1958) 60 NLR 145.



**APPLICATION** for leave to proceed in application for relief for
infringement of fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12(1) of the
Constitution.



T. Walaliyadda for petitioner.

_Cur adv vult._



**291**



April 28, 1994.  


**FERNANDO, J.**

** **

Learned Counsel for the petitioner supports this application for leave to
proceed on two grounds only.



First he submits that the appointment of the 1st respondent as the Deputy
Bribery Commissioner by the Cabinet of Ministers was illegal, or otherwise
improper, because the Cabinet had delegated_ the power to make that
appointment to the Public Service Commission by P3 of 26. 2. 92; and
thereafter it was only the Commission which could have made that appointment.
Although the principle that delegation denudes the delegating authority of its
power was upheld in Silva v. Attorney General (1) now Article 158 of the
Constitution expressly provides otherwise, so that the Cabinet is entitled to
exercise the power of appointment notwithstanding prior delegation.



Secondly, he submits that the Cabinet has laid down national policy for
recruitment to and promotion in the public service in a series of Circulars
(P4 to P7 and P11) ; that even if the Cabinet had the power to make that
appointment, the principles and procedures laid down in those Circulars were
necessarily and automatically applicable to and binding on the Cabinet; and
that in appointing the 1st respondent the Cabinet acted in violation of those
Circulars.



Counsel submits that those principles and procedures, being matters of
national policy, are applicable both to the delegate and to the Cabinet
itself. However, we find that the Circulars are addressed to Secretaries to
Ministries, Chief Secretaries to Provincial Councils, and various other
officials of public authorities; they have not been expressly made applicable
to the Cabinet itself. Indeed some of the provisions of the Circulars seem to
be quite inappropriate in relation to appointments by the Cabinet. Thus
paragraph 8 of P4 which requires the Ministry of Public Administration to set
up a Committee to monitor the implementation of the provisions of the Circular
is quite inconsistent with its applicability to the Cabinet. Learned Counsel
was unable to cite any authority suggesting that the delegating authority is
necessarily bound by conditions which it imposes upon the delegate.

**292**



We are of the opinion that these Circulars are not, as a matter of law,
applicable to or binding on the Cabinet.



These two contentions, involving questions of law as to the power and
authority of the Cabinet to make the impugned appointment, and the principles
and procedures applicable thereto, are unsustainable.



Although invited to make any further submissions he wished to, learned Counsel
did not address us on any of the other averments of fact contained in the
petition, to support an allegation that the fundamental rights of the
petitioner had been violated.

Leave to proceed is therefore refused.



**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.



**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.



_Leave to proceed refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/28.html_  

