##  Vadivelu v. Oic, Sithambarapuram Regional Camp Police Post,Vavuniya and
Others - SLR - 146, Vol 3 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 28; (2002) 3 Sri LR 146 (5
September 2002)

**146**

**VADIVELU  
v.  
OFFICER IN CHARGE,SITHAMBARAPURAM  
 REGIONAL CAMP POLICE POST, VAVUNIYA  
AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
J. A. N. DE SILVA, J. AND  
WEERASURIYA, J.  
SC NO. 44/2002 (FR)  
JULY 01, 2002  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Restrictions against travel and residence imposed on a
refugee - Permissible limits of such restrictions - Article 14 (1) (h) of the
Constitution.  
_  
The petitioner was a Tamil refugee living in a refugee camp in Vavuniya. He
was subjected to severe restrictions against travel to and residence in
Colombo once in June, 2001, for taking his sick child to Colombo for
treatment, and again on visiting a sick relative in Colombo in December -
January, 2002, accompanied by his two children. An application was filed in
court on 16. 01. 2002 in respect of the January, 2002, restrictions. The
petitioner had this application filed first before returning to Vavuniya from
Colombo complying with the conditions of travel pass.  
  
The petitioner had to purchase a form, supply the photographs of himself and
his two children who accompanied him to Colombo and find a sponsor in Colombo
paying Rs. 1,000 (to that sponsor). The sponsor had to be approved by the
Police, to stand surety for producing the petitioner and his two children. The
petitioner had to then attend an inquiry. Further, the petitioner and the two
children were videographed and given a pass for two weeks to travel to Colombo
and to reside at Modera at a given address.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1) The petitioner's failure to complain on account of the June, 2001, travel
restrictions within one month did not estop him from complaining against the
subsequent restrictions. The application was therefore, not time-barred.  
  
(2) The impugned restrictions were burdensome, time consuming and costly and
effectively restricted the right of travel and residence. They were not

**147**

permitted by law or emergency regulations in terms of Articles 15 (6) and 15
(7) of the Constitution.  
  
3\. The petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 14 (1) (ft) has been
infringed by executive action by application to him of the travel pass system.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
M. A. Sumanthiran with P. S. Bandaranayake, K. Prabakaran and Renuka
Senanayake for petitioner.  
  
_I. Demuni de Silva, Senior State Counsel_ for respondents.  


_Cur. adv. vult._

September 05, 2002  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
This application was argued together with Dias v. Secretary, Ministry  of
Defence, SC application No. 604/2001 (FR).  
  
The petitioner was compelled to apply for and obtain a "travel pass" in order
to travel from Vavuniya to Colombo, which he claimed was an infringement of
his fundamental rights under Articles 11,12 (1), 12 (2) and 14 (1) (h). Leave
to proceed was not granted in respect of Article 11.  
  
The petitioner is a Tamil citizen of Sri Lanka who had been living in
Killinochchi and carrying on business as a merchant. In 1990 he had to leave
Sri Lanka, with his family, on account of the then prevailing armed conflict.
In 1995 they were brought back to Sri Lanka by the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, and were placed in the Sithambarapuram Refugee Camp
(or "Welfare Centre") in Vavuniya.

**148**

From the inception, they were not permitted to leave the Camp premises without
obtaining a pass. At first, a pass was valid only for the date of issue, but
later it was vaid for three months at a time. The pass entitled the holder to
travel only in the areas "cleared" by the Security Forces, and that too only
within the Vavuniya District. The petitioner claimed that because of the
restrictions on travel imposed by the pass system, he and other members of his
family were unable to obtain any form of gainful employment.  
  
The petitioner alleged that in June, 2001, his three-year old grandÂ­daughter
suffered attacks of epilepsy, and was admitted to the Vavuniya General
Hospital; that from there she was transferred to the Anuradhapura General
Hospital; and that the District Medical Officer Anuradhapura, advised that she
be taken to Colombo. For that purpose the petitioner had to apply for travel
passes for himself and his daughter. He had to submit a "Referral of Patients
for Special Management" form issued by the DM0, Vavuniya and to arrange for a
sponsor to guarantee their return. That "Referral" was dated 26. 09. 2001, and
contained an endorsement by the DMO : "This letter is given to get pass at
Sanasa Camp", and it had been signed by the Consultant Paediatrician of the
Lady Ridgeway Hospital on 06. 10. 2001. The petitioner averred that they were
granted travel passes limited to seven days, and therefore had to return
within seven days although the child's treatment had not been completed. The
respondents stated that the relevant books and records did not show that the
petitioner had made an application for travel passes in June 2001, and
accordingly denied the petitioner's version. That denial has been made without
due care, and is unacceptable, as it  is quite clear from the documents
produced by the petitioner that the child had been examined in Colombo in
October 2001. An application under Article 126 was not filed within one month,
and accordingly that incident is not the real issue in this case, although it
does help to understand the petitioner's state of mind in regard to the pass
system.  
  
Thereafter, on 19. 12. 2001, the petitioner received a telegram that his
wife's uncle was seriously ill in Colombo, and wished to see

**149**

his family. His complaint is in relation to the several delays and
difficulties which he and his two children experienced in regard to their
journey to Colombo to see their sick relative. He alleged that he had  to
purchase an application form; to supply photographs; to furnish the address of
the place in Colombo at which they intended to stay; and to produce a sponsor
who would guarantee their return. He made his application on 22. 12. 2001,
giving an address at Modera, and was told to go back to the -Camp and wait
until a response was received from the Modera police. The petitioner averred
that the sponsor had to be "a person who was deemed as a qualified surety by
the Police for this purpose", and that he had to pay that sponsor a sum of Rs.
1,000. They had also to present themselves for an inquiry at the Sanasa police
post of the Vavuniya police and satisfy the police that their travel was for a
bona fide purpose. The sponsor had to surrender her own "pass", and was given
time till 25. 01. 2002 to produce the petitioner and his two children in order
to reclaim her "pass". On 02. 01. 2002, the petitioner and his two children
were videographed at the police post, and given two-week travel passes. The
instructions on the reverse of the travel pass required the holder, on
reaching his destination, to hand over the pass to the OIC of the relevant
police station "and obtain a Residence Registration Pass within 24 hours on
arrival", and, on his return, to surrender the Residence Registration Pass to
the police, to recover the travel pass from the police, and to hand it back to
the authority which issued it. They complied with all those conditions. They
did not risk overstaying in Colombo, fearing that the police might take them
into custody and that the sponsor might forfeit her own pass, and decided to
return to Vavuniya on time. Before leaving Colombo, however, the petitioner
gave instructions to make this application, which was filed on 16. 01. 2002.  
  
The petitioner contended that the several conditions imposed on him were
restrictions on his freedom of movement, that those conditions and
restrictions had not been imposed on other persons similarly circumstanced,
and that they had been imposed on him on account

**150**

of his race; and also that they were not authorized or imposed by any law or
emergency regulation. He submitted that thereby his fundamental rights under
Article 14 (1) (ft), 12 (1) and 1212 (2) had been in infringed.  
  
The respondents contended that although the "Residential and Travel Pass
System" was not introduced by any law or emergency regulation, that system was
implemented in the Vavuniya District in the interests of national security as
"it is the duty of the State to safeguard the independence, sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of Sri Lanka and ensure the safety of every citizen
and property". That system had been introduced in 1992 as a security measure
"and was operated with the assistance of the Police, Armed Forces and other
civilian authorities in order to prevent LTTE cadres from infiltrating into
the Vavuniya District and areas south of Vavuniya to engage in acts of
sabotage, killings and other terrorist activities". A similar system was in
force for those who wished to enter Vavuniya. Further, the petitioner was a
displaced person residing in a Welfare Centre, and "it was to his advantage to
have the security of computer embossed "travel pass" as it helped the
establishment of his identity wherever he travelled [as there was a computer
system which] enabled the authorities to verify the identity of such persons
within a short period and avoid undue delays and inconvenience to visitors
such as the petitioner". They also produced several internal circulars and
memoranda regarding the implementation of the pass system, relying on which
they urged that if the petitioner had so desired his pass could have been
extended "up to a period of 3 months", and that if the petitioner had failed
to return "steps would be taken to investigate the matter and if it is
established that [he had] left the Island or settled down in any other part of
the country the [sponsor's] pass would be duly  released to the sponsor". The
respondents also submitted that the petitioner's application was out of time.  
  
In regard to the steps which the petitioner had to take in order to obtain
travel passes, learned Senior Counsel did not concede that

**151**

he had to purchase an application form and to make a payment to the sponsor.
However, the respondents have offered no explanation as to how applicants
obtain application forms, and it is also likely that a sponsor acceptable to
the authorities would have expected some compensation in return for his
guarantee. I find the petitioner's version to be more probable.  
  
The procedures with which the petitioner had to comply did not prevent him
travelling to Colombo, and hence there was no total denial of his right to
freedom of movement. However, the question arises whether those procedures
were nevertheless so burdensome as to amount to an infringement or impairment
of that right. The respondent's contentions raise two issues. Were those
procedures and restrictions no more than mere formalities which no sensible
person would complain of, and to which the maxim de minimis non curat lex
would apply? Was the freedom of movement, intrinsically and inherently,
subject to implied restrictions of that sort?  
  
If the procedures which the petitioner had to follow were broadly comparable
to the requirements of obtaining a boarding pass, having luggage security
checked, and completing an embarkation card on leaving a country by air, I
would readily have agreed that there was no infringement. However, those
procedures were for beyond maintaining a record of the identity of persons
travelling to and from Vavunisya, and their places of residence. They were
quite burdensome, time-consuming and costly, and effectively restricted the
right of travel and residence. A delay of ten days in the issue of travel pass
would sometimes make a journey futile. Thus, where the intended travel was for
the purpose of urgent medical treatment, or visiting a dying relative, the
patient might have died before a pass was issued. Again, if travel was in
order to attend a function, or to vote at an election, or to institute legal
proceedings (such as this very application), delay might have defeated the
purpose of travel. Finding an acceptable sponsor, and making the necessary
payment, would be more than mere formalities, particularly for a resident of a
refugee camp. The requirements in regard to notifying a place of residence and
obtaining

**152**

a residence registration pass had the effect of discouraging a change of
residence in Colombo, and to that extent affected movement and residence
within Colombo. Although the respondents claim that the petitioner could have
applied for a travel pass for a longer period, or that the stipulated period
could have been extended, they appear to concede that the maximum was three
months. Further, although they assert that if the petitioner left Sri Lanka or
chose a place of residence outside Vavuniya his sponsor would not have
forfeited her pass, yet an inquiry was necessary before the sponsor could be
released from her guarantee and her pass returned. In any event, the fact that
the relevant circulars and memoranda governing all these matters were
unpublished and inaccessible to the petitioner was itself  an unacceptabe
restriction. Laws and regulations affecting fundamental rights must
necessarily be published and accessible to citizens.  
  
In my view, the restrictions on the freedom to travel were comparable to the
procedures often applicable to obtaining a visa for travel to a foreign
country, with no assurance that permission would be granted. Cumulatively,
they were significant restrictions on the petitioner's freedom of movement and
residence guaranteed by Article 14 (1) (h).  
  
I must add that Article 27 (12) requires that "the State" \- and that includes
the Judiciary - "shall recongize and protect the family as the basic unit of
society". It is true that the directive principles of State policy do not
confer or impose legal rights and obligations, and are not enforceable in any
Court, but that does not mean that the Judiciary is bound to ignore them. In
considering the nature of the restrictions placed on the petitioner's right to
travel to Colombo, it is relevant that they tended to weaken rather than to
protect the family and family ties. Besides, they did not facilitate the full
realization of his fundamental rights and freedoms (as contemplated by Article
27 (2) (a).  
  
A further question is whether, having regard to the then prevailing armed
conflict, the freedom of movement was impliedly subject to such  restrictions.
It has been observed that the freedom of speech does

**153**

not extend to falsely crying, "Fire!" in a crowded theatre. An express
restriction imposed by law or delegated legislation is not necessary in order
to ensure that the freedom of speech is not abused by such conduct. Likewise,
the freedom of movement does not give persons engaged in armed conflict with
the State the liberty to move around as they please. There are many inherent
limitations of that sort. It requires no express provision to conclude that
the freedom of movement does not grant a citizen the right to enter, without
consent, the premises in which State institutions are situated or private
premises.  Such access can legitimately be controlled or regulated in various
ways. However, the right of citizens to travel on public highways and to have
access to public places may only be curtailed by restrictions imposed in terms
of Articles 15 (6) and 15 (7).  
  
There is force in the respondent's contention that the restrictions complained
of were imposed in the interests of national security, and were reasonably
necessary for that purpose. However, Article 15 (7) required that such
restrictions be imposed by a law, or by regulations made under the law
relating to public security. Accordingly, the travel pass system constitutes a
restriction not authorized by Article 15 (7).  
  
I hold that the petitioner's fundamental right under Article 14 (1) (h) had
been infringed by executive action by the application to him of the travel
pass system.  
  
In his petition the petitioner had pleaded a violation of Article 11. The
restrictions imposed were undoubtedly burdensome and inconvenient, but they
were not cruel, inhuman or degrading. Leave to proceed under Article 11 was
therefore refused.  
  
The petitioner also claimed that Articles 12 (1) and 12 (2) had been
infringed. There is evidence that the travel pass system applied not only to
those living in refugee camps in Vavuniya, but to all those travelling to and
from Vavuniya; and that they applied to persons of all communites (Dias v.
Secretary, Ministry of Defence is an example). Article 12 has not been
infringed.

**154**

I must now turn to the respondents' contention that the application was time-
barred. It was argued that the petitioner became aware of the travel pass
system in June, 2001, and that he should have challenged the system within one
month; and that he had acquiesced in the system, and therefore could not later
challenge it. It is true that the petitioner could have challenged the system
on the first occasion when it was applied to him. But, each violation gives
rise  to a separate cause of action. This situation cannot be compared to a
circular or scheme which purports to change an employee's terms and conditions
of service. The failure to make a prompt challenge would often preclude a
subsequent challenge - on the ground that the change in terms and conditions
has become final. There is distinction between that and other violations of
fundamental rights. The failure to challenge an unlawful arrest (or detention,
or torture, or denial of freedom of speech) on one occasion does not mean that
the victim can there after be subjected to subsequent violations with
impunity. I hold that the petitioner's complaint in respect of the December
travel  pass was within time and was not barred by acquiescence.  
  
As for relief, there is evidence that even before this application was filed,
steps were being taken to relax the travel pass system, and that it was
ultimately abolished on 05. 03. 2002; perhaps by filing this application the
petitioner accelerated that process. He has succeeded in vindicating the
principle involved, and having regard to all the circumstances I consider
costs and nominal compensation to be adequate.  
  
I grant the petitioner a declaration that his fundamental right under Article
14 (1) (h) has been infringed and award him compensation and costs in a sum of
Rs. 30,000 payable by the State on or before 31. 10. 2002.  
  
**J. A. N. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**WEERASURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/28.html_  

