##  Nandasena v. Uva Regional Transport Board - SLR - 318, Vol 1 of 1993
[1992] LKSC 29; (1993) 1 Sri LR 318 (7 December 1992)

**318**

**NANDASENA** **  
v.** **  
UVA REGIONAL TRANSPORT BOARD**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO J.  
GOONEWARDENA J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 59/92.  
C.A. NO. 385/86.  
LT. NO. R/22975.  
DECEMBER 07, 1992.

_     Industrial Dispute - Transfer of employer - Constructive termination -
Vacation of post._

The applicant-appellant was employed by the respondent Board as a bus
conductor attached to the Embilipitiya Depot. On 3.4.1984 he was interdicted
without pay on charges falling into two categories

1\. Assault and conspiracy to assault the Depot Manager on 26.3.1984.

2\. Failing to reveal to the respondent the correct facts relating to the
incident of 26.3.84.

After a domestic inquiry he was found not guilty of the first charge but
guilty of the second charge of misleading the Board by concealing the truth
and/or making a false statement relating to the incident of assault which took
place on - 26.3.1984. Consequently he was held to be not a fit and proper
person to hold employment under the Board. On 26.12.84 the Personnel Manager
informed the appellant of the result of the domestic inquiry and indicated
that the punishments meted out were disentitlement to salary during the period
of interdiction and a disciplinary transfer to a new station of which he will
be informed subsequently. On 31.12.84 he was informed that his new station was
the Ratnapura Depot with effect from 1.1.1985.

319

On 2.1.1985 the appellant wrote to the Personnel Manager asserting his
innocence and that he was not at Embilipitiya on the day of the incident and
stating that the unlawful deprivation of wages and transfer constituted a
constructive termination of his services and he would be appealing against the
order of 26.12.84. He asked for stay of the transfer pending the appeal. He
called for a reply on or before 15.1.1985. On 11.1.85 the Personnel Manager
replied that he had no power to stay the transfer citing the Board's rule 14
which provided that upon an appeal being made a punishment transfer would not
be stayed. The appellant wrote again to the Personnel Manager on 21.1.1985
asking for a reconsideration and that pending the result of the appeal he be
transferred to the Godawala Depot as this was within the limit of his free
travel pass whereas Ratnapura was not and would involve him in additional
expenses. The Personnel Manager did not reply.

On 8.2.1985 the Depot Manager Ratnapura issued a vacation of post notice
giving seven days to explain his absence. On 10.2.85 the appellant replied he
was awaiting the Personnel Manager's final decision. On 22.2.85 the Depot
Manager Ratnapura informed the appellant that he was deemed to have vacated
his post on 5.1.85 by failing to report for work on or after that date.

On 28.2.85 the appellant wrote to the Personnel Manager seeking a
reinstatement and a posting to either Kahawatta or Godakawela pending the
result of his appeal. On 1.4.85 the Personnel Manager replied rejecting the
appeal and reiterating the position set out in the letter of 11.1.1985.

On 28.2.1985 the appellant made an application to the Labour Tribunal in
respect of the termination of his services. The Board took up the position
that the appellant had been transferred to Ratnapura as a punishment upon
being found guilty of serious misconduct. The transfer order continued to be
operative despite the appellant's appeal and upon his failing to report for
work at the Ratnapura Depot he was properly deemed to have vacated his post.

The notes of inquiry of the domestic hearing were not produced before the
Labour Tribunal and the application by the appellant to have them so produced
was objected to by the respondent and disallowed by the Tribunal.

**Held :** (Fernando J. dissenting)

1\. If the disciplinary transfer was an injustice and an unfair imposition of
punishment, it would still be so whether the new station be Ratnapura or
Godakawela suggested by the appellant. The imposition of the transfer and the
forfeiture of salary by way of punishment, after an adverse finding at a
domestic inquiry did not have the effect of a constructive termination of the
contract of employment there being no other complaint of wrong doing by the
respondent other than with regard to the infliction of this punishment.

320

If the appellant had made an application to the Labour Tribunal claiming that
the punishment meted out to him after the domestic inquiry was in reality a
constructive termination of services then he could have properly urged the
Labour Tribunal to order the production of the notes of inquiry held by the
domestic tribunal.

2\. There is no material to say that the disciplinary order of transfer was
unjustified or constituted arbitrary punishment.

3\. Even assuming the transfer was invalid the employee must obey it. He could
appeal against the order but he cannot refuse to carry it out. He must comply
and complain.

4\. The failure to report at the Ratnapura Depot was a deliberate and
calculated act of disobedience and a virtual repudiation of his contract. The
appellant of his own volition secured his own discharge from employment under
the Board by vacating his post.

**Per Gunawardene J.**

This Court is the last Court and the tribunal of ultimate jurisdiction in the
judicial hierarchy. Its orders, rulings and judgments are immune from legal
challenge and anyone dissatisfied therewith has no recourse to further legal
remedies. A consciousness of this I think, must constantly be in the Court's
mind, reminding it of the need for the exercise of self-discipline and self-
restraint in its attempt to ensure that the influence of its actions is never
other than for the public good.'

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Ceylon Estate Employers Federation v. Manakulasooriya S.C. 254/73 S.C.
Minutes of 13.9.73._  
_  
2\. Re Duran (No. 2) Judgment No. 392 of the Administrative Tribunal of the
International Labour Organisation._  
_  
3\. Re Reynolds Judgment No. 38 of the Administrative Tribunal of the
International Labour Organisation._  
_  
4\. Ceylon Estate Staffs' Union v. Superintendent Meddecombra Estate, Watagoda
(1970) 73 N.L.R. 278, 287, 288._  
_  
5\. Janatha Estates Development Board v. Kurukuladitta (1990) 2 Sri L.R. 169._  
_  
6\. Hayleys Ltd. v. De Silva (1963) 64 N.L.R. 130, 139._  
_  
7\. Lewis Brown & Co. Ltd. v. Periyapperuma (1971) 76 N.L.R. 115._  
_  
8\. Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers Union (1972) 75
N.L.R. 182._  
_  
9\. Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Tea, Rubber etc. Workers Union (1976) 77
N.L.R. 6._  
_  
10\. Workman of Phillips (India) Ltd. v. Phillips (India) Limited (1960) 2
Labour Law Journal pp. 135-6._  
_  
11\. Gulam Haqquani Khan v,. State of Uttar Pradesh (1958) 2 Labour Law
Journal p. 673, 676._

321

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_Percy Wickremasekera_ for applicant-appellant.  
  
_Ranjith de Silva_ for respondent Board.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 29, 1993.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The Applicant-Appellant was employed by the Respondent as a bus conductor from
1.8.75. While serving at the Embilipitiya Depot, he was interdicted without
pay on 3.4.84 on several charges, falling into two categories : assault and
conspiracy to assault the Depot Manager on 26.3.84, and failing " to reveal to
the (Respondent) the correct facts relating to the incident of 26.3.84 " ("
the second charge "). After the disciplinary inquiry, by letter dated
26.12.84, the Appellant was informed that he had been found guilty of the
latter charge, for which two punishments would be imposed, namely the
withholding of his salary for the period of interdiction and a transfer on
disciplinary grounds; by letter dated 31.12.84 he was informed that he was
transferred to the Ratnapura Depot with effect from 1.1.85. On 2.1.85 the
Appellant complained to the Assistant Commissioner of Labour that the denial
of half-pay during interdiction, and the withholding of his salary by way of
punishment, were wrongful. On the same day he wrote to the Personnel Manager,
asserting that he had not been at Embilipitiya at the time of the incident and
that therefore he was innocent of the second charge; that he intended to file
an appeal against the order of 26.12.84; that the denial of half-pay during
interdiction and the punishments imposed were unlawful; that a transfer
pending appeal, after having being deprived of his salary for nine months,
would be a grave injustice, for which there could be no redress even if his
appeal succeeded; and requesting a stay of the transfer pending appeal. The
caption of that letter suggests that he was treating the order as a
constructive termination. The Personnel Manager replied that he had no power
to stay the transfer, citing the Board's disciplinary rule 14, which provided
that upon an appeal being filed there would be an automatic stay of
punishments other than, inter alia, punishment transfers. It is common ground
that the Appellant filed an appeal on or about 22.1.85. Thereafter he again
sought a stay of the transfer, suggesting that pending appeal he could

322

be transferred to Godakawela which would fall within the limit of his free
travel pass (unlike Ratnapura), thus eliminating additional expense to him.
Pending the outcome of this correspondence he did not report for duty at
Ratnapura. On 8.2.85 the Depot Manager, Ratnapura, issued a vacation of post
notice giving him seven days time to explain his absence; the Appellant
replied on 10.2.85 saying that he was awaiting the Personnel Manager's final
decision. Before he received any further reply from the Personnel Manager, on
22.2.85 the Depot Manager, Ratnapura, informed him that he was deemed to have
vacated his post on 5.1.85 by failing to report for work on and after that
date. This was before the Appellant had received any communication regarding
his appeal. On 28.2.85 the Appellant appealed against the vacation of post
order, seeking reinstatement, again urging that, pending the determination of
his first appeal, he be transferred to a station falling within the limit of
his free travel pass. This appeal was refused on 1.4.85, without considering
the correctness of the finding or the punishment in respect of the second
charge.

On 28.2.85 the Appellant made an application to the Labour Tribunal in respect
of the termination of his services. In the answer the Respondent sought to
justify the termination on the basis that the Appellant had been transferred
to Ratnapura as a punishment, upon being found guilty of serious misconduct;
that the transfer order continued to be operative notwithstanding appeal; and
that upon his failure to report for work at Ratnapura he had properly been
deemed to have vacated his post.

At the inquiry the Appellant gave evidence to the effect that he had been away
in Colombo, at the time of the incident of 26.3.84; not only was there no
contradiction of this evidence but it was not even suggested in cross-
examination that this was untrue, or that he had concealed matters within his
knowledge. The only evidence led on behalf of the Respondent was in regard to
his admitted failure to report at the Ratnapura Depot on and after 5.1.85.

The President of the Labour Tribunal did not consider the second charge
levelled against the Appellant, or the validity and proportionality of the
punishments imposed. She took the view that the admitted failure of the
Appellant to report for work had not been explained in terms of the rules, by
proof that the Appellant had been absent

323

for reasons of illness or other unavoidable cause or that he had been on
leave; and that the transfer had not been stayed by reason of the pending
appeal. The application was dismissed. For the same reasons, the Court of
Appeal dismissed his appeal stressing that " the facts leading to the
disciplinary transfer was not the issue to be determined by the Tribunal."

Learned Counsel for the Appellant strenuously contests this position. The
Appellant not only disputed the findings of guilt on the second charge, but
considered the punishments imposed as being so wrongful, unreasonable and
disproportionate as to amount to a constructive termination of his services;.
the refusal to stay the punishment transfer pending the appeal was also
unreasonable and unjust, particularly as the prejudice caused could not be
remedied even if his appeal succeeded. Had he complied with the transfer order
pending appeal, if the order in appeal proved to be adverse, he would then
have been unable to canvass that order on the basis of a constructive
termination. because he would then be deemed to have accepted and acquiesced
therein.

The issue before the Labour Tribunal was whether there had been a termination
of the Appellant's services by the Respondent, and if so whether that
termination was justified. From the fact that an employer deems his employee
to have vacated his post it does not conclusively follow that there has been a
termination by the employee : that would depend on the circumstances.
Accordingly, the issue before the Tribunal also involved the question whether
the Appellant's failure to report for work amounted to a repudiation of the
contract of employment; or whether it was a transgression only justifying
disciplinary action short of dismissal; or whether it was a bona fide
challenge to a disputed order; or whether it was a justifiable or permissible
response to a wrongful or unreasonable punishment. That question therefore
could not have been answered without considering the basic issue, whether the
Appellant was guilty of the second charge, and if so the consequential
question whether the punishments imposed were proper, reasonable and
proportionate.

In _Ceylon Estate Employers' Federation v. Manakulasooriya_ (1), it was held
that although under the contract of employment the Federation was entitled to
transfer the workman, nevertheless in the circumstances the transfer was not
justified; that although the

324

 workman should have, in the interests of the institution, proceeded to his
new station, reported for work, and thereafter made his protest, nevertheless
he had not vacated his post by his failure to proceed on transfer; and that
the workman was entitled to reinstatement, with some back wages, the
Federation being given the option of paying compensation in lieu of
reinstatement. This is a general principle which is internationally
recognised. Thus C.F. Amerasinghe (Law of the International Civil Service,
1988, pp. 903-904) says

" a refusal to comply with a transfer order renders [an employee] subject to
disciplinary measures entailing the institution of disciplinary
proceedings.......... The refusal of a transfer cannot normally be treated per
se as a case of abandonment of post entailing automatic termination. It is
also not a basis for summary dismissal for serious misconduct."

He cites Re Duran (No. 2) (2), Judgment No. 392, and Re Reynolds (3), Judgment
No. 38, both judgments of the Administrative Tribunal of the International
Labour Organisation. In Re Duran it was observed

" If one party to a contract fails or refuses to perform his duties under the
contract in circumstances which show that he does not intend ever again to
resume them, i.e. show in effect that he is abandoning his post, the other
party is entitled to treat the contract as at an end; he is not obliged to
wait indefinitely in case the first party might change his mind. This is what
abandonment means. It contains both a physical and a mental element. A
temporary absence from a place does not mean that the place is abandoned;
there must be shown also an intention not to return. So to the physical
failure to perform a contractual duty there must be added the intention to
abandon future performance. Proof of a intention is not always easy, and the
object of Rule 980 is to allow the intention to. be assumed from the fact of
absence without reasonable explanation for fifteen days. The explanation has
not got to be one that exonerates the staff member from breach of contract or
from other disciplinary measures, but it has to be one which negatives the
intention to abandon..........

325

A bona fide challenge to the validity of an order is a satisfactory
explanation for not complying with it. By challenging the order in the manner
prescribed by the regulations, the complainant was affirming the contract, not
abandoning it."

This principle has been consistently applied in .Sri Lanka. In _Ceylon Estate
Staffs' Union v. Superintendent, Meddecombra Estate_ (4), a workman had
refused to accept a transfer on the ground that it would amount to a demotion;
he was dismissed for failure to comply with the transfer order. Since there
was no evidence that the workman was down-graded, and since his position
remained unaffected by the transfer, Weeramantry, J., upheld the termination
of his services. However, it is quite clear that if the transfer did involve a
demotion, the termination would not have been upheld. Weeramantry, J., posed
the questions for decision in this way;

" This appeal thus involves a consideration of two matters, namely whether the
transfer was so prejudicial to the employee as to make the transfer wrongful,
and secondly the propriety and legality of the order of termination of
services made for defying a transfer order."

In the instant case, too, like questions arose for decision in appeal, both by
the Court of Appeal and by this Court. Having referred to a judgment of the
Indian Supreme Court, which recognized the right of industrial tribunals to
interfere if a transfer order was made mala fide or for the ulterior purpose
of punishing an employee for trade union activities, Weeramantry, J., held
that the evidence placed before the Tribunal by the workman did not show that
his emoluments would be affected to an exent rendering justifiable his refusal
to accept a transfer. Here, however, the evidence before the Tribunal could
lead only to one conclusion, that the disciplinary findings and order were
unjustified. While it is true that Weeramantry, J., observed

" No doubt the employee was entitled to contest the right of the management to
make this transfer and the employee was entitled to take the necessary steps
towards bringing this dispute to adjudication in the manner provided by law.
The employee was not entitled however to set the employer at defiance by
flatly refusing to carry out orders ",

326

It is relevant that he nevertheless proceeded immediately to add

" There is of course no general principle that an employee is in all cases
bound to accept such a transfer order under protest, for there may be cases
where the mala fides prompting such an order is so self-evident or the
circumstances of the transfer so humiliating that the employee may well refuse
to act upon it even under protest. In the present case however I do not think
the orders were of such a nature that it can fairly be said that the employee
was entitled flatly to refuse to obey them even under protest."

In Janatha _Estates Development Board v. Kurukuladitta_ (5) the workman was
transferred as a punitive measure upon a finding of misconduct; he denied the
charge, and refused to comply with the transfer order, whereupon he was
dismissed. The Labour Tribunal having considered the evidence, took the view
that the allegations against him had not been proved in the Tribunal; and
therefore that the transfer order was unreasonable, that order was upheld on
appeal. The only difference in that case is that the finding of misconduct was
reached without an inquiry, whereas here the finding was after an inquiry, but
an appeal was pending. What is material, however, is that in both cases the
evidence before the Tribunal did not establish the charge. Thus it is settled
law that in the ordinary exercise of the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal
and of the appellate courts, questions undoubtedly arise as to whether the
charge (in respect of which a punitive transfer has been ordered) has been
established in the Tribunal, whether the transfer was wrongful or
inappropriate, and whether termination was, in all the circumstances, an
appropriate punishment for non-compliance. Neither in law nor in equity does
the fact that an employer has a disciplinary rule purporting to make dismissal
(even if termed vacation of post) mandatory for non-compliance with a transfer
order compel those questions to be answered in favour of the employer, or in
any way fetter the jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal or the appellate
courts.

It has been urged that any recognition of an employee's right to refrain from
complying with a transfer order would result in serious abuse, in that there
would be non-compliance with every transfer order. It is contended in reply
that non-recognition of a limited right of bona fide challenge of an improper
transfer order would enable

327

an employer to dismiss an employee for frivolous reasons, with impunity, by
falsely finding him guilty of some trumped-up charge; and then, without
imposing the desired punishment of dismissal, to subject him to a vexatious
punishment transfer. The employee will then be in a dilemma : if he proceeds
on transfer, he thereby - acquiesces and accepts his guilt; if he does not, he
will be deemed to have abandoned his post, and, on the Respondent's
contention, upon an application to a Labour Tribunal, the Tribunal can only
consider the question of vacation of post and is not empowered to inquire into
the finding of guilt. There is considerable force in the Appellant's
contention. It may well be that a vexatious punishment transfer amounts to a
constructive termination, and that an employee may challenge such a
termination in the Labour Tribunal; and that compliance with such an order
will not amount to acquiescence which bars his right to invoke the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal. But that point has not been argued, and has to
be decided another day.

The employer's argument based on the possibility of abuse cannot succeed. The
recognition of a limited right, bona fide to challenge an improper transfer
order cannot result in any injustice to the employer. If the employer treats
the employee as having vacated post, and the Labour Tribunal holds that the
employee was guilty of the charge, and that the transfer was an appropriate
punishment, the vacation of post order will stand. If the Tribunal, however,
finds that the employee was not guilty, there would be no injustice whatsoever
in the consequential finding that the punishment transfer was unjustified,
that the vacation of post order was unwarranted, and that reinstatement must
be awarded. Indeed, it would be a travesty of justice, as in this case, for a
Court to find that an employee's guilt has not been finally established either
in the internal "due process" provided by the employer's rules and
regulations, or by the procedures established by law, but that nevertheless
the punishment was proper, and therefore that non-compliance with the
punishment justifies termination. That would be to set aside the conviction,
but allow the sentence to stand.

The contention on behalf of the employee has the advantage of consistency both
with legal principle and equity. The employee who declines to comply with a
transfer order runs a great risk. If a Tribunal holds that he was guilty of
the charge against him, and that non-compliance with the transfer order was
not bona fide, his

328

dismissal will stand. If, however, he is not found to be guilty, reason and
justice require that the punishment be annulled.

The Tribunal and the Court of Appeal therefore erred in failing to address the
basic issue of misconduct. At the commencement of the proceedings, the
Appellant had moved for summons on the Respondent to produce the disciplinary
inquiry notes and findings the Respondent requested time and the matter was
postponed for 21.1.86. On that day it was submitted on behalf of the
Respondent that these documents were not being produced as they were
irrelevant, because the Appellant had been dismissed not on the disciplinary
findings, but for failing to report for work. It was further submitted that
the Respondent could not be compelled to produce these documents because batta
had not been deposited; in answer to the Tribunal, it was indicated that even
if batta was deposited, they would not be produced; and also that the
witnesses who gave evidence at the disciplinary inquiry would not be called to
testify before the Tribunal.

Even if the Appellant was guilty of failing to reveal the correct facts in
relation to the incident in connection with which he was facing charges, I am
inclined to the view that the two punishments imposed were unreasonable and
disproportionate to the offence. Learned counsel for the Respondent did not
contend that the deprivation of half-pay during interdiction was proper. That
apart, the deprivation of nine months salary was well as a punishment transfer
is patently excessive. However, that question does not now arise for
determination, for on the evidence before the Tribunal, only one finding was
possible - that the Appellant was not guilty of the second charge - because
there was no evidence, suggestion. or submission to the contrary either before
the Tribunal or on appeal. The Appellant's appeal does not appear to have been
disposed of by the Respondent; had that appeal succeeded, then necessarily the
punishments imposed had to be set aside; even if the appeal did not wholly
succeed, it was nevertheless possible that the appellate body might have held
that the transfer was an excessive punishment.

I do not need to consider whether the Respondent ought, notwithstanding the
disciplinary rules (perhaps upon the application of section 31 (B) 4 of the
Industrial Disputes Act), to have stayed the transfer or to have transferred
him to a place within the limits of his

329

free travel pass. On the facts as they now appear, the punishment transfer was
unjustified; the refusal to proceed on transfer was based both on a bona fide
challenge of the transfer order as well as on circumstances which arguably
supported a stay or a variation; that refusal was therefore at most a
technical breach not motivated by an intention to repudiate the contract, or
to abandon his post, or defy the employer; it did not warrant termination. The
problem that now confronts the Respondent could have been avoided if the
inquiry conducted by the Respondent in respect of the appeal against the
vacation of post order had been consolidated with the appeal in respect of the
disciplinary proceedings.

I have considered whether this matter should be remitted to the Tribunal for a
further inquiry to enable the Respondent to lead evidence on the second
charge. There are two reasons why this should not be done. The Respondent
categorically refused to produce the witnesses and documents in relation to
the second charge; this is therefore not a case of an inadvertent omission to
prove some incidental fact, but a deliberate refusal to produce the evidence
relating to one of the main facts in issue. A party litigant in that position
should not be given a second chance to rectify omissions or defects of his
case. Although that is a sufficient reason in itself, here there has been a
lapse of over seven years since the incident, and a further inquiry may well
result in the lapse of another seven ears before a final decision.

It is settled law that if, as in this case, a Labour Tribunal fails to
consider and decide a relevant issue, or addresses the wrong question, there
is an error of law which entitles the aggrieved party to redress from
appellate courts in the exercise of their ordinary appellate jurisdiction (
_Hayleys Ltd. v. de Silva_ (6); _Lewis Brown & Co. Ltd. v. Periyapperuma _(7);
_Colombo Apothecaries Co. Ltd. v. Ceylon Press Workers Union_ (8); _Brooke
Bond (Ceylon) Ltd. v. Tea, Rubber_ (etc.) _Workers Union_ (9); and it is that
jurisdiction with which we are here concerned, and not with an attempt to
invoke powers of review, such as Certiorari for error of law. Where the error
of law is so fundamental, as in this case, the undoubted duty and
responsibility of the appellate courts is, and their inveterate practice has
been, to grant redress by ensuring a just and equitable order : not to decline
jurisdiction. Section 31 C of the Industrial Disputes Act does not authorise a
Labour Tribunal to deny an aggrieved party his right to

330

an order which is just and equitable as between the parties, and within the
framework of the law, on some uncertain and undefined assumption, of
fluctuating content, as to public benefit and the like; and if a Labour
Tribunal makes an order which it is not empowered to make, it would be
contrary to law (and hence to the public interest also) for the appellate
courts to allow that order to stand.

I therefore set aside the judgements and orders of the Labour Tribunal and the
Court of Appeal, and make order as follows

1\. The Appellant will be reinstated forthwith with full back wages (inclusive
of increments and other salary increases) from the date of interdiction.

2\. If the Respondent does not wish to continue the Appellant in employment
for any reason, the Respondent shall have the option of paying compensation,
in lieu of reinstatement, in a sum equivalent to three years salary, (computed
on the basis of the salary he would presently be entitled to had he been
reinstated). This payment shall be in addition to the back wages ordered under
(1) above.

3\. The Appellant will be entitled to a sum of Rs. 5,000 as costs in the
Labour Tribunal, in the Court of Appeal, and in this Court.

**S. B. GOONEWARDENE, J.**

This is an appeal taken against a judgment of the Court of Appeal, which
considered and dealt with an order made by the Labour Tribunal upon an
invocation of the jurisdiction conferred upon it by section 31 B (1) (a) of
the Industrial Disputes Act.

To examine the questions that arise on such appeal, the following background
material is relevant.

The appellant joined the Ceylon Transport Board as a conductor in 1975 and on
the decentralisation of the Board in 1978, was assigned to the Uva Regional
Transport Board, the respondent in this appeal. He was attached to the
Embilipitiya depot in the same capacity as a conductor from the inception of
such Regional Board

331

and, except for a brief period during 1982-83, continued to be attached to
such depot.

Consequent upon an alleged incident of assault of the Depot Manager of the
Embilipitiya Depot on 26.3.84, the appellant was interdicted from service on
3.4.84 and a charge sheet (A2) was served on him containing seven charges. The
main charges related to an allegation of assault of such Depot Manager or of
being concerned or connected therewith, although the appellant in his evidence
before the Labour Tribunal had endeavoured to make out that such allegation
related only to an attempt to assault.

After a domestic inquiry upon those charges, he was found not guilty of such
main charge but guilty of two others, one of which (charge No. 5) was of
misleading the Board by concealing the truth and/or making a false statement
relating to such incident of assault and the other (charge No. 7), that in
consequence, he was not a fit and proper person to hold employment under the
Board.

The result of the inquiry was made known to the appellant by the Personnel
Manager of the Board by a communication dated 26th December 1984 (A1), which
indicated that the punishments meted out to him were that he was disentitled
to his salary payable during the period of his interdiction and that he was
being subjected to a disciplinary transfer to another place of work. He was
called upon by such communication to report forthwith to the Depot Manager of
the Embilipitiya Depot in order to resume work and notified that he would be
informed of his new station subsequently. It was also indicated to him that if
he was dissatisfied with the result of the inquiry, he was at liberty to make
an appeal within one month. The appellant contended before the Labour Tribunal
that he did file such an appeal and though that would appear to be the true
position, a copy of such appeal was not made available to such Tribunal, nor
indeed any material adduced to show whether the same had been disposed of and
if so with what result.

By R7 dated 31.12. 84 the new station to which the appellant had been assigned
to take up duties, namely the Ratnapura Depot, was made known to him, and by
R7A of 10.1.85 while being notified that he had been released from
Embilipitiya for this purpose, had

332

his attention drawn to the fact that up to that point of time he had failed to
report to the Depot Manager of Embilipitiya as directed by notification A1.

On 2.1.1985 the appellant addressed a communication to the Personnel Manager
(A5) under a heading indicating that the topic of such communication was that
in connection with the incident of e assault on the Depot Manager,
Embilipitiya, by resorting to the unlawful deprivation of wages and transfer
to another station, there was a constructive termination of his employment. In
the body of such communication he had stated that he was intending to appeal
against that order and requested that pending the appeal, the order of
transfer to Ratnapura be cancelled, failing which, he had added that he would,
on the basis of the unlawful acts committed up to that time, namely, the
failure to stay the transfer and the deprivation of his salary, consider that
there was a constructive termination of his employment and take action
according to law. He had also called for a reply on or before 15.1.1985.

On 11.1.85 the Personnel Manager addressed a communication to the appellant
(A6), stating that according to the policy of the Board, whenever an employee
committed an act against its principal administrative officer in the depot, he
had to be moved away forthwith from that depot. While stating that a very
-fair course had been adopted in holding such a disciplinary inquiry and in
making the resulting order, the Depot Manager had stressed that he had no
authority to cancel the disciplinary order of transfer already made, but that
the appellant was free to appeal and thereby endeavour to obtain any measure
of relief.

The appellant next addressed a communication dated 21.1.1985 to the Personnel
Manager (A7), drawing attention to the contents of his earlier letter of
2.1.1985 (A5). Therein, he had stated that although upon an order in appeal,
punishment could ordinarily be alleviated, there was no possible reversal of
any punishment resulting in a transfer already given effect to and thus
requested that pending the result of the appeal he be transferred to the
Godakawela Depot, as this would enable him to utilise his free travel pass and
thereby avoid extra expenditure.

333

On the appellant's failure to take up duty at Ratnapura, a telegram had been
sent to him asking him to report for work immediately. His response, also by
telegram (R1), was to the effect that he had sent a letter to the Personnel
Manager and was awaiting a reply. On his failure to report for duty at the
Ratnapura depot, the Depot Manager Ratnapura then sent to the appellant a
letter dated 8.2.85 (A8) which stated that the reasons contained in the
telegram were not acceptable and that the appellant had without giving notice,
kept away and not reported or work. The appellant was called upon to tender an
explanation within seven days and in doing so, to support his absence with a
medical certificate, had he been ill. It contained a statement to the effect
that if the appellant failed to furnish an acceptable explanation, he would be
treated as having vacated his post with effect from 5.1.1985 and that action
would be taken accordingly. In response, the appellant addressed a
communication dated 10.2.85 to the Depot Manager, Ratnapura (A9), wherein he
had stated that there had been an exchange of letters between himself and the
Personnel Manager and that he was awaiting a final decision. He had added that
in response to letter A6 sent to him by the Personnel Manager, he had replied
by letter A7 and was awaiting a reply thereto, to advice himself as to what
lawful action he should take.

Thereafter, the Depot Manager Ratnapura addressed a communication dated
22.2.1985 to the appellant under the heading, " Failure to report for work
without giving notice " (A10), which contained a statement that there had not
been an explanation as to why he had failed to report for work from 5.1.1985
without giving notice, and that accordingly he would be treated as having
abandoned his employment under the Board with effect from that date. The
appellant then addressed an appeal dated 28.2.85 to the Personnel Manager
(A12), seeking a reinstatement and a posting to the depot either at Kahawatta
or at Godakawela, pending the result of his earlier appeal. By A13 of
1.4.1985, the Personnel Manager replied to the appellant rejecting such
appeal, stating that since he himself had abandoned his post the Board could
not accept any responsibility in that regard, that the reasons adduced for not
reporting for work were insufficient and that despite the true position having
been made clear to the appellant by his letter dated 11.1.85 (A6), he, the
appellant, upon his own interpretation of matters had elected not to report
for work, that the appellant's absence was due, not to unavoidable or
acceptable causes and that he was therefore treated as having vacated his
post.

334

Apart from noting these factual matters which advisedly have been set out
somewhat in detail, it is important also to note that the conditions of
service to which the appellant was subject, made applicable the Board's
disciplinary rules (R6), in terms of which there could be no stay of a
disciplinary transfer pending the result of an appeal to the domestic
appellate body, for which there was provision in the rules. It is likewise
necessary to note that the rules pertaining to leave (R8), also contained a
provision that if an employee kept away from work without informing the Board
for a period of three consecutive days, a notice to him in terms similar to
those contained in the notice A8 sent to the Appellant, had to be sent and
that he should be treated as having vacated his post.

The appellant subsequently went before the Labour Tribunal alleging that
before a definite decision had been made by the Personnel Manager, the Depot
Manager of the Ratnapura Depot had notified him that he had failed to report
for duty without giving notice and that he was treated as having vacated his
post. Upon a claim that by punishing him and denying him his salary for the
period of his interdiction and subsequently treating him as having vacated his
post there was an unlawful termination of his employment, he sought relief by
way of reinstatement and back wages.

At the inquiry before such Tribunal an endeavour had been made on behalf of
the appellant, to have brought before it, the notes relating to the
disciplinary inquiry earlier held against him, but this had been resisted by
the respondent Board upon an assertion that his services were not terminated
as a consequence of the findings made or punishment imposed after such
disciplinary inquiry, but that the appellant was deemed to have vacated his
employment since he had not reported for duty as he had to do, when he was
transferred to another depot. The President of the Labour Tribunal for her
part, considered that the failure of the appellant to report for duty in the
expectation of a reply, despite an earlier communication by the Personnel
Manager that he was unable to cancel the disciplinary transfer, was without
justification. The President was of the view that the document A5 written by
the appellant to the Personnel Manager itself showed that the appellant was
aware that despite an appeal, his transfer was to take effect. On the basis
that the appellant had not obtained leave during the period of his absence and
that in terms of the disciplinary rules the reason adduced by him for not
reporting

335

for work was not acceptable, the President concluded that the appellant
himself had vacated his post, and accordingly dismissed his application.

The appellant's subsequent appeal to the Court of Appeal produced the same
result, that court concluding that the facts leading to the disciplinary
transfer had no bearing on the issue to be decided by the Labour Tribunal,
that the appellant who was in a transferable service failed to report for work
without obtaining leave and that therefore the conclusion reached by the
Labour Tribunal was a correct one.

Dissatisfied with that result, the appellant has once again taken this appeal
and has placed in the forefront of his case the contention that the Labour
Tribunal failed to have before it the notes relating to the disciplinary
inquiry held against him and therefore failed to make all such inquiries and
hear all such evidence, as is required by the Industrial Disputes Act. The
appellant has also contended that the Court of Appeal failed to determine the
question as to whether an employee is bound to accept an unjust, punitive
transfer and/or whether an employer could treat an employee who refuses to
accept an unreasonable punitive transfer as having vacated his employment. It
was submitted for the appellant in argument; firstly with respect to the
disciplinary transfer that it was not possible for him to have complied and
thereafter complained, for the reason that if he succeeded on his appeal to
the domestic appellate body there could not have been restitution as regards
the period already served upon such punitive transfer; and secondly, in effect
that, as the only way in which he could have invoked the jurisdiction of the
Labour Tribunal was on the footing of an actual termination of his employment,
he had, so to say, to bring about that result, a position I find difficult to
reconcile with the appellant's own claim I referred to earlier, that the very
infliction of punishment upon him, he considered a constructive termination of
his employment. It would suffice to say at this point that it his employment
had been constructively terminated earlier, there should have been no need for
him to have thereafter brought matters to a head by failing to report for work
and thus exposing himself to the possibility of his own discharge from
employment, as in the event happened.

336

If I understood Counsel for the appellant correctly, the effect of what he
said was that if the appellant acted upon his transfer, he would nave
continued in his employment and he could then not have invoked the
jurisdiction of the Labour Tribunal so as to enable him to challenge before
such Tribunal the findings made and the punishment imposed after such domestic
inquiry, and therefore if he did not adopt this course of action which as it
happened produced the result of his losing his employment, the appellant would
have found himself serving at Ratnapura upon his punishment transfer. That may
have been an ingenious way of trying to achieve a particular result, but I am
not altogether satisfied that it was something done with due regard to the
demands of propriety, as could be used to lead to the ultimate success of the
appellant's endeavours in this regard. The course adopted, to my mind, savours
of an attempted contrivance to confer a jurisdiction upon the Labour Tribunal
that the legislature did not intend it should have, a manipulation of events
in order to try to do indirectly, that which could not have been done
directly.

Be that as it may, I will now proceed to consider the case put forward by the
appellant on a twofold basis. The first is as to whether the imposition of
this punishment transfer to Ratnapura as a consequence of having been found
guilty by the domestic inquiring body after an inquiry at which an opportunity
of presenting his case was available and which he availed of (there being no
complaint in that regard), could reasonably have been considered by the
appellant as a constructive termination of his employment. We are here dealing
with a situation where there was an express right available to the employer,
the Board, as a matter of contract between the parties, to transfer the
appellant out of the Embilipitiya Depot or any other, from time to time. Under
what circumstances then might it have been possible for the appellant to have
reasonably considered that there had been a constructive termination of his
employment, having regard to the fact that he was sought to be subjected to
this single and solitary instance of transfer, though no doubt by way of
punishment, after a disciplinary inquiry had been held. Usefully one might
consider here a view expressed by S. R. de Silva in his Monograph No. 4 " The
Contract of Employment " at page 162 thus...

**337**

" But perhaps the conduct on the part of an employer which would amount to a
constructive dismissal would have to amount to at least a breach of an implied
obligation fundamental to the employment relationship. For instance, repeated
transfers of an employee from one geographical locality to another in
circumstances which make it impossible for the employee to comply would, even
where an express right of transfer exists, amount to a mala fide exercise of
that power, thus amounting to a constructive dismissal of the employee "

While not finding anything indicating a breach by the employer of an implied
obligation fundamental to the employment relationship, I do not find anything
suggesting the existence of a mala fide exercise of a power of transfer
either, or indeed even an allegation to that effect. On the other hand, I find
it difficult to reconcile the existence even of a state of affairs suggesting
something much less, such as perhaps would point to some impropriety on the
part of the respondent Board, with the readiness expressed by the appellant to
take up duties at a station of his choice at another depot. If the appellant
was truly affronted by what he felt was an injustice done to him by unfairly
imposing a punishment by way of a disciplinary transfer, that should have been
so, whether the new station was Ratnapura he was ordered to report at, or
Godakawela the station he suggested instead. This, to my mind, alters the
basis of his true grievance from the claimed one of unfair treatment meted out
to him by the very act of transfer, to the actual one of unwillingness to
undergo the inconvenience and expenditure involved in a transfer to a station
not of his choice. On an objective evaluation of the appellant's case, I do
not consider that the imposition of this transfer and the forfeiture of his
salary by way of punishment, after an adverse finding at a domestic
disciplinary inquiry, had the effect of a constructive termination of his
contract of employment as claimed, there being no other complaint of
wrongdoing by the respondent Board other than with regard to the infliction of
this punishment.

On the second basis, I will examine the appellant's position on a subjective
footing, as perhaps in the manner suggested in his correspondence with the
Board, that he honestly considered himself entitled to treat the punishment
transfer made as amounting to a constructive termination of his employment.
What then could he have done upon his conclusion to that effect, after
receiving his orders

338

to proceed to Ratnapura followed by the refusal to vary such order, despite
his threat that such refusal would result in his taking appropriate action on
the basis that such unlawful transfer was a constructive termination of his
employment? Before proceeding to answer that question, it will be useful to
reproduce the following passages from S. R. de Silva's Monograph " The
Contract of Employment " (ibid) at pages 157 and 158 thus :-

" However, it is essential to bear in mind that in law a termination by the
employer or by the employee can arise in consequence of the conduct of the
employer or the employee as the case may be. In other words, either party may,
in a given situation, though not expressly terminating the contract of
employment, by his conduct in relation to the other party, be guilty of what
is generally described as a constructive termination.

Where the conduct of one party amounts to a constructive termination, then the
law deems the contract in question to have terminated as a result of the
action of the party who has so misconducted himself. Therefore, if the
employer has conducted himself in relation to the employee in such a way as to
amount to a constructive termination of the contract, then the termination of
the contract, will be deemed to be by the employer and such termination
attracts the consequences of an express termination by the employer. eg. the
employee can have recourse to the Labour Tribunal on the basis that the
employer has terminated his services.'

The answer then to the question I have posed is, to say that in accordance
with what he threatened to do, no sooner he learnt of the respondent Board's
position that the order of transfer was to remain unaltered, independent of
his appeal made to the domestic appellate body, the appellant could have made
an application to the Labour Tribunal claiming that the punishment meted out
to him after the domestic inquiry was in reality a constructive termination of
his services and on that basis, and not on the basis he did, sought
appropriate relief. Had he taken that step in that way, then, and only then,
in my view, may it have been possible to have properly urged the Labour
Tribunal to secure the production before it of the disciplinary inquiry notes,
as the very foundation of such application would then have been a challenge to
the legality of that order of

339

punishment made consequent to such disciplinary inquiry, that it amounted in
reality to a constructive termination of his employment, thus rendering an
examination of such notes by such Tribunal, an act that it could not have
refrained from undertaking, in the proper discharge of its duty upon such
application.

Instead, what course did the appellant choose to adopt? He opted to act in the
manner he did of not reporting for work at his new station, giving as his
excuse that he was awaiting a final decision from the Personnel Manager, when
in fact such decision had already been made known to him by the latter, by his
communication of 11.1.85 (A6), wherein he had clearly pointed out that he
lacked the authority to cancel a disciplinary order or transfer. I therefore
cannot take the view that the respondent Board was remiss in any regard, in
contending, at the stage it did, which was in proceedings initiated after it
was compelled to discharge him from employment for absenting himself without
excuse, that the notes relating to the disciplinary inquiry had no relevance
to the issue before the Labour Tribunal.

I will now proceed to consider the submission made for the appellant that it
was not competent for the Board to discharge him from employment on his
failure to report for work as ordered, at Ratnapura. Two cases were relied on
as being favourable to him, which it was claimed the Court of Appeal failed to
take into account, the first of them was the unreported case of the Ceylon
Estate _Employers Federation v. Manukulasuriya and others_ (1). That case was
decided on the basis of a finding by the President of the Labour Tribunal in
proceedings by way of reference by the Minister of Labour for settlement by
arbitration, that the available material clearly demonstrated that the order
of transfer there was unjustified and consequently it was held that one who
refused to accept such a transfer had not repudiated his employment. The other
case was that of the J. E. D. B. v. Kurukuladitta (5), where the Court of
Appeal held that an employee was not bound to comply with an arbitrary,
punitive transfer and that a termination of service in such a situation was
not justified. In the instant case, there is no material upon which to say
that the disciplinary order of transfer was unjustified or constituted
arbitrary punishment.

340

The views reflected in the following passages from the judgment of Weeramantry
J. in the case of Ceylon Estates Staffs' Union v. _Superintendent Meddecombra
Estate, Watagoda_ (4), commend them selves to me as being of much relevance
and importance in deciding the present case. -

" No doubt the employee was entitled to contest the right of , the management
to make this transfer and the employee was entitled to take the necessary
steps towards bringing this dispute to adjudication in the manner provided by
law. The employee was not entitled however to set the employer at defiance by
flatly refusing to carry out orders.

One can well visualise the enormous practical difficulties and the
indiscipline that would result from the view that pending any dispute as to
transfer, the employee can refuse to act in the position to which he has been
transferred."

I have not been referred to any dicta or judgments of this Court relating to
the result of the disobedience to a transfer order. There would appear however
to be Indian authority to the effect that disobedience to a transfer order can
amount to misconduct justifying termination. In _Workman of Phillips (India)
Ltd. v. Phillips (India) Limited_ (10) where a workman refused to accept a
transfer order it was held by the Labour Court of Madras that it could not be
contended that the order of termination for disobeying the order of transfer
was bad and inoperative on the ground that it was passed without holding any
domestic inquiry after the receipt of the explanation from the employee
concerned. In cases where it is not the employee's position that there was no
such refusal on his part, but he only challenges the legality of the order of
transfer which he has admittedly disobeyed, it was held to be unnecessary to
hold a further inquiry on this matter. By way of analogy with the public
service, reference may also be made to _Gulam Haqquani Khan v. State of Uttar
Pradesh_ (11), where it was held (ibid At p. 676) regarding a public officer,
that " even assuming that the transfer was invalid the petitioner was bound.
to have obeyed it. He could have filed an appeal or representation but he
could not have refused to carry it out ".

341

The same approach of complying and then complaining did indeed commend itself
to Wijayatilleke J. as being the prudent course to adopt, in the case of the
_Ceylon Estate Employer's Federation v. Manukulasooriya and others_ (supra).

The response of the Personnel Manager to the appellant's request made to him
in that regard by A5, was to inform the latter by A6, that he had no authority
to interfere with the disciplinary transfer. Nonetheless the appellant by A7
made another request to the same Personnel Manager on similar lines, but could
hardly have reasonably expected a different response, having regard to the
contents of A6 which reflected the Personnel Manager's position that he had no
such authority, a position consistent with the Board's disciplinary rules. It
is not possible to say therefore that it was incumbent upon the Personnel
Manager to have replied to A7, to repeat once again the same thing, that he
had no such authority. Indeed there can scarcely be any other reasonable
conclusion here except that the appellant's endeavour was not so much an
attempt at obtaining genuine relief in this regard, but rather that it was a
thought out move to protract and prolong matters and thereby strive to secure
a result he desired. It seems to me therefore that the failure to report at
the Ratnapura Depot, giving as his ostensible reason that he was awaiting a
reply to A7 from the Depot Manager, was a deliberate and calculated act of
disobedience amounting to a refusal to take up duty in that station, although
not expressly stated in those terms and perhaps disguised to look different.
Even if one is therefore to take the view that the respondent Board terminated
the appellant's contract of employment, I think there was ample justification
for taking that action, having regard to the appellant's conduct in doing what
he did, which in my view amounted to a wilful defiance of the authority of the
respondent Board and in the light of the provisions governing his employment,
a virtual repudiation of his contract.

I however incline to the view, one which learned Counsel for the respondent
strenuously contended for, that rather than the respondent Board terminating
his employment under it, the appellant of his own volition secured his own
discharge from employment under the Board by vacating his post, which
according to the disciplinary rules binding on him had to be the result of his
being absent from work without having obtained leave and failing to show
justification for such absence. There is no doubt in my mind that the
appellant conducted himself

342

in a way which resulted in his discharge from employment, forcing upon the
Board a step he compelled it to take, leaving it no other choice. I cannot
agree that he could have been permitted the liberty of considering himself the
arbiter of whether what was inflicted upon him by way of punishment was unjust
or unlawful, so as to have entitled him in the circumstances of this case to
force the Board to do what it did, which was to treat him as having vacated
his post and discharge him from employment, and thereupon to make application
to have himself reinstated by the Labour Tribunal which if successful would
have carried with it the effect also of nullifying the punishment imposed
after the adverse findings against him at the disciplinary inquiry. I do not
think, having regard to the entire sequence of events, that it was any act for
which the Board could be held responsible which resulted in the appellant
losing his employment so that there would have been justification for ordering
his reinstatement.

The Court of Appeal in dealing with the appellant's appeal to it, was
exercising an appellate power given to it by law. It was not exercising a
supervisory power and therefore by extension, this Court upon this appeal is
not exercising any supervisory power either. The Court of Appeal was therefore
not called upon, and by the same token this Court is not called upon, to
decide upon the legality or reasonableness of the Board's rules relating to
discipline and leave. I am not therefore prepared, sitting on this appeal, as
I might perhaps have been, if called upon to do in the exercise of a
jurisdiction involving public law remedies, to examine these rules by
reference to which the Personnel Manager guided himself in refusing to stay a
disciplinary transfer pending an appeal to the domestic appellate body, and
pronounce upon them by way of review as to their reasonableness or legality,
so as to say or imply that such Personnel Manager or any other functionary of
the Board should have acted differently, and it follows that I am not prepared
to think that these rules should have been changed, modified or disregarded in
order to accommodate the demands of the appellant. Lest there be a likelihood
of undesirable repercussions and consequences exercising influence beyond the
area of the questions involved in the present appeal, I am not prepared to
hold that the Personnel Manager, himself acting in disregard of the rules
framed by the Board as binding on its employees and embodied as a condition of
service in the appellant's contract of employment, could have felt free to
stay the

343

transfer of the appellant pending a decision on his appeal to the domestic
appellate body. This Court is the last Court and the tribunal of ultimate
jurisdiction in the judicial hiararchy. Its orders rulings and judgments are
immune from legal challenge and anyone dissatisfied therewith has no recourse
to further legal remedies. A consciousness of this I think must constantly be
in the Court's mind, reminding it of the need for the exercise of
selfdiscipline and self-restraint in its attempt to ensure that the influence
of its actions is never other than for the public good.

To hold, as is what he asks the Court to do, that the appellant must be
reinstated would virtually amount to all or any of the following : to saying
without there being, for whatever reason, any material upon which to do so,
that the decision of the domestic tribunal that the appellant was guilty was
wrong; to saying alternatively, if the findings against him after the
disciplinary inquiry were justified, that the punishment consequently imposed
upon the appellant, was harsh, excessive or without justification; to act on
this appeal as if it was, or has contained within it, the appeal to the
domestic appellate body and in effect deciding such appeal in the appellant's
favour; to saying that notwithstanding the rules that should be considered he
was bound by, the appellant was relieved of the duty to report forthwith to
the Depot Manager of the Embilipitiya depot after his period of interdiction
as he was called upon to do by document A1; to saying likewise that the
appellant had a right both to persist in not wanting to take up his employment
in the Ratnapura depot, albeit as a result of a disciplinary transfer, and to
keep away without leave, when in fact the appellant was in transferable
employment and otherwise liable to be transferred to the Ratnapura depot or
elsewhere and thus to say in effect that the Board rules did not apply to him
or alternatively that the Board had to act as though they did not so apply; to
saying that the appellant was at liberty to nominate other stations of
transfer of his choice other than Ratnapura in the event that the disciplinary
transfer was being given effect to; to saying that the appellant was entitled
to even disregard communications which had the effect of pointing out to him
the consequences of his refusal to report for work as directed and to saying
that he had the licence even in his application for reinstatement made to the
Board, to nominate stations other than Ratnapura as stations of transfer.
Indeed if the appellant was to be reinstated by an order of this Court, it
would not surprise me to think that he would

344

want that to be done, so as to enable him to work at the Embilipitiya Depot
and if not there, at a station of his choice.

For myself, I am not prepared to go along with an order that would have the
effect of bringing about any such result and therefore expressing agreement
with the concurrent findings of the Labour Tribunal and the Court of Appeal
that the answer to the only materials issue was that the appellant by his own
conduct vacated his post and lost his employment, I would dismiss this appeal
although without costs.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of my brother, S. B.
Goonewardene, J; with which Judgment I agree.

I make order that this appeal be dismissed without costs.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/29.html_  

