##  Perera Alias Charles v. Rodrigo - SLR - 332, Vol 2 of 1994 [1989] LKSC 29;
(1994) 2 Sri LR 332 (20 October 1989)

**  332**

### PERERA ALIAS CHARLES

**v.**

**RODRIGO**

SUPREME COURT.

BANDARANAYAKE, J.,

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

GOONEWARDENE, J.

S.C. APPEAL N0. 39/93.



_Maintenance ‑ Right of divorced wife to claim maintenance until the date of
divorce in maintenance proceedings instituted before the divorce ‑
Jurisdiction ‑Maintenance Ordinance, sections 2, 10._



On 06 May, 1986 the respondent ‑ appellant instituted a divorce suit in the
District Court against the applicant ‑ respondent.



On 02 September, 1986 the applicant ‑ respondent instituted maintenance
proceedings against the respondent ‑ appellant claiming monthly maintenance
for herself.



On 19 January, 1989 maintenance proceedings commenced and was put off.



On 06 February, 1989 evidence in the divorce proceedings was begun and decree
_nisi_ was entered. The respondent‑appellant agreed to pay Rs. 50,000/­before
31 May, 1989 and return 3 items referred in a list annexed to the plaint
before 19 February, 1989 whereupon the applicant ‑ respondent agreed to
withdraw the maintenance case. On 06 June, 1989 the respondent‑appellant paid
the sum of Rs. 50,000/‑ but there was no evidence of the return of the three
items. In the absence of proof of return of the three items the question of
the applicant ‑respondent's obligation to withdraw the maintenance case did
not arise.



On 31 May, 1990 the maintenance case was called and the Magistrate overruled
the objection in regard to maintainability and ordered Rs. 27,000/‑ to be paid
as maintenance for the period ending with the decree absolute which was
entered on 20 October, 1989.

**  333**

In appeal the High Court upheld the Magistrate's order in regard to
maintainability but set aside the order in regard to maintenance and sent back
the case for the Magistrate to determine the quantum of maintenance for the
period in question.



In appeal against the order of the High Court,



**Held:**



(1)        There is a legal duty cast upon a husband to maintain his wife
during the subsistence of the marriage independent of an order from a
Magistrate to do so. In a case where a Magistrate orders a husband to pay
maintenance to a wife on her application under the Maintenance Ordinance, he
does no more than compel the husband to fulfil that duty. A subsequent decree
for divorce, operates to relieve the husband of that duty and therefore the
Magistrates' refusal to enforce payment for any period thereafter would be
based not so much on a loss of jurisdiction but rather on his unwillingness to
lend his authority to recover something which is not due.



(2)        There is no bar to a divorced woman being eligible to receive
maintenance for a period anterior to her divorce, and thus being entitled to
resort to the provisions of the Maintenance Ordinance especially where, as
here, an application had been made to a Magistrate prior to a decree for
divorce being granted.



(3)        The liability of the appellant to support the respondent was
coterminous with the duration of their marriage ending with the divorce; at
the time the applicant ‑respondent made her application to the Magistrate's
Court for maintenance she was the wife of the respondent‑appellant and had an
enforceable right to receive maintenance and the subsequent decree for divorce
did not take away the jurisdiction (which in any event must be considered to
relate back to a point of time when it was properly invoked) to thereafter
make an order for maintenance for a period prior to the divorce.



**Cases referred to :**



1. _         Menike v. Siyathuwa  _42 NLR 53 

2\.         _Ariyanayagam v. Thangamma   _41 NLR 169.

**  334**

3\.         _Peiris v. Peiris_ 45 NLR 18.

4\. _         Fernando v. Amerasena _45 NLR 25, 27.

5. _         _ _Kent v. Kent_ AIR 1926 Mad 59.

6. _         Sarana v. Heenukku _45 NLR 196.

7. _         Francis Fernando v. Vincentine Fernando _59 NLR 522.

8\.         _Premawansa v. Somalatha_ 63 NLR 561.

9\. _         Mihirigamage v. Bulathsinhala _65 NLR 134,



_Menike v. Siyathuwa_ 42 NLR 53 not followed.



**APPEAL** from judgment of High Court of Negombo.



_R.K.S. Sureschandra_ for Respondent‑Appellant‑Petitioner



_M.D.K. Kulatunga_ with _Leon Fernando_ for Applicant‑ respondent‑Respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

October 04, 1993.

S. B. GOONEWARDENE, J.

**  **

A brief narrative of the circumstances germane to this appeal is as set out
below.



On 2nd September, 1986 the respondent made an application to the Magistrate's
Court of Negombo for an order directing the appellant who at the time was her
husband, to pay her a monthly allowance as maintenance.



On 6th May, 1986 the respondent also instituted in the District Court of
Negombo a divorce action seeking a decree for divorce _a vinculo matrimonii_
against the appellant.



On 19th January, 1989 inquiry into the maintenance application commenced with
the respondent giving her evidence, but at the end

**  335**

of her examination‑in‑chief the inquiry was postponed on the motion of Counsel
for the appellant for a date to cross‑examine her.



On 6 February, 1989 the evidence of the respondent was led in the divorce
action in the presence of both parties and on that uncontradicted evidence a
decree _nisi_ was entered granting her a divorce on the ground of malicious
desertion. The evidence of the respondent led before the District Judge on
that date, namely the 6th February 1989, contains a statement that the
appellant had agreed to return to her a sum of Rs. 50,000/‑ of her money with
him, as well as three other items referred to in a list annexed to the plaint,
particulars relating to which however are not available in the material
presented to this Court. According to such evidence the agreement had been
that the appellant would return the money on or before 31 May, 1989 and the
other three items during the evening of 19 February, 1989\. It is found
further stated in her evidence that after such items and cash had been
returned in full, she was agreeable to withdrawing the maintenance
application. According to the proceedings of 6 June, 1989 in the divorce
action, the appellant had paid to the respondent on that date in open Court
the sum of Rs. 50,000/‑, but there is no record of his having returned the
other items he undertook to return, nor was Counsel for the appellant able, at
the hearing before us, to point to any material to establish that that was in
fact done. In the absence of proof as to that, the question whether the
respondent was under any legal obligation to withdraw her application for
maintenance does not arise for consideration.



The decree _nisi_ entered in the divorce case was made absolute on the 20
October, 1989.



On 31 May, 1990 the maintenance application was called in the Magistrate's
Court and in the face of a challenge relating to

**  336**

jurisdiction mounted by the appellant, oral submissions were made regarding
its maintainability. The Magistrate by his order dated 22 October, 1990 upheld
the respondent's contention that the application was maintainable and then
went on to order the appellant to pay a sum of Rs. 27,000/‑ as maintenance for
a period ending with the date on which the decree nisi for divorce was made
absolute in the District Court.



The appellant then appealed against such order to the Provincial High Court of
Negombo and the learned High Court Judge in the exercise of his appellate
powers upheld the submission regarding the maintainability of the application
for maintenance, but correctly set aside so much of the Magistrate's order as
purported to determine the quantum of maintenance payable, as the only
question which was then before the Magistrate was as to the maintainability of
such application. The High Court Judge also directed that a fresh inquiry be
held by the Magistrate to determine the quantum of maintenance payable for the
period in question.



This appeal is taken against the judgment of the High Court and the only
argument placed before us was based on the fact that no order for maintenance
had been made by the Magistrate in the maintenance application up to the time
of the entering of the decree absolute on 20 October, 1989 in the divorce
action.



There is in my view no doubt either in point of principle or on authority,
that if a wife is not faced with a legal disqualification in that regard, her
husband is under a duty to maintain her during the subsistence of their
marriage, such duty terminating only with the termination of the marriage, nor
did Counsel for the appellant seek to argue differently.

**  337**

Indeed I would say that an essential concomitant of the marital relationship
is the husband's duty to support his wife which lasts as long as the marriage
lasts. The point however sought to be made for the appellant was that,
although the Magistrate's Court had jurisdiction as at the time it entertained
the application, since no order for maintenance had been made up to the time
the decree _nisi_ was made absolute in the divorce proceedings on 20th October
1989, the jurisdiction of the Magistrate's Court came to an end and no order
could have been made after that date to pay maintenance even for the period
prior to the entering of the decree absolute, although the appellant
undisputedly had not maintained the respondent during that period.



Total reliance for this contention was placed upon the judgment in the case of
_Menike v._ Siyathuwa (1) which had been decided by de Kretser, J. sitting
alone. In that case the wife (the appellant) had obtained an order for
maintenance against her husband (the respondent) from the Magistrate's Court.
Thereafter the parties were divorced under the provisions of the Kandyan
Marriages Ordinance No. 3 of 1870 in which proceedings no order for
maintenance was obtained by the wife although the Registrar was empowered to
so order. Subsequently the divorced wife applied to the Magistrate's Court to
recover arrears of maintenance and this was successfully resisted by the
husband on the basis that she had ceased to be his wife and could not maintain
her claim. On appeal it was contended for her that the only mode of getting
rid of the order for maintenance was to have it cancelled under section 5 of
the Maintenance Ordinance and as none of the conditions prescribed in the
section had application, the order had to remain in force and had to be
enforced. De Kretser J. in response to that contention said (at page 54) as
follows:‑



"The answer to that is that the Ordinance only applied while the conjugal
relationship exists, and that the very terms of that section and of other
sections in the Ordinance indicate that the Ordinance applies only while the
relationship of husband and wife continues. It is clear that the Ordinance was
intended to apply only while marital relations continued.



###   338

The Ordinance is on the same lines as the corresponding provisions in the
Indian Criminal Procedure Code. Sohini, in his commentary on that Code, at
page 1035, deals with this very position and says "where the cessation of
conjugal relations has been proved the responsibility attached thereto must
cease, and a Magistrate is competent to stay an order for maintenance already
made and to refuse to issue his warrant and to try all questions raised before
him which affect the rights of a woman to receive maintenance."



In dismissing the appeal the learned Judge said (also at page 54) thus:



"It is sufficient to say that the order for maintenance is now ineffective,
that the Magistrate is _functus officio_ and that it was therefore his duty to
refuse to continue the proceedings."



If I understand his language the way I think he intended it to be understood,
which indeed is the way Counsel for the appellant himself contended it should
be understood, it is convenient to state at once, with much respect to the
learned Judge, that I cannot possibly agree that the Magistrate became
_functus officio_ and could not continue proceedings. Whilst so saying, I
would add that to my mind it is doubtful upon a close examination of it
whether the quotation from Sohini has this sweeping effect that de Kretser, J.
contended for it.



As respects the jurisdiction of a Magistrate's Court to order maintenance in
proceedings under the Maintenance Ordinance in a somewhat analogous situation,
in the case of _Ariyanayagam v. Thangamma_ (2) de Kretser, J. once again had
occasion to hold that an order made by the District Court in proceedings in
the exercise of its matrimonial jurisdiction making provision for the
maintenance of the children of the marriage, operate as a bar to proceedings
for their maintenance under the Maintenance Ordinance. He relied here too on a
passage from Sohini ( _ibid_ ) which is stated by him to have the effect that
a woman is not entitled to an order for maintenance from a Magistrate, when a
decree for maintenance obtained by her in a civil Court is in force.

###   339

The importance of that case here lies partly in that de Kretser, J.'s general
line of thinking was not followed by Soertsz, J. in _Peiris v. Peiris_ (3) __
or by Keuneman, J. (with Jayatillake, J. agreeing) in _Fernando v. Amarasena_
(4), __ and partly in comments, reproduced from an Indian case, found in the
latter.



In the former case Soertsz, J. (at page 20) said:



"It seems to me that the Maintenance Ordinance provides special machinery for
securing maintenance for parties entitled to it, and when resort is made for
relief under this Ordinance, in a case like the present one the only question
that arises in regard to the jurisdiction of the Magistrate to grant it, is
the question of fact does the husband refuse or neglect to maintain wife or
child".



Were I to attempt to express the legal effect of what Soertsz, J. there said,
with reference to the circumstances of the instant case, while being mindful
at the same time of the fact that the application for maintenance here was
made before the decree absolute in the divorce action was entered, I do not
think I would be wrong in stating it thus: "The only question that arises in
regard to the jurisdiction of the Magistrate to grant it (maintenance) is the
question of fact ‑ 'did the husband refuse or neglect to maintain his wife',
for the period for which in the event the Magistrate ordered payment?"



In the latter case I referred to i.e. _Fernando v. Amarasena_ (4) __ there is
reproduced (at page 27) the following passage from the judgment of Devadoss,
J. in the Indian case of _Kent v. Kent_ (5) thus:



"... what had to be proved to the satisfaction of the Magistrate was 'that the
husband had neglected to maintain his wife' and where that was proved the
Magistrate had jurisdiction".



And again (at page 27):



"A mere order for maintenance (made in a civil suit) is non-equivalent to
maintaining the wife, and the order whatever may be its force or nature cannot
take away the Magistrate's jurisdiction so long as the husband neglects or
refuses to maintain the wife."

**  340**

_             _ The case of _Sarana v. Heenukku_ (6) was one where the
marriage in question was dissolved by the Provincial Registrar under the
provisions of Section 20 of the Kandyan Marriage Ordinance and under section
20(2) (b), the appellant was ordered by the Registrar to pay monthly a sum of
Rs. 2/‑ to the respondent for her maintenance. Subsequently the respondent
applied successfully to the Magistrate's Court for enforcement of the
maintenance ordered upon an invocation of the provisions of section 20(5) and
(6) of the Kandyan Marriages Ordinance. These provisions state that an order
made, _inter alia_ under section 20(2) has the effect of an order of the
Magistrate's Court made in the exercise of a jurisdiction under Section 2 of
the Maintenance Ordinance and could be enforced by that Court as it was an
order made by it. It was argued for the appellant husband that after the
dissolution of the marriage, a Magistrate's Court had no power under section 2
of the Maintenance Ordinance to direct the payment of any sum of money.
Howard, C.J., rejected this argument and in dismissing the appeal held that in
considering the limitations on the powers exercisable by a Magistrate under
section 2 of the Maintenance Ordinance, the proper interpretation to be given
to section 20 of the Kandyan Marriage Ordinance is that the Magistrate can
exercise his power with regard to maintenance in the case of a marriage
dissolved under the Ordinance as if the parties were husband and wife.



In the case of _Francis Fernando v. Vincentine Fernando_ (7) __ the wife had
obtained a maintenance order in her favour from the Magistrate's Court
subsequent to which there was a decree for divorce granted by the District
Court in which an order for the payment of alimony in favour of the wife was
also made. Thereafter, there was an application made by the wife under section
10 of the Maintenance Ordinance for enhancement of the quantum of maintenance
earlier ordered, which the Magistrate granted. An appeal taken was pressed (as
indicated by the report of the judgment) only on the ground that as by the
decree of the Divorce Court the applicant‑respondent ceased to be the wife of
the appellant, she was not entitled to invoke the provisions of the
Maintenance Ordinance. Sinnathamby, J. said that he did not consider it
necessary 'to decide whether a wife who had obtained a decree for divorce can
thereafter apply for

**  341**

maintenance' under section 2 of the Maintenance Ordinance (a position
different from the instant case where at the time the application was made the
decree for divorce had not been granted) but went on to hold that since
section 10 of the Ordinance does not use the word 'wife' (being the word used
elsewhere in the Ordinance) but instead uses the word "person", it is open to
a divorced "wife" to apply for enhancement under section 10 of the Ordinance.
Although this case affords no direct resolution to the question I am concerned
with on this appeal, at the least it suggests a disagreement by Sinnathamby,
J. with the statements of de Kretser, J. in _Menike v. Siyathuwa_ (1) __ that
I have already referred to that the Maintenance Ordinance was intended to
apply only while marital relations continued and that the Magistrate became
_functus officio_ consequent upon the decree for divorce.



In the case of _Premawansa v. Somalatha_ (8) __ the Respondent obtained an
order from the Magistrate directing the appellant to pay her maintenance.
Thereafter the parties were divorced under the provisions of the Kandyan
Marriages and Divorce Act. On a subsequent application being made to the
Magistrate by the Respondent claiming arrears of maintenance and a distress
warrant to recover the same, it was proved to the Magistrate that the marriage
had already been dissolved and it was contended that the earlier order to pay
maintenance could not therefore be enforced, a contention which the Magistrate
rejected. On appeal, Thambiah, J. held that a distress warrant could be issued
to recover arrears of maintenance payable up to the time of the dissolution of
the marriage.



In _Mihirigamage v. Bulathsinhala_ (9) the appellant wife made an application
under section 2 of the Maintenance Ordinance describing herself in such
application as the wife, when in fact the marriage had ended by a decree for
divorce entered earlier. The Magistrate after inquiry refused the application
on the ground that the appellant had at the date of the application ceased to
be wife of the Respondent and was therefore not entitled to an order under
section 2 of the Ordinance, a position upheld in appeal by Weerasuriya, S.P.J.
Whatever view one may take as to the correctness of this decision, by

**  342**

contrast, in the instant case as I have already pointed out, the Respondent
was the wife of the appellant at the time of her application to the Magistrate
and was entitled to describe herself as such and the claim upheld by the
Magistrate did not require the payment of maintenance for any period after the
marriage was dissolved. What must be emphasised is that this decision
certainly does not purport to say that a jurisdiction which the Magistrate
possessed when it was properly invoked during the subsistence of the marriage
could be subsequently lost with the termination of marital relations by
divorce as respects payment of maintenance for any period prior to such
termination.



The point, I think, that must not be lost sight of is that there is generally
a legal duty cast upon a husband to maintain his wife during the subsistence
of the marriage independent of an order from a Magistrate to do so as the
words in section 2 of the Maintenance Ordinance themselves suggest. In a case
where a Magistrate orders a husband to pay maintenance to a wife on her
application under the Maintenance Ordinance, he does no more than compel the
husband to fulfil that duty. A subsequent decree for divorce, operates to
relieve the husband of that duty and therefore the Magistrate's refusal to
enforce payment for any period thereafter to my mind, would be based, not so
much on a loss of jurisdiction, but rather on his unwillingness to lend his
authority to recover something which is not due. In that view of the matter, I
see no bar to a divorced woman being eligible to receive maintenance for a
period anterior to her divorce, and thus being entitled to resort to the
provisions of the Maintenance Ordinance especially where, as here, an
application had been made to a Magistrate prior to a decree for divorce being
granted. Therefore I must with great respect disagree with the thinking of de
Kretser, J. as expressed in his judgment in the case of _Menike v. Siyathuwa_
I started with.



The effect of what is contended for the appellant is to say that by reason of
the decree absolute being entered in the divorce action, the respondent for
all practical purposes lost a right which inhered in her to be maintained by
the appellant during a period when they were husband and wife. I have not been
able to find anything in the

**  343 **

Maintenance Ordinance to justify a reading of its provisions so narrowly and
restrictively as to secure such a result. It is, to my mind, in the highest
degree doubtful that the framers of the Maintenance Ordinance who introduced
it into the Statute book with the obvious intention of expeditiously enforcing
the matrimonial duty cast upon a man, also intended that its very terms should
be permitted to be made use of as an instrument wherewith the man could rid
himself of that duty. Indeed for myself I would be slow to read the statute in
that way. It does not require much imagination to see that if the appellant's
argument is upheld, it could well act as an encouragement to any scheming
husband to attempt to delay maintenance proceedings pending in a Magistrate's
Court with the object of evading compliance with his duty to maintain his
wife, in the expectation that the decree in a parallel divorce proceeding
would wipe out the right to enforcement of that duty.



For the purpose of the present appeal it is sufficient to say that the
liability of the appellant to support the respondent was coterminous with the
duration of their marriage ending with the divorce, that at the time the
respondent made the application to the Magistrate's Court for maintenance she
was the wife of the appellant and had an enforceable right to receive
maintenance and that the subsequent decree for divorce did not take away the
jurisdiction of the Magistrate (which must I think in any event be considered
to relate back to a point of time when it was properly invoked) to thereafter
make an order for maintenance for a period prior to the divorce.



The judgment in appeal of the High Court is accordingly affirmed and this
present appeal is dismissed with costs.



**BANDARANAYAKE, J.** ‑ I agree.



**AMERASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/29.html_  

