##  Ratnayake v. Mushin - SLR - 169, Vol 1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 29; (1988) 1
Sri LR 169 (11 March 1988)

**

169

RATNAYAKE  
v.  
MUSHIN

**

SUPREME COURT.  
WANASUNDERA, J., H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. AND G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.  
S.C. 34/86; C.A. 439/78 (F); D.C. COL. 1534/RE .  
FEBRUARY 09 AND 18, 1988.

_

Landlord and tenant-Arrears of rent-Advance-Set-off-Authorized rent fixed by
Rent Board-Does it have a retroactive operation?

_

The defendant moved into occupation of the premises let in November 1973 and
from this month to 30th June 1974 the defendant paid Rs. 480 per month. The
Rent Board by its order dated 5th June 1971 fixed the authorized rent as Rs.
234 per month and again by its order dated 2nd June 1975 at Rs. 279 per month.
On 1st May 1973 prior to moving in the tenant paid the plaintiff Rs. 1,440
being "3 months advance".

**

Held-

**

(1) As the tenant's position at the trial was not that the whole of the
advance should be set off against arrears but only so much of the Rs. 1,440 as
was in excess of three months authorized rent and no issue was raised on the
point of setting-off the whole of the advance, the whole of the Rs. 1,440 was
not available for setoff against arrears and the tenant was hence in arrears.

(2) There is a distinction between fixation of the authorised rent and
determination of the authorized rent. When the Rent Board determines the
authorized rent it ascertains what according to law is the authorised rent of
the premises aced variable factors like annual value and permitted increases
are involved.

The content of the Orders of the Rent Board has nothing to indicate that the
Rent Board intended its decisions to apply to a period prior to the date on
which the decisions were made. The orders do not have a retroactive operation.

**

Cases referred to :

**

1\.  _William v. Somasunderam (1970) 71 NLR 459.

_

2\.  _Ranasihghe v. Jayatilake (1971) 72 NLR 126._

**

APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P. C_. with _Gomin Dayasiri_ and _Miss L. N. A. de Silva_ for
defendant-appellant.

_

A.A.M. Marleen_ with _N. Jaufer A. Hassen_ and _A. R. M. Azard_ for plaintiff-
respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**170**

MARCH 11, 1988.

**

G. P. S. DE. SILVA, J.

**

The plaintiff as landlord instituted this action on 15th December, 1975,
against the defendant, the tenant of business premises No. 98, Deans Road,
Colombo 10, for ejectment on the ground of arrears of rent. The plaintiff
pleaded in his amended plaint that the agreed rental was Rs. 480 per mensem
and that the defendant paid rent up to 30th June 1974 but failed to pay any
rent thereafter. The defendant in his answer denied that he was in arrears of
rent and said that he had duly paid the authorized rent. After trial, the
District Judge entered decree for ejectment and the defendant preferred an
appeal. The Court of Appeal affirmed the decree for ejectment and the
defendant has now appealed to this court, having obtained leave from the Court
of Appeal.

The defendant came into occupation of the premises in November, 1973. It is
common ground that from November 1973 to 30th June 1974 the defendant had paid
by way of rent Rs. 480 per month. It was also admitted that cash payments by
way of rent were made only up to 30th June 1974. It was in evidence that the
Rent Board by its order dated 5th June, 1974, marked D1 had fixed the
authorized rent at Rs. 234 per month. Again, by its order D2 dated 2nd June,
1975, the Rent Board fixed the authorized rent at Rs. 279 per month. Although
the defendant came into occupation of the premises only in November 1973, yet
on 1st May 1973 he had paid the plaintiff a sum of Rs.1,440 being "3 months
advance" as evidenced by D16.

The first submission, of Mr. H. L. de Silva, Counsel for the defendant-
appellant, was that the Court of Appeal was in error in holding that the
advance of Rs. 1,440 (vide the receipt D16) could not be set-off against the
unpaid rent in order to determine whether the tenant was in arrears. Mr. de
Silva stressed that the receipt D16 ex facie described the sum of Rs. 1,440
received by the plaintiff from the defendant on 1st May 1973 as "3 months
advance" and that the plaintiff too had so stated in the course of his
evidence. Mr. de Silva further submitted that the defendant's position that
this sum of Rs. 1,440 was not an "advance" but a deposit which could be
returned only upon the termination of the tenancy was untenable in law in view
of section 9 of the Rent Act which prohibits the payment or receipt of a
"deposit" for the grant of a tenancy.

**171**

Mr. Marleen for the plaintiff-respondent while conceding that the sum of Rs.
1,440 was available for set-off against unpaid rent if this sum was paid by
the tenant by way of "an advance" (and in that event the defendant would not
be in arrears of rent) contended that the case for the defendant as presented
before the District Court was quite different from the case sought to be made
out on his behalf in appeal. It seems to me that if the position of the
defendant at the trial was that the sum of Rs. 1,440 paid on 1st May 1973 was
an "advance" of 3 months rent that has to be set-off against arrears of rent,
then that fact would have been placed in the forefront of his case. But
strangely enough, this plea was not set out in the answer, nor was it put in
issue at the trial. What is more, the defendant in his evidence took up an
entirely different position, namely that out of the sum of Rs. 1,440 the
plaintiff could retain a sum of Rs. 702 but that the balance sum of Rs. 738
must be set-off against accruing arrears of rent. The Court of Appeal in the
course of its judgment makes pointed reference to this factual position: "It
was not the appellant's position that all the money he had paid as an advance
could and should be set-off against accruing arrears. What was contended for
was, that only so much of the Rs. 1,440 as was in excess of three months
authorized rent should be set-off and was therefore deductible". Having
regard, therefore, to the manner in which the case for the defendant was
presented before the District Court and, in particular, in the absence of a
specific issue on this point, it seems to me that Mr. de Silva's submission
that the entire sum of Rs. 1,440 is available for set-off against arrears of
rent is not well-founded.

Mr. de Silva's next submission was that the decisions of the Rent Board, D1
and D2, had retroactive effect and that the finding of the Court of Appeal
that D1 and D2 were operative only from the date of the decisions was
erroneous. Counsel maintained that the determinations (D1 an D2) of the Rent
Board were declaratory of the authorized rent and had retroactive effect from
the commencement of the year in which the determinations were made. He
emphasized that the decisions of the Rent Board did not constitute "a fixing
of the authorized rent" but rather a legal conclusion arrived at on a
consideration of the matters set out in sections 4 and 5 of the Rent Act No. 7
of 1972.

In support of this contention Mr. de Silva relied on two authorities, viz.
_William vs. Somasunderam,_ (1) and _Ranasinghe vs. Jayatilake,_ (2)

**172**

As rightly submitted by Mr. de Silva, H. N. G. Fernando, C. J. in these two
decisions drew a distinction between the "fixation" of the authorized rent and
its "determination". Mr. de Silva urged that in terms of the Rent Act the
Board "determines" the authorized rent, that is to say, the Board "ascertains
what according to law is the authorized rent" of the premises.

In _Ranasinghe vs. Jayatillake_ (supra) the order of the Rent Control Board
was made on 5th November 1964, but the plaintiff's claim for rent overpaid to
the landlord was for the period from 1962 to September 1964. Fernando, C.J.
took the view that the order of the Rent Control Board was applicable for
1962, 1963 and up to September 1964. In the course of his judgment the learned
Chief Justice expressed himself thus:

"It must be assumed therefore that the Board's determination was reached upon
due consideration of s.5 (1) (a) of the Act and other provisions relevant to
the ascertainment of the authorized rent.

It thus appears that the objection that the Board's determination of November
1964 is not evidence of the amount of the authorized rent for a past period,
is at best purely technical. The provisions of the Act relating to the
standard rent of assessed premises and to permitted increase of the standard
rent are such that there is little possibility that the authorised rent of any
premises at anytime can be higher than the amount which was the authorized
rent at any earlier period. On the contrary, the only apparent possibility is
one r quite unfavourable to a landlord, namely that the authorised rent of
premises say in 1962 or 1963 may be lower than the amount which a Rent Control
Board may determine under s. 16A in 1964 At page 129."

In the appeal before us the authorized rent as determined on 5.6.74 was Rs.
274 (D1) but after an interval of one year (2nd June 1975) the authorized rent
had gone up to Rs. 279. It is to be noted that the "annual value" of the
premises is only one of the factors to be taken into account in determining
the authorized rent. The "permitted

Editor's Note: Fernando C.J. has pointed out that this sentence of his
judgment erroneously states the opposite of what he intended; the next
sentence indicates the actual intention.

**173**

increase" which is another relevant factor, could well vary from time to time,
even within a period of one year. If I understood Mr. De Silva aright, he
conceded that this was a variable factor. In the instant case, there is no
evidence in regard to the date of the applications made to the Rent Board for
determining the authorized rent. On a perusal of D1 and D2 there is nothing to
indicate that the Rent Board intended the decisions to apply to a period prior
to the date on which the decisions were made. Therefore, having regard to the
facts and circumstances of the present case, I find myself unable to accept
the contention that D1 and D2 have a retroactive operation.

The appeal, accordingly, fails and is dismissed with costs.

**

WANASUNDERA, J.** \- I agree.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/29.html_  

