##  Jinawathie and Others v. Emalin Perera - SLR - 121, Vol 2 of 1986 [1986]
LKSC 29; (1986) 2 Sri LR 121 (19 March 1986)

**

121

JINAWATHIE AND OTHERS  
v.  
EMALIN PERERA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., WANASUNDERA, J., RANASINGHE, J., ATUKORALE, J.  
AND TAMBIAH, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 62/84.  
D.C. KURUNEGALA No. 260/L.  
JANUARY 21, 22, 23 AND 24, 1986.

_

Land Reform Law No. 1 of 1972 ss. 2, 3. 7, 18, 19, 20, 21, 278 (Amending Act
No. 39 of 1981), 29, 32-land Reform Commission-Statutory declaration-Statutory
determination-Statutory lessee-Undivided interests-Deeming provisions-Rule of
eiusdem generis-Land Reform (Special Provisions) Act No. 39 of 1981 s. 19
(5)-Ownership-Vindicatory action

_

The object of the Land Reform Law was to impose a ceiling on land ownership
restricting a person's holding to a maximum of 50 acres.

Upon the coming into operation of the Land Reform Law No. 1 of 1972 on
26.08.1972 all agricultural land in excess of 50 acres became vested in the
Land Reform Commission in absolute title free from all encumbrances and the
former owner became a statutory lessee who had to make a statutory declaration
within the specified period on the prescribed form of the total extent of the
agricultural land held by him as such statutory lessee. In the declaration the
required particulars had to be furnished along with a plan or sketch plan. The
portion which the statutory lessee would prefer to retain could also be
indicated.

Thereafter the Land Reform Commission makes a statutory determination
specifying the portion or portions of the land which the statutory lessee is
allowed to retain. On the publication of the statutory determination in the
Gazette the Commission disentitles itself to any right or interest in the
agricultural land specified in the statutory determination from the date of
such publication.

Where any agricultural land is co-owned, each co-owner was deemed by a
statutory fiction to own his share in the co-owned land as a distinct and
separate entity for the purposes of the Land Reform Law. Where a person or
thing is deemed to be something it only means that whereas such person or
thing is not in reality that something the law requires him or it to be
treated as if he or it were with all the attendant consequences and incidents.
The rule of eiusdem generis does not operate to impose any limitation on the
notional situation arising from the application of the deeming provision as
the enumerated classes are exhaustive of the genus.

Once the statutory determination is made the person m whose favour it was made
becomes owner of the land specified in the. determination with all the
incidents of ownership. The land does not then cease to be a distinct and
separate entity and it does

**122**

not become once again an undivided portion of the larger land from which such
specified portion was carved out. By virtue of the Amending Act No. 39 of 1981
any encumbrance which subsisted over and in respect of the undivided shares
the recipient of the statutory determination held in the larger land would
however be revived. Subject to this such recipient is absolute owner of the
portion of land specified in the statutory determination vested with the jus
utendi the jus fruendi and (so far as the law does not prohibit) the jus
abutendi, the right of alienation and the right to vindicate his title in an
action at law.

**

Cases referred to :

**

(1) _East End Dwellings Co., Ltd. v. Finsbury Borough Council-_ [1952] A.C.
109, 132.

(2) _Abeykoon Hamine v. Appuhamy-_ (1950) 52 NLR 49.

(3) _De Silva v. Goonetilleke-_ (1931) 32 NLR 21.

(4) _Peeris v. Saunhamy_ -(1955) 54 NLR 207.

(5) _Pathirana v. Jayasundera-_ (1951) 58 NLR 169, 177.

(6) _Palisena v. Perera-_ (1954) 56 NLR 407.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

E. S. Amerasinghe, P.C. with K. N. Choksy, P.C., S. S. Ratnayake, Miss D.
Guniyangoda, A. L. Britto Muttunayagam, Miss l. R. Rajepakse and Nihal
Fernando_ for defendants-appellants.

_

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q. C. with L. C. Seneviratne, P.C., Laksman Perera and
Miss T. Keenawinne _ for plaintiff-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

March 19, 1986. **  
RANASINGHE, J.

**

In the village of Digama, in the Kurunegala District, lies the land called
Flensberg Estate alias Bebilawatta. It was about 234 acres in extent. It was
purchased in February 1961, upon deed No. 226 dated 28.2.1961, and attested by
T. D. M. Samson de Silva, N.P., by the plaintiff-respondent, the 2nd
defendant-appellant's wife the 1st defendant-appellant, the 4th to the 6th
defendants-appellants and the wife of the 3rd defendant-appellant for a sum of
Rs. 160,000. Whilst the plaintiff-respondent and the 1st defendant-appellant
became entitled to an undivided 1/3 share each, the balance 1/3, it is common
ground, belonged, at the time material to these proceedings, equally to the
4th to the 6th defendants-appellants, who are all brothers, and to the wife of
the 3rd defendant-appellant who is also a brother of the 4th to the 6th
defendants-appellants. The 2nd defendant-appellant had, from January 1970,
with the consent of them all managed the said estate for and on behalf of all
the co-owners referred to above.

**123**

On 17.10.77 the plaintiff-respondent commenced these proceedings before the
District Court against the 1st to the 6th defendants-appellants praying for a
declaration of title to, and the ejectment of the defendants-appellants from
the distinct and separate extent of 50A. OR. 21 P.- depicted as Lot 6 in Plan
No. 2525 dated 15.10.1977 made by W.D.B. Reginald, L. S., and produced as P8
at the trial in the District Court-from and out of the larger land of
Flensberg Estate alias Bebilawatta of about 234 acres in extent, referred to
above, on the ground: that the plaintiff-respondent is entitled to the sole
and exclusive possession of the said distinct and separate extent so depicted
in Plan P8 upon the Order dated 25.9.1974-which was produced at the trial as
P6-made under the provisions of sec. 19 of the Land Reform Law No, 1 of-1972:
and that the defendants-appellants are wrongfully and unlawfully disputing her
exclusive title to the said distinct and separate portion of land and are
keeping her out of possession from the said parcel of land.

The learned District Judge, by his judgment dated 18.12.1979, entered judgment
for the plaintiff as prayed for, and, upon an appeal lodged by the defendants-
appellants, the Court of Appeal affirmed the judgment of the District Court
and dismissed the said appeal of the defendants-appellants. The defendants-
appellants have now come before this Court to have the aforementioned
judgments set aside.

The position taken up by the defendants-appellants, who pray that the
plaintiff-respondent's action be dismissed, briefly is that the Order, P6,
relied on by the plaintiff-respondent, does not convey any title to the
plaintiff-respondent, and that, in the absence of dominium in the plaintiff-
respondent in and over the extent of 50A. 21 P. described in the schedule to
the plaint and also depicted as Lot 6 in the plan P8, the plaintiff-respondent
cannot have and maintain the action as presently constituted.

The Land Reform Law No. 1 of 1972, which is the very first Law enacted under
the Constitution of 1972 by the National State Assembly of the Republic of Sri
Lanka, came into operation on 26.8.1972. In its Long Title the said Law was
stated to be

"A Law to establish a Land Reform Commission to fix a ceiling on the extent of
agricultural land that may be owned by persons, to provide for the vesting of
lands owned in excess of such ceiling in

**124**

the Land Reform Commission and for such land to be held by the former owners
on a statutory lease from the Commission, to prescribe the purposes and the
manner of disposition by the Commission of agricultural lands vested in the
Commission so as to increase productivity and employment, to provide for the
payment of compensation to persons deprived of their lands under this Law and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

Sec. 2 of the said Law also proceeds to spell out the purposes of the said Law
to be "to establish a Land Reform Commission with the following objects:

(a) to ensure that no person shall own agricultural land in excess of the
ceiling, and

(b) to take over agricultural land owned by any person in excess of the
ceiling and to utilize such land in a manner which will result in an increase
in its productivity and in the employment generated from such land."

Sec. 3 (1) sets out the maximum extent of agricultural land, referred to as
the "ceiling which could be owned by a person on and after the date-which as
set out earlier, was the 26th August 1972 on which the said Land Reform Law
comes into operation, as being, in the case of land which does not consist
exclusively of paddy land, fifty acres. Sub-section (2) of sec. 3 states that
any agricultural land owned by any person in excess of the "ceiling" on the
26th August 1972 shall as from that date "be deemed to vest in the Commission
; and be deemed to be held by such person under a statutory lease from the
Commission"

Sec. 4 of the said Law deals with disputes which arise between parties as to
the ownership of any agricultural land which has, by operation of sec. 3(2),
vested in the Commission, and the manner in which such disputes are to be
resolved. Special provisions are set out in sec. 5 to deal with persons who
became owners of agricultural lands in excess of the ceiling after the date of
commencement of the provisions of the Land Reform Law.

Under and by virtue of the provisions of sec. 6, the Commission gets absolute
title, free from all encumbrances, to any agricultural land which becomes
vested in the Commission in terms of the provisions of

**125**

secs. 3 and 5. Sec. 7 enacts that, "for the purposes of this Law" which, as
stated, is spelt out in sec. 2, where any agricultural land is co-owned, each
such co-owner shall be deemed to own his share in such co-owned land "as a
distinct and separate entity'". Sec. 12 makes provisions in regard to
mortgages, leases, usufructuaries and holders of life interest who have
interests in such agricultural land.

In the case of agricultural land which is owned by private companies or co-
operative societies the shareholders are for the purposes of the "ceiling" set
out in sec. 3, deemed to own such land in proportion to the shares held by
each shareholder of such company or society.

Every person who becomes, in terms of sec 3(2) above, a statutory lessee, is
required by sec. 18(1) to make, within the period specified therein, a
declaration, referred to as the "statutory declaration", in the prescribed
form, of the total extent of the agricultural land held by him as such
statutory lessee. The declaration, which is so made, must not only furnish the
particulars required by paragraphs (a) to (f) of sub-sec. (2), but also be
accompanied by a survey plan, or sketch map depicting the boundaries of the
lands so declared, and also of the portion or portions, if any, which the
declarant expresses a preference to retain. Encumbrances, if any, which are
attached to such land are also required to be set out in such declaration. A
failure to make such declaration or the making of a false declaration are made
offences.

Upon the receipt of such declaration the Commission is required to make what
is called a "statutory declaration". Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of sec. 19
requires the Commission to make as soon as practicable, such a statutory
determination specifying the portion or portions of the agricultural land
owned by the statutory lessee which such lessee shall be allowed to retain. In
making such determination the Commission has to take into consideration the
preferences, if any, expressed by the statutory lessee as to the portion or
portions of such land that he may be allowed to retain. The Commission is
empowered, before making such statutory determination, to create any class of
servitude on or over such land, to survey such land, and is also required to
pay such sum, as the Commission considers reasonable, to the statutory lessee
to fence such land-sub-sec. (2) of sec 19. Such statutory determination so
made is also required: to specify the extent of the agricultural land which
the Commission permits the statutory lessee to retain: to refer to a survey
plan, made by the

**126**

Survey-General or under his direction, of the extent of such agricultural land
so permitted to be retained by the statutory lessee: and to specify any
servitude or encumbrance attaching to such land-sec. 21 (a), (b) and (c). Once
a statutory determination has been so made by the: Commission, the Commission
is required to publish it in the Gazette. and to send a copy of it to the
statutory lessee by registered post-sec. 19 (1) (b). A statutory determination
so made. and published shall come into operation from the date of such
publication-sec. 20, and "shall be final and conclusive and shall not be
called in question in any court, whether by way of writ or otherwise"-sec. 19
(1) (b). Once such statutory determination so comes into operation, "the
Commission shall have no right title or interest in the agricultural land
specified in the statutory determination from the date of such
publication"-sec. 20.

There are two other sections in this Law, which were referred to by learned
counsel at the hearing of this appeal before this Court. One is section 29
which requires the Chairman of the Commission to notice, by publication in the
Gazette and in any other manner as may be determined by him, "every person,
who was interested in such land immediately before the date on which such land
was so vested" in the Commission, to make within a period of one month a
written claim to the whole or any part of the compensation payable in respect
of such land specifying the particulars set out in paragraphs (a) to (d) of
the said section. The other is section 64 which provides that the provisions
of the Land Reform Law shall have effect notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in the two Acts \- the Rubber Estates (Control of Fragmentation) Act
2 of 1958, and the Estates (Control of Transfer and Acquisition) Act of 1972
\- "or in any other law, custom or usage".

A careful consideration of the provisions of the Land Reform Law (hereinafter
referred to as "this Law") which have been set out at length earlier, in their
proper sequence shows: that, with the coming into operation of the said
provisions, on 26.8.1972, the entirety of the agricultural land owned by a
person, who is entitled to more than fifty acres, has to be deemed to vest
immediately in the Commission; that what is so deemed to vest, vests
absolutely free from all encumbrances; that thenceforth the person who owned
such land is deemed to be a statutory lessee of the Commission upon the terms
and conditions set out; that in the event of a dispute arising between such
statutory lessee and another as to the ownership of any such

**127**

land, the Commission has the power to make an interim order as to which of
them is to possess such land and the interim order so made is to remain in
operation until such time as a final order is made by a competent court to
which the Commission is required to, refer such dispute. Thereafter. such
statutory lessee has to make a, 'statutory declaration' within a specified
time setting out the particulars required to be set out, including a survey
plan or sketch map depicting the boundaries of the portion or portions of the
land which has so vested and which such lessee prefers to retain. Upon the
receipt of such statutory declaration the Commission is required to make as
soon as practicable a 'statutory determination" specifying the portion or
portions of the agricultural land that the statutory lessee shall be allowed
to retain. Before making such a determination the Commission: shall take into
consideration the preferences, if any, expressed- by the statutory lessee as
to the portion of land which he desires to retain; may create any class of
servitude on or over such land; shall have the right to survey such land;
shall pay the statutory lessee a reasonable sum for fencing such portion of
land. Such statutory determination should: specify the extent of the
agricultural land which the Commission permits the statutory lessee to retain;
refer to a survey plan made by the Survey-General or under his direction
depicting the portion of agricultural land which the statutory lessee is so
permitted to retain; specify the servitudes or encumbrances, if any, which
attach to such portion of land. The statutory determination so made must be
published in the Gazette, and a copy must be sent to the statutory lessee
under registered cover. Once it is so published, the statutory determination
will become effective from the date of such publication, and the Commission
shall, from such date, have no right, title, or interest in the agricultural
land so specified in such statutory determination.

An examination of the provisions of this Law shows that there is no difficulty
or ambiguity in the application of such provisions to a case where the entire
extent of agricultural land was owned by one person. That is where one person,
as defined in section 66 of this law, alone owned the entirety of the
agricultural land which is deemed to vest in the Commission upon the
provisions of the said law coming into operation. Disputes, such as have
arisen in this case, are said to have arisen mainly, if not wholly, because
the agricultural land, which has given rise to these proceedings, was owned,
immediately prior to the date on which the said Law came into operation, in
common by

**128**

several co-owners only some of whom were entitled to agricultural land above
the "ceiling" whilst the extents held by the other co-owners fell well below
such ceiling.

A consideration and a determination, at the outset, of the purpose and the
object for which the Legislature promulgated this Law will be not only
extremely helpful but also very necessary to resolve the issues which arise in
this case. A careful perusal of the Long Title of this Law and also the
provisions of section 2 of this Law leave no room for any conjecture or doubt
whatever in regard to this matter. Sec. 2, which is an enacting provision of
this Law, sets forth, as set out earlier, very lucidly and categorically that
the purpose is to set up a land Commission. The objects are stated to be
twofold: to ensure that no person shall, from and after the commencement of
this Law, own any agricultural land in excess of the ceiling fixed by this
Law: to take over the excess land owned by a person and to utilize such land
in such a manner as to increase both its productivity and its capacity to
generate employment. The clear and unambiguous language of section 2, which is
in complete harmony with that in which the Long Title itself is couched,
heralds the primary and dominant object to be that, henceforth, no person
shall, in the Republic of Sri Lanka, own more than fifty acres of agricultural
land. The taking over of the excess land and using it is a direct and
necessary consequence of the imposition of the ceiling. The utilization of the
excess so taken over in a meaningful manner would in itself be a very
important object of this piece of legislation. Even so, it seems to me that
the unquestionable principle and the predominant object sought to be achieved
by the Legislature in promulgating this Law was to confine the holding of
agricultural land by a person to a maximum extent of fifty acres, and fifty
acres alone. The object and policy of an Act are often the basis of
interpretation of its provisions - Craies: Statute Law (7th Ed.) p. 92.

The statutory process so expressed is quite straightforward and simple in its
application to a person who is the sole owner of the entirety of an
agricultural land which is deemed to have vested in the Commission on
26.8.1972 - the date on which the provisions of the Land Reform Law came into
operation.

It is, however, necessary in this case to consider the operation of the
provisions detailed above in regard to a person, whose extent of agricultural
land over and above the said ceiling of 50 acres does not constitute a
distinct and separate entity but comprises only undivided

**129**

interests in a larger land, which he is entitled to only in common with
several other persons, all or several of whom, however, do not own interests
over and above the said ceiling. Sec. 7 of this Law is the provision which has
to be resorted to in such a situation. The provision of this section requires,
by the use of a statutory fiction, the interests of a co-owner, which would,
at the time this Law comes into operation be only an undivided share of a
larger land owned in common, to be treated as a distinct and separate entity.
Such an assumption is only "for the purposes of this Law". The purpose, as
already stated, is primarily to determine the extent of the holding of such a
person so that such holding could thereafter be restricted to an extent of
only 50 acres. The moment this Law comes into operation the undivided share of
a co-owner, whether he be one whose interests are over fifty acres or not,
becomes, in the eye of the law, a distinct and separate entity, equal to the
undivided extent he was earlier entitled to in the common land. Such entity
is, at that time, still not identified or located on the ground, as distinct
from the larger land. It is, at that stage, as learned Counsel submitted, only
notional, and only confined to paper. By the use of this fiction undivided
interests are treated as divided, and a co-owner is treated as the sole owner
of a distinct entity, in order to set the provisions of this Law in motion.
The effect of the operation of the provisions of sec. 7 is to bring about a
separation or partition of the undivided share of a person, who, at the time
this Law comes into operation, owns such interests in common with several
others, and transform such undivided share into a distinct and separate
portion. Even though still only notional and only existing on paper, yet, the
law requires the extent of land such person is entitled to, to be treated as a
distinct and separate entity. The combined operation of the provisions of sec
2 and sec. 7 of this Law would result, in the case of a person, coming within
sec. 3 (2), but whose interests in agricultural land comprise, either wholly
or partly, undivided share or shares of land, in such undivided shares being
converted, albeit notionally, to a distinct and separate entity, and such
distinct and separate entity then being treated as vesting in the Commission.
The undivided share of a person would thus, in law, be considered as having
ceased to exist as an undivided share, and being separated off from the
undivided shares of the other co-owners, and becoming a distinct and separate
entity. The undivided shares of the other co-owners, though they were also
considered, by virtue of sec. 7, as having a distinct and separate existence,
would, where they do not come within the operation of sec. 3 (2), thereafter
cease to be considered as having any longer a

**130**

separate existence and would continue to be recognized as having their
original character of undivided shares held in common. The distinct and
separate entity brought into being, though at that stage only notionally and
confined to paper without any identification of its existence on the ground,
will become identified and located on the ground once the provisions of sec.
18, 19 and 21 have run their operational course.

As has been set out above, where an agricultural land becomes subject to the
provisions of this Law in consequence of its owner being one who is entitled
to land over and above the ceiling, such agricultural land is "deemed" to vest
in the Commission, and its owner is "deemed" to be a statutory lessee of such
land. It is, therefore, necessary to examine the nature and scope, in law, of
such a deeming provision as section 3 (2) of this Law. In statutes the
expression "deemed" is commonly used for the purpose of creating a statutory
function so that the meaning of a term is extended to a subject matter which
it properly does not designate. Thus where a person is "deemed to be
something" it only means that whereas he is not in reality that something the
Act of Parliament requires him to be treated as if he were. When a thing is
deemed to be something, it does not mean that it is that which it is deemed to
be, but it is rather an admission that it is not what it is deemed to be, and
that notwithstanding it is not that particular thing it is nevertheless deemed
to be that thing. Where a statute declares that a person or thing shall be
deemed to be or shall be treated as something which in reality it is not, it
shall have to be treated as so during the entire course of the proceeding-vide
Bindra: Interpretation of Statutes (6th Ed.) pp. 912-914. In such a case it
has also to be so treated as that something else with the attendant
consequences -Stroud - Vol. 2-(4th Ed.) Words and Phrases, p. 716. So too

"If you are bidden to treat an imaginary state of affairs as real, you must
surely, unless prohibited from doing so, also imagine as real the consequences
and incidents which, if the putative state of affairs had in fact existed,
must inevitably have flowed from or accompanied it ................. The
statute says that you must imagine a state of affairs; it does not say that
having done so, you must cause or permit your imagination to boggle when it
comes to the inevitable corollaries of that state of affairs".

**131**

-per Lord Asquith in the case of East End Dwellings Co., Ltd. v. Finsbury Borough Council (1). Thus where, in pursuance of a statutory direction, a thing has to be treated as something which in reality it is not, or an imaginary state of affairs is to be treated as real, then not only will it have to be treated so during the entire course of the proceeding in which such assumption is made, but all the attendant consequences and incidents, which, if the imagined state of affairs had existed, would inevitably have flowed from it, have also to be imagined or treated as real.

The separation off of the undivided interests of one co-owner alone from the
larger land whilst the undivided interests of the other co-owners remain in
common and undivided is a process which was possible under the law as it
existed at the time this Law came into operation. Such a course was possible
under the written law-sec. 26 (2) (d) of the Partition Act 16 of 1951-and also
by common consent of the co-owners. Under the Partition Law the process by
which a division or separation off was effected had to be initiated by one of
the co-owners. This Law seeks to bring about such division or separation off
by the operation of its express provisions, by express provisions of law
independent of the voluntary act of one or more of the co-owners.

Sec. 64 of this Law, as set out earlier, states that the provisions of this
Law are to prevail over the provisions of the two Acts specifically set out
therein and also of "any other law, custom or usage". "Law" would, in view of
the provisions of the Interpretation Ordinance (Chap. 2) include both the
written and the unwritten law.

It has been contended that the words "any other law" should be given a
restricted meaning eiusdem generis with the two proceeding Acts, and not a
wide and general interpretation which could even cover the common law
principles relating to co-owners, and co-owned properties. The rule of eiusdem
generis is that, where particular words are followed by general words, the
general words should not be construed in their widest sense but should be held
as applying to objects, persons or things of the same general nature or class
as those specifically enumerated, unless of course there is a clear
manifestation of a contrary purpose. It is only a rule of construction which
enables a court to ascertain the intention of the Legislature when the
intention is not clear. It should not be resorted to, for the purpose of
defeating the intention of the Legislature but for the purpose of elucidating
the words and giving effect to its intention.

**132**

It will not apply where the specific words do not come under a class or
category; nor where the whole scheme of the enactment and the object and the
mischief of the enactment do not require such a restricted meaning to be
attached to the words of the general import. There must be a distinct genus or
category. The specific words must apply not to different objects of a widely
differing character but to something which must be called a class, or kind of
objects. Further, if the particular words exhaust the whole genus, as for
instance, where the specific words embrace all the persons or objects of the
class designated by the enumeration, the general words take on a meaning
beyond the class-Bindra: (6th Ed.) pp. 273, 280, 282, 285-6.

The Estates (Control of Transfer and Acquisitions) Act No. 2 of 1972 is an Act
"to control the transfer or ownership of Estates and to provide for the
acquisition of Estates in the national interest". An "Estate" is defined as a
land or group of lands, which is not less than 100 acres and is cultivated or
used for purposes of husbandry and which constitutes a distinct and separate
property whether owned by one or more persons, and declares null and void the
transfer of such Estates without the consent of the Minister. The Tea and
Rubber Estates (Control of Fragmentation) Act No. 2 of 1958 is an Act "to
control the Fragmentation" of tea and rubber estates, which have been defined
to mean rubber and tea estates of not less than 100 acres in extent. It
prohibits not only the transfer of ownership of such estates but also the
partition, whether by deed of agreement between the co-owners or under the
provisions of the Partition Act through Court, of such estates without a
certificate of consent from the relevant authority specified in the Act. These
two Acts deal with the transfer and the partition of estates, which are 100
acres and over in extent. The definitions given therein of "transfers"
exhausts all methods and kinds of alienation. Similarly, the definitions of an
"estate" exhaust all types and kinds of agricultural lands used for the
benefit of the community. It would, therefore, seem that there is no room for
the application of the rule of eiusdem generis, and that the general words
"any other law" must be given the widest possible meaning. Even if the rule
has to be applied, then the general term would take in laws dealing with the
partition of co-owned lands. Hence, if there is any provision of this Law
which is inconsistent with any existing provision of law dealing with the
partitioning of co-owned lands, then, such existing provisions will have to
give way, to the extent necessary to give effect to such express provision
contained in this Law. The

**133**

provisions of sec. 64 of this Law cannot and must not be construed to wipe out
the entirety of the existing law, relating to the common ownership of lands
and the partition of such co-owned lands, which was in existence on 26.8.1972.

It must also be observed that there is in this Law provision for the
determination of any disputes which may be raised by a co-owner in, regard to
the title of another co-owner, who becomes a statutory lessee, to the distinct
and separate entity which, in terms of sec. 7 of this Law, would represent the
undivided share which such co-owner owned up to 26. 08. 1972. Even in regard
to the determination of the specific portion to be given over to a statutory
lessee, who was once a co-owner, the other co-owners would not be without an
opportunity of making representations to the Commission if their interests are
affected. Even though there is no express provision granting an affected co-
owner an opportunity of being heard before a statutory determination is made,
yet, as the concept of determination connotes a hearing of affected parties,
"the justice of the common law" will step in and provide him with such
opportunity. In terms of sec. 27 B (1) of this Law, as amended by Act No. 39
of 1981, any encumbrance, which attached to the statutory lessee's undivided
share in the common land immediately prior to the date on which the distinct
and separate entity, brought into existence by the provisions of sec. 7 as
representing the undivided share of such statutory lessee in the common land,
vested in the Commission, would be revived from the date on which the
statutory determination is made under sec. 19 specifying the extent of land
such statutory lessee is permitted to retain. Any such encumbrance will indeed
be specified in the statutory determination itself-vide sec. 21 (c).

It has been contended on behalf of the defendants-appellants: that the effect
of a statutory determination published in terms of sec. 19 of this Law is only
as set out in sec. 20: that P6, which is the statutory determination relied on
by the plaintiff-respondent in this case, amounts only to a disclaimer on the
part of the Commission: that it does not vest any dominium in respect of the
portion of land described in the schedule to the plaint: that P6 cannot in law
be relied on as conferring any title, much less-a title superior to that of
the defendants-appellants, which could be vindicated by the plaintiff-
respondent as against the defendants-appellants: that the words of sec. 20 are
plain and clear and call for no interpretation.

**134**

In regard to the interpretation of statutes, it is useful to recall that:
there is no place for interpretation unless the words of a statute admit of
two meanings: in case of ambiguity interpretation becomes necessary as the
courts have to attach an intelligible meaning to confused and unintelligible
sentences-Craies: p. 64: the primary duty of a court of law is to find the
natural meaning of the words used in a statute in the context in which they
occur: where the language of an Act is clear and explicit the court must give
effect to it whatever may be the consequences as the words of a statute speak
the intention of the Legislature- Craies Statute Law (7th Ed.) pp. 64-65: the
provisions of an Act of Parliament should not be so construed as to reduce it
to rank absurdity: a meaning should not be attributed to the general language
used by the Legislature which would not carry out its object and would produce
consequences which to the ordinary intelligence are absurd; and it must be
given a meaning as will carry out its objects- Craies, p. 85: if there are two
interpretations of the words in an Act which are possible, then the Court
should adopt that which is just, reasonable and sensible rather than which is
none of those things: Courts will not lightly impugn the wisdom of the
Legislature, and if an alternative construction, although not the most
obvious, will give a reasonable meaning to the Act and obviate the absurdities
or inconveniences of an absolutely literal construction the courts would adopt
such alternative construction- Craies, pp. 86, 90: if possible the words of an
Act of Parliament must be construed so as to give a sensible meaning to them,
and the words must be construed ut res magis valeat quam pereat so that the
intention of the Legislature may not be treated as vain or be left to operate
in the air- Craies, pp. 69, 95, 103: construction is to be made of all the
parts together, and not of one part only by itself -Bindra (6th Ed.) p. 42,
Craies, p. 127: there is a presumption against alterations of the common law,
and it is presumed that the Legislature does not intend to make any changes in
the existing law beyond that which is expressly stated in, or follows by
necessary implication from, the language of the statute itself-Maxwell (12
Ed.) p. 116.

That, once the statutory determination, under sec. 19, is made, the portion of
land, which is the subject-matter of such determination, ceases to have a
distinct and separate existence, and becomes once again part and parcel of the
larger common land and becomes subject to the common ownership of all the co-
owners, and that the compensation, which becomes payable, in terms of sec. 29
of this

**135**

Law, in respect of that portion of land which has vested in the Commission as
being the statutory lessee's land in excess of the ceiling, has to be shared
proportionately by all the co-owners of the larger co-owned land, is a
submission which was strongly put forward on behalf of the defendants-
appellants. Whilst this submission was being considered it became clear,
during the hearing itself, that this proposition would entail two somewhat
startling consequences-which learned President's Counsel for the defendants-
appellants himself accepted and described as two ""oddities" -viz. that the
statutory lessee, the plaintiff-respondent, whose holding, under and by virtue
of this Law, should be fifty acres and fifty acres only, would still be left-
on the basis that the extent of the larger common land, Flensberg Estate
referred to earlier, was 234 acres, and that the undivided shares of the
respective co-owners were as set out above, and also on the footing that the
1st defendant-appellant herself became a statutory lessee and her extent of 78
acres also vested in the Commission and she herself was thus left only with
the ceiling of 50 acres-with 59 acres: that, on the other hand the four co-
owners, the 4th to the 6th defendants-appellants and the wife of the 3rd
defendant-appellant, who were jointly entitled to the balance undivided 1/3
share, or 78 acres (with each one being entitled to an undivided 1/12 share of
19 1/2 acres),-the total holdings of none of whom exceeded the "ceiling", and
none of whom admittedly came within the purview of this Law - would together
lose about 19 acres (each one losing about 4 1/2 acres), having to content
themselves, in return, with only a proportionate share of the compensation
payable in terms of sec. 29 of this Law. Learned President's Counsel explained
this anomalous situation as being an inevitable consequence of the express
provisions of this Law and urged that such consequences should not deter the
Court from giving effect to the plain and natural meaning of the provisions-
particularly secs. 20, 29-of this Law. If, in the situation detailed above, a
statutory lessee, such as the 1st defendant-appellant, had also been entitled
to agricultural land other than the co-owned land and he was to accept the
entirety of the fifty acres, which he is allowed to retain, from such other
land, then the position of the other co-owners, such as the 4th to the 6th
defendants-appellants, would upon the basis of the said contention, be worse
as they would then be deprived of an even larger extent of land; but such
statutory lessee himself would be left with an even larger extent, well above
the ceiling.

**136**

The compensation payable under sec. 29 of this Law would be poor consolation
to a person whose land is taken away by the State. It would be more so to one
who owns only a few acres, well below the "ceiling". The blow would be most
cruel and oppressive where the person is one whom it was not the purpose and
object of the Legislature to touch in any way, and the person on whom it was
primarily intended to impose a ceiling is, on the other hand, found to be able
to add to his upper limit. The only wrong committed by each of such small-
holders for such unexpected predicament they would find themselves in, would
be to have owned a land in common with a large land-owner whom the State
intended, by such legislation, to affect adversely. A consequence such as this
could and would never have been in the contemplation of the Legislature when
it enacted this law. It would clearly negative the purpose and object of this
Law which has been clearly and categorically proclaimed by the legislature. If
another interpretation, which would obviate such an untoward result is
reasonably available, it is the duty of the Court to come down on the side of
such an interpretation as would operate to promote the avowed purpose and
object of the Legislature, and suppress and cure the mischief aimed against.

Sec. 29 of this Law, which is relied on strongly by the defendants-appellants,
provides for a notice calling upon "every person who was interested in such
land immediately before the date on which such land vested" to claim "the
whole or any part of the compensation payable under this Law in respect of
such land". Hence it has been contended that, in the case of an agricultural
land such as Flensberg Estate, which was co-owned by the plaintiff-respondent
and the defendants-appellants immediately prior to 26.8.1972, each one of such
co-owners would come within the category of "Every person who was interested
in such land" and as such each one of them could claim a proportionate share
of the compensation payable by the Commission in respect of the land which has
vested in the Commission. The agricultural land, which is vested in the
Commission and in respect of which compensation is payable under this section,
is the entirety of the agricultural land which the statutory lessee owned on
the day preceding the 26th August 1972, less the extent of fifty acres which
the Commission permits such lessee to retain. Applying the provision of this
section to the facts and circumstances of this case, the land, in respect of
which such compensation is payable, would be the extent of 78 acres, which the
plaintiff-respondent was

**137**

deemed to own as a distinct and separate entity from and out of Flensberg
Estate, less the extent of 50 A.OR.21 P. depicted as Lot 6 in plan P8. The
said extent of 78 acres, treated as distinct and separate entity, was taken
away from the plaintiff-respondent on the basis that the plaintiff-respondent
was the owner of the said entity. No dispute had been raised by any of the
other co-owners, the defendants-appellants and the wife of the 3rd defendant-
appellant, to the title of the plaintiff-respondent to the said extent of 78
acres. The 50 acres, which is described in P6 and which by then has been
actually demarcated on the ground, within the said Flensberg Estate, is an
extent carved from and out of the aforesaid extent of 78 acres, and given to
the plaintiff-respondent as the maximum extent of land the plaintiff-
respondent will thenceforth be permitted to hold. That being the basis upon
which the Commission has to act under this Law, the Legislature cannot be said
to have intended that the compensation in respect of the balance extent of 28
acres, which continues to remain vested in the. Commission, be paid by the
Commission to anyone other than the person from whom the entire extent of 78
acres was taken over, though only notionally at that stage, as a distinct and
separate entity, and to whom subsequently an extent of 50 acres, carved out on
the ground after a survey, done by the Surveyor-General or under his
directions and depicted in a plan, and to fence which said extent the
Commission had to give the plaintiff-respondent a sum which was considered by
the Commission to be reasonable for such purpose, was handed back by the
Commission to be retained by him. Persons, who had a lien, as set out in sec.
12, or other similar claims, in law, in and over such land, could put forward
their claims under sec. 29. Any claims to such land on the basis of title
would have been resolved long before the section 29-stage is reached. Such
claims, if any, would have been resolved at the stage of sec. 4, long before
the stage of the statutory determination, under sec. 19, is reached.

Sec. 32(1) of this Law, which relates to the actual payment of compensation,
states that, if in response to the notice sent out in terms of sec. 29, no
claim to the compensation payable is received from any person, other that "the
former owner" of such land, the Chairman of the Commission shall cause
compensation to be paid to "such former owner". The "former owner" so
contemplated is obviously the person, from whom the land, in respect of which
compensation is to be paid, was taken over, as an entity, on the basis that he
is the owner of such land and who was thereafter treated as the statutory
lessee of such land. Where the entirety of an entity,

**138**

which was distinct and separate immediately prior to the commencement of this
Law, belonged only to one person there can be no doubt. In the case of land,
which was commonly owned immediately prior to the commencement of this Law,
the "former owner" contemplated must, in order to advance the purpose and
object of the Law, be construed to mean the person, in whose hands the land,
treated as a distinct and separate entity, was deemed to vest in the
Commission, and who was subsequently permitted to retain an extent of fifty
acres from and out of the said land. That person in this case, now before this
Court, would be the plaintiff-respondent.

In the process of achieving the primary object set out in this Law which, as
set out earlier, was "to ensure that no person shall own agricultural land in
excess of the ceiling", the very first step taken is to consider, as vested in
the-Commission, the agricultural lands "owned" by a person in excess of the
ceiling of fifty acres on the specified date. The whole process begins on the
basis that the person from whom the land is so taken over is the owner of such
land. If any one disputes the title of the person, so treated as the owner,
such disputes, as already set out, would be gone into, and the question of the
title to the said land would be settled before the stage of the sec. 18
declaration is reached. Thereafter, when the Commission makes a statutory
determination under sec. 19, it does so once again on. the footing that the
statutory lessee was, in law, the owner of such land immediately prior to
26.8.72. It is on the same basis that the Commission thereafter permits the
statutory lessee to retain the extent of 50 acres specified in the statutory
determination, and itself retains the balance extent of land which had already
been vested in it, the Commission. The fifty acres so. given back to the
statutory lessee is given to him as the maximum the statutory lessee could
retain under this law. This law also, if not expressly, at least impliedly,
assures to the statutory lessee that no further reduction of such extent could
and would take place by the operation of the provisions of this Law. At the
time the said extent of 50 acres, along with the other land then held by the
statutory lessee, vested in the Commission it vested absolute title in the
Commission, wiping out not only the existing title of the statutory lessee but
also, where the land had, immediately prior to 26.8.72. been commonly owned,
the title of the other co-owners as well. In P6, the only person referred to
is the plaintiff-respondent, the statutory lessee who is "allowed to
retain"-the legal significance of which said words will be considered later-
the specific extent more fully described in the schedule thereto.

**139**

Sec. 27 B of this Law, as inserted by the amending Act No. 39 of 1981, states
that, when a person is allowed to retain any agricultural land in consequence
of a statutory determination made under sec. 19, any encumbrance, which
subsisted over that land on the day immediately preceding the date on which
that land vested in the Commission, shall be revived from the date of such
determination. Thus an encumbrance which subsisted over and in respect of the
plaintiff-respondent's undivided shares in the larger land would, from and
after the date on which P6 came into operation, be revived and attach to the
land described in P6.

In this view of the matter, I am of opinion that the land, referred to in P6,
did not, once the said determination P6 was made, cease to be a distinct and
separate entity and become once again a part of the larger land called
Flensberg Estate, of which it had formed a part prior to 26.8.72 and which had
also been subject to common ownership.

P6 the statutory determination in this case states, as set out earlier, that
the plaintiff-respondent "shall be allowed to retain" the said extent of land
referred to in the schedule to P6, and also fully described in the schedule to
the plaint in this case. The effect of such a statutory determination, upon
its publication in the Gazette, is set out in this Law itself, in sec. 20. All
that is stated therein is that "the Commission shall have no right, title or
interest in the agricultural land specified in the statutory determination
from the date of such publication". It is merely a renunciation of all
interests on the part of the Commission. There is, in P6, no express vesting
or conferment of title in the plaintiff-respondent, who is referred to in P6
as the statutory lessee, in respect of the Land referred to in P6 and
described in P6 as "the portion of agricultural land owned" by the statutory
lessee and which she shall be allowed to retain-.

What then is the effect, in law, of the plaintiff-respondent being "allowed to
retain" the land described in the schedule to P6-which is also, as set out
already, the land more fully described in the schedule to the plaint-and
further referred to as a portion of agricultural land owned" by the statutory
lessee? The order embodied in P6 is made as the final act in the process of
"ensuring that no person (plaintiff-respondent) shall own agricultural land in
excess of the ceiling (50 acres)''-vide sec. 2(a). This process had started
with the take over of agricultural land owned by the plaintiff-respondent. The
land so handed back to the plaintiff-respondent had also, prior to that, been

**140**

surveyed and fenced at the expense of the Commission. The Commission has
renounced all claims in respect of it. No one else has been granted any rights
whatsoever either to, in or over such land. Against this backdrop of facts and
circumstances there cannot be any doubt but that the provisions of this law
intended that the plaintiff-respondent alone should possess and take the
income from the said land. Sec. 19 (5) of the Land Reform (Special Provisions)
Act No. 39 of 1981 proceeds on the basis that the consequence of a statutory
determination, under sec. 19 of this Law, was to make such person the owner of
such agricultural land. The selfsame sub-section (5) of sec. 19 of the said
Act No. 39 of 1981 , also implies that a person, in whose favour such a
statutory determination under sec. 19 is made, had the right to sell such
land; for, restrictions are placed by this sub-section on the right of such
person to sell such land.

Ownership is the right which a person has in a thing to possess it, to use it
and take the fruits, to destroy it, and to alienate it. These rights have been
described by the text writers as: jus utendi, jus fruendi, and jus utendi-
Grotius 2.3.9, Voet 6. 1. 1. Wille, in his book on the Principles of South
African Law (3rd Ed.) discusses at page 190 the "Legal Effects of Ownership"
as follows

"The absolute owner of a thing has the following rights in the thing:

(1) to possess it ;

(2) to use and enjoy it; and

(3) to destroy it; and

(4) to alienate it";

and, in discussing the right to possession, states, also at page 190:

"the absolute owner of a thing is entitled to claim the possession of it; or,
if he has the possession he may retain it. If he is illegally deprived of his
possession, he may by means of vindicatio or reclaim recover the possession
from any person in whose possession the thing is found. In a vindicatory
action the claimant need merely prove two facts, namely, that he is the owner
of the thing and that the thing is in the possession of the defendant"

**141**

At page 193, Wille states, in regard to the Right of Use and Enjoyment:

"The owner of a thing has a right to use and enjoy it, including the right to
take the fruits of it. Such use, however, is subject ........ to legislative
restrictions in many cases, and also subject to the rule that an owner of
property may not infringe the legal rights of other persons, sic utere tuo ut
alienum non laedas. If an owner's right of use or enjoyment are infringed he
has appropriate legal remedies".

The Right of Destruction is discussed by Wille, at page 201, as:

"An owner has the right of altering and destroying his property for he has the
jus abutendi. The right of destruction, however, exists only if not forbidden
by law". In regard to the right of alienation, Wille states at page 202: "the
absolute owner of a thing is entitled to alienate, that is, transfer the
dominium in it; or he may grant to another person any lesser real right in it,
and consequently he may let it, or mortgage it, or grant a praedial or
personal servitude over it"

Having regard to what has been stated earlier, and having regard also to the
circumstances that the Commission renounces all rights it had in respect of
such land it seems to me that the person, in whose favour a statutory
determination, such as P6, is made, would, upon the making of such a
determination, become possessed of those attributes-viz: the right to possess,
to take the income, and to deal with it in any way, including alienation and
even destruction, so long as it is not illegal, which are, in law, the essence
of ownership.

The nature and the scope of an action rei vindicatio has been considered and
clarified in several decisions of the Supreme Court of this Island. In the
case of Abeykoon Hamine v. Appuhamy (2), Dias, S. P. J. quoted with approval
the decision of a Bench of four judges in De Silva v. Goonetilleke (3) where
Macdonell, C.J. said:

"There is abundant authority that a party claiming a declaration of title must
have title himself. 'To bring the action rei vindicatio plaintiff must have
ownership actually vested in him'-1 Nathan p.362, s. 593........ This action
arises from the right of dominium..... The authorities unite in holding that
plaintiff must show title to the corpus in dispute, and that if he cannot, the
action will not lie".

**142**

In the following year Dias, S. P. J., once again affirmed this principle in
the case of Peens v. Savunhamy (4) when he stated that, in an action for
declaration of title, where the defendants are in possession, the burden lies
on the plaintiff to prove that he has dominium to the land in dispute.
Gratiaen, J. too reiterated this principle, in the case of Pathirana v.
Jayasundera (5) in this way:

"in a rei vindicatio proper the owner of immovable property is entitled, on
proof of his title, to a decree in his favour for the recovery of the property
and for the ejectment of the person in wrongful occupation. "The plaintiff's
ownership of the thing is of the very essence of the action". Maasdrop's
Institutes (7th Ed.) Vol. 2, 96-.

This principle was re-affirmed once again by Gratiaen, J., in the case of
Palisena v. Perera (6) where the plaintiff came into court to vindicate his
title based upon a permit issued under the provisions of the land Development
Ordinance (Chap. 320). In giving judgment for the plaintiff, Gratiaen, J:
said:

". . . . . a permit-holder who has complied with the conditions of his permit.
enjoys, during the period for which the permit is valid, a sufficient title
which he can vindicate against a trespasser in civil proceedings. The fact
that the alleged trespasser had prevented him from entering upon the land does
not afford a defence to the action.........

In a vindicatory action the plaintiff must himself have title to-the property
in dispute: the burden is on the plaintiff to prove that he has title to the
disputed property, and that such title is superior to the title, if any, put
forward by the defendant in occupation. The plaintiff can and must succeed
only on the strength of his own title, and not upon the weakness of the
defence.

On a consideration of the foregoing principles-relating to the legal concept
of ownership, and to an action rei vindicatio-it seems to me that the
plaintiff-respondent did, at the time of the institution of these proceedings,
have, by virtue of P6, "sufficient" title which she could have vindicate
against the defendants-appellants in proceedings such as these.

**143**

Although reference was also made, during the hearing before this Court, to the
provisions of sec. 8 of this Law, the issues arising in these proceedings can,
however, be decided without having recourse to the provisions of sec. 8, which
said section could more appropriately be considered in proceedings directly
connected with agricultural land owned by a private company.

For the foregoing reasons, I am of opinion that the plaintiff-respondent's
action is entitled to succeed.

The appeal of the defendants-appellants is, accordingly, dismissed with costs.

**

SHARVANANDA, C.J. -** I agree.

**

WANASUNDERA, J. - **I agree.

**

ATUKORALE, J. **\- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J. **\- I agree. _  
  
Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/29.html_  

