##  M.S. Perera v. Forest Department and Another - SLR - 187, Vol 1 of 1982
[1982] LKSC 29; (1982) 1 Sri LR 187 (11 March 1982)

# 187

#  SUPREME COURT

#  
M.S. Perera

#  vs.

#  Forest Department and Another  


 S.C. Appeal No 1/80 ‑ S.C. Application No. 645/73(C.A.)  


###  M.C. Gampaha Case No. 65797/A



Forest Ordinance as amended by Act No. 13 of 1961 ‑ section 24 the Regulation
(5) made thereunder by the Minister empowering Official to perform certain
acts ‑Ultra Vires Rule ‑ Delegatus non potest delegare.



Accused Appellant was convicted by a Magistrate for transporting timber into
or out of prohibited areas without a permit from an authorised officer and
thereby contravening regulation (5)2 made by the Minister under section 24 of
Forest Ordinance. Appellant moved in revision to have conviction set aside on
the ground that the regulations were ultra vires the Minister's powers.



The Appellant contended that the aforesaid regulations were ultra vires and
invalid as the Minister to whom Parliament had delegated power to (a) specify
the area within or out of which timber could not be transported without a
permit and (b) to designate the officer authorized to issue the permit, could
not validly delegate that power to the Conservator of Forests.



**Held** _:_ that the regulation 5(1) or (2) is not ultra vires the Minister's
powers as the Conservator acts as the Minister himself and his decision is the
Minister's decision and that official is the alter ego of the Minister.



#  188



**APPEAL** from Judgment of the Court of Appeal.



Present **:             **Sharvananda J, Wanasundera J. and Ratwatte J.





Counsel: **        ** _Walter Jayawardene, Q. C_., with

> > _Nimal Senanayake,_ Senior Attorney‑at‑Law,
>>

>> _Kithsiri Gunaratne_ , _(Miss) S.M. Senaratne_

>>

>> and _Saliya Mathew_ for the

>>

>> Accused ‑ Petitioner‑ Appellant.

>>

>> _M. M. Zubair_ , Senior State Counsel, for the

>>

>> Attorney‑General.

Argued on: **     **12th, 15th & 25th January 1982.

Decided on: **    **11th March 1982.

_Cur. adv. vult._



**SHARVANANDA   J.**



The accused‑appellant was charged along with another with having transported
timber in a prohibited area without a permit and thereby contravened
Regulation 5(2) made under the Forest Ordinance. He was convicted on his own
plea and fined Rs.100/‑, while the other accused was discharged. He moved in
revision to have the said conviction quashed on the ground that the Regulation
in question was ultra vires and therefore his conviction and sentence were
illegal. The Court of Appeal rejected his contention and dismissed the
application. The appellant has preferred this appeal from the judgment of the
Court of Appeal.



Section 24(l) of the Forest Ordinance (Cap. 451) as amended by Act No. 13 of
1966 provides as follows:



"The Minister may make regulations respecting the transit of all forest
produce by land or water. Such regulations may, among other matters:



(a) Prohibit the transport of timber within, into, or out of any specified
local area without a permit from any Forest Officer duly authorised to issue
the same or otherwise than in accordance with the conditions of such permit."



The other provisions are not material for the present purposes.



The Minister made the relevant Regulation 5 published in Part I of Government
Gazette No. 14710/7 of 29th August 1966\. It reads as follows:



#  189



"1. The Conservator of Forests may, by notification published in the Gazette,
for the purpose of section 24(l)(b) of the Ordinance specify any area as an
area within, into, or out of which timber of any species specified in the
notification shall not be transported without a permit issued by an officer
authorised in that behalf.



2. No person shall within or out of any such area transport or cause to be transported timber of any species specified in such notification without a permit issued by a Forest Officer authorised in that behalf by the Conservator of Forests."



The notification made by the Conservator of Forests is published in Gazette
No. 14710/7 of  29th August 1966.



It was the contention of senior Counsel for the Appellant that the aforesaid
Regulation is ultra vires and invalid in law, as the Minister to whom
Parliament has delegated the power (a) to specify the area within or out of
which timber could not be transported without a permit, and (b) to designate
the officer authorised to issue the permit, could not validly delegate that
power to the Conservator of Forests. He based his argument on the maxim
"delegatus non potest delegare" and relied on two unreported judgments which
had upheld this contention. The first of these case was the case of
_Wickremaratne v. Samarasinghe_ et al (S.C. 1238 ‑ 39/68, M.C. Badulla 7280 ‑
S.C. minutes of 8th May 1970). In that case, De Kretser J., sitting alone,
held that the delegation was ultra vires as offending the principle "delegatus
non potest delegares." According to him, a perusal of Regulation 5 established
that the Minister was thereby giving the Conservator of Forests the right to
decide:



"(a)       Which the specified local areas are "within, into, or out of which"
timber could not be transported without a permit, and

(b)        Who the Forest Officers are to whom the Conservator had given
authority to issue permits."



and that these rights which have been entrusted by Parliament to the Minister
by section 24 to be exercised by him personally had been wrongly delegated by
him to the Conservator of Forests. He referred to the significance of section
65 of the Forest Ordinance which provides that "all regulations or rules made
or approved by



#  190



the Minister under this Ordinance shall be published in the Gazette and shall
thereupon have the force of law." He adverted also to section 59(e) of the
Ordinance and stated that under this provision, the Minister "could not
authorise the Conservator to authorise other officers to issue permits." He
concluded that Regulation 5(l) and (2) were bad because of unauthorised
sub‑delegation.

           

The second decision was _Podiratne and another v Range Forest Officer
Puttalam_ (S.C. 163/72, M.C. Puttalam 11394 ‑ S.C. minutes of 11th November
1975), which was a decision of two Judges of the last Supreme Court, where
Weeraratne J., with Tennekoon CJ. agreeing, followed the decision of De
Kretser J. and held that Regulation 5 was ultra vires the Forest Ordinance on
the ground of alleged sub‑delegation, as held by De Kretser J.



However, in the case of _R.F.O., Ratnapura, v. Nandasena_ (S.C. 969/73, M.C.
Ratnapura 82530 ‑ S.C. minutes of 27 February 1975),  Walpita J., with Ismail
J. agreeing, disagreed with the judgment of De Kretser J. and held that
Regulation 5 did not involve any delegation of legislative power that was
vested in the Minister and that what was delegated was only an 'administrative
power', the delegation of which power was not prohibited. This judgment of
Walpita J. had apparently not been brought to the notice of Weeraratne J. and
Tennekoon CJ.



Section 24 of the Forest Ordinance authorised the Minister to make regulations
respecting the matters referred to in that section. Section 65 of the
Ordinance vests these regulations with the force of law on their publication
in the Gazette. It is not disputed that the aforesaid Regulation 5 along with
the other Regulations appearing in Gazette No. 14710/7 were made by the
Minister. He has exercised the power delegated to him by the Legislature. He
has not delegated that function to the Conservator of Forests. All that he has
done under the aforesaid Regulation 5 is to impose on the Conservator of
Forests the duty or obligation of specifying the areas and the species of
timber to which the regulations are to apply and to empower the Conservator to
authorise Forest Officers to issue the relevant permits for the transportation
of such timber.



The question in issue is whether by Regulation 5 the Minister has
sub‑delegated to the Conservator of Forests, his principal Forest



**  191**



Department official, a part of the legislative powers vested in him by section
4 of the Ordinance, as held by De Kretser J., or merely delegated a part of
his administrative powers, as held by Walpita J.



There is a strong presumption against construing a grant of delegated
legislative power as empowering the delegate to sub‑delegate the whole or any
substantial part of the law‑making power entrusted to it. ‑ see _King Emperor
v. Benoari Lal Sarma_ [1945] A.C. 14, 24. "When Parliament has specifically
appointed an authority to discharge a legislative function, a function
normally exercised by Parliament itself, it cannot readily be presumed to have
intended that its delegate should be free to empower another person or body to
act in its place." (De Smith ‑ Judicial Review of Administrative Action, 4th
Ed. at 300). It is undoubtedly true that the Minister acting under section 24
must himself discharge the duty of legislation there cast upon him and cannot
transfer it to other authorities. In my view, the Minister has not by
Regulation 5 delegated his legislative powers at all. By that regulation, the
Minister has endowed the Conservator of Forests with the administrative power
of specifying or demarcating the areas within or out of which timber or any
species specified therein could not be transported without a permit and of
authorising Forest Officers to issue the relevant permit.



Denning LJ. in _Lewisham Borrough Council v. Roberts_ ([1949] 1 A.E.R. 815 at
824), brought out the distinction:



"I take it to be quite plain that when a Minister is entrusted with
administrative, as distinct from legislative, functions he is entitled to act
by any authorised official of his department. The Minister is not bound to
give his mind to the matter personally. That is implicit in the modern
machinery of Government."



In the same case, Jenkins J. elaborated at page 828:



"A Minister must perforce, from the necessity of the case, act through his
departmental officials, and where , ........... functions are expressed to be
committed to a Minister, those functions must as a matter of necessary
implication, be exercisable by the Minister either personally or through his
departmental officials, and acts done in the exercise of those functions are
equal acts of the Minister whether they are done by him





#  192



personally, or through his departmental officials, as in practice except in
matters of the very first importance they almost invariably would be done. No
question of agency or delegation as between the Minister and Mr. O'Gara (the
official) seems to me to arise at all."



Constitutionally there is no delegation by the Minister to his officials. When
an officer exercises a power or discretion entrusted to him, constitutionally
and legally that exercise is the act of the Minister. If a decision is made on
the Minister's behalf by one of his officials, then that constitutionally is
the Minister's decision. It is not strictly a matter of delegation. It is that
the official acts as the Minister himself and the official's decision is the
Minister's decision. When a Minister is entrusted with administrative as
distinct from legislative functions, he is entitled to act by any authorised
officer of his department. The Minister is not bound to give his mind to the
matter personally. This is implicit in the modern machinery of Government. In
the _Lewisham Borrough Council case_ (supra), it was held that the powers
there in question were not legislative but merely administrative and that the
Minister was entitled to delegate them, as he did.



The rationale of the principle has been lucidly explained by Lord Greene MR.
in _Carltona, Ltd. v. Commissioner of Works_ [1943] 2 A.E.R. 560 at 563.



"In the administration of government in this country the functions which are
given to ministers (and constitutionally properly given to ministers because
they are constitutionally responsible) are functions so multifarious that no
minister could personally attend to them. To take the example of the present
case no doubt there have been thousands of requisitions in this country by
individual ministries. It cannot be supposed that this regulation meant that,
in each case, the minister in person should direct his mind to the matter. The
duties imposed upon ministers and the powers given to ministers are normally
exercised under the authority of the minister by responsible officials of the
department. Public business could not be carried on if that were not the case.
Constitutionally, the decision of such officials is, of course, the decision
of the minister. The minister is responsible. It is he who must answer before
Parliament for anything that his officials have done under his authority, and,
if for any



#  193



important matter he selected an official of such junior standing that he could
not be expected competently to perform the work, the minister would have to
answer for that in Parliament. The whole system of departmental organisation
and administration is based on the view that ministers being responsible to
Parliament will see that important duties are committed to experienced
officials. If they do not do that, Parliament is the place where complaint
must be made against them. "



Thus, if a decision is made on the Minister's behalf by the Conservator of
Forests, then that constitutionally is the Minister's decision. It is not
strictly a matter of delegation; it is that the Conservator acts as the
Minister himself and his decision is the Minister's decision. That is the
normal way in which executive business is done. The official is the alter ego
of the Minister.



Looked at in the light of the principles enunciated above, it appears to me
that the delegation in question in the present appeal is not a delegation of
legislative power or function. There is nothing in the nature of entrustment
of legislative power by that section ‑ at most there is a delegation of
administrative function or power only. It related simply to specifying the
area and the species of timber to which the regulations are to apply; it
further delegated to the Conservator of Forests the power to authorise
particular Forest Officers to issue permits for the valid transportation of
timber. There is, so far as I can see, nothing in the nature of legislation in
such a reservation. In my view, De Kretser J. had not addressed his mind to
this aspect of the matter. He had failed to draw the distinction between
delegation of legislative power and conferment of administrative powers on his
principal departmental officer, viz. the Conservator of Forests, and had thus
come to misapply the maxim "delegatus non potest delegares" to the provision
in Regulation 5. As Walpita J. in his judgment pointed out, "one cannot expect
the Minister in the midst of his manifold duties to take upon himself
personally the task of specifying or demarcating the areas or the species of
timber to which prohibition applies. This administrative matter has to be
passed on to his Departmental officials, for whose actions he is responsible
to Parliament. Regulation 5 only makes this clear. It is also not a matter of
such vital importance to which it can be said he must give his personal
attention."



#  194



Mr. Jayawardene addressed us on section 65 of the Forest Ordinance, which
provides that:



"All regulations or rules made or approved by the Minister under this
Ordinance shall be published in the Gazette and _shall thereupon have the
force of law._ "



and submitted that this section does not preclude judicial review of the vires
of the Regulation. He questioned the correctness of the view expressed by Lord
Herschell in _Institute of Patent Agents v. Lockwood_ (1894 A.C. 347) that the
purpose of such a section was to give subordinate legislation the same effect
as an Act of Parliament. In _Ran Banda v. River Valleys Development Board_ (71
N.L.R. 25), this question was considered and Weeramantry J. held that the
clause that the Regulation shall be "as valid and effectual as though it were
herein enacted" did not confer validity on a regulation which was outside the
scope of the enabling powers. I agree with Weeramantry J. that formulae such
as contained in section 65 do not bar the Court from reviewing the validity of
the Regulation on the ground of being in excess of the statutory authority.
This question was recently considered by the House of Lords in _Hoffmann ‑La
Roche v. Secretary of State_ ([1974] 2 A.E.R. 1128) and the majority of the
Court held that the Courts have jurisdiction to declare an order made by
statutory instrument to be invalid, even though, in accordance with the
requirements of the enabling legislation, it has been approved by both Houses
of Parliament. Lord Morris stated the position thus at page 1140: "Whereas the
Courts of Law could not declare that an Act of Parliament was ultra vires, it
might be possible for the Courts of Law to declare that the making of the
order (even though affirmatively approved by Parliament) was not warranted
within the terms of the statutory enactment from which it purported to derive
its validity." The view expressed by Lord Denning MR. in the Court of Appeal
in the same case [1973] 3 A.E.R. 945 at 954, 955 that , "an order made by
statutory instrument acquires the status of an Act of Parliament" was
disapproved by both Lord Diplock and Lord Cross of Chelsea.



In my judgment, De Kretser J. in _Wickramaratne v Samarasinghe et al_ S.C.
1238 ‑ 39/68, M.C. Badulla 7280 (S.C. minutes of 8th May 1970) erred in
holding that Regulation 5(l) and (2) was ultra vires on the ground of
sub‑delegation of legislative power; the view expressed by Walpita J. in
_R.F.O., Ratnapura v. Nandasena_ (S.C. 969/73, M.C. Ratnapura 82530 ‑ S.C.
minutes of 27th February 1975)



#  195



represents the correct legal position respecting the validity of Regulation 5.



I hold that the aforesaid Regulation 5(1) and (2) is not ultra vires and I
affirm the judgment appealed from and dismiss the appeal.



**Wanasundera J.** ‑ I agree.

**Ratwatte J.** ‑ I agree.



_**Appeal dismissed**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/29.html_  

