##  Sriyani Silva (Wife of Jagath Kumara Deceased) v. Iddamalgoda, Officer In
Charge Police Station, Payagala and Others - SLR - 14, Vol 1 of 2003 [2000]
LKSC 29; (2003) 1 Sri LR 14 (23 August 2000)

**14**

**SRIYANI SILVA (WIFE OF JAGATH KUMARA-DECEASED)**

**v.**

**IDDAMALGODA, OFFICER-IN-CHARGE,**

**POLICE STATION, PAYAGALA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA, CJ.

BANDARANAYAKE, J., AND

EDUSSURIYA, J.

SC APPLICATION No. 471/2000

29th AUGUST AND 29th NOVEMBER

2001, 25th MARCH, 29th APRIL, 20th MAY, 6th AND 10th JUNE 2002





_Fundamental Rights - Articles 11,13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution - Death
of detenue in Police custody in consequence of alleged torture- Acquired right
to enforcement - Locus standi of the widow to prosecute such right - Articles
17 and 126(2) of the Constitution_ \- _Time bar - Interpretation of statutes._

On 12.6.2000 the deceased was arrested and kept in custody at the Payagala
Police Station where he remained in custody until he was produced before the
Magistrate on 17.06.2000 when he was remanded to prison. On 20.6.2000 the
detenue died at the Remand Prison. There is _prima facie_ evidence including
medical evidence to the effect that the deceased was assaulted whilst in
police custody and his death resulted by reason of such assault.

A petition was filed on 18.7.2000 on behalf of the petitioner (the deceased
detenue). On 23.8.2000 on the day it was for support, the court allowed
coun­sel to amend the petition by substituting the widow of the deceased as
the peti­tioner. The amended petition was allowed by court on 23.10.2000. At
the hear­ing of the application two preliminary objections were raised on
behalf of the respondents:



(a)       The petitioner had no _locus standi_ to make this application in
view of Article 126(2) of the Constitution which provides that the person
whose rights are infringed may by himself or by an attorney-at-law apply for
relief. The right is personal to the aggrieved person. Hence if he is dead a
legal representative cannot initiate proceedings under  
that Article.

(b)       The petitioner's (the widow's) application is out of time as she
came into the case only on 23.8.2000 after the lapse of one month from the
death of the deceased.

15

The petitioner alleged infringement of rights, _inter alia,_ under Articles
11,13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution.

**Held** (Edussuriya, J. dissenting):



1.                     Article 17 of the Constitution provides for the entitlement to relief for infringement of fundamental rights and Article 126 deals with the fun­ damental rights jurisdiction of the court and its exercise.  


2.                     The deceased detenue who was arrested, detained and allegedly tor­tured and thereby died acquired a right under the Constitution to seek redress from the Court for violation of his fundamental rights. Hence when there is a causal link between the death of a person and the process, which constitutes the infringement of such person's funda­mental rights any one having a legitimate interest could prosecute that right in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution. There would be no objection _in limine_ to the wife of the deceased instituting proceedings in the circumstances of this case.  


3.                     The golden rule of plain, literal and grammatical construction has to be read subject to the qualification that the language of the statute is not always that which a grammarian would use.

_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.

"It could never be contended that the right ceased and would be inef­fective
due to the intervention of the death of the person, especially in
circum­stances where the death in itself is the consequence of injuries that
constitute the infringement. If such an interpretation is not given it would
result in a pre­posterous situation in which a person who is tortured and
survives could vin­dicate his rights in proceedings before the court, but if
torture is so intensive that it results in death, the right cannot be
vindicated in proceedings before this court. In my view a strict literal
construction should not be resorted to where it produces such an absurd
result."

4\. The original petition was filed within time. Hence the application is
within time as provided by Article 126(2).

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights (Preliminary
objections)

**Case referred to :**

1.                     _Somawathie v Weerasinghe and Others_ (1990) 2 Sri LR 121 (distin­guished)

2.                     _Corocraft v Pan-Am_ (1969) Q B 616 at Pg 638.

**16**

3.                     _Lyons v Tucker_ (1880) 6 Q B D 660 at Pg 664

4.                     _Barru v Lachchman_ 111 PR 1913 at Pg 417

5.                     _Rananjaya Singh v Baijnath Singh and Others_ AIR 1954 S.C. 749,  
752

6.                     _Chatenay v Brazilian Submarine Telegraph Co_ (1891) 1 Q B 79, 85

7.                     _Abel v Lee_ (1871) L.R. 6 P 365 at 371

8.                     _Premalal de Silva v Inspector Rodrigo and Others _(1991) 2 Sri LR  
301

_J.C. Weliamuna_ for petitioner.

_Manohara de Silva_ for 1st respondent.

_Saliya Peiris_ for 2nd and 3rd respondents.

_Viveka Siriwardena de Silva_ for 5th to 7th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult_

December 10, 2002  


**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

This is an application filed by the wife of a deceased detainee, praying for a
declaration that her deceased husband's fundamental rights guaranteed by
Articles 11, 13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution were violated, and claiming
for a sum of Rupees One Million as compensation from the 1st to 4th
respondents and the State.

The initial petition was filed on 18.07.2000 by an attorney-at-law of the
Legal Aid Commission on behalf of the petitioner and was listed for support
for leave to proceed on 23.08.2000. On that day, learned counsel for the
petitioner, who supported the applica­tion moved to amend the caption to read
as on behalf of the wife as the legal representative of the deceased. Learned
counsel for the petitioner submitted that the prayer to obtain compensation
was for the deceased's wife and for the minor child of 2  1/2 years of age.
The Court allowed the petitioner to change the caption and the amended
petition dated 30.08.2000, filed on 25.09.2000 was sup

17  

ported on 23.10.2000. On that day, this Court granted leave to pro­ceed for
the alleged infringement of Articles 11,13(2) and 17 of the Constitution.

When this matter was taken up for hearing, two preliminary objections were
raised on behalf of the respondent, _viz.,_

i.                     the petitioner has no _locus standito_ make this
applica­tion; and

ii. the petitioner's application is out of time.

Learned counsel for the respondents submitted that although the petitioner
claims that she is entitled to continue with this appli­cation, the question
of continuation does not arise in this case, as the detainee died before
making any application alleging that the respondents violated his fundamental
rights. The question before us therefore is, whether the wife or a third party
of a deceased per­son, has a right to institute proceedings in this Court in
terms of the provisions of the Constitution, seeking relief for the alleged
infringe­ment of a deceased person's fundamental rights.

Fundamental rights are enshrined in Chapter III of the Constitution, which
contains 8 Articles, _viz.,_ Articles 10 to 17 that deal with different
freedoms and rights. Article 17, which is an enabling as well as a governing
provision as far as the remedy for an infringement of a fundamental right is
concerned, reads as fol­lows:



_" Every person shall be entitled to apply to the Supreme Court, as provided
by Article 126, in respect of the infringe­ment or imminent infringement, by
executive or administra­tive action, of a fundamental right to which such
person is entitled under the provisions of this Chapter."_



This Article contains a clear enunciation of the entitlement of any person to
apply to the Supreme Court in respect of an alleged infringement or an
imminent infringement by executive or adminis­trative action. However, the
applicability of this provision is subject to the conditions and limitations
enshrined in Article 126 of the Constitution. Article 126 of the Constitution
deals with the funda­mental rights jurisdiction of the Courts and its
exercise. Article

18

126(2), which is directly relevant to the question under review, is in the
following terms:

_ _

_"Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right or language right
relating to such person has been infringed or is about to be infringed by
executive or administrative action, he may himself or by an attorney-at-law on
his behalf, within one month thereof, in accordance with such rules of court
as may be in force, apply to the Supreme Court by way of petition in writing
addressed to such Court praying for relief or redress in respect of such
infringement. Such application may be proceeded with only with leave to
proceed first had and obtained from the Supreme Court, which leave may be
granted or refused, as the case may be, by not less than two Judges"._ __

_ _

Learned counsel for the respondents relied heavily on _Somawathie v
Weerasinghe and Others_ C) where an application was filed by the petitioner on
behalf of her husband for violation of Articles 11 and 13 of the Constitution.
In that case the majority held that Article 126(2) of the Constitution, when
construed according to the ordinary, grammatical, natural and plain meaning of
its lan­guage, gives a right of complaint to the person affected or to his
attorney-at-law and to no other person.



I am of the view that _Somawathie v Weerasinghe and others_ (supra) on which
learned counsel for the respondents placed heavy reliance, can be
distinguished, in relation to the facts of this case.



In _Somawathie's_ case (supra) application was made by the wife of the virtual
complainant alleging the infringement of her hus­band's fundamental rights
guaranteed by Article 11,13(1), 13(2), 13(5) and 13(6) of the Constitution. At
the time the said application was filed, he was in the Remand Prison, Mahara.
The virtual com­plainant was named as the 4th respondent in that application.



The evidence before us in the present case, however, is dif­ferent.



The deceased detainee was taken into custody on 12.06.2000, and was produced
before the Magistrate on 17.06.2000 on which occasion he was handed over to
the Remand

19

Prison, Kalutara. The petitioner averred that on 18.06.2000, the mother and
the sister of the deceased detainee visited the prison, but they were not
allowed to meet him. On 19.06.2000, the uncle of the deceased detainee who
visited the prison was informed that the detainee was transferred to the
Magazine Remand Prison on 18.06.2000. On 21.06.2000, the Payagala Police
informed the peti­tioner that the detainee had died on the previous night at
the Magazine Remand Prison.  


Several affidavits were filed along with the petition, which indicated that
the detainee was severely assaulted during the time he was kept in police
custody. I do not wish to venture into the details of the allegation on
assault as we are only dealing with the preliminary objections raised by the
respondents at this juncture. However, I am of the view that it is necessary
to refer to the post mortem report which was called by this Court at the time
leave to proceed was granted on this application. This report refers to 20
injuries, which were identified on the Head, Trunk, Upper limbs and Lower
limbs of the deceased and the AJMO had given the cause of death as "Acute
renal failure due to muscule cutaneous injuries fol­lowing blunt trauma". The
detainee, an averagely built male, was 23 years of age at the time of his
death.



It is to be noted that on 17.06.2000, at the time the detainee was brought to
the Remand Prison, Kalutara, he made a statement to one of the prison
officials informing him that he was assaulted while he was kept at the
Payagala Police Station (P6). Again on 18.06.2000 at 2.50 p.m. the detainee
had made a statement informing that about 10 officers including the 2nd and
3rd respon­dents assaulted him at the Police Station.



Learned counsel for the 5th to 7th respondents conceded that factually the
instant case could be distinguished from _Somawathie's_ case (supra). Her
position was that Article 126(2) of the Constitution was given a plain
grammatical meaning in _Somawathi'es_ case (supra) and the factual
consideration should not play a role in the interpretation of the plain and
ordinary words of the provision.



Considering the crux of the arguments raised by learned counsel for the
respondents, according to the provisions of the

20



Constitution, a person other than whose rights are infringed cannot make an
application to vindicate the rights of another person, even if that other
person on whose behalf the application is made is not among the living.
Therefore a relative of a person, whose death was caused by torture, would not
be able to obtain redress through the fundamental rights jurisdiction
enshrined in our Constitution. I find it difficult to agree with these
submissions made by learned counsel for the respondents for the following
reasons.



It is to be noted that the sole object in statutory interpretation is to
arrive at the intention of the legislature. Donaldson, M.R. in _Corocraft v
Pan-Am_ (2), said that,

_ _

_" the duty of the Courts is to ascertain and give effect to the will of
Parliament as expressed in its enactments."_



In _Lyons v Tucker (3)_ Grove, J. stated that the golden rule of plain,
literal and grammatical construction has to be read subject to the
qualification that the language of statutes is not always that which a
grammarian would use.



Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that Article 126(2) read with
Article 17 of the Constitution provides a right for a victim to seek relief
from this Court for an infringement or an immi­nent infringement of a
fundamental right. Learned counsel drew our attention to Bindra, who had
stated that,

_ _

_" If a statute which creates a right does not prescribe a reme­_ _dy for the
party aggrieved by the violation of such a right, a remedy will be implied and
the party aggrieved may have_ _relief, in an appropriate action founded upon
the statute. The_ _creation of a new duty or obligation or the prohibition of
an_ _act formerly lawful carries with it by implication a corre­_ _sponding
remedy to assure its observance._ "(Interpretation of Statutes, 7th edition,
pp. 729-730)



This concept, _viz.,_ a right must have a remedy, is based on the principle
which is accepted and recognized by the maxim _ubi jus ibi remedium -_ "there
is no right without a remedy". Thus, one cannot think of a right without a
remedy as the right of a person and the remedy based on the said right would
be reciprocal.

21

Considering the constitutional provisions, Chapter III of our Constitution,
which deals with the fundamental rights, guarantees a person, _inter alia,_
freedom from torture and from arbitrary arrest and detention (Articles
11,13(1) and 13(2) of the Constitution). Consequently, the deceased detainee,
who was arrested, detained and allegedly tortured, and who met with his death
subsequently, had acquired a right under the Constitution to seek redress from
this Court for the alleged violation of his fundamental rights. It could never
be contended that the right ceased and would become inef­fective due to the
intervention of the death of the person, especial­ly in circumstances where
the death in itself is the consequence of injuries that constitute the
infringement. If such an interpretation is not given it would result in a
preposterous situation in which a per­son who is tortured and survives could
vindicate his rights in pro­ceedings before this Court, but if the torture is
so intensive that it results in death, the right cannot be vindicated in
proceedings before this Court. In my view a strict literal construction should
not be resorted to where it produces such an absurd result. Law, in my view,
should be interpreted to give effect to the right and to sup­press the
mischief. Hence, when there is a causal link between the death of a person and
the process, which constitutes the infringe­ment of such person's fundamental
rights, any one having a legiti­mate interest could prosecute that right in a
proceeding instituted in terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution. There
would be no objec­tion _in limine_ to the wife of the deceased instituting
proceedings in the circumstances of this case.



The second objection taken up by the 7th respondent was that this petition was
filed after the mandatory one month period provided by Article 126(2) of the
Constitution.



As pointed out earlier, the deceased detainee was taken into custody on
12.06.2000. On 21.06.2000, the Paygala Police informed the deceased detainee's
father that the deceased detainee died on the previous night. Throughout this
period, the deceased detainee was in the custody of the police and the remand.
The Legal Aid Commission filed the initial petition on 18.07.2000. The
application on behalf of the deceased detainee was therefore filed, within
time, as provided by Article 126(2) of the Constitution.

22

For the reasons aforesaid, the preliminary objections taken by the respondents
are overruled. Registrar is directed to take steps to list this application
for hearing. In all the circumstances of this case, there will be no costs.

**S. N, SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree

**EDUSSURIYA, J.**



At the date of filing the original application under Article 126 of the
Constitution, namely, 18/07/2000, the person on behalf of whom it was filed
(by an attorney-at-law) was already dead (died on 20/06/2000) and as such
there was no application which the Court could have entertained, and therefore
it should necessarily have been rejected.



That application of 18/07/2000 should therefore be rejected _nunc pro tune._
In any event, the Petitioner to that application can­not proceed with it. In
the circumstances, the so called amendment dated 23/08/2000 in which an
entirely different person (the widow) is the Petitioner, becomes a new
application, which is time barred according to the very Article (Article 126)
under which the new Petitioner seeks redress, since the new Petitioner's
husband had died on 20th June 2000\. Then again there cannot be an amend­ment
to an application which the Court cannot entertain.



It is settled law, that, by way of an amendment a party should not be allowed
to overcome a time bar or prescription.

23



Further, according to Counsel Weliamuna's statement to Court on 23/08/2000,
(journal entry of 23/08/2000) the attorney-at-law had received instructions
from the widow to institute proceed­ings _on her behalf as legal
representative of the deceased._ If that be so, it is a fresh application that
should be presented to Court by the new Petitioner as legal representative, of
the deceased.



In the circumstances, the order of this Court allowing the pre­sent petition
to be filed as an amendment was in my view made _per_ _incuriam_ for the
reasons stated above.



Further, according to paragraph 36 of the so called amended petition, the
present Petitioner's position is that the rights guaran­teed under Articles
11, 13 and 17 of the Constitution to the deceased, devolved on the present
Petitioner (widow) on the death of her husband and she, the present Petitioner
is therefore entitled _to continue_ with the first application. Once again I
repeat that the first application was one which the Court could not entertain
in as much as the person on whose behalf it had been presented was dead by the
date of institution, and therefore there is no question of continuing with
that application.



Therefore the so called amended petition now before Court is a new petition
filed on 25th September 2000 though dated 30th August 2000 (vide the date
stamped on the motion accompanying the so called amended petition) over three
months after the death of the person whose fundamental rights had allegedly
been infringed.



The attorney-at-law for the present Petitioner in fact filed an entirely new
petition on 25th September 2000 under the guise of an amendment in an
endeavour to overcome the time bar.



For the above mentioned reasons I uphold the preliminary objection raised by
the learned State Counsel regarding time bar, in respect of the widow's
application and, consequently dismiss this application.



The next question for decision is whether the widow of a per­son whose
fundamental rights had been infringed is entitled to make or continue with an
application for redress under Article 126(2) on the basis of devolution on the
widow, of the right acquired prior to death by a deceased person whose
fundamental rights had been infringed to seek redress.

Article 126(2) reads as follows:

_ _

_" Where any person alleges that any such fundamental right or language right
relating to such person has been infringed by executive or administrative
action, he may by himself or by an attorney-at-law on his behalf, within one
month there­of, in accordance with such rules of Court as may be in force,
apply to the Supreme Court by way of Petition in writing_

24



_addressed to such Court praying for relief or redress in_ _respect of such
infringement. Such application may be pro­_ _ceeded only with leave to proceed
first had and obtained from the Supreme Court, which leave may be granted or_
_refused, as the case may be, by not less than two Judges. "_



On a plain reading of Article 126(2) it is clear that where a person's
fundamental rights have been infringed, that person by himself on by an
attorney-at-law on his behalf can seek redress from the Supreme Court.



The language contained in Article 126(2) is unambiguous as it stands and in my
view excludes persons other than those named therein from seeking redress.
Article 126(2) does not set out the heirs or the dependants of the person
whose fundamental rights have been infringed, as persons who could seek
redress.



Counsel for the present Petitioner has cited the following passage from Bindra
on _Interpretation of Statutes_ in this connec­tion. "If a statute which
creates a right does not prescribe a reme­dy for the party aggrieved by the
violation of such right, a remedy will be implied and the party aggrieved may
have relief, _in an appro­_ _priate action founded upon the statute._ The
creation of a new duty or obligation or the prohibition of an act formally
carries with it by implication a corresponding remedy to assure its
observance".



There is nothing in the Constitution which implies that the widow of a person
whose fundamental rights were infringed has a right to relief or redress under
Article 126(2). Besides, Article 126(2) provides a remedy to the person whose
fundamental rights have been violated. The right to seek redress is only given
to those whose fundamental rights have been infringed. Therefore this pas­sage
in Bindra on _Interpretation of Statutes -_ 7th Edition Page 729-730 has no
applicability to the matter presently before us.



In _Somawathie v. Weerasinghe and Others_ wherein Amerasinghe J. stated that
"....where the words are in themselves precise and unambiguous, and there is
no absurdity, repugnance or inconsistency with the rest of the Constitution
the words them­selves do best declare that intention. No more can be necessary
than to expound those words in their plain, natural, ordinary, gram­matical
and literal sense", and according to the majority decision a

25



wife has no _locus standi_ in a case where her husband's fundamen­tal rights
had been violated.



In that case the wife of the person whose rights had alleged­ly been violated
presented an application complaining of the infringement of the fundamental
rights of her husband and accord­ing to the majority decision, Article 126(2)
only permitted those per­sons named therein to make such an application and
accordingly held that the wife had no _locus standi to_ maintain the
application.



Kulatunge, J. taking a dissenting view on the question of _locus standi_ of
the wife stated that in circumstances of grave stress or incapacity
particularly where torture resulting in personal injury is alleged to have
been committed, next of kin such as a parent or the spouse may be the only
people able to apply to this Court in the absence of an attorney-at-law who is
prepared to act as Petitioner; and if such application is also supported by an
affidavit of the detenue either accompanying the petition or filed
subsequently which would make it possible to _regard it as being virtually the
application of the detenue himself,_ this Court may entertain such application
notwithstanding the failure to effect literal compliance with the requirements
of Article 126(2).



In this connection I may also refer to _Fundamental Rights in_ _Sri Lanka (A
Commentary)_ (1993) where Justice Sharvananda has stated "that the injured
person alone has _locus standi_ to complain of the infringement of his
fundamental rights" (pages 408 and 410).



Bindra on _Interpretation of Statutes_ in Chapter XI states that it is a rule
of construction of statutes that in the first instance the grammatical sense
of the words is to be adhered to unless there be some strong and obvious
reason to the contrary and that where there is no ambiguity in the words there
is no room for construction, and that the necessity for interpretation does
not arise where the language is plain. Further that if language is plain,
consequences whatever they may be should be disregarded so that even if the
plain meaning of the language results in an absurdity the plain meaning must
be given effect to. That if the result of giving effect to the plain meaning
is unfortunate it is for the Legislature to take action to remedy the defects
of the law as enacted and it is not for the Courts to usurp the functions of
the Legislature and by strain



26



ing the meaning, ignoring the clear terms of the law, seek to evade the
consequences, which in the opinion of Court may prove ill-fraught, _Barru v.
Lachhman_ See(4) also _Rananjaya Singh v._ _Baijnath Singh and Others_ (5).
The effect of the words is a question of law. _Chatenay v. Brazilian Submarine
Telegraph Co.(6)_ per Lindley, L.J. I may mention that well established rules
of interpre­tation cannot be disregarded to give effect to reasonableness.



At page 438 Bindra states "where the meaning of words is plain, it is not the
duty of the Courts to busy themselves with sup­posed intention. A Court cannot
stretch the language of a statuto­ry provision to bring it in accord with the
supposed legislative intention underlying it unless the words are susceptible
of carry­ing out the intention, (page 438)



In _Abel v. Lee_ (7) Willes J. stated "I utterly repudiate the notion that it
is competent to a judge to modify the language of an Act of Parliament in
order to bring it into accordance with his views as to what is right and
reasonable".



Further, it is also a golden rule of interpretation that Courts cannot fill in
gaps or rectify defects when the words are unam­biguous.



In this connection I may also refer to Article 30 (1) (b) and Article 30 (1)
(c) of the Governments' Proposals for Constitutional Reforms of October 1997
and the Constitution of the Republic of Sri Lanka Bill August 2000 which made
provision (1) for an aggrieved person who is unable or incapable of mak­ing an
application under Article 17 by reason of physical, social or economic
disability or other reasonable cause, an application to be made on behalf of
such person by a relative or friend of such person if the person aggrieved
raises no objection, and (2) also provided for an application to be made in
respect of any person or persons affected, in the public interest, by any
person or by any incorporated or unincorporated body of persons acting _bona
fide._ So that even at that stage it was not sought to widen the scope of
Article 126 (2) to enable a widow or heirs of a deceased person whose
fundamental rights had been violated to file an application for redress. It is
therefore safe to conclude



27



that the intention of the Legislature under Article 126 was to grant relief
only to the person whose fundamental rights had been violated.



Article 17 read with Article 126 (2) provides a remedy to those whose
fundamental rights have been infringed and Article 126 (2) categorically
states that the person whose fundamental rights have been infringed, himself
or by an attorney-at-law on his behalf should made an application for redress.
There is nothing therein which even remotely suggests that a widow has such a
right or that such right devolves on a widow or heirs of a person whose
fundamental rights have been infringed.



In the circumstances it would be preposterous on our part to hold that the
Legislature intended that the right to apply for redress should pass to the
heirs or that the heirs of a deceased whose fundamental rights had been
infringed were entitled to apply for relief under Article 126 (2).



In passing I may add that the laws of this country adequate­ly provide for the
widow or the dependants of a deceased per­son who met with this death as a
result of a wrongful act of another to seek compensation based on loss of
support or main­tenance and such compensation has to be calculated on
evi­dence.



Counsel for the present petitioner has drawn the attention of Court to the
fact that Sri Lanka has ratified the International Convention Against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and is obliged
to grant redress to victims of torture and in the event of the death of a
victim of torture the dependants are entitled to compensation, and as such,
Article 126 should be construed accordingly.



The International Convention Against Torture was ratified by Sri Lanka in 1994
whereas the Constitution was promulgated in 1978. It certainly cannot be said
that one can read into Article 126 (2) of the Constitution of 1978 a
Legislative intention in 1978, to grant relief to a widow of a person whose
fundamental rights have been infringed because Sri Lanka ratified the

28

International Convention Against Torture sixteen years later in 1994,
containing a provision to grant relief to dependants of vic­tims of torture in
the event of the death of a victim as a result of torture.



By this application the widow of the person whose funda­mental rights were
allegedly infringed has applied for compen­sation of the basis that the
"rights guaranteed under Articles 11,13 and 17 of the Constitution devolved
upon the Petitioner and she is entitled o "continue" with this application
seeking relief " (Paragraph 36 of the amended petition".)



Under Article 17 read with Article 126 of the Constitution, what are the
rights that accrue to a person whose fundamental rights or language rights
have been infringed or are about to be infringed?



Article 126 (2) sets out that _where any person alleges that a fundamental
right or language right relating to him has been infringed or is about to be
infringed he may by himself or by an attorney-at-law apply to the Supreme
Court for relief or redress in respect if such infringement._



Therefore the right to relief and the right to apply for relief are vested
only in the person whose fundamental rights have been infringed and are
personal rights which accrue to him and him alone and therefore those rights
must necessarily die with him. However, where an applicant under Article 126
(2) for relief, dies after the Respondents had joined issue with the
applicant, that is after _litis contestatio,_ then the right to relief will
pass to the legal representatives, that is to the estate of the deceased.



In _Premalal de Silva v. Inspector Rodrigo and others_ the applicant Premalal
de Silva disappeared subsequently and this Court directed compensation to be
paid to the legal representa­tives of the applicant in the event of it being
established that the applicant was dead.

In any event, even if the right to relief which accrued survives the death of
the person whose fundamental rights were infringed as claimed by the
Petitioner's Counsel, then it is the legal rep-

29

resentative of the deceased representing the estate of the deceased who can
claim relief since that right to claim relief (compensation in this instance)
that has survived is an asset of the estate of the deceased. In this instance
the widow has not filed her petition in this Court as the legal representative
of the deceased (vide caption), although counsel Weliamuna had stat­ed on 23rd
August 2000 (Vide journal entry 23/08/2000) that he moves to amend the caption
to read "on behalf of K.A. Sriyani as the legal representative of M.K.L.
Jagath Kumara the deceased" and for that reason too the present Petitioner
cannot maintain this application.



For the above mentioned reasons, I uphold the objection raised by the learned
State Counsel that the Petitioner (widow) has no _locus standi to_ maintain
this application.



I therefore dismiss this application. No costs are ordered solely because the
petitioner is a widow.

_  Preliminary objections overruled._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/29.html_  

