##  Nizam and Others v. Elkaduwa, Secretary, Ministry of Education Central
Province and Others - SLR - 349, Vol 3 of 1997 [1997] LKSC 29; (1997) 3 Sri LR
349 (24 September 1997)

349

NIZAM AND OTHERS

v.

ELKADUWA, SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF EDUCATION

CENTRAL PROVINCE AND OTHERS



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, ACJ.,

WIJETUNGA, J. AND

ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.

S.C. APPLICATION (FR.) NO. 160/95

JULY 1 AND 30, 1997.



Fundamental Rights - Plantation Schools - Transfer of teachers -
Classification of teachers for service in "estate schools"-Article 12(1) of
the Constitution.



The petitioners were assistant teachers attached to several schools in the
plantation sector in which the large majority of students were from the
estates, even though those schools were not physically located on the estates.
The petitioners were summarily transferred on the ground that they had been
recruited for service only in "estate schools" viz. schools established and
maintained on estates which were subsequently taken over by the government.
The available documents including letters of appointments used expressions
such as "plantation sector school" or "plantation school" but there was
ambiguity as to whether the petitioners were recruited to serve only in
"estate schools". In fact at the time of their transfer, the petitioners had
been serving in schools which were not former "estate schools" from about two
to five years.



# Held:

** **

1\. All assistant teachers appointed between 1983-1988 were in the same class
notwithstanding differences in phraseology in documents. Further, any
ambiguity in the letters of appointment should be construed contra
proferentem, and in favour of the petitioners.



2\. When the 1st respondent caused the petitioners to be transferred to four
"estate schools" he acted in the mistaken belief that they were eligible to
serve only in the vested former "estate schools". The transfers were,
therefore, wrongful, arbitrary and unreasonable, and violative of Article
12(1) of the Constitution.



**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.



_R. K. W. Goonasekera.,_ with _J. C. Weliamuna_ and _Luxman Jothikumar_ for
the petitioners.



_D. S. Wijesinghe, P.C.,_ with _Manohara R. de Silva_ for the 1st to 4th
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._



**350**



September 24, 1997.  


**FERNANDO, ACJ.**

** **

The six petitioners are assistant teachers who were serving in six different
Tamil medium schools in the Nuwara Eliya District. Each petitioner received a
letter dated 1.2.95 summarily transferring him/her; the reason given was that
he/she had been recruited for service only in "estate schools" Consequent upon
protests and objections, the transfers were deferred until May 1995. The
petitioners complain that the transfers were contrary to Article 12(1) because
they were irrational, arbitrary, and capricious, and to Article 12(2) because
they were politically motivated.



It is not in dispute that the petitioners were liable to be transferred to
other Tamil medium schools within the same District, and that the transfers
were not routine year-end transfers. Several other assistant teachers were
also transferred at the same time, and for the same reason, but they did not
complain to this Court.



According to the statistics furnished by the petitioners these transfers
aggravated the existing shortages of teachers in those six schools:



SCHOOL

|

NUMBER OF

|

TEACHERS

|



|

SHORTAGE  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
Required

|

Available

|

Transferred  
  


St Gabriel's BMW



St Mary's MV



Holy Rosary TV



Highlands MV



St Joseph's MV



Sr John Boscoe MV





|



23



62



37



61



47



37





|



23



29



24



54



30



34

|



8



9



2



15



8



3



|



8 (35 %)



42 (68 %)



15 (40 %)



22 (36 %)



25 (53 %)



6 (16 %)  
  
TOTAL

|

267

|

194

|

45

|

118 (44 %)  
  


These figures speak for themselves. None of the schools had excess teachers,
and the only one (St Gabriel's) which had the required number, ended up with a
shortage of 35%, while St Mary's ended up with 68%. The school which was least
affected had a shortage of 16%. When the schools are looked at collectively,
they

**351**



initially had a teacher shortage of 27%; but despite that, a further 17% were
transferred, increasing the shortage to 44%.



That is not all. The petitioners also claimed that the transfers were not
designed to meet more serious shortages in the four schools to which they were
transferred; they pointed out that the transfers created, and in one instance
aggravated, excesses of teachers:









SCHOOL

|



NUMBER OF

CLASROOMS

|



NUMBER OF



|



TEACHERS

|





Excess

  
  
---|---|---|---|---  
  
Available



|

Transferred  
  


Shannon TV



Fruithill TV



Panmour TV



Dickoya TV



|



12



8



19



12

|



10



8



22



14



|



5



1



5



5

|



3 (25 %)



1 (12 %)



8 (42 %)



7 (58 %)



  
  
TOTAL



|

51

|

54

|

16



|

19 (37 %)  
  


Only Shannon TV had a shortage of teachers, and there the transfers resulted
in an excess of three. Considered collectively, these four schools had small
excess of about 6%, and the transfers inflated that excess to 37%. The figures
justify only one conclusion, that these four schools did not have a greater
need than the former six.



In his affidavit, the 1st respondent, the Secretary to the Provincial Ministry
of Education, denied the petitioners' averments relating to the above figures,
and claimed:



". . . in almost all schools in the Central Province there is a deficiency of
teachers. **In Estate Schools it is more acute than in other schools**. I
annex hereto marked '1R9' statistics showing the deficiency of teachers in the
Ambagamuwas Division to which the petitioners belong which shows that the
deficiency of teachers in Estate Schools [is] more grievous than in other
schools."



But no such documents was tendered to Court, and in the 1st petitioner's
counter-affidavit he said that 1R9 had not been served on the petitioners, and
reserved his right to reply to it.



The petitioners' position thus remains uncontradicted. The 1st respondent
would have had ready access to all the relevant

**352**



statistics, but did not produce any., His claims - that there was a serious
shortage of teachers in the four schools to which the petitioners were
transferred, and that the shortage in the Estate Schools was more acute than
in other schools - is therefore unsubstantiated and unacceptable. Contrary to
common sense, teachers were being taken away from where they were really
needed, and put where they were not, creating a shortage of 44% in the former
and an excess of 37% in the latter. Accordingly, it is clear that the reason
for the transfers was not the best interests of the children in the schools
concerned, and it bears repetition that it is those interests which must
always be paramount in any sensible system of education and educational
administration. The power to transfer teachers is not unfettered; it exists
for the purpose of ensuring fairplay for teachers, efficiency for schools,
and, above all, a proper education for children; and it must be used for those
purposes.



The petitioners contend that they were recruited to serve in "Plantation
Sector Tamil medium schools" in the District, and not merely in what were
formerly "estate schools"; when the former "estate schools" were taken over by
the Government, they became Government schools - just like any other
Government school, big or small, urban or rural; "estate schools" cannot now
be construed as a reference to the former "estate schools" which had ceased to
exist; and that expression now refers to Government schools in the plantation
sector.



The respondents' position is that the petitioners were recruited to serve, and
are entitled to serve, only in one category of Government Tamil medium schools
in the District, namely, "estate schools"; those are the schools established
and maintained on estates (to which Part VI of the Education Ordinance (Cap.
185) applied); although those schools were taken over by the Government
between (1962 and 1990), the references in various notifications, letters of
appointment and other documents to "estate schools" are to these former
"estate schools", even though the schools, and perhaps even the estates, are
now vested in the State; and while it is true that several different
expressions have been used [] - all these refer to the former "estate
schools".

**353**



In the absence of an applicable definition, I have to determine what "estate
schools" meant, and whether the other expressions used were synonymous. Apart
from physical location and characteristics, some consideration of the people
whom those schools were intended to serve is not irrelevant. For that reason I
must refer to a letter dated 28.2.95, written to the 1st respondent by a trade
union formed to take up the cause of some of the teachers who were
transferred, in which it was stated that, according to statistics provided by
the respective Principals; the great majority of the students of the following
schools "come directly from estates":





SCHOOL



|

PERCENTAGE OF STUDENTS FROM ESTATES

  
  
---|---  
  


St Gabriel's BMV



St Mary's MV



Holy Rosary TV



Highlands MV



St Joseph's MV



Sr John Bosco MV



|



75 %



91 %



100 %



85 %



88 %



79 %  
  




The 1st respondent did not contradict these figures. It seems to me that these
schools were serving the children of those employed on estates almost to the
same extent as other schools physically located on estates.



Where rules and regulations, or terms and conditions in agreements, are not
free from ambiguity, subsequent practice may sometimes throw light on what was
intended. It is not in dispute that at the time of the impugned transfers all
six petitioners were serving in schools which were not former "estate
schools", and had been so serving for periods ranging from about two to five
years.



The 1st respondent did not deny that fact, but explained that some transfers
had been made in violation of the letters of appointment; that such transfers
aggravated the problems of insufficient teachers in the estate schools; and
that the number of estate school teachers "who had gradually got themselves
transferred out of the estate schools increased to such an extent that all the
estate schools assistant teachers had to be re-transferred back to estate
schools in

**354**



accordance with the terms of their letters of appointment". This confirms that
there was a widespread practice. of transferring teachers who were in the same
category as the petitioners to schools which were not former "estate schools".



The 1st respondent produced a circular issued in February 1991 by the
Education Service Committee of the Public Service Commission, as well as a
letter dated 31.7.91 which he himself had written to the Provincial Director
of Education of the Central Province. The gist of these two documents was that
assistant teachers recruited to serve on "estate schools" were working
elsewhere, and that this should be rectified. His own letter directed their
transfer to - estate schools in which there were vacancies. Nevertheless, even
after that circular and that letter, four of the six petitioners had been
transferred to other schools. To say, therefore, that they had "got themselves
transferred out" is to imply that all the officers who, directly or
indirectly, authorised the transfers bore no responsibility for those
transfers. I see no reason why the petitioners should be deprived of the
benefit of the presumption of the regularity of official acts, unless there is
evidence to the contrary.



I must now turn to the documents directly relevant to the issues for
determination. The 1st respondent produced a Cabinet decision dated 24.2.82
approving a Cabinet Paper on "Recruitment of Non-Graduate Teachers for Estate
Schools taken over by the Government" () and granting approval "to fill the
vacancies for non-graduate teachers in the Estate Schools" with such recruits.
This establishes that the Cabinet had in mind the category of "estate schools
taken over by the Government".



However, at the hearing on 1.7.97 we found that the Gazette notification
issued immediately after that Cabinet decision was not available. Only one
Gazette notification (dated 25.10.83) had been produced. That was by the
petitioners, and was for the subsequent year. That was in English, and
referred, in the heading and in two other places, to "Plantation Sector
Schools"; it also referred in another place to a "Plantation School", but made
no reference whatever to "estate schools", or to schools taken over by the
Government.

**355**



The 1st respondent had not produced any of the Gazette notifications, but only
copies of three drafts, in Sinhala; a copy of the notice published in the
newspapers on 4.3.82, and copies of two notices, dated 25.10.83 and 1.11.85,
sent to the Government Printer, for publication in the Gazette.



The Sinhala draft of 4.3.82 corresponded to the Cabinet decision. The 5th and
6th petitioners were recruited in pursuance of that notification.



However, the Sinhala drafts of 25.10.83 (in pursuance of which the 1st to 3rd
petitioners were recruited in 1986) and of 1.11.85 (in pursuance of which the
4th petitioner was recruited in 1988) used different phraseology. Except for
one place in the former draft, both drafts throughout referred to ".".



The letters of appointment issued to the petitioners, in 1983, 1986 and 1988,
also displayed no consistency in language, using several different terms.



Mr. Wijesinghe, PC, for the 1st to 4th respondents, submitted that all those
Sinhala terms, as well as "Plantation Schools", referred to the vested former
estate schools.



Mr. Goonesekera for the petitioners contended otherwise, and referred to a
report dated 18.8.95 submitted to the Ministry of Education by a committee
appointed in June 1995 "to suggest a definition for plantation schools". That
committee stated that there were "two categories of schools catering to the
children from estates in the plantation area": namely, the vested former
"estate schools" and the Government schools, which were either established by
Government or taken over by Government from private institutions. The
Committee's recommendation was:



" ... there are no more estate schools and all are now state schools. The term
"Plantation Schools" was evolved with a special concept and a purpose. The
purpose is to mark the disadvantaged schools in the plantation area for
development through positive discrimination. The concept encompassed all

**356**



disadvantaged schools in the plantation area. Therefore all schools failing
under the first category (taken over estate schools) and schools that enroll
majority of students from estates among the second category should be
considered plantation schools until such time [as] they are developed to the
level of other schools in the country."



The annex to that report stated that the appointment of Plantation School
teachers was "first made according to the Cabinet Paper 306 of 1984
(Continuation) titled Plantation Sector Tamil Medium Schools - Recruitment
1,000 prospective teachers 1984'." The title suggested that there might be a
difference between the appointments made at various times. However, neither
the Cabinet Paper nor the decision was produced.



Mr. Goonesekera also referred to a project, which the Swedish international
Development Authority (SIDA) and the Ministry of Education was engaged in, for
the development of educational facilities for "plantation schools".



We accordingly adjourned the hearing to enable the respondents to produce the
official documents which might help to resolve the ambiguity \- such as the
Cabinet Papers, schemes of recruitment and transfer, the published Gazette
notifications, and the approved cadre and salary scales of these and other
assistant teachers. But when we resumed we found that nothing more was
forthcoming.



The submissions of learned Counsel raise the following questions:



1\. Does the expression "estate schools" (and other similar expressions) refer
only to the former "estate schools" now vested in the Government?



2\. If so, do the terms and conditions of service of the petitioners
disentitle them from serving in other schools?



1\. It seems to me that the Cabinet intended in 1982 to recruit teachers to
serve in only the vested former "estate schools". However, that intention
should have been given effect either in

**357**



the form of a scheme of recruitment or a Gazette notification calling for
applications; and the letters of appointment should have been in accordance
with the scheme of recruitment, and failing that, with the Gazette
notification. In the absence of those documents, the use of several different
phrases prima facie tends to suggest that, after 1982, a different meaning was
intended, and that the SIDA project was based on a different concept. The
recruiting ambiguity is one which probably ought to be decided contra
proferentem, against the employer, because it was the employer alone who
drafted and issued those documents.



However, I need not decide that question in view of my finding in regard to
the second.



2\. Mr. Wijesinghe relied heavily on a declaration which, he submitted, every
assistant teacher had to sign, including the petitioners. The 1st respondent
produced a specimen of that declaration, but not the declarations which the
petitioners are alleged to have signed. Mr. Goonesekera denied that they had
signed any such declaration. In any event, that declaration was to the effect
that the appointee clearly understood that he was being appointed for service
in estate schools `taken over the Government and declared that he would never
apply for a transfer **to any other Government school.** Although Mr.
Wijesinghe submitted that this was in terms of the letter of appointment, in
fact the letters of appointment only required a declaration that the appointee
would not apply for a transfer **to another District.**



One letter of appointment has a condition that the appointment is confined to
plantation schools () in the District, and that even within the District the
appointee has no right to a transfer to any other schools. The 1986 letter of
appointment states that the appointment is confined to the District, and that
the appointee has no right to a transfer outside the District; however, there
is a handwritten and unauthenticated addition (in the printed form) that the
appointment is confined to "estate schools" () in the District. Such additions
are of doubtful validity. The 1988 letter of appointment states that service
is confined to plantation schools () in the District. All the letters provide
that the appointing authority had the power to transfer the appointee outside
the District on promotion,

**358**



if upon such promotion the appointee's services were required outside the
District.



Prima facie, all the assistant teachers appointed between 1983 and 1988, on
the basis of the above three Gazettes, are in the same class, and no reason
has been suggested why there should be any difference in their terms and
conditions of service particularly in regard to transfer. Difference in
phraseology in the gazettes and in the letters of appointment should not too
easily be assumed to result in significantly different terms and conditions.
Further, any ambiguity in the letters of appointment should be construed
contra proferentem, and in favour of the appointees. Looked at broadly, those
letters contain a restrictive condition which has two aspects: every
appointment is confined to the District, and to one category of schools within
that District. The first is clearly not absolute: while the appointee has no
right to a transfer, the appropriate authority may transfer him/her, in
specified circumstances. Service outside the District is therefore neither
prohibited nor unlawful. In the absence of plain words, there is no reason why
the second aspect should be construed as being absolute. If it is permissible
for the appropriate authority to transfer the appointee to a school outside
the District, why should the position be different in regard to a transfer to
other schools within the District?



Another relevant fact is that, after the impugned transfer letters dated
1.2.95, the 1st respondent by letters dated 22.3.95 informed the petitioners
that it had been decided, inter alia, to transfer teachers in the same
category as the petitioners to "estate schools" in which there **were
vacancies**.



I hold that, even if "estate schools" and similar expressions refer to the
former vested estate schools, yet the respondents have failed to prove that
the terms and conditions of service of the petitioners prohibited their
transfer to other schools. The petitioners were therefore lawfully serving in
the six schools to which they had been transferred; those schools, and the
children in those schools, continued to need their services; when the 1st
respondent caused them to be transferred to four "estate schools", he cited in
the mistaken belief that they were eligible to serve only in the vested

**359**



former "estate schools", and not in those six schools; and if he had not made
that mistake and had duly considered the needs of the schools and the
students, he could not reasonably have concluded that the impugned transfers
were necessary or proper. The transfers were therefore wrongful, arbitrary and
unreasonable, and in violation of Article 12(1).



As for the allegation of discrimination on political grounds, although the
petitioners have produced affidavits and other documents in support, it is
clear that a large number of other similar transfers were effected on the same
basis, which I now hold to be mistaken. Indeed, the respondents say that
questions were raised in Parliament and in the Central Provincial Council as
to why teachers recruited for service in the vested former estate schools were
serving elsewhere. It is therefore more probable that the operative cause of
the impugned transfers was that mistaken belief, and not anything else. I
therefore reject that part of the petitioners claim.



Although the transfers were with immediate effect, eventually they were
deferred for three months; the transfers were also within the same division of
the Nuwara Eliya District, and not outside. There was genuine ambiguity about
the legal issues. They have now served for over two years in their new
stations, and it would not be in the best interests of the schools and their
pupils that they should now be retransferred. The only equitable remedy is
therefore compensation. I award each petitioners a sum of Rs. 30,000 as
compensation and costs, payable by the Ministry of Education of the Central
Province within one month, and I direct the 1st respondent to make all the
necessary arrangements for these payments.



**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J**. - I agree.



_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1997/29.html_  

