##  Atukorale,Gamini and Others v. T.P.F. De Silva - I.G.P. and Others - SLR -
280, Vol 1 of 1996 [1995] LKSC 29; (1996) 1 Sri LR 280 (25 April 1995)

**280**

**ATUKORALE AND OTHERS  
****v** **.  
T. P. F DE SILVA \- I.G.P AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 137/95(F/R).  
29 FEBRUARY AND 02 MAY 1996.

_Fundamental Rights ‑ Constitution Articles 12(1), 12(2), 14(1) (a) and 14(1)
(b) ‑ Police Ordinance sections 77(1), 77(3), 78(1) ‑ Refusal to allow U.N.P
May Day rally at the _ _Kandy_ _Central Bus Stand ‑ Discrimination._

The Petitioners' request to use the Kandy Bus Stand which means the Cen­tral
Bus Stand, and for a procession to be conducted from the Mahaiyawa Playground
along Trinco Street, Ward Street, Clock Tower and upto the venue of the
meeting for their U.N.P May Day rally was refused by the 1st Respondent on the
ground of security, logistical and administrative and imperative constraints.
The 1st Respondent failed to explain what was im­plied by the grounds stated.
The 1st Respondent offered the Colombo Galle Face Green and the Bogambara Car
Park as alternative venues which the Petitioners refused to accept. At the
same time, permission to four other political parties which are constituent
parties of the Peoples Alliance (PA) to hold processions and meetings on May
Day of the same year was granted, the Ceylon Workers Congress led by S.
Thondaman, Minister of Rural De­velopment in Bandarawela, the Ceylon National
Workers Congress led by Mr. M.S. Sellasamy Chairman, Silk and Allied Products
Authority in Hatton, the Kandurata Janatha Peramuna led by Mr. P
Chandrasekeram, Deputy Minister of Housing and Public Utilities in
Nuwara‑Eliya and the Red Flag Organisation of the Communist Party in Matara.
This was alleged to be discriminative of the U.N.P which was the major
opposition party to the PA.

The 1st Respondent however offered the "parking area" of the Bogambara Grounds
(not the Bogambara Grounds) but he was silent as to why the security situation
and logistical problems had no application to the parking area of the
Bogambara Grounds. Further it appeared that 1st Respondent was saying that the
governing criteria in permitting the four other parties the use of
Bandarawela, Hatton, Nuwara-Eliya and Matara were most certainly not security
or logistical or administrative imperatives, but as "they had done so for a
long period of time and these celebrations had a virtual geographical base
over the years, whereas the major political parties with larger

**281**

followings always had their May Day celebrations in the "City" (presumbly
Colombo).

**Held:**

(1) In terms of section 77(1) of the Police Ordinance what is required is that
at least six hours notice must be given of a proposed procession. Contrary to
what 1st Respondent says the law does not require any formal application to be
made to anyone. And in fact an application or what amounts to it had been
made.

(2) In terms of section 77(3) of the Police Ordinance the 1st Respondent could
have prohibited the procession" in the interests of the preservation of public
order" but no such ground was urged by the 1st Respondent.

(3) Section 78(1) of the Police Ordinance empowers the Police as occasion
requires to direct the conduct of assemblies and processions in any public
place and to prescribe the routes such processions should take. There is no
occasion for the police to offer alternative venues for such meetings.

(4) There has been a violation of the Petitioners right to equality before the
law (Article 12(1) of the Constitution) and they have been discriminated
against on the ground of their political opinion (Article 12(2) of the
Constitu­tion).

(5) Inasmuch as the Petitioners were unreasonably and without valid grounds
refused permission to hold their meeting and procession in Kandy, thus
preventing the petitioners from holding their May Day meeting and procession
on 1.5.95, there has thus been a violation of the Petitioners' entitlement to
the freedom of speech and expression (Article 14(1) (a) and also a violation
of their entitlement to the freedom of peaceful assembly (Article 14(1) (b) of
the Constitution).

**APPLICATION** for relief for violation of Fundamental Rights.

_L.C. Seneviratne P.C._ with _Paul Perera P.C., Daya Pelpola, D. H. N.
Jayamaha,  _and _Ronald Perera_ for the Petitioners.

_Upawansa_ _Yapa P.C. Additional Solictor‑General _with __ _Miss_. _H.
Jayasundera S.C._ for the Respondents.

_Cur._ _adv. vult._

**282**

August 01, 1996.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.**

The 1st Petitioner in this case is, _inter alia_ , the General Secretary of
the United National Party (UNP) which is a recognised political party; the 2nd
Petitioner is the General Secretary of the Jathika Sevaka Sangamaya (JSS); the
3rd Petitioner is the Administrative Secretary of the Lanka Jathika Estate
Workers Union (LJEWU), and the 4th Peti­tioner is the Secretary of the
National Public Services Trade Union Federation (NPSTUF).

They allege violations of fundamental rights enshrined in Articles 12(1),
12(2), 14(1) (a) and 14(1) (b) of the Constitution.

Leave to proceed has been granted to the petitioners as prayed for, but only
in their capacities as persons and/or citizens of Sri Lanka.

The Petitioners state that the Working Committee of the United National Party
(hereinafter referred to as the UNP) decided to hold its May Day Procession
and Meeting for the year 1995 in Kandy, and that in consequence of such
decision, the Coordinating Secretary to the Chairman of the UNP by letter
dated 17.3.95 (P1) invited the 3rd Re­spondent the Deputy Inspector General of
Police, Kandy, to a meeting on 25.3.95 to discuss the necessary arrangements.
The 3rd Respondent did not attend. Thereafter by letter dated 30.3.95(P2),
addressed to the 1st Respondent, the Inspector General of Police, the
Secretary of the U.N.P Kandy District Organisation requested permission to
hold the UNP May Day Celebration in Kandy. The letter also intimated to the
1st Respondent the fact that the large crowd which was expected would be
proceeding to the venue of the meeting in processions. The exact details would
be intimated later. By letter dated 3.4.95(P3), the 1st Petitioner informed
the 1st Respondent that the venue for the 1995 UNP May Day celebrations was to
be the Kandy Town Bus Stand and that the Kandy Municipal Council had
unanimously decided to make the bus stand available for the said purpose. The
1st Petitioner wanted this fact conveyed to the 3rd Respondent and also the
fact that he was applying for the necessary permit for the use of a loud
speaker. On the same day, a second letter (P4) was sent by the 1st Petitioner
to the 1st Respondent stating that a meeting of the UNP May Day Organisa‑

**283**

tion Committee was scheduled for 8.4.95 at 10.00 a.m. and requesting the 1st
Respondent to direct the 3rd Respondent or his representative to be present
for the reason that "police participation and advice in relation to security
arrangements and traffic arrangements" were im­portant. The 1st Respondent
replied by letter dated 5.4.95 (P5) refer­ring to the application to hold the
1995 May Day Rally in Kandy and refusing permission stating that, "it is
regretted that approval cannot be given to this application. As a matter of
practice, over the years, with very few exceptions, May Day Rallies have been
confined to the Colombo area for all political parties. The reasons are
security, logistical, and administrative imperatives.

I shall be thankful therefore if this matter can be discussed with D. I. G.
Colombo to arrange for a suitable venue for the UNP May Day Rally to be held
in Colombo."

On 18.4.95, the 1st Respondent again wrote to the 1st Petitioner (letter P7)
referring to his letter refusing permission (marked P5) and requesting that
the holding of the May Day Rally in Colombo be dis­cussed with the D.I.G.,
Colombo in order to finalise arrangements for the holding of the Rally in
Colombo. On the following day (19.4.95) the Secretary (Legal) of the UNP
replied to the 1st Respondent by letter marked P8 stating that in consequence
of what transpired in the course of a debate in Parliament, the UNP was "going
ahead with preparations for holding the May Day Celebrations, consisting of a
meeting and procession in Kandy", and requesting an opportunity to discuss the
details as early as possible.

In reply to P8, the 1st Respondent wrote to the 1st Petitioner on 20.4.95 (P9)
stating: "It is possible to consider a reduced scale of May Day Celebrations,
confined to only a public meeting, without demon­strations etc.. to be held in
Kandy." This letter P9 further requests the 1st Petitioner to work out the
details with the Senior Superintendent of Police, Kandy.

Thereafter, the 1st Respondent again wrote to the 1st Petitioner letter dated
25.4.95 (P10) referring to a meeting held that very morning attended by the
1st Petitioner, the 3rd Respondent, SSP Kandy, and SP Kandy. It appears that
the 1st Respondent chaired the meeting.

**284**

The letter sets out that, "From the discussion we had today, it is clear that
your specific application is for the following :‑

1\. a public meeting at the Kandy Bus Stand which means Central Bus Stand,

2\. for a procession to be conducted from Mahaiyawa Playground, along Trinco
Street, Ward Street, Clock Tower and the venue of the meeting."

The letter goes on to say that, "our position would be clearly, hav­ing regard
to the above considerations (viz. the security situation and other logistical
problems) to permit the holding of a public meeting on May Day at Bogambara
Grounds in the parking area. A Municipal permit is available for this purpose.
No Municipal Permit has been ten­dered in respect of the proposed meeting at
Kandy Central Bus Stand . . . . . . I regret that no procession permit can be
granted . . . . I would wish to inform you that a meeting for May Day to be
held at Colombo Galle Face Green, with a procession to commence from
Sugathadasa Stadium, proceeding on the route taken in earlier years could yet
be offered, if you agree."

This letter P10, is the final communication by the 1st Respondent on the
matter; the position according to which is as follows :‑

(i) that the "specific application" of the Petitioners was :

> (a) to hold a public meeting at the Kandy Central Bus Stand, and
>
> (b) to conduct a procession along the stated route;

(ii) that permission for both these requests was refused by the 1st
Respondent;

(iii) that as an alternative the 1st Respondent would permit only the holding
of a public meeting in the parking area at the Bogambara Grounds, for which
purpose a Municipal permit was available (i.e. without a procession); and

**285**

(iv) that the 1st Respondent was still offering an alternative venue, viz:
Galle Face Green, Colombo, with the procession, as in former years, commencing
from the Sugathadasa Stadium.

The Petitioners have countered the several matters set out above in the
following way :‑ Meeting the allegation of the lack of a Municipal Permit, the
petitioners state that the Kandy Municipal Council after its unanimous
decision on 31.3.95 (P11) had in fact given permission by its letter dated
4.4.95 (P12) for the use of the Kandy Bus Stand for the meeting. Secondly the
Petitioners aver that there are no grounds to suggest that the security
situation in Kandy was serious and state further that although the 1st
Respondent offered Colombo as an alternate venue, the fact was that, at the
relevant time a state of emergency had been declared in respect of Colombo,
but not in respect of Kandy or any other part of the country. The Petitioners
have produced marked P13(a) to P13 (i), copies of newspaper articles from
20.4.95 to 26.4.95, which speak of security alerts in Colombo and proposed
plans of terrorists to attack May Day rallies in the city of Colombo. They
also aver that the route for the UNP procession offered by the 1st Respond­ent
was the selfsame one where a former President of Sri Lanka was assassinated by
a terrorist bomb whilst leading the UNP May Day procession in 1993, and also,
that in October 1994, the Presidential Candidate of the UNP was himself
killed, also by a terrorist bomb at a spot not far away. They state therefore
that, by all accounts, Kandy was a safer place than Colombo, and that in fact,
fewer police officers would have been required to man the route in Kandy as
proposed by them, than would be required to man the route in Colombo as
sug­gested by the 1st Respondent.

The Petitioners next make the accusation that the 1st Respondent has in fact
given permission to four other political parties, which are constituent
parties of the Peoples Alliance, to hold processions and meetings on May Day
of the same year, as follows:

(i) the Ceylon Workers Congress led by Mr. S. Thondaman, Minister of Rural
Development ‑ in Bandarawela;

(ii) the Ceylon National Workers Congress led by Mr. M.S. Sellasamy, Chairman,
Silk and Allied Products Authority in Hatton;

**286**

(iii) the Kandurata Janatha Peramuna led by Mr. P. Chandrasekeram, Deputy
Minister of Housing and Public Utilities ‑ in Nuwara Eliya, and

(iv) the Red Flag Organisation of the Communist Party ‑ in Matara.

In conclusion, the Petitioners state that the order of the 1st Respondent
contained in letter P10, referred to above, was arbitrary, capricious,
malicious and discriminatory and was designed to prevent the petitioners
and/or the UNP and its affiliated Trade Unions from exercising their
legitimate political and fundamental rights.

Learned President's Counsel for the Petitioners strenuously urged that,
although the 1st Respondent was constantly referring to security, logistical
and administrative constraints and imperatives as reasons for refusing
permission, he had nowhere explained as to what those words implied; nor has
he given any indication of what they actually constituted in relation to the
Petitioners' request, and that, therefore, this court had no opportunity of
examining them and arriving at a deci­sion in regard to their reasonableness
or otherwise. Learned Counsel also urged, that the fact that others were given
permission to hold their May Day processions and meetings in outstation towns
like Bandarawela, Hatton, Nuwara Eliya and Matara as aforesaid, whilst the
Petitioners were refused such permission in respect of Kandy, con­stituted a
serious act of discrimination against the Petitioners.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners further complains that by offering
permission to use the car park of the Bogambara Grounds, Kandy for their May
Day Rally, the 1st Respondent ensured that the UNP rally will not be held in
Kandy, as he knew full well that such car park was wholly unsuitable for the
purpose and would therefore be rejected as a possible venue.

The Petitioners say that as a result, the fundamental rights guar­anteed to
them under Articles 12(1), 12(2), 14(1)(a) and 14(1)(b) of the Constitution
have been violated.

The 2nd Respondent has been added as a party to these proceed­ings as he made
certain comments with reference to this matter in the

**287**

course of a debate in Parliament. Although the 2nd Respondent is the Deputy
Minister of Defence, under whose purview the Police Depart­ment comes, he
plays no part in either granting or refusing permission under the provisions
of the Police Ordinance, for the holding of public processions. In any event
he has filed an affidavit stating, _inter alia_ , that the speech he made in
Parliament was "for the purpose of inviting the Petitioners for further
discussions on the question of the venue for the proposed 1995 UNP May Day
Celebrations."

In these circumstances, Learned President's Counsel for the Petitioners did
not press his case as against the 2nd Respondent, but strenuously urged that
the 1st Respondent had been guilty of violating the fundamental rights of the
Petitioners.

The 1st Respondent has filed a detailed affidavit replying to the several
averments of the Petitioners, and the 3rd Respondent has fol­lowed suit with
an affidavit generally supportive of that of the 1st Re­spondent.

The chief points urged by the 1st Respondent are

i) that no formal application was made by the UNP for permis­sion;

ii) that permission was refused for security, logistical and administrative
imperatives;

iii) that he (the 1st Respondent) offered the Petitioners the city of Colombo
as an alternative venue to Kandy, for both the meeting and the procession;

iv) that, in any event, he offered the Bogambara Grounds, Kandy, as an
alternative venue to the Kandy Central Bus Stand, if such UNP meeting would be
held on a reduced scale, confined only to a public meeting without
demonstrations, and

v) that the other four rallies were allowed to be held in Bandarawela, Hatton,
Nuwara Eliya and Matara because they had acquired a virtual geographical base
over the years.

**288**

It may be useful at this point to consider the provisions of the Police
Ordinance (Cap.65) in terms of which the permission sought would be granted.

**Section 77(1) states:**

"No procession shall be taken out or held in any public place in any urban
area, unless notice of such procession has, at least six hours before the time
of the commencement of such proces­sion, been given to the Officer‑in‑charge
of the police station nearest to the place at which the procession is to
commence.

**Section 77(3) states:**

"Notwithstanding anything in any other law, an officer of police of a rank not
below the grade of Assistant Superintendent, if he considers it expedient so
to do **in the interests of the preservation of public order,** may give
directions (whether orally or in writing) prohibiting the taking out of any
procession, or imposing upon the person or persons organising or taking part
in the pro­cession such conditions as appear to him to be necessary,
in­cluding conditions prohibiting or restricting the display of flags, banners
or emblems."

**Section 78(1) states:**

"Officers of Police not below the grade of Sub‑inspector may, as occasion
requires, **direct the conduct of all assemblies and processions in any public
place, prescribe the routes by which and the times at which such processions
may pass,** and di­rect all crowds of twelve or more persons to disperse when
they have reason to apprehend any breach of the peace . . . . . "

It appears therefore that in terms of section 77(1) of the Police Ordinance,
what is required is that at least six hours notice must be given of a proposed
procession. Contrary to what the 1st Respondent says, the law does not require
any "formal application" to be made to anyone. In any event, it seems evident
that the several requests made by the Petitioners have been accepted and
acknowledged by the 1st

**289**

Respondent as constituting an application and that the 1st Respond­ent has
himself proceeded on that footing in dealing with the Petition­ers. This is
amply illustrated by the correspondence referred to above. Even in his letter
to the Secretary, Ministry of Defence dated 31.3.95 produced by him marked
1R3, the 1st Respondent says, "I attach hereto an application made by the
United National Party to hold their annual May Day Celebrations including the
conduct of a procession at Kandy, "In any event, if the 1st Respondent felt
that there was no com­pliance with any supposed legal requirement of a formal
application, he had only to say so, instead of acting as he did and even going
to the extent of offering an alternative venue. I feel therefore that not only
is this a mere afterthought, but is a requirement imposed by the 1st
Re­spondent which is not warranted by law.

Secondly, in terms of section 77(3), the 1st Respondent could have prohibited
the procession "in the interests of the preservation of public order." No such
ground is urged by the 1st Respondent for refusing permission. Instead, his
position is that permission was refused for security, logistical and
administrative imperatives. As submitted by learned President's Counsel for
the Petitioners, no one knows what they are, and the 1st Respondent has made
no attempt to either say what they are, or give any particulars of what they
constitute or entail. On the contrary, in paragraph 19(c) of his affidavit,
the 1st Respondent calls them "obvious security, logistical and administrative
constraints." The Petitioners quite rightly say that it is the 1st Respondent
who has full knowledge of what they are and it is upto him to give all
necessary details to enable this court to determine whether there was
sufficient material to justify the 1st Respondent's refusal. They further
state that the only conclusion that can be arrived at from the 1st
Respondent's failure to explain himself, is that his action was arbitrary,
capricious and _mala_ _fide_. The Petitioners add that the 1st Respondent's
refusal to allow the procession on such grounds, _sans_ explanation, amounted
to his abusing his powers. In any event, it was in Colombo and not in Kandy
that a state of emergency had been declared.

Thirdly, section 78(1) empowers the Police as occasion requires, to direct the
conduct of assemblies and processions in any public place and to prescribe the
routes such processions should take. There is no occasion for the police to
offer alternate venues for such meetings.

**290**

This notwithstanding the 1st Respondent says that he offered the Petitioners
an alternative venue, viz ‑ Galle Face Green, Colombo, and also offered the
former route used by the UNP commencing from Sugathadasa Stadium, for the
procession. I have already dealt with the submissions of the Petitioners in
this regard. The Petitioners' submit further that the 1st Respondent "cannot
dictate to political parties where they should have their political rallies or
meetings, "nor suggest that they should hold them on a "reduced scale". They
say that these suggestions were not done _bona fide_ but with an ulterior
motive. In any event, for some unexplained reason, the 1st Respondent says in
his affidavit, "Considering the logistical, security and administrative
con­straints in relation to a full scale May Day rally in an area other than
in Colombo as contemplated by the UNP, I was of the view that such an event,
if held, anywhere else other than in the metropolis would pose a security
threat particularly under the situation prevailing then in the country."

No substantiation of this is given by the 1st Respondent in the teeth of the
Petitioners' position that Kandy was safer than Colombo.

Whilst on this point it may be enlightening to refer to letter marked 1R3
produced by the 1st Respondent himself. Letter 1R3 was written by the 1st
Respondent to the Secretary, Ministry of Defence. The first paragraph of this
letter has been referred to already. The second para­graph reads thus

2\. **" As a matter of policy **these festivities _(i.e._ May Day
Celebra­tions) have been confined to Colombo. The reasons are security and
logistics. Exceptions have been made rarely over the years. It is there­fore
necessary to have **a policy directive** for the conduct of May Day
Festivities including processions. The regulation of their venue need to be
determined.

3\. An appropriate directive may please be issued."

This letter speaks for itself, and needless to say, did not attract a reply.
Learned Counsel for the Petitioners merely submitted that 1R3 revealed the 1st
Respondent's thinking.

**291**

Fourthly, the 1st Respondent pleads in his affidavit that as the Petitioners
wanted Kandy as their venue, he offered them the Bogambara Grounds as an
alternative to the Kandy Central Bus Stand to hold their meeting. This, as the
Petitioners rightly point out, is not the truth. What the1st Respondent
offered by his letter P10, referred to above, was not the Bogambara Grounds
but the "parking area" of the Bogambara Grounds. Further, the 1st Respondent
says in his affidavit that this he did "having regard to the security
situation and logistical problems." Besides there being no particulars of what
these terms constitute, the 1st Respondent is silent as to why the "security
situation and logistical problems" have no application to the parking area of
the Bogambara Grounds. In any event, the Petitioners state that the car park
was offered knowing that it will not be accepted.

Lastly, the 1st Respondent pleads that he did not discriminate against the
Petitioners. In paragraph 19(e) of his affidavit he says:

"Specifically denying the allegation of discrimination, I emphatically state
that at the meeting I had with the petitioners on 25.4.1995, I explained to
them the position as regards the Ceylon Workers Congress, the Ceylon National
Workers Congress, the Kandurata Janatha Peramuna and the Red Flag Organisation
of the Communist Party and their being permitted to hold their May Day
celebrations in the provinces, as they has done so for a long period of time
and these celebrations had acquired a virtual geographical base over the years
whilst the major political parties in the country which had a larger following
had always had their May Day Celebrations in the city wherein the requisite
security, logistical and administrative infrastructure was available. In the
circumstances, I state that permitting these smaller parties to continue to
have their May Day Celebrations in the provinces did not constitute unequal
treatment of the Petitioners."

Going further, the 1st Respondent states in paragraph 21 of his affidavit:

"I categorically deny the averments that the Petitioners are similarly
circumstanced as the Ceylon Workers Congress, the Ceylon National Workers
Congress, the Kandurata Janatha Peramuna and the Red Flag Organisation of the
Communist Party."

**292**

Besides merely so stating, the 1st Respondent does not go on to explain why
and how. The 1st Respondent does not explain where the dissimilarities, if
any, lay. No facts or figures are given to substantiate his position. On the
contrary it appears that "security, logistical and administrative imperatives"
played no part in Bandarawela, Hatton, Nuwara Eliya and Matara. Whereas they
were of paramount importance in Kandy. Further, what the 1st Respondent seems
to say is that, whereas the governing criteria in refusing Kandy as the venue
were security, logistical and administrative imperatives, the governing
crite­ria in permitting the four other parties the use of Bandarawela, Hatton,
Nuwara Eliya and Matara as venues were most certainly not security, or
logistical or administrative imperatives, but, (i) as "they had done so for
along period of time" and (ii) as "these celebrations had ac­quired a virtual
geographical base over the years, "whereas the major political parties with
larger followings always had their May Day Celebrations in the "city"
(presumably Colombo).

By a strange process of reasoning the 1st Respondent states that in the
circumstances, "permitting these smaller parties to continue to have their May
Day Celebrations in the provinces did not constitute unequal treatment of the
Petitioners."

It is not possible to agree with either the reasoning or the conclusion of the
1st Respondent. On the other hand, it is clear that there has been
discrimination and unequal treatment. The Petitioners urge that the reason
**** for such discrimination was political, inasmuch as the four parties which
were given permission to hold their meetings and processions in the provinces
were all constituent parties of the Peoples Alliance, whilst they (the
Petitioners) belonged to the UNP which constituted the opposition.

Upon a careful **** consideration of all the facts of this case, I hold that
there has been a violation of the Petitioners right to equality before the law
(Article 12(1) of the Constitution) and that they have been discriminated
against on the ground of their political opinion (Article 12(2) of the
Constitution).

I further hold that, inasmuch as the Petitioners were unreasonably and without
valid grounds refused permission to hold their meeting and

**293**

procession in Kandy; thus preventing the petitioners from holding their May
Day meeting and procession on 1.5.95, there has been a violation of the
Petitioners entitlement to the freedom of speech and expression (Article 14(1)
(a) and also a violation of their entitlement to the free­dom of peaceful
assembly (Article 14(1) (b) of the Constitution).

Since it appears that the 2nd and 3rd Respondents did not have a direct hand
in the above violations, no findings are made against them. I however hold
that the 1st Respondent is responsible for all the violations abovementioned.

I therefore hold and declare that the 1st Respondent has violated the
fundamental rights of the Petitioners enshrined in Articles 12(1), 12(2),
14(1) (a) and 14(1) (b) of the Constitution, and accordingly quash the
determination and/or order made by the 1st Respondent on 25.4.95 refusing the
Petitioners permission to hold their 1995 May Day meet­ing and procession in
Kandy as requested by them.

I also make order that each of the four Petitioners be paid a sum of Rs.5000/‑
as costs by the State.

**AMERASINGHE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**DHEERARATNE, J. ‑ **I agree.

_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/29.html_  

