##  Hettiarachchi v. Seneviratne, Deputy Bribery Commissioner and Others (No.
2) - SLR - 293, Vol 3 of 1994 [1994] LKSC 29; (1994) 3 Sri LR 293 (4 July
1994)

# 293

#  
HETTIARACHCHI

**v.**

**SENEVIRATNE,**

**DEPUTY BRIBERY COMMISSIONER AND OTHERS (NO. 2)**  

  
SUPREME COURT

M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

P. R. P. PERERA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION 127/94

JUNE 07, 1994.



Fundamental Rights - Application for leave to proceed - Article 12(1) of the
Constitution - Application supported on further submissions \- Article 132(3)
of the Constitution - Finality of order of 28 April 1994 - Per incuriam rule -



**Held:**

** **

It is a well established rule that in general a court cannot re-hear, review,
alter or vary its own judgment once delivered. The rationale of that rule is
that there must be finality to litigation. Interest reipublicae ut sit finis
litium. A court whose judgments are subject to appeal, cannot set aside or
vary its judgment, even if plainly wrong in fact or in law; that can be done
only on appeal. It may, of course, have a limited power to clarify its
judgment, and to correct accidental slips or omissions.



The matter of this application had been first supported on 28 April 1994 and
the court made a final order.



A decision will be regarded as given per incuriam if it was in ignorance of
some inconsistent statute or binding decision; but not simply because the
court had not the best of argument.



Proceedings under Article 126 are essentially adversarial in nature. of
course, the court has ample power to probe a matter for the purpose of
ascertaining the truth; to expedite the work of the court by suggesting the
consideration of issues of fact and law which seem to arise; and by indicating
how a submission might be clarified or refined; and by guiding an argument in
the direction of the matters of fact and law actually in issue. But it will
nevertheless leave counsel entirely free to decide what he wishes to place
before the court, and how he proposes to do so. The court recognizes and
respects counsel's right to do so. It will not encroach on counsel's rights;
especially when he repeatedly insists on following a plan of action he appears
to have set himself and disregards suggestions from the bench as to an
alternative course that might be followed. We must take the case as counsel
deems it best presented on the interest of his client. Moreover, the court
must take care to guard itself against any appearance of bias which might
result

**294**



from intervention, for justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be
done. As Judges, we are expected to be neutral. Therefore the court must
refrain from entering into the arena by initiating and presenting legal and
factual submissions on behalf of a party.



The jurisdiction and powers of this court are derived from the Constitution,
and the Rule of Law binds the judiciary equally with the other organs of
government. Judges must apply and observe the law, leaving the amendment of
the law to those constitutionally empowered to do so; and Judges cannot under
the thin guise of interpretation, violate the Constitution and the law in
order to give effect to their personal preferences as to what the law ought to
be.



The court has done what it could legitimately do to secure and advance
fundamental rights in the matter of formulating rules for facilitating access
to justice.



The duty of the judiciary as an organ of Government, to secure and advance
fundamental rights, does not require a Judge to drop his mantle as a judge and
become an advocate actively espousing the cause of some person who complains
to him that his rights have been violated. The duty of the judge, whether in
the exercise of his fundamental rights jurisdiction, or any other
jurisdiction, is to maintain his neutrality and thereby secure rights
guaranteed by the Constitution or conferred by any other law.



The submission now was that even though the Cabinet had the power to appoint
the 1st respondent as Deputy Bribery Commissioner, yet that power was neither
absolute nor unreviewable (Article 55(5)) and that failure to permit the
petitioner to offer himself for consideration prima facie violated his right
to equality under Article 12(1).



In the exceptional circumstances of this case, leave to proceed should be
granted.



## Cases referred to



1 _. Perera v. Jayawickrama_ (1985) 1 Sri LR 285

_ _

2 _. Bandara v. Premachandra_ S. C. 213/95 - S. C. Minutes of 16.8.93.

_ _

3 _. Pepper v. Hart_ (1993) 1 All ER 42.

_ _

4 _. Fernando v. Fernando_ (1956) 58 NLR 262.

_ _

5 _. Raju v. Jacob_ (1968) 73 NLR 517.

_ _

6 _. Katirmanthamby v Hadjiar_ (1971) 75 NLR 228.

_ _

7 _. Kariapperuma v Kotelawala_ (1971) 77 NLR 195.

_ _

8 _. In revision_ (1921) 23 NLR 275 (per Shaw J)



9\. Manchinahamy v. Muniweera (1950) 52 NLR 409.

_ _

10. _Sirinivasa Thero v. Sudassi Thero_ (1960) 63 NLR 31. 

_ _

11. _Ranmenikhamy v. Tissera_ (1962) 65 NLR 214.

_ _

12. _Moosajees Ltd. v. Fernando_ (1966) 68 NLR 414.

_ _

13. _Walker Sons and Co. Ltd. v. Fernando_ (1964) 68 NLR 73.



**295**



14. _Liyanage v. The Queen_ (1965) 68 NLR 265.

_ _

15. _Brvers v. Canadian Pacific Steamships Ltd._ (1957) 1 QB 134, HL (1958) AC 495.

_ _

16. _Jones v. National Coal Board_ (1957) 2 QB 55, 64.

_ _

17. _Somawathie v. Weerasinghe_ (1990) 2 Sri LR 121, 128-129. 

_ _

18. _Faiz v A. G._ SC 89/91 S.C. Minute of 19.11.1993.



**APPLICATION** for leave to proceed on question of equality under Article
12(1) of the Constitution.



R. K. W. Goonesekara, E D. Wickramanayake and D. W. Abeykoon for petitioner.



_Cur adv vult._



July 04, 1994.  


**FERNANDO, J.** **read The following order of the Court:**



On 15.4.94 the petitioner filed a petition under Article 126 of the
Constitution, alleging that his fundamental right guaranteed by Article 12(1)
had been violated by reason of the appointment of the 1st Respondent as Deputy
Bribery Commissioner. The Petitioner's application for leave to proceed was
taken up for consideration on 28.4.94. Learned Counsel who then appeared
supported that application on two grounds only. In the order made that day we
held, for the reasons stated, that those grounds could not be sustained. Since
Counsel failed to respond to several not-so-subtle indications from the bench
that the factual allegations in the petition might perhaps be considered in
relation to Article 55(5) of the Constitution, in our order of 28.4.94 we were
constrained to observe  
  
" Although invited to make any further submissions he wished to, learned
Counsel did not address us on any of the other averments of fact contained in
the petition, to support an allegation that the fundamental rights of the
Petitioner had been violated. "



On 30.5.94 the petitioner moved the Court to permit further submissions in
support of his application, claiming that it "raises matters of great national
and public importance". He asked the Court, "as guardian of the fundamental
rights of all citizens", to consider the Petitioner's complaint of the
violation of his fundamental

**296**



right; and that the matter be listed before a ..bench of five judges so that
"senior Counsel may make further and full submissions". The Chief Justice
directed that the matter be considered by the same three judges who had dealt
with it previously.



An application under Article 126 may be proceeded with only with leave to
proceed first had and obtained from this Court, which leave may be granted or
refused, as the case may be, by not less than two Judges. When the three of us
refused leave to proceed, we were exercising the jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court (see Article (132 (2)), and our decision was the decision of the Supreme
Court; we were not sitting as some fragmented part of the Court. The
petitioner's motion of 30.5.94 was filed under a misapprehension that other
Judges of the Court, or more Judges, or even all the Judges, could constitute
an appellate tribunal in respect of that decision of the Supreme Court which
refused him leave to proceed under Article 126(2). While other Judges of the
Supreme Court might regard that decision as erroneous, and refuse to follow it
when deciding **other** matters, it was final as far as that case was
concerned.



It is quite wrong to assume, as the petitioner does in his motion, that the
power of the Chief Justice under Article 132(3) to direct that an appeal,
proceeding or matter be heard by a bench of five or more Judges of, in his
opinion, the question involved is one of general and public importance, makes
any difference. That provision confers no right of appeal, revision or review.
In any event, the Petitioner is mistaken in thinking that his application
involved for decision some novel or uncertain question of general, public or
national importance. That decisions of the Cabinet are subject to review in
the exercise of the fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court is a matter
on which there is no uncertainty - not only are the express provisions of
Article 55(5) quite clear, but this has been confirmed in decisions of this
Court (as far back as 1984, by a Full Bench of nine Judges in Perera v.
Jayawickrama (1), and less than an year ago in Bandara v. Premachandra (2).
The principles applicable to the review of such decisions, for inconsistency
with the fundamental right to equality, are the same as those applicable to
all other executive decisions made in the exercise of constitutional or
statutory powers. Thus there is not in this case any question of law having
far reaching consequences.



**297  
 **

That the case may be of great interest to the public, or even sensational, is
beside the point. As far as a court of law is concerned, there are no
unimportant matters. The status and position of the persons before us, whether
as petitioners or respondents, are of no consequence. In the words of
Deuteronomy 1:16 -17



"And I charged your Judges at that time, saying hear the causes between your
brethren and judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the
stranger that is with him. Ye shall not respect persons in judgment; but ye
shall hear the small as well as the great; ye shall not be afraid of the face
of man....."



And we might also say with Lord Denning (Ex parte Blackburn [1968] 2 013 150,
155)



"Exposed as we are to the winds of criticism, nothing which is said by this
person or that, nothing which is written by this pen or that, will deter us
from doing what we believe is right."



Our pulses do not beat any faster either because of the persons before us or
because of public comments by any person.



It must not be supposed, or suggested, that the need to obtain leave to
proceed under Article 126(2) is a mere formality. The onus is on a petitioner
seeking relief to establish a prima facie case. Even if an important question
of law, or jurisdiction, does appear to be involved, it must not be assumed,
as some do, that this must necessarily be deferred for consideration at the
final hearing. If it is relevant as a threshold consideration, that threshold
must be crossed by obtaining leave to proceed, before seeking to proceed
further.



It is a well-established rule that in general a court cannot rehear, review,
alter or vary its own judgment once delivered. The rationale of that rule is
that there must be finality to litigation. Interest reipublicae ut sit finis
litium. A court whose judgments are subject to appeal, cannot set aside or
vary its judgment, even if plainly wrong in fact or in law : that can only be
done on appeal. It may, of course, have a limited power to clarify its
judgment, and to correct accidental slips or omissions.

##  

## 298

##  

## MANIFEST ERROR, OMISSION OR INADVERTENCE OF THE COURT



Since there is no opportunity for rectification by way of appeal in the case
of the decisions of the highest court, may that court vary its own order ?



In support of his submission that this Court should vary its own order, Mr.
R.K.W. Goonesekera, who now appears for the Petitioner, cited a recent
decision of the House of Lords in Pepper v. Hart (3). and four local decisions
: Fernando v. Fernando (4), Raju v. Jacob (5), Katirmanthamby v. Hadjiar (6),
and Kariapperuma v Kotelawala (7). To that list can be added many others :
e.g. In revision(8), Menchinahamy v Muniweera (9), Sirinivasa Thero v Sudassi
Thero (10), Ranmenikhamy v. Tissera (11). But all these, with the exception of
Katirmanthamby v Hadjiar, are instances of manifest error, omission, or
inadvertence by the Court itself.



In Pepper v Hart, at the conclusion of the hearing of an appeal, the Appellate
Committee of the House of Lords was inclined to dismiss the appeal, because it
considered that the statutory provision in question should be interpreted in
one way, but it did not make an order. The appeal was then re-argued before an
expanded Appellate Committee, to consider whether Parliamentary history was
relevant to the interpretation of that provision. Having decided that it was,
the House of Lords then took the contrary view as to the meaning of that
provision, and allowed the appeal. This decision does not help the Petitioner,
as the question of the House of Lords setting aside its own order did not
arise.



Moosajees Ltd v. Fernando (12), is perhaps more relevant. A bench of five
Judges decided a preliminary question of law arising in a number of cases, in
Walker Sons and Co. Ltd. v. Fernando (13). Then, in view of the subsequent
decision of the Privy Council upon a related question of law in Liyanage v.
The Queen (14) , a bench of five Judges (including four of the original five)
considered that the original decision was incorrect, and reversed it in
Moosajees Ltd. v. Fernando. However, despite the original decision upon the
preliminary question, the case had not yet been finally disposed of on

**299**



the merits. The principle on which the Court acted was that "an order which
has not attained finality according to the law or practice obtaining in a
Court can be revoked or re-called by the Judge who made the order, acting with
his discretion exercised judicially and not capriciously". Here, however, our
order of 28.4.94 finally disposed of the matter.



The headnote of Katirmanthamby v. Hadjiar incorrectly states that the Court
set aside its own order. That was a case which did not involve any lapse by
the Court. Order absolute had first been entered granting probate of a Last
will; upon the application of one party, the District Judge then vacated the
order absolute. On appeal it was held that this (second) order was wrong, as
the correction of error was a matter for the Supreme Court; that order was set
aside. Thereupon an application was made to revise, not the order of the
Supreme Court, but the order absolute itself. This was allowed on the ground
that the District Judge had failed to comply with a mandatory provision of
law. It is true that H.N.G. Fernando, C.J., did observe that the Supreme Court
could have been invited, at the stage of appeal, to exercise its revisionary
powers. But there the petitioner had an independent statutory right to move in
revision, and what the Supreme Court set aside in revision was not its **own**
order, but the first order of the District Judge, the second order having
previously been set aside in appeal. That decision does not support Mr.
Goonesekera's contention that we should vary our own order.



A decision will be regarded as given per incuriam if it was in ignorance of
some inconsistent statute or binding decision; but not simply because the
Court had not the benefit of the best argument: (see Halsbury, Laws of England
4th edition, Vol. 26, para 578 citing Brvers v. Canadian Pacific Steamships
Ltd.(15).



Mr. Goonesekera unreservedly accepted the correctness of the' Court's decision
on the two matters that had originally been argued. This, he emphatically
stated, was not an application for review or revision. Not being a case of
error, omission or inadvertence, the decisions cited have no relevance. Mr.
Goonesekera sought to overcome the resulting difficulty by submitting that
"the Court must do what the Court **should** do". What should the Court have
done

**300**



except what it ought to have done in the circumstances, and, indeed, had done?



## INTERVENTION BY COURT ON BEHALF OF ONE PARTY



Mr. Goonesekera did not say so, but (at the hearing on 28.4.94) should the
Court have intervened to do what learned Counsel who then appeared for the
Petitioner had failed to do? This would have been quite improper: proceedings
under Article 126 are essentially adversarial in nature. Of course, the Court
has ample power to probe a matter for the purpose of ascertaining the truth;
to expedite the work of the Court by suggesting the consideration of issues of
fact and law which seem to arise; and by indicating how a submission might be
clarified or refined; and by guiding an argument in the direction of the
matters of fact and law actually in issue. But it will nevertheless leave
Counsel entirely free to decide what he wishes to place before the Court, and
how he proposes to do so. The Court recognizes and respects Counsel's right to
do so. It will not encroach on Counsel's rights, especially when he repeatedly
insists on following a plan of action he appears to have set himself and
disregards suggestions from the bench as to an alternative course that might
be followed. We must take the case as Counsel deems it best presented in the
interest of his client. Moreover, the Court must take care to guard itself
against any appearance of bias which might result from intervention, for
justice must not only be-done, but must be seen to be done. As Judges, we are
expected to be neutral. Therefore the Court must refrain from entering into
the arena by initiating and presenting legal and factual submissions on behalf
of a party. In Jones v. National Coal Board (16), Lord Denning said  
  
"[The judge) must keep his vision unclouded ...let the advocates one after the
other put the weights into the scales - the nicely calculated less or more -
but the judge at the end decides which way the balance tilts, be it ever so
slightly. ... The judge's part in all this is to hearken to the evidence, only
himself asking questions of witnesses when it is necessary to clear up any
point that has been overlooked or left obscure; to see that the advocates
behave themselves seemly and keep to the rules laid down by law; to exclude
irrelevancies and discourage repetition; to make sure by

**301**



wise intervention that he follows the points that the advocates are making and
can assess their worth; and at the end to make up his mind where the truth
lies. If he goes beyond this, he drops the mantle of a judge and assumes the
role of an advocate; and the change does not become him well ... Such are our
standards."



Do the obligations created by Article 4(d) impose exceptional obligations on
the Court to intervene on behalf of a Petitioner by initiating and presenting
his case? There have been from time to time submissions and exhortations, both
inside and outside the courtroom, that Judges must adopt "investigative" or
"inquisitorial" procedures; that they must be "activist"; and even that they
must resort to techniques of interpretation of constitutional and statutory
provisions whereby they would give effect to their own notions as to what the
law should be, despite express provisions to the contrary. The jurisdiction
and powers of his Court are derived from the Constitution, and the Rule of Law
binds the Judiciary equally with the other organs of government; Judges must
apply and observe the law, leaving the amendment of the law to those
constitutionally empowered to do so; and Judges cannot under the thin guise of
interpretation violate the Constitution and the law in order to give effect to
their personal preferences as to what the law ought to be Somawathie v.
Weerasinghe (17), and Faiz v. Attorney-General (18).  
  
In reaching the conclusion that there is no such duty to intervene, it is
relevant to note that substantial efforts have been made by the Supreme Court,
within the frame work of the Constitution and the law, to secure and advance
fundamental rights, although ethical considerations have precluded Judges from
making extra-judicial responses to comments suggesting that public
expectations have not been adequately met. While discharging its adjudicatory
functions relating to fundamental rights, the Court has provided relief in a
variety of ways; it has taken steps to secure and advance fundamental rights
by clarifying and explaining their meaning and by giving guidelines and
directions in that regard in appropriate cases. Moreover, the Court has
simplified and facilitated the invocation of the fundamental rights
jurisdiction and the grant of effective relief in respect of violations, both
administratively and by means of rules of court.

**302**



In January 1990, the Court began to entertain informal applications from
persons held in detention who alleged the violation of their fundamental
rights, particularly under Articles 11, 13(1) and 13(2). During the four-year
period 1990-1993, about 5,500 such applications were entertained, and about
4,200 were disposed of ; any delay in disposal was due, almost invariably, to
the default of parties or their representatives.



By the Supreme Court Rules, 1990, those procedures were not only formalised
(Rule 44) but numerous other ambiguities and technicalities were eliminated
(e.g. as to the grant of proxies, the proper persons to be named as
petitioners, applications by third parties, curing deficiencies in pleadings,
etc.). Subsequently, further provision was. made permitting the exemption of
indigent petitioners from the payment of court charges, as well as the
assignment of Counsel and the payment of fees to assigned Counsel, where the
interests of justice required it: Supreme Court (Exemption from Fees) Rules
1991, and Supreme Court (Assigned Counsel) Rules 1991. The relevant rules are
annexed to this order as an Appendix, since it appears that the lack of
awareness and appreciation of these rules has not only deterred victims of
fundamental rights infringements from invoking this. jurisdiction, but has
also given rise to the misconception that there is undue expense, delay,
technicality, and difficulty, in regard to this jurisdiction.



In accordance with the principle that Judges should preserve their detachment
and impartiality, these rules were so framed as to exclude their involvement
in giving advice, in the preparation of papers, or in the presentation of a
party's case. However, the Court has done what it could legitimately do to
secure and advance fundamental rights by facilitating access to justice.



If the Petitioner needed assistance in obtaining the services of Counsel, he
could have availed himself of the benefits provided by those rules. However,
he seems not to have been in any need to obtain such legal representation.
Once he had legal representation whether made available under the rules or of
his own choice, the obligation of Court was to allow Counsel to present his
case in the way in which he wished to. The duty of the Judiciary as an organ
of

**303**



Government, to secure and advance fundamental rights, does not require a Judge
to drop his mantle as a Judge and become an advocate actively espousing the
cause of some person who complains to him that his rights have been violated.
The duty of the Judge, whether in the exercise of his fundamental rights
jurisdiction, or any other jurisdiction, is to maintain his neutrality and
thereby secure rights guaranteed by the Constitution or conferred by any other
law.



## THE IRRELEVANCIES THAT BURDENED THE PETITION



There were certain vague and unsubstantiated allegations in the petition upon
which (for the reasons which are set out later in this order) we could not
have granted leave to proceed from an alleged infringement of Article 12(1)
read with Article 55(5).



Although learned Counsel at the hearing on 28.4.94 referred to these matters,
it seemed to us that he was indirectly depending on them as establishing a
foundation for his submission that they made the case to be one of public
importance, in which the public were especially interested, and therefore,
that leave to proceed should be granted. While public interest might be
excited by many things, including vague and unsubstantiated allegations in a
petition submitted to this Court, that does not confer on them the quality of
being important either in a popular sense or in a legal sense.



In paragraphs 16 acid 17 of his petition, the Petitioner had made several
accusations to the effect that while a bribery allegation against an unnamed
and unidentified person was under investigation by the Bribery Commissioner,
influence was brought to bear on that officer again, by an unnamed and
unidentified person - to stop that investigation; there was no affidavit from
that officer, or any document, in support of the allegation of improper
influence, which thus remained as pure hearsay. In the absence of particulars,
such accusations can seldom, if ever suffice to establish the prima facie case
which entitles a Petitioner to the grant of leave to proceed. The Court had to
presume that Counsel refrained from referring to unsubstantiated allegations
of that sort because in his professional judgment he thought that they could
not be established,

**304**



or because he was so instructed, or for some other good reason. Mr.
Goonesekera very properly made no effort to rely on those averments, or upon
yet another allegation that the 1st Respondent's appointment was bad because
he was then a judicial officer. Without the slightest hesitation he jettisoned
these irrelevancies that burdened his case.



## VARIATION OF ORDER OF 28TH APRIL 1994



In the written statement which we directed Counsel to file before supporting
this application, Mr. Goonesekera pointed out that our order of 28.4.94 did
not expressly state that the Petitioner had failed to establish a prima facie
case of the infringement of the Petitioner's fundamental rights; in his
submissions he urged that, although the decision of the Court was final, the
terms of that order clearly indicated that we were not satisfied that all the
relevant material had been placed before it; and that, having regard to the
sole and exclusive fundamental rights jurisdiction of this Court, the
Petitioner should therefore be given an opportunity of making further
submissions on the question whether the appointment of the 1st Respondent (as
averred in paragraph 3 of the petition) involved a denial of an equal
opportunity of being considered for the post. There was all the more reason
for this, he said, because we ourselves had indicated that perhaps a case
might be made out under Article 55(5). He submitted that the Petitioner had
many years experience in the Bribery Commissioner's Department, while the 1st
Respondent had none; the Petitioner had not only attended to the duties of the
Deputy Bribery Commissioner for over an year (that post having fallen vacant
in 1991), but had even been appointed, by the Cabinet, to act as Bribery
Commissioner for a short period in 1992; that even though the Cabinet had the
power to appoint the 1st Respondent as Deputy Bribery Commissioner, yet that
power was neither absolute nor unreviewable (Article 55(5)); and that the
failure to permit the Petitioner to offer himself for consideration prima
facie violated his right to equality under Article 12(1).



Had the matter been presented in that way on 28.4.94, in response to our
suggestion, we have no doubt whatever that we would have granted leave to
proceed. When the present application was

**305**



supported on 7.6.94, for the reasons we have now set out, we were of the view
that, in the exceptional circumstances of the case, leave to proceed should be
granted on the sole question whether the Petitioner's right to equality under
Article 12(1) had been violated by the failure to give him an opportunity to
offer himself for consideration for appointment as Deputy Bribery
Commissioner.



_Leave to proceed granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/29.html_  

