##  Jayatunga v. The Attorney General and Another - SLR - 197, Vol 1 of 2002
[2002] LKSC 29; (2002) 1 Sri LR 197 (25 February 2002)

**197**

**JAYATUNGA  
v.  
 THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
ISMAIL, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 42/2001  
HC PANADURA NO. 4/99  
MC PANADURA NO. 20748  
18 JANUARY, 2002  
  
_Criminal Law - Three accused jointly charged for offences under sections 316
and 317 of the Penal Code - Effect of acquittal of the 2nd accused on the
conviction of the 1st accused apparently on the same evidence - Effect of
Magistrate's failure to consider the alibi offered by the 1st accused.  
_  
The 1st accused (the appellant) and the 2nd and 3rd accused were charged
jointly before the Magistrate on the basis of common intention with offences
under sections 316 and 317 of the Penal Code. The virtual complainant was one
Abeydheera. The other witness to the incident was his aunt Nancy Nona who with
the help of Abeydheera was attempting to pluck a jak fruit. The prosecution
case was that at that stage, 3rd accused arrived and told them not to pluck
jak fruits as they did not own the jak tree. At that stage the 2nd accused
arrived with a club and struck a blow on the arm of Abeydheera. Next the
appellant came with a Kathy and struck Abeydheera causing a grievous injury.
The medical evidence described the cut injury as grievous.  
  
The defence of the appellant and the 2nd accused who testified at the trial
was an alibi. The 3rd accused said that when she objected to the plucking of
jak, Abeydheera went to his house and returned with a sword. In self defence
she held on to the sword when both of them fell and she sustained injuries.
She could not explain the injury sustained by Abeydheera.  
  
The Magistrate convicted the appellant on both counts. The 2nd accused was
acquitted on the 1st count (section 317, causing grievous hurt with a
dangerous weapon) but he was convicted on the 2nd count (section 316 causing
grievous hurt). The 3rd accused was acquitted on both counts. On appeal, the
High Court acquitted the appellant on the 2nd count but affirmed his
conviction on the 1st count; and acquitted the 2nd accused on the 2nd count.
On appeal to the Surpreme Court -

**198**

**Held :  
**  
(1) The acquittal of the 2nd accused on count 2 did not vitiate the conviction
of the appellant on count 1 on the evidence of the same witnesses as it
appeared that the acquittal of the 2nd accused on the 2nd count was not based
on the ground of credibility of witnesses but on the absence of injury caused
by the alleged blow with a club. There had been some doubt in the mind of the
High Court Judge whether in those circumstances the charge under section 316
was established. However, in the absence of evidence of a common intention,
the High Court Judge could have found the 2nd accused guilty of the lesser
offence under section 314.  
  
(2) The failure of the High Court Judge to give due consideration to the
defence evidence is fatal to the conviction to the appellant.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _The King v. Tholis Silva -_ 30 NLR 267.  
  
2\. _Chandrasena and Others v. Munaweera -_ (1998) 3 Sri LR 94 (CA).  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.  
  
_Ranjith Abeysuriya, PC_ with _Sharmanie Gunaratne_ for appellant.  
  
_M. R. M. Hamza, State Counsel_ for Attorney-General.

_Cur. adv. vult._

February 25, 2002  
  
**HECTOR YAPA, J.  
**  
The accused-appellant was charged along with two other accused in  the
Magistrate's Court of Panadura under two counts. The first count alleged that
on 21\. 02. 1993 these accused voluntarily caused grievous hurt to Jayantha
Abeydheera with a katty and thereby committed an offence punishable under
section 317 read with section 32 of the Penal Code. In the 2nd count it was
alleged that in the course of the same transaction they voluntarily caused
hurt to the said Jayantha Abeydheera with a club and thereby committed

**199**

an offence punishable under section 316 read with section 32 of the Penal
Code. After trial the learned Magistrate convicted the  accused-appellant on
both counts. The 2nd accused was acquitted on the 1 st count and was convicted
on the 2nd count. The 3rd accused was acquitted on both counts.  
  
Thereafter, the following sentences were imposed on the accused-appellant. On
the 1st count he was ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000, with a default term
of three months' imprisonment. Further, he was sentenced to a term of six
months' rigorous imprisonment which was suspended for a period of three years.
On the 2nd count he was ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000 with a default term
of three months' imprisonment. The 2nd accused who was convicted on the 2nd
count was ordered to pay a fine of Rs. 1,000 with a default term of 3 months'
imprisonment.  
  
The accused-appellant and the 2nd accused appealed to the High Court from the
said convictions and sentences. The learned High Court Judge after hearing the
appeal found the accused-appellant guilty only on the 1st count and thereafter
ordered him to pay a fine of Rs. 2,500 and sentenced him to a term of 6
months' rigorous imprisonment which was suspended for a period of 5 years. The
2nd accused was acquitted on the 2nd count.  
  
The accused-appellant lodged an appeal in the High Court against  the said
conviction and sentence and sought leave to appeal to the Supreme Court. The
learned High Court Judge granted leave on the following questions of law :  
  
(i) Whether the accused-appellant should have been given the benefit of a
reasonable doubt that arose in the prosecution case having regard to the
strong evidence given by the accused.  
  
(ii) This being a criminal case, whether the defence evidence should have been
subjected to evaluation as required by law.

**200**

The case for the prosecution rested on the evidence of two eyeÂ­witnesses,
namely the injured Jayantha Abeydheera and his aunt Nancy Nona. According to
their evidence on the day in question, while Nancy Nona was plucking jak
fruits, the plucking stick (kekka) got stuck and therefore she had sought the
help of her nephew Jayantha Abeydheera to recover the plucking stick. When her
nephew was attempting to free the entangled stick, the 3rd accused had come
there and told them not to pluck jak fruits as they (witnesses) did not own
the tree. At that point of time, the 2nd accused had come armed with a club
and struck a blow which alighted on the arm of Abeydheera. Immediately
thereafter, the accused-appellant had come armed with a katty and struck a
blow on Abeydheera causing so grievous injury to his forearm. According to the
medical report marked P1, there was a cut injury on his left forearm which was
described as a grievous injury.  
  
When the defence was called the accused-appellant and the other two accused
gave evidence. The accused-appellant and the 2nd accused in their evidence
took up the position that they were not at the scene when this incident took
place and that they came to know about it later. According to the evidence of
the 3rd accused, when Abeydheera (injured) and Nancy Nona came to pluck jak
fruits from a tree which was co-owned, she (3rd accused) had told them not to
pluck any jak fruits. At that stage Abeydheera (injured) had run to his house
and had come armed with a sword. Fearing that he would attack her, she had
held on to the sword, when both of them fell and as a result she sustained
injuries. However, she was unable to say whether Abeydheera had suffered any
injury.  
  
At the hearing of this appeal, learned President's Counsel for the accused-
appellant made the submission that the acquittal of the 2nd accused by the
learned High Court Judge necessarily cast a doubt on the credibility of the
two prosecution witnesses who stated that the 2nd accused had dealt a blow on
the injured Abeydheera with a club and the blow alighted on his arm. Further,
it was these two

**201**

witnesses who deposed to the fact that the accused-appellant inflicted the cut
injury on the arm of the injured Abeydheera. Therefore, counsel contended that
when the High Court Judge declined to act on the evidence of these two
prosecution witnesses with regard to the alleged club blow by the 2nd accused,
their evidence lost its cogency and in the result such evidence should not
have been used to base the conviction of the accused-appellant. However, a
close examination of the reasoning of the High Court Judge would show that his
decision to acquit the 2nd accused was not on the basis that he disbelieved so
that part of the evidence given by the two witnesses, but for two other
reasons. Firstly, in view of the evidence of the injured, who stated that he
received no injury as a result of the club blow given by the 2nd accused.
Secondly, there was no medical report before the Court to show that any injury
had been caused as a result of the said club blow. In other words, there has
been some doubt in the mind of the High Court Judge on the question whether
there was any injury caused as a result of the club blow to establish the
second count under section 316 of the Penal Code. It may be that the club blow
was a light blow or that the said club blow had not properly alighted on  the
body of the injured so as to cause any injury. Hence, the learned High Court
Judge has concluded that the material was not sufficient to establish the 2nd
charge against the accused-appellant and the 2nd accused. However, in the
absence of any evidence to establish a common intention in this case, the
learned High Court Judge could have found the 2nd accused guilty of the lesser
offence of causing hurt under section 314 of the Penal Code, since it was the
evidence of the injured Abeydheera that the club blow of the 2nd accused
caused him bodily pain even though there was no injury as such. Under these
circumstances, it cannot be said that the High Court Judge had disbelieved the
evidence of the injured Abeydheera and his aunt Nancy Nona, when they said
that the 2nd accused attacked the injured with a club. The learned High Court
Judge has thought it best to give the 2nd accused, the benefit of the evidence
given by the injured who said that even though the club blow alighted on his
hand he was not injured and the fact that there was no medical

**202**

evidence to support a club injury under section 316 of the Penal Code.
However, he has failed to address his mind in regard to the possible lesser
offence that has been disclosed. For the above reasons, I am unable to agree
with the submission of learned President's Counsel that the learned High Court
Judge had disbelieved the two prosecution witnesses on this point.  
  
The other submission that was made by learned President's Counsel was the
failure of the learned High Court Judge to consider the defence evidence,
specially the evidence given by the accused-appellant, before he decided to
sustain the conviction of the accused-appellant. Counsel contended that there
was complete failure by the High Court Judge to consider the evidence given by
the defence. In support of this submission, learned Counsel cited the case of
The King v. Tholis Silva,'" where it has been held that it is the duty of a
Court to scrutinize the defence put forward in a case and if it is rejected,
to give reasons therefore. Counsel also referred to the case of Chandrasena
and Others v. Munaweera, where the need for a Judge to analyse and evaluate
the evidence of both the prosecution and the defence with reasons has been
highlighted and commented upon.  
  
In this case, it is to be observed that the learned High Court Judge makes no
reference at all to the defence evidence in his judgment. The failure to
consider the defence evidence was a serious injustice done to the accused-
appellant who had taken up the position that he was not at the scene, when the
attack on the injured took place. It is to be remembered that when evidence is
presented by an accused person in his defence, it is the duty of the Judge to
consider it however weak that defence may be, before deciding whether the
prosecution has succeeded in proving the case against the accused. On the
other hand, if the High Court Judge decided to reject the evidence of the
defence (accused-appellant) he should say so, giving reasons. Therefore, as
submitted by learned President's Counsel, the failure of the learned High
Court Judge to give due consideration to the defence evidence is fatal to the
conviction of the accused- appellant in this case.

**203**

For the aforesaid reasons, I answer the second question of law raised in this
appeal in the affirmative and in view of my final order, I refrain from
answering the first question of law as it would now be a matter for the
learned Magistrate to decide. Accordingly, I set aside the conviction and the
sentence imposed on the accused-appellant. However, in the interests of
justice, I direct that a - de novo - fresh trial be held against the accused-
appellant before the present Magistrate of Panadura on the count he was found
guilty. I have seriously considered the question, whether it would be right to
place the accused-appellant in peril for the second time after a lapse of
several years, but the circumstances of this case do not warrant me to take
any other view. Therefore, the appeal is allowed but a retrial is ordered.  
  
**FERNANDO, J. -** I agree.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.  
  
Retrial of the appellant on count 1, by the Magistrate directed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/29.html_  

