##  Mv & Kalyani & and Another v. Mutiara Shipping Company - SLR - 105, Vol 2
of 1998 [1998] LKSC 3; (1998) 2 Sri LR 105 (27 January 1998)

**105**

**MV "KALYANI"  AND ANOTHER  
v.  
MUTIARA SHIPPING COMPANY NY**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 100/96  
C.A. NO. 253/96  
H.C. ACTION IN REM NO. 17 OF 1995  
24TH AND 25TH JUNE, AND 7TH OCTOBER, 1997  
  
_Admiralty jurisdiction - Admiralty Jurisdiction Act, No. 40 of 1983 - S. 2
(1) (a) - Power of the Court to grant damages for infringement of rights of
ownership - Defendant's right to make a counter - claim for malicious arrest
of a vessel - Power of the High Court to order plaintiff to give security for
the counter-claim.  
  
_Per Fernando, J.  
  
"It seems to me, therefore, that the more reasonable interpretation of section
2 (1) (a) is that a plaintiffs claim 'to" ownership includes a complaint not
only that the defendant has challenged his title, but also that the defendant
has interfered with or deprived him of all or any of his rights of ownership.
That provision does not limit the relief which the court may grant upon such a
claim; it permits a declaration of title, and the restoration of possession,
as well as damages for the infringement of the rights of ownership*.  
  
**Held:  
**  
1\. Accordingly, in terms of section 2 (1) (a) a defendant is entitled to
counterclaim for damages for wrongful arrest of a vessel where there was
either mala fides or gross negligence which implies malice.  
  
Per Fernando, J.  
  
". . . . the power of the court, consistently recognised and exercised over a
long period of time to award damages for malicious arrest, is ancillary or
incidental to its power to arrest a vessel, and can be exercised in the same
proceedings. Such a claim for damages can be made without awaiting the
termination of the proceedings."  
  
2\. The High Court has the power to order the plaintiff to give security for
the defendant's counter-claim for damages for malicious arrest.

**106**

**Cases referred to:  
**  
1\. _Abdul Hamidu v. Perera_ (1925) 26 NLR 433, 436.  
  
2. _Bawazir v. Acting Master MV Ayesha_ (1986) 1 Sri LR 314 at 319-320.  
  
3\. _Government of the USA v. The Ship Valiant Enterprise_ (1961) 63 NLR 337,
343.  
  
4\. _Xenos v. Aldersley (The Evangelismos)_ (1858) 12 Moo. PCC 352.  
  
5. _The Walter D. Wallet_ (1893) P 202.  
  
6. _The Cathcart_ (1867) LR 1 A & E 314.   
  
7\. _Churchill v. Siggers_ (3 E & B 929, 937).  
  
8\. _The Strathnaver_ (1875) 1 AC 58, 66 (PC)  
  
9\. _The Active_ (1862) 5 LT 773.  
  
10\. _The Kate_ (1864) 9 LT 782.  
  
11\. The Collingrove  
  
12\. _The Numida_ (1885) 10 PD 158, 160.  
  
13\. _The Margaret_ _Jane_ (1869) 20 LT 1017, 1018  
  
14\. _The_ _Orion_ (1852) 12 Moo. PCC 356n.  
  
15\. _The_ _Nautilus_ (1852) 12 Moo. PCC 35n; (1852) Swa. 105.  
  
16\. _The Gloria de Maria_ (1856) Swa. 106.  
  
17\. _The Glasgow_ (1852) 12 Moo. PCC 356n.  
  
18\. _The John_ (1830) 2 Hagg 305.  
  
19\. _The Western Ocean_ (1870) LR 3 A & E 38.  
  
20\. _The Eleonore_ (1863) 9 LT 397.  
  
21\. _The George Gordon_ (1884) 9 PD 46.  
  
22\. _The Eudora_ (1879) 4 PD 208.  
  
23\. _The Cheshire Witch_ (1864) 11 LT 350.  
  
24\. _The Crimdon_ (1900) P 171.  
  
25\. _Astro Vencedor SA v. Mabanaft_ (1971) 2 QB 588, 595.  
  
26\. _Eswaralingam v_. _Sivagnansunderam_ (1962) 63 NLR 396, 398.  
  
27\. _Sirinivasa Thera_ _v. Sudassi Thera_ (1960) 63 NLR 31.  
  
28\. _Cargo (etc.) Management Corp v. The Ship Valiant Enterprise_ (1961) 64
NLR 271, 275.  
  
29\. _The Carnarvon Castle_ (1878) Maritime Law Cases 607.  
  
30\. _The Charkieh_ (1873) LR 4 A & E 120.  
  
31\. _The D. H. Peri_ (1862) Lush 543, 167 ER 246.  
  
32\. _The Mary (or Alexandra)_ (1867) 16 LT (NS) 98.  
  
33\. _The Bazias 3, The Bazias_ 4 (1993) 2 ALL ER 964, 970.  
  
34\. _Soleada SA v. Hamoor Tanker_ Inc (1981) 1 ALL ER 856.  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_Chula de Silva P.C with R. Sri Kantha and Murshid Maharoof_ for the
appellants.  
  
_N. Sinnathamby with D. Philips_ for the respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**107**

27th January, 1998  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
Both the plaintiff-petitioner-respondent company (the plaintiff) and the 2nd
defendant-respondent-appellant (the defendant) claim ownership of the MV
Kalyani (the vessel). While the vessel was in the Port of Colombo, in the
possession and control of the defendant, the plaintiff instituted this action
in rem in the High Court of Colombo on 10.4.95, by issuing a writ of summons,
in terms of rule 4 of the High Court (Admiralty Jurisdiction) Rules, 1991
(made under Article 136 of the Constitution read with section 11 (3) of the
Admiralty Jurisdiction Act, No. 40 of 1983). At the same time the plaintiff
applied for and obtained a warrant for the arrest of the vessel, under rule
25, and the vessel was accordingly arrested on 16.4.95. On 21.4.95 the High
Court directed the release of the vessel upon the defendant giving security,
by means of bank guarantees to the value of US$ 300,000.  
  
In its petition dated 17.5.95, the plaintiff claimed the ownership of the
vessel, alleging that it was wrongfully and unlawfully in the possession of
the defendant who had no right thereto, and prayed for a declaration that the
plaintiff was the owner of the vessel, and:  
  
"for damages in a sum of US$ 300,000, together with further damages in a sum
of US$ 3,000 per day until the vessel . . . is delivered to the plaintiff in
good order and condition."  
  
The defendant filed a "statement of claim/answer" dated 25.4.95, and an answer
dated 27.6.95, pleading that he was the owner of the vessel; he made three
claims in reconvention, of which only one is relevant to the present appeal:
that the plaintiff "wrongfully and/or maliciously and/or fraudulently caused
the vessel to be arrested" on or about 10.4.95, in consequence of which
wrongful arrest the defendant had suffered loss and damage in a sum of US$
300,000 and continuing damages in a sum of US$ 3,000 per day. He also asked
the court to order the plaintiff to deposit security/bail in respect of those
counter-claims.  
  
Although somewhat wider issues were argued in the High Court, the questions
that now arise are just two. The first is whether the defendant was entitled
to make a claim in reconvention for damages

**108**

for wrongful and/or malicious and/or fraudulent arrest (which I will for
convenience refer to as "malicious arrest"); and it is common ground that this
depends upon the interpretation of section 2 (1) (a) of the Admiralty
Jurisdiction Act, No. 40 of 1983. The second question, which arises only if
the Court does have the power to entertain such a claim, is whether the Court
can order the plaintiff to give security/bail in respect of that claim in
reconvention for malicious arrest.  
  
The High Court answered both questions in the affirmative, and directed the
plaintiff to give/deposit security for the claims in reconvention in a sum of
US$ 300,000, as a condition precedent to the trial of the action. He held that
the larger power, of determining claims to possession or ownership, must be
taken to include the lesser power, of awarding damages in the event of a
determination by the Court that the arrest was wrongful.  
  
The plaintiff made applications for leave to appeal and for revision to the
Court of Appeal, which made an interim order staying the order for the deposit
of security. In the course of that order, the Court observed:  
  
. . . an action in common law would lie for the wrongful arrest of a ship even
in English law. Thus it is to be seen that the defendant is not entitled to
make a claim for damages by way of a claim in reconvention in an action
instituted by the plaintiff for the arrest of a ship under the provisions of
the Admiralty Jurisdiction Act of 1983. The learned High Court Judge . . . .
appears to have taken the view that since section 2 (1) (a) gives him a
jurisdiction to determine any claim in regard to the possession or ownership
of a ship that the said jurisdiction necessarily empowers him to decide the
question of damages arising on account of a wrongful arrest. This does not
appear to us to be tenable and we are of the view that the learned High Court
Judge erred in requiring security . . .  
  
Mr. Chula de Silva, PC, for the defendant, submitted that the Court of Appeal
had decided the principal question in issue, and decided it wrongly, on the
mistaken assumption that simply because there is a common law remedy, there is
no remedy under the statute, and asked for special leave to appeal to this
Court.  
  
Both counsel agreed that the question whether there can be a counter-claim for
malicious arrest was of general importance and had not been the subject of any
decision in "Sri Lanka. Special leave was granted on three questions which
ultimately became narrowed down to the two questions which I have set out
earlier.

**109**

I. Any claim to the possession or ownership of a ship.  
  
1\. Section 2 (1) (a) of the Act. This provides:  
  
"The admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court . . . shall . . . be as follows,
that is to say, jurisdiction to hear and determine any of the following
questions or claims:  
  
(a) any claim to the possession or ownership of a ship or to the ownership of
a share therein . . ."  
  
Before considering what claims a defendant may make in reconvention, it is
relevant to consider what claims a plaintiff may make under this limb.  
  
Mr. Sinnatamby for the plaintiff contrasted the language of some of the other
limbs of section 2 (1) - which refer to any claim in respect of a mortgage,
any claim arising out of any agreement, any claim in the nature of pilotage,
and any question as to possession, etc. - and submitted that a claim "to"
possession or ownership is much narrower in scope. The effect of this
contention is that a claim "too the ownership of a vessel is no more than an
assertion that ownership has been denied; such a claim cannot result in
anything more than a decree that the claimant is entitled to ownership, and to
an order that the vessel be restored to him. This contention attempts to draw
a distinction between title and other rights of ownership: and asserts that
only the outright denial of title gives rise to a claim "to" ownership, while
interference with, or deprivation of, other rights of ownership do not give
rise to claims "to" ownership - and accordingly that there can be no
adjudication or relief in respect of the latter. Claims for damages for the
deprivation of the possession of a vessel, or of its use, are not to be
regarded as claims "to" ownership, and are outside the jurisdiction of the
High Court. He contended that if the legislature had intended to allow such
claims, paragraph (a) would have referred to "any claim in respect of [or as
to] ownership".  
  
It was not, argued Mr. Sinnatamby, as if there was no remedy in respect of
such other claims: actions could be brought in other Courts, in Sri Lanka or
elsewhere, in respect of such claims for damages. That means, however, that if
a vessel is hijacked in one jurisdiction, and if some of its equipment is
removed and sold in

**110**

another, and if it is then arrested in Colombo in an action in rem brought by
the true owner, the High Court can only give him a declaration of title and
restoration of possession; and he would be compelled to institute separate
actions, in Colombo or elsewhere, in respect of his other causes of action.
Even if the vessel had been completely stripped of its machinery and
equipment, so that it became a mere hull, the Court would be powerless to
award damages or compensation to the true owner to ensure that he would at
least receive the actual value of his vessel. Such an interpretation would
result in great inconvenience; would encourage a multiplicity of suits; and
may even compel an owner to institute proceedings in another jurisdiction with
no real hope of enforcing the judgment. Indeed, that interpretation would seem
to exclude the claim for damages which the plaintiff itself made.  
  
Mr. de Silva submitted (citing Abdul Hamidu v. Perera,(1) ) that the word
"any" excludes limitations or qualifications of any kind whatsoever, and
signifies that claims of every kind were permissible. A claim for damages in
respect of the wrongful or malicious deprivation of possession of a vessel was
therefore included in the phrase "any claim to possession". I do not agree
with that reasoning. If the word "to" does indeed have the effect to
restricting permissible claims to bare declarations (and to restoration of
possession), and of excluding claims for damages, the undoubted amplitude of
the word "any" would have the effect only of allowing "any" claim (i.e. all
claims, or each and every claim) falling within the permitted category, but
would not in any way eliminate those restrictions, or enlarge the permitted
category of claims.  
  
However, I find it difficult to agree with Mr. Sinnatamby that the word "to"
restricts the category of permissible claims to bare declarations (and
restoration of possession). The use of other phrases - such as n respect of,
arising out of, in the nature of, and as to - would make little difference,
because it could nevertheless equally well have been argued that a claim "in
respect or (or "as to") ownership includes only a declaration, on the ground
that a claim for damages for infringements of the rights of ownership is not
one in respect of (or as to) ownership, but arises from the denial of the
rights of ownership.

**111**

In my view this provision must be interpreted in the context of the undoubted
purpose of the Act: to enable certain disputes to be resolved by the High
Court under and in terms of the special procedures provided. What then are the
claims "to" ownership which the Legislature had in mind? The rights of the
owner of a thing include not only the right to recognition by others that he
is the owner - i.e. recognition of title \- but also his right to possess, to
use, and to enjoy the fruits of that thing. A dispute regarding his ownership
can certainly arise if someone else merely claims title to that thing. But
such a dispute would also arise \- and more often arises - when another
interferes with, or deprives him of, any of his other rights of ownership. So
when the true owner of a thing asks the Court to decide a dispute regarding
his claim "to" ownership, that claim will, more often than not, involve
assertions that the adverse party has wrongfully interfered with or deprived
him of his rights to the possession, use and enjoyment of that thing - and the
denial of title will generally be only a matter of inference from those
wrongful acts. Obviously, the effective resolution of such a dispute requires
not only a declaration of title and an order for the restoration of
possession, but also a remedy for the wrongful denial or infringement of other
rights of ownership, and that would generally take the form of compensation or
damages.  
  
It is therefore more reasonable to interpret the jurisdiction to decide claims
"to" ownership as not being confined to the academic determination and
declaration of title, but as extending to the adjudication of all the
questions and issues arising from an alleged infringement of any of the rights
of ownership.  
  
Let me turn briefly to claims "to" possession. If a person claims that he was
entitled, to possession of a vessel under an agreement with the owner, but
that the owner has wrongfully deprived him of his rights of possession, could
it reasonably be argued that his claim "to" possession cannot include a claim
for damages for the wrongful deprivation of possession? Having regard to the
delays in litigation, it may well happen that the agreed period for which he
was entitled to possession has expired by the time the action is decided, so
that an order for restoration of possession is no longer possible: must he
then be content with a decree that he was indeed entitled to possession during
that period? Here, too, it is more reasonable to regard his claim 'to"
possession as including a claim that he had been wrongfully deprived of
possession, and a claim for compensation.

**112**

It seems to me, therefore, that the more reasonable interpretation of section
2 (1) (a) is that a plaintiff's claim "to" ownership includes a complaint not
only that the defendant has challenged his title, but also that the defendant
has interfered with or deprived him of all or any of his rights of ownership.
That provision does not limit the relief which the Court may grant upon such a
claim: it permits a declaration of title, and the restoration of possession,
as well as damages for the infringement of the rights of ownership. That
interpretation has the added virtue of avoiding incovenience and injustice.  
  
Nothing in the Act denies to defendant the benefit of section 2 (1) (a), and
so it must follow that the claims in reconvention which a defendant is
entitled to make include such claims for damages. I will return to the
question whether the defendant's claim for damages for malicious arrest falls
within that class of claims, after dealing with the legislative history of the
1983 Act.  
  
At the conclusion of the oral argument, we asked both counsel to cite any
decisions interpreting the corresponding English provisions (and similar
provisions, if any, enacted in other jurisdictions). The written submissions
later filed contained no reference whatever to any such decisions or
provisions.  
  
**2\. Legislative context and history.** While I think that the language of
section 2 (1) (a) of the 1983 Act lends itself much more readily to the
broader interpretation, consistent with both convenience and justice, than the
narrower one for which Mr. Sinnatamby contends, yet I cannot ignore the fact
that the 1983 Act - "to amend and consolidate the law" \- has a complex
legislative history of many decades. Indeed, what Mr. de Silva cited in
support of the broader interpretation were three 19th century decisions. It is
therefore necessary to consider whether, possibly, the legislative context of
the 1983 Act provides any justification for preferring the narrower
interpretation. Was it the law before 1983 that such claims could not be
entertained, and, if so, is there any reason to think that the Legislature
intended the law to remain unchanged?  
  
The history of our Admiralty law, and its dependence on English law, has been
traced back to the Charter of Justice of 1833: see Bawazir v. Acting Master MV
AYESHA,(2) at 319-320 and it is sufficient for me to make a brief reference to
just some aspects of that history.

**113**

The need to refer to English Law arises because our Admiralty Law prior to
1983 was English Law. Section 2 of the Ceylon Courts of Admiralty Ordinance,
No. 2 of 1891, declared the Supreme Court to be a Colonial Court of Admiralty
(in terms of the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890), having:  
  
'Jurisdiction, subject to the provisions and limitations contained in the
Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890, over the like places, persons, matters
and things as the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court in England, whether
existing by virtue of any Statute or otherwise, and such Colonial Court of
admiralty may exercise such jurisdiction in like manner and to as full an
extent as the High Court in England . . .  
  
No distinction was made between statutory and common law jurisdictions. It was
held in Government of the USA v. The ship Valiant Enterprise (3), that the
jurisdiction conferred was limited to the admiralty jurisdiction of the High
Court of England as it existed at the passing of the Act; accordingly,
statutory changes introduced after 1891 and before 1961 were not part of our
law.  
  
However, when that Ordinance was repealed by section 3 (1) (a) of the
Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, the High Court (designated in
terms of section 23) was given "admiralty jurisdiction", namely:  
  
"the admiralty jurisdiction for the time being of the High Court of England"
(section 54),  
  
unless and until the Legislature made contrary provision.  
  
Thus in 1973 the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court was the same as that
of the High Court of England, and included' those jurisdictions introduced by
statute after 1891, as well as after 1973. Here, too, no distinction was made
between statutory and common law jurisdictions.  
  
Immediately before the 1983 Act was enacted, therefore, the admiralty
jurisdiction of the High Court was the same as that of the High Court of
England.  
  
What then was the admiralty. jurisdiction of the English High Court? Or,
rather, did that jurisdiction include the power to entertain a claim for
damages for-malicious arrest?

**114**

Mr. Sinnatamby's contentions were summarized thus in his written submissions
tendered after the oral argument:  
  
. . . there is no justification for adding to the jurisdiction of the Court
provided by section 2 (1) of the Act. It is significant that even the English
Law - Supreme Court Act, 1981 - does not vest this jurisdiction to entertain
claims for wrongful arrest, but assuming, not conceding, that is a common law
remedy, the English Law may have left the door open by section [20 (1) (c)
which brought in 'any other admiralty jurisdiction which it had immediately
before the commencement of this Act']. This provision is not in our Act and
accordingly it is not open to introduce English Law, more so as the
Legislature has considered the matter and in section 12 of our Act expressed
the limitation on the use of English Law to matters of procedure as against
jurisdiction.  
  
. . . none of the Admiralty Law text writers - such as Meeson, Jackson - make
any reference to a jurisdiction to try claims for wrongful arrest or [to
order] security for counter-claims and neither does Halsbury or the British
Shipping Laws make any reference to such a jurisdiction. The Evangelismos case
is not even referred to by them, though the Strathnaver case is referred to
[in] Halsbury but not in relation to this but on the aspect of the right of a
party to question the acceptance of a surety provided for the release of a
vessel."  
  
Section 1 (1) (a) of the Administration of Justice Act, 1956, is virtually
identical to section 20 (2) (c) of the Supreme Court Act, 1981, and to our
section 2 (1) (a). Section 2 (1) of the 1956 Act makes provision similar to
section 20 (1) (c) of the 1981 Act, but our 1983 Act has nothing of that sort.  
  
Mr. de Silva relied heavily on the Privy Council decision in Xenos v.
Aldersley (The Evangelismos)(4). That was a claim for damage done by collision
brought against the Evangelismos, which was arrested and detained for some
months; the plaintiffs failed to establish that it was the vessel which had
caused the damage; the owner of that vessel was therefore dismissed from the
suit with costs; and he asked the High Court of Admiralty of England to award
damages against the plaintiffs for the damages and losses sustained in
consequence of such arrest and detention. The Court refused, as it considered
that

**115**

the arrest had been made in the bona fide belief that it was the vessel which
had been in collision with the plaintiffs' vessel. On appeal, the Privy
Council said:  
  
"It appears that there was a defence put in, by which the appellants claimed
not only to have the suit dismissed, but to have costs and damages awarded to
them for the injury sustained by the detention and demurrage of the ship while
under arrest . . .  
  
It is also said that it is the established rule of the Admiralty Court where a
party brings an action and succeeds in upholding it, that he is entitled,
unless there are circumstances to take it out of the ordinary rule, to have
some compensation for the loss he has suffered, which in some cases is very
inadequate, but it is the only compensation the Court can award.  
  
Their Lordships think there is no reason for distinguishing this case, or
giving damages. Undoubtedly there may be cases in which there is either mala
fides, or that crassa negligentia, which implies malice, which would justify a
Court of Admiralty giving damages, as in an action brought at Common Law
damages may be obtained. In the Court of Admiralty the proceedings are,
however, more convenient, because in the action in which the main question is
disposed of, damages may be awarded.  
  
The real question in this case, following the principles laid down with regard
to actions of this description, comes to this: is there or is there not,
reason to say that the action was so unwarrantably brought, or brought with so
little colour, or so little foundation, that it rather implies malice on the
part of the plaintiff, or that gross negligence which is equivalent to it?'  
  
The Privy Council agreed that there were circumstances which afforded ground
for believing that the vessel was the one which had been involved in the
collision, and affirmed the judgment, and dismissed the appeal.  
  
Mr. de Silva also cited The Walter D. Wallet (5) and the Cathcart(6). The
former was not an admiralty action in rem, but an action at Common Law for the
malicious arrest of the vessel. It was held:  
  
'No precedent, as far as I know, can be found in the books of an action at
Common Law for the malicious arrest of a ship by means of admiralty process
... As Lord Campbell said in Churchill v. Siggers(7). To put into force the
process of law maliciously and without any reasonable or probable cause is
wrongful; and, if thereby another is prejudiced in property or person, there
is that conjunction of injury and loss which is the foundation of an action on
the case'. Why is the process of law in admiralty proceedings to be excepted
from this principle? It was long ago held that an action on the case would lie
for malicious prosecution . . . It car. hardly be denied that it would have
lain for malicious arrest of a person by

**115**

admiralty process in the days when admiralty suits so commenced . . . But if
for arrest of a person by admiralty process, why not for arrest of a person's
property? I can imagine no answer, and the language of the reasons of the
Privy Council in the case of The Evangelismos . . . appears to me to treat the
existence of such an action at Common Law as indisputable . . . Probably the
reason why no example of such an action at common law is to be found, is that
superior convenience, though not exclusive jurisdiction, to which the above
words refer. As the Court of Admiralty, when setting aside the arrest (which
would be the preliminary to a Common Law action) could do full justice to the
injured person, he would not, and probably could not, subsequently resort to a
Common Law tribunal".  
  
There was no actual damage; the ship was not detained in port by the arrest;
nor was her loading interfered with. "Still, the action of the defendants was
... in common law phrase, without reasonable or probable cause; or, in
equivalent admiralty language, the result of crassa negligentia, and in a
sufficient sense mala fides." One pound sterling was awarded as damages.  
  
That was an action at Common Law. The Cathcart (supra) was an action in rem,
in the Admiralty Court, on a mortgage. The plaintiffs were condemned in costs
and damages because:  
  
. . . they had full knowledge of the facts . . . and would have known they had
no right to arrest the vessel. Add to this, the arrest of the vessel was on
the eve of commencing a profitable voyage, and after a decision of the
magistrate adverse to their claim, and [they] have attempted to support the
proceeding by making charges of fraud against the defendants which they have
quite failed to prove."  
  
Mr. de Silva submitted that in the present case the defendant's counter-claim
was the same: damages for a malicious arrest without reasonable or probable
cause.  
  
If the question which we now have to decide had arisen at any time after 1891
and before 1973, our Courts would have had to determine what the English Law
was in 1891, and I have no doubt that our Courts would have regarded the 1858
decision of the Privy Council (supported by the two subsequent decisions) as
correctly stating the English Law. Likewise, in and after 1973, the provisions
of the Administration of Justice Act, 1956, and the Supreme Court Act, 1981,
would have been regarded as confirming, and not reversing, those three English
decisions.

**117**

However, in view of Mr. Sinnatamby's very confident assertion that Halsbury
and English text-writers do not even refer to The Evangelismos, I tried to see
whether that was a wayward or now obsolete decision, or whether other
decisions either had followed it or were to the like effect. There were
numerous relevant references in the English and Empire Digest, volume 1 (of
which the 1961 . edition is the latest available in the Supreme Court
library). In several cases The Evangelismos had been applied or approved: The
Strathnaver(8), The Active(9), The Kate(10), The Collingrove(11), The
Numida(12), and The Margaret Janer(13), are some.  
  
Further, in The Evangelismos the Privy Council followed established
principles, and did not create a new precedent. Prior to 1858, defendants
complaining of wrongful arrest had been awarded "costs, losses, charges,
damages, demurrage and expenses caused by the illegal arrest of "The Orion
(14), "costs and expenses consequent on the arrest of" The Nautilus(15), and
"costs, damages, demurrage and expenses" caused by the arrest of The Gloria de
Maria(16), a salvage action which was later abandoned by the plaintiff. Again,
in The Glasgow(17), a dispute as to ownership which has a resemblance to the
present case \- the ship was sold by her master without any authority from her
owner, and her name was changed; it was then arrested:  
  
"at the suit of her owner . . . in a cause of possession, and the ship
remained under arrest until the cause was heard . . .. the Judge, by his
interlocutory decree, dismissed the defendants who had purchased this ship,
and condemned ... her former owner in demurrage and costs."  
  
One of the decisions cited in the argument in the Privy Council was The
John(18). The Vice-Admiralty Court of Gibraltar in a cause of possession,
decided in favour of the plaintiff, the alleged purchaser of the vessel; that
decision was reversed on appeal, and the Court ordered restitution of the
vessel to its former possessor:  
  
". . . as he has been dispossessed of his vessel, which has been in the hands
of [the plaintiff] for two or three years, I should not do full justice if I
did not pronounce also for compensation, in the nature of demurrage . . . I am
willing to presume that everything has been done for proper motives; but, as I
think the

**118**

judgment of the Court below is founded on erroneous principles . . . it is my
duty to reverse it, and award to the party such relief as may amount to an
equitable compensation for the injury which he has sustained."  
  
Damages or wrongful arrest have been awarded, not only in actions for damage
done by involving collision, in which the wrong vessel was arrested (as in The
Evangelismos (supra) ), but in many other types of action. Where after
obtaining the arrest of a vessel the plaintiff abandoned the suit, in The
Western Ocean (19), an action to enforce a mortgage - he was ordered to pay
the defendant interest on the money paid into Court to obtain the release of
the vessel; see also The Gloria de Maria (supra), and The Eleonore(20), both
salvage actions. In the latter, it was held that the fact that the arrest was
made without prior claim and for a sum disproportionate to the value of the
property and the services rendered, was evidence of negligence, and that the
defendant was entitled to damages.  
  
Apart from abandonment, in salvage actions damages have been awarded where the
arrest was improper: The Nautilus (supra), where the vessel had been arrested
although the sum due had been tendered before the arrest, and The George
Gordon (21), where the defendant had to provide bail in an exorbitant sum,
because the claim was unreasonably excessive, the plaintiffs were ordered to
pay all costs and expenses of finding bail. However, damages were not awarded
where mala fides or gross negligence were lacking: The Kate (supra), The
Strathnaver (supra), and The Margaret Jane (supra). In The Eudora(22), the
holder of a bottomry bond arrested the secured vessel before the bond was due;
the bond was paid at or before maturity; and the shipowner was held entitled
to costs, but not to .damages in the absence of mala fides or gross
negligence. The John and The Glasgow were causes of possession. The dispute in
The Walter D. Wallet, (supra) had its origin in an agreement to sell the
vessel, although the question of damages arose in a subsequent action at
Common Law.  
  
In most of these causes damages were awarded for arrest and detention during
the period **before** judgment. In the The Cheshire Witch(21), the vessel was
detained for twelve days **after** the action had been dismissed, because the
plaintiff was considering an appeal, which he then decided against: damages
were awarded. In The John

**119**

(supra) compensation seems to have been awarded even for detention pending
appeal.  
  
Finally, I must refer to The Crimdon (24), which involved R.S.C. Order 29,
rules 12 and 18 - which are similar to rules 159 and 163 of our old Admiralty
Rules, 1883, which have been re-enacted as rules 141 and 145 of our present
High Court (Admiralty Jurisdiction) Rules, 1991:  
  
"141\. Any person desiring to prevent the arrest of any property may file a
notice undertaking, within three days after being required to do so, to give
bail to any action or counter-claim that may have been, or may be, brought
against the property, and thereupon the Registrar shall enter a caveat in the
caveat warrant book . . .  
  
145\. The entry of a caveat warrant shall not prevent the issue of a warrant,
but a party at whose instance a warrant is issued for the arrest of any
property in respect of which there is a caveat warrant outstanding shall be
condemned in all costs and damages occasioned thereby unless he shall show to
the satisfaction of the Judge good and sufficient reason to the contrary."  
  
Despite an undertaking by the defendants' solicitors, given without
qualification, to enter an appearance and to give bail in a sum not exceeding
the value of the ship, cargo and freight, and the caveat thereupon entered,
the plaintiffs arrested the ship (even without inquiry as to whether the
undertaking was satisfactory). It was held that they had failed to show good
and sufficient reason for the arrest and were condemned in damages and costs.  
  
For the sake of completeness, I must also refer to our old Rule 129, now re-
enacted as Rule 115:  
  
115\. A party claiming an excessive amount, either by way of claim or setoff
or counter-claim, may be condemned in all costs and damages thereby
occasioned.'  
  
If a party having a just claim may be condemned in damages because the amount
he claimed was excessive, can a party making a wholly unjust claim escape?  
  
These rules reflect the undoubted jurisdiction of Admiralty Courts to
compensate a party for the injury he has suffered by reason of what amounts to
the malicious abuse of its process. As observed in The Kate: (supra)

**120**

. . . redress in the form of costs and damages, is a just remedy approved [n
The Evangelismos] ... and has been the undisputed and uniform practice of this
court from the beginning down to the present time."  
  
So also in The Collingrove (supra), The Numida (supra), the defendant was
awarded as damages the commission he paid to obtain bail in order to obtain
the release of the vessel and thereby to avert the damage he would have
suffered by its continued detention, because:  
  
"It has always been the practice in the Court of Admiralty for the judge to
award these damages to the defendant, whereupon the trial the facts have shown
that he was entitled to them, without putting him to the necessity of bringing
a fresh action for them."  
  
The reason was stated thus in The Walter D. Wallet: (supra)  
  
"As the Court of Admiralty, when setting aside the arrest . . could do full
justice to the injured person, he would not, and probably could not,
subsequently resort to a Common Law tribunal".  
  
In view of this mass of case law, Mr. Sinnatamby's submission that The
Evangelismos had not been referred to in Halsbury and by text-writers
surprised me. I find that Halsbury (volume 45, paras 13781379) does refer to
that decision, and half a dozen besides, in support of the following:  
  
"1378\. An action lies against a person who maliciously and without reasonable
and probable cause procures, by means of Admiralty proceedings, the arrest of
a ship, if the ship has been released and the proceedings have terminated in
favour of the person aggrieved by the arrest.  
  
1379 . . . Where actual damage has been sustained, the Admiralty Court will
not, if the facts are properly brought to its knowledge . . . put the injured
party to the necessity of bringing a fresh action, but will, in the original
action, award him damages for the wrongful arrest, usually in the nature of
demurrage".  
  
Further, The Evangelismos was manifestly approved in Astro Vencedor SA v.
Mabanaft(25). In considering whether a claim for damages for wrongful arrest
was within the scope of an arbitration (upon charterers' claim for damages
against ship owners), Lord Denning said .

**121**

'The arrest of the ship was the direct consequence of the charterers' claim
for damages against the shipowners. . . The arrest was simply the follow-up to
that claim. It was so closely connected with it that the rightness or
wrongness of the arrest is also within the scope of the arbitration. This is
borne out by the practice of the Admiralty Court. There have not been many
claims for wrongful arrest recently. But the practice of the Court of
Admiralty is to deal with a claim for wrongful arrest at the same time as the
claim for which the arrest was made. In The Evangelismos ... the Privy Council
said that such procedure is very 'convenient'.'  
  
As for omission by text-writers, The Evangelismos is in fact referred to in
the British Shipping Laws (1971 ed., vol. 2, para 1192; and 1961 ed., vol. 4,
paras 399-400 and 445).  
  
I now turn to Mr. Sinnatamby's submission that the jurisdiction, if any, to
award damages for malicious arrest is a Common Law jurisdiction which exists
in England because it is expressly saved, and is absent in Sri Lanka because
our Act lacks a similar saving clause.  
  
In considering whether that was a Common Law jurisdiction, it is necessary to
remember that while a jurisdiction granted by statute to a Court cannot be
expanded, either by removing statutory restrictions or by extension to other
subjects, under the guise of interpretation, yet the grant of such a
jurisdiction generally implies the grant of all that is necessary to make it
effective.  
  
The decisions discussed above show that the power to award damages for
malicious arrest - which is an abuse of the process of the Court - has always,
"from the beginning down to the present time", been regarded as ancillary or
incidental to the several jurisdictions of the Court of Admiralty, whether in
"causes of possession" (as in The Glasgow), (supra) or in other actions in
respect of mortgages; collisions, salvage, sale agreements, or bottomry bonds;
and never as distinct jurisdiction.  
  
It is true that a power of that kind is often expressly given, particularly in
relation to ex parte orders - as, for instance, interim injunctions (section
667, CPC), and orders for arrest and sequestration before judgment (section
654, CPC). However, in the case of those admiralty actions which commence with
an ex parte arrest, "the undisputed and uniform practice" of the Court has
always been to grant a "just remedy" in the form of costs and damages,
"without putting the defendant to the necessity of bringing a fresh action",
provided the arrest has been mala fide or grossly negligent, thereby

**122**

doing "full justice to the injured person". The duty of the court to prevent
an injustice, especially where it arises from the act of the court itself, has
been recognized leg. Eswaralingam v. Sivagnanasunderam(26), Sirinivasa Thero
v. Sudassi Thero(27)).  
  
In my view, that power is not a distinct jurisdiction; and certainly not a
distinct Common Law jurisdiction - and none of the cases suggests that it has
ever been regarded as such. On the contrary, it has been exercised as a power
which is necessarily incidental to an admiralty jurisdiction - whether
conferred by statute or otherwise -which commences with an arrest because the
Court must be able to do full justice, by repairing an injury done to a party
by the arrest ordered by the Court, at the instance of the other party in an
action "which was so unwarrantably brought, or brought with so little colour,
or so little foundation" as to imply malice. To put it another way, when a
plaintiff makes a claim, he invokes a jurisdiction; the arrest of the vessel
is "simply the follow-up to that claim"; and the "wrongness of the arrest" is
a matter within the scope of the original claim, and therefore of the
jurisdiction originally invoked.  
  
That may be illustrated by reference to the Admiralty Court Act, 1840, which
was enacted to improve the practice and to extend the jurisdiction of the High
Court of Admiralty in England. Section IV conferred jurisdiction "to decide
all questions as to the title to or ownership of any ship or vessel, or the
proceeds thereof remaining in the Registry, arising in any cause of
possession, salvage, damage, wages or bottomry, which shall be instituted in
the said Court." The Glasgow (supra) was one such "cause of possession",
decided in 1855, and involved a question as to title to ownership; the arrest
was referable to the jurisdiction granted by section IV; and the determination
that the arrest was wrongful and the order for demurrage were also referable
to that same jurisdiction. Sections III and VI gave jurisdiction in respect of
mortgages, salvage, towage, damage to ships, and necessaries supplied, and
awards of damages for arrests in such cases were referable to those
jurisdictions. A "cause of possession" in one in which a "claim to possession"
is made; and "the cause of possession contemplated in section 4 [of the 1840
Act] is of the same nature as the possessory action in respect of land known
to our courts under the Roman Dutch law, namely . . . . a suit in which a
person who had possession can be restored to possession if wrongly
dispossessed": Cargo (etc.) Management Corp. v. The Ship Valiant
Enterprise(28).

**123**

Turning to our old rules of 1883, Form 21 (12) provides specimen pleadings in
an action for restitution of a ship: the appropriate claim is for "the
restitution of the vessel together with costs and damages for the seizure
thereof."  
  
I therefore hold that, prior to the 1983 Act, the power of the Courts of
Admiralty to award damages for malicious arrest was incidental to their power
to arrest vessels in order effectually to exercise their statutory
jurisdictions. I find nothing, within the four corners of the 1983 Act,
suggestive of a legislative intention to take away that power. While I do
consider the more reasonable interpretation of the language of section 2 (1)
(a) to be that it permits both a claim as well as a counterclaim for damages
for interference with of deprivation or the rights of ownership (cf. Form 21
(12) ), that, however, is not necessary for the decision of this appeal,
because the defendant's claim is more restricted: it is a claim for damages
for malicious arrest. I hold that such a claim is permissible; and that any
contrary interpretation is unacceptable because of the language of section 2
(1) (a) and its legislative history, and the resulting inconvenience and
injustice.  
  
**3\. The nature of the claim for damages for malicious arrest.  
  
**This appeal was argued on the assumption, by bench and bar, that the claim
was wholly delictual in nature. However, there can be a delictual claim for
"malicious arrest" only in respect of a person. The malicious arrest of a
vessel, by admiralty proceedings, it seems to me, would constitute a malicious
abuse of legal proceedings, and a cause of action would accrue to a defendant
aggrieved by such proceedings only if and when the proceedings terminate in
his favour. It follows that until then he can neither institute an action nor
make a counter-claim. However, the power of the Court, consistently recognised
and exercised over a long period of time to award damages for malicious
arrest, is ancillary or incidental to its power to arrest a vessel, and can be
exercised in the same proceedings. Such a claim for damages can be made
without awaiting the termination of the proceedings.  
  
Answering the first question, I hold that the defendant was entitled to make a
counter-claim for damages for a wrongful arrest where there was either. mala
fides or gross negligence which implies malice.

**124**

**ii. Security for counter-claim  
**  
Mr. de Silva referred to rules 18 and 46, which recognise the right of a
defendant to make a counter-claim against the plaintiff, and cited rule 36 in
support of his contention that the Court can order the plaintiff to give
security in respect of such a counter-claim. He referred to The Carnarvon
Castle(29), and The Charkieh(30). Rule 36 provides:  
  
"36 (1). Bail on behalf of a party to an action in rem shall be given by bond
and shall be [in form 13] and the sureties to the bond must enter into the
bond . . . "  
  
However, that rule does not require or authorise the Court to order bail; it
only prescribes how bail is to be given, if the Court does order bail. Whether
and when the Court can order bail depends on other provisions.  
  
Rule 114, for instance, provides that "if a plaintiff ... is not resident in
Sri Lanka, the Judge may, on the application of the adverse party, order him
to give security for costs." Prima facie, the express grant of the power to
order security for costs and the omission of any power to order security for a
counter-claim, gives rise to a legitimate (though not conclusive) inference
that the latter is excluded.  
  
Mr. Sinnatamby went much further. "Bail" in rule 36, he submitted, was
confined to security for the release of a vessel or other property; "bail" did
not include security for other matters; and hence there could be no "bail" for
a claim for damages for malicious arrest. Further, under the rules a plaintiff
could be required to give security only for costs, and for nothing else; in
English Law, exceptionally, security for a counter-claim, he said, "has only
been entertained in collision cases where each party sues the other and
accordingly it would be unfair to permit one party to arrest a vessel in cases
where the other cannot do so as the vessel either does not exist or is not
within the Court's jurisdiction". At a more fundamental level, he argued, "not
even the District Court under the Civil Procedure Code has the power to
require a plaintiff to give security for a counter-claim ... [and] what is
sought to be obtained is an order unheard of in the Civil Law in this
country".  
  
Whatever "bail" may mean in other contexts, in our Admiralty Rules "bail" does
not have the restricted meaning of security for the release

**125**

of property. In my view, our 1883 rules used that term in the wider sense of
security: thus rules 128 and 150 referred to "bail for costs" and "bail for
costs of appeal", respectively. Accordingly, the sureties' obligation under a
bail bond \- in Form 16 - arose, inter alia, if the plaintiff:  
  
"shall not pay what may be adjudged against him in the action, with costs (or
for costs if bail is to be given only for costs) . . . "  
  
"Bail" could thus be ordered for costs only, or for the amount of the
judgment, even if there was no question of the release of property from
arrest. The current rules, too continue to use the term "bail" in the wider
sense of security. Form 13 is similar to the old Form 14, but goes on to add a
reference to plaintiffs, "in the case of a counterclaim", not paying what may
be adjudged against them in the action, with costs. Although rule 114 now
refers to security (and not bail) for costs, "bail" elsewhere in the Rules
continues to be used in the same sense as before. But all this only shows that
bail can be given for a monetary counter-claim: it is not helpful as to when
the Court can order such bail.  
  
Mr. Sinnatamby correctly pointed out that the two cases cited by Mr. de Silva
were collision cases, for which English Law long had special provision (such
as section 34 of the Admiralty Court Act, 1861, and R. S. C. Order 75 rule
25). However, I find that in an old case, The D. H. Peri (31), it was held
that a foreign plaintiff will be required to give security for costs, but not
for. damages for wrongful arrest of the vessel although the defendant filed an
affidavit that the plaintiff had arrested, his vessel mistaking it for
another. Although the note of this decision in the Empire Digest states:
"Semble : cases may arise in which the security would be extended", the
English reports make no mention of any such observation. This decision was
followed in The Mary (or Alexandra)(32), an action instituted by the United
States. Counsel for the defendant referred to three other cases instituted by
the United States, involving vessels belonging to the same defendant, in which
the Court "during the vacation said it would not hear the United States unless
they gave security for both damages and costs". It was held:

**126**

"On behalf of the defendants it is argued that, this being a cause of
possession, in which by the practice of the court the vessel is not released,
damages must accrue to them from the institution of the cause - that is,
supposing the cause to have been improperly instituted; that the reasons for
requiring a plaintiff out of the jurisdiction to give security for costs apply
a fortiori to his giving security for damages; and I was referred also to the
practice of the Court of Chancery in granting injunctions. I do not deny that
there is force in these arguments: but, on the other hand, it has not been the
practice of this court to requite from a plaintiff out of the jurisdiction
security for damages (b. H. Peri).. The only case to the contrary is a recent
one decided in the vacation. I must decline to change the settled practice of
the court, and least of all in a case like the present, where there is no
reason to suspect the solvency or good faith of the plaintiffs."  
  
The Bazias 3, The Bazias 4,(33) is to the same effect.  
  
However, neither our 1983 Act, nor our rules - old and new contain anything
similar to Order 75, rule 25. It might perhaps have been argued that this was
a casus omissus, which made the English provision applicable by virtue of
section 12 of our Act, but the following new Rule 182 - to which I will return
in a moment - of our 1991 Rules gives wider powers to the Court  
  
"Nothing in these rules shall be deemed to limit or affect the inherent powers
of the Court to make any order as may be necessary to prevent injustice or to
prevent an abuse of the process of the court."  
  
I will first dispose of the submission that the power to order security for a
counter-claim is so extra-ordinary that it must be presumed to have been
outside legislative contemplation. Let me recall that a plaintiff bringing an
action in rem can obtain - by means of the seizure of the defendant's property
through an ex parte Court order - a pre-judgment security for his claim. That
is certainly unusual. But chapter 47 of the Civil Procedure Code does provides
for sequestration before judgment, giving the plaintiff a similar pre-judgment
security. To deter and to remedy an abuse of that process, section 654
provides that the Court must require the plaintiff (and that is without the
defendant even asking for it) to enter into a bond to pay all damages that may
be sustained by such sequestration - obviously because a subsequent award of
damages may be futile if the plaintiff had given no security.

**127**

Apart from such pre-judgment security, when a party obtains - before the final
adjudication - an enjoining order or an interim injunction which is
detrimental to the tights and interests of the adverse party, section 667 CPC
empowers the Court to award reasonable compensation if there was no probable
ground for applying for the injunction; and despite the absence of any express
provision, in the exercise of their discretion, Courts often order the party
asking for an injunction to give security.  
  
An order that security be given for a counter-claim for damages for a wrongful
arrest, where a pre-judgment security has been obtained ex parte, may be
unusual, but I do not think it to be fundamentally contrary either to
principle or to practice. Here we are considering an arrest which is alleged
to be not merely wrong, but also malicious - i.e. to be an abuse of the
process of the Court. On a question of procedure and practice such as this, if
there is an omission or an ambiguity, I must lean in favour of an
interpretation which permits an order for security.  
  
Rule 182 recognises the inherent powers of the Court to make orders to prevent
injustices and abuses of the process of the Court. It would appear from Mr.
Sinnatamby's submission that the rationale for the rule in English Law, in
collision cases, was to prevent the unfairness which results when the
plaintiff has arrested the defendant's vessel and thus has security for his
claim, by the defendant is unable to obtain a similar security. In view of
article 12 (1) of the Constitution, such concepts of fairness - of equality
before the law and the equal protection of the law - must pervade the
interpretation of the rules generally, and accordingly there is, no reason why
the power to order security for a counter-claim should be limited to collision
cases. I hold that rule 182 gives the Court a discretionary power to order
security for a counter-claim for malicious arrest.  
  
I must now consider how such security is to be calculated. That depends on
what heads of damage or compensation the Court can take into account in a
claim for malicious arrest.  
  
The decisions I have cited above show that losses, charges, demurrage, and
expenses caused can be recovered. The decisions in The George Gordon, The
Collingrove, The Numida, (supra), and

**128**

Soleada SA v. Hamoor Tanker Inc, (34) indicate that damages include the costs
and expenses (including commission paid) of finding bail.  
  
In ordering security in a sum of US$ 300,000 the learned High Court Judge
appears to have been influenced by the value of the vesel and/or the amount of
security provided by the defendant for the release of the vessel. Since the
defendant is in possession of the vessel, the value of the vessel is not
relevant. I therefore consider, that sum to be excessive. Taking into
consideration the possible loss occasioned by detention during the short
period which elapsed before the Court ordered the release of the vessel, and
the costs of finding bail, the security ordered should not have exceeded US$
30,000. Of course, looking at the matter today, the defendant has incurred the
costs of finding bail for over two years, but that delay would not have been
then anticipated; and if I were to order increased security on account of that
delay, I must for the same reason, in all fairness, order an appropriate
increase in the security which the defendant had to provide.  
  
As for the consequences of not providing security, our attention was not drawn
to any provision of the Act or the rules, or to any decision, dealing with the
question whether the High Court could dismiss, or stay, a plaintiff's action
for failure to provide security for a defendant's counter-claim; nor was any
submission made on that question.  
  
Answering the second question, I hold that the High Court had power to order
the plaintiff to give security for the defendant's counterclaim for damages
for malicious arrest, but that the amount fixed was excessive.  
  
**ORDER  
**  
For the above reasons, I allow the appeal, set aside the order of the Court of
Appeal, and restore the order of the High Court, subject to a reduction in the
amount of security. The plaintiff shall provide security in the High Court in
the sum of US$ 30,000 by depositing that sum or by means of a bank guarantee,
in accordance with the usual practice and procedure in that Court, and upon
such terms and conditions as that Court shall determine. If such security is
not provided within one month from the date of this judgment, or such extended

**129**

period - not exceeding a further two months - as the High Court may allow,
fairness demands that the defendant be forthwith released from his obligation
to provide security, and the High Court shall so order, but without prejudice
to the plaintiff's right to proceed with the action without security.  
  
I make no order for costs.  
  
**DHEERARATNE, J. - I agree.  
  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. - I agree.  
**_**  
Appeal allowed.**_  
  
_**Amount of security reduced.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/3.html_  

