##  Wickremasinghe and Others v. Cornel Perera and Others - SLR - 294, Vol 1
of 1996 [1996] LKSC 3; (1996) 1 Sri LR 294 (15 July 1996)

**294**

**WICKREMASINGHE AND OTHERS  
****v** **.  
****CORNEL** **PERERA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
DHEERARATNE, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. (S. L. A.) NO. 49/96.  
C.A. REVISION APPLICATION NO. 889/95.  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 4413/Spl.  
15 JULY, 1996.

_Application for review of order made by the Supreme Court by the court making
order or by reference to a fuller bench ‑Difference between jurisdiction to
grant special leave to appeal and appellate jurisdiction._

Leave to appeal to the Supreme Court can be granted either by the Court of
Appeal under Article 128(1) or by the Supreme Court under Article 128(2) of
the Constitution. When the Court of Appeal grants leave to appeal it does not
purport to correct errors either of inferior Courts or of its own. Obtaining
leave is a condition precedent to invoking the appellate jurisdiction of this
Court, and the grant of leave only involves considering whether the matter is
fit for review. It is thus distinct from the appellate jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal.

In the same way, when the Supreme Court grants leave under Article 128(2), it
exercises a jurisdiction which is anterior to and distinct from its appellate
jurisdiction. The proceedings in respect of leave, are thus distinct from the
appeal itself.

In any event, even if in a broader sense they can loosely be regarded as being
part of the appellate jurisdiction, yet it has two distinct stages, involving
two distinct issues, the first is whether leave ought to be granted, and that
depends on whether the question is important enough to merit adjudication by
the highest court, and the second is, at the appeal stage, to find the right
answer to that question. Thus it may happen that even if this Court thinks
that probably the question raised must be answered adversely to the
Petitioner, yet the Court may grant leave because it is in the public interest
that that question should be finally and authoritatively decided by the
Supreme Court.

The Petitioners' application for special leave to appeal was concluded on

**295**

28.2.96 and hence could not be referred under Article 132 (of the
Constitu­tion) to a "fuller bench".

The first part of the order which the petitioners seek to review for the
second time, permits and requires the District Court to decide (and not to
delay) the important questions of law which all parties concede are involved
in the action. The second part of the order, review of which the petitioners
now seek (although they did not in March 1996) merely permits the **status
quo** to prevail until the interim injunction inquiry is over. Although
asserting that that order was wrong, Counsel made no effort to show in what
respect the Court's reasoning was faulty. Thus there was no ground for the
second application for review.

The application for special leave was finally concluded when the order of
28.2.96 was made, and it cannot now be re‑opened before another bench or be
referred by His Lordship the Chief Justice to a "fuller bench". It was duly
listed before the present bench of the Supreme Court and no ground for review
has been established.

**Cases referred to :**

1\. _De Silva v._ _Fernandopulle_ ___S.C._ __ Nos. 66 & 67/95 S.C. Minutes of
9.7.96.

2\. _Moosajees_ _v_. _Fernando_ (1966) 68 NLR 414.

3\. _Liyanage_ _v. The Queen_ (1965) 68 NLR 265.

**APPLICATION** for review by the Supreme Court of its own order or by
refer­ence to a fuller bench.

_M.A. Sumanthiran_ for the Defendant Respondent‑Petitioners.

_S. Sivarasa P.C._ with _S.L. Gunasekera , S. Mahenthiran, Nihal Fernando _and
_N. R. Sivendran _for the Plaintiff‑Petitioner‑Respondent.

_Cur. adv_ _. vult._ __

July 26, 1996.

**FERNANDO, J.**

This is an application, filed on 7.5.96, to "constitute a fuller bench to
review the orders dated 21st March and 28th February 1996", and to set aside
those orders.

His Lordship the Chief Justice said that he did not think that he had the
power to refer this matter to a fuller bench and directed that it

296

be listed before the same bench which made those orders, and accordingly it
came up before this bench on 15.7.96.

The facts are fully set out in our order dated 21.3.96. The Plaintiff
instituted action in the District Court challenging his purported removal from
the office of Chairman and Managing Director (but not Director) of the 12th
Defendant Company. An enjoining order was made, and subsequently extended;
Counsel for the 1st to 6th and 12th Defendants ‑ the present Petitioners ‑
stated that the last extension of that enjoining order was operative up to 2nd
February, 1996. The present Petitioners made an application in revision,
asking the Court of Appeal to revise the order of 30.11.95 (in respect of the
enjoining order), to vacate the enjoining order issued, to uphold a
preliminary objection and dismiss the Plaintiff's action, and to stay the
proceedings in the District Court pending the hearing and determination of the
revision application. On 30.1.96 the Court of Appeal issued notice and made
order staying all further proceedings in the District Court; the Court made no
reference whatever to the enjoining order, although it was still in force.

The application for special leave to appeal against the order made on 30.1.96
was considered on several dates, and on 28.2.96 (1) special leave was granted
by this bench upon the question whether the Court of Appeal had the
jurisdiction and /or the discretion to make interim orders having the effect
of staying all proceedings in the Dis­trict Court, and in particular the
Plaintiff's application for interim in­junction and the Plaintiff's action
itself; (2) pending the final hearing and determination of the appeal, the
operation of the interim order made by the Court of Appeal was stayed, and the
District Court enjoining order was varied; and (3) the Court also made the
following order:

"Notwithstanding any order already made by the Court of Appeal, the District
Court of Colombo is directed to proceed to hear and determine the Plaintiff's
application for interim injunction and the action as expeditiously as
possible, giving precedence to that case; the District Court is directed to
call this case on 8.3.96, for the purpose of fixing dates in respect of the
interim injunction inquiry, which Counsel agree can be disposed of without
oral evidence, and to conclude that inquiry on or before 10.6.96;

**297**

and the enjoining order granted by the District Court will stand extended and
be operative [subject to certain modifications] up to 10.6.96, or the
conclusion of that inquiry, whichever is earlier."

In their petition filed on 13.3.96 (the first application for review) the
Petitioners did not seek review of the order granting special leave, the stay
of the Court of Appeal's interim order, and the variation of the District
Court's enjoining order. (Learned Counsel now appearing for the Petitioners
also stated that he did not seek review in respect of that part of the order.)

In the first application, the Petitioners prayed for the deletion of the
above‑quoted paragraph from the order of 28.2.96, and asked that a larger
bench be constituted to hear their application. However, at the hearing,
learned Counsel then appearing for the Petitioners stated that he had no
complaint in respect of the last part of that order, but sought review of the
first part of that order, namely the direction to the District Court to
proceed with the hearing.

But learned Counsel now appearing for the Petitioners states that they now
seek review of the **whole** of the above‑quoted paragraph of the order of
28.2.96.

Counsel submitted that we should recommend to His Lordship the Chief Justice
that the second application for review be referred to a "fuller bench", or to
a differently constituted bench. He contends that :

(1) despite the recent decision of a bench of five Judges of this Court in _de
Silva v. Fernandopulle_ (1) __ an order made by one bench can be reviewed by a
differently constituted bench or by a fuller bench;

(2) _Moosajees_ _v. Fernando,_ (2) __ is authority for the proposition that a
matter which has not been finally disposed of; can be re‑exam­ined by another,
differently constituted bench; in the present instance this Court commenced
exercising its appellate jurisdic­tion, when granting special leave, and the
exercise of that appellate jurisdiction has not yet been concluded;

**298**

(3) the Plaintiff‑Respondent is not entitled to the substantive relief which
he sought in the District Court, and the impugned portion of our order of
28.2.96 gives him, by way of interim relief, that which he cannot get
ultimately; and

(4) in the course of the submissions in February, the bench had suggested that
the parties might consider certain agreements or undertakings on the basis of
which the litigation then pending in the District Court (namely, the interim
injunction inquiry and the trial) might continue, during the pendency of the
appeal in this Court, and that upon the Petitioners not agreeing to any such
adjustment, the order made on 28.2.96 incorporated all those suggestions; and
thereby that order caused vexation to the Petitioners.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners tried to brush aside the unanimous
decision of a bench of five Judges in de _Silva v. Fernandopulle,_ with the
single sweeping submission that the Court having held that an application for
review must be considered by the same bench, nevertheless went on to review,
at great length, the impugned judgment on the merits, and then dismissed that
application. It is unfortunate that the following observations of Amerasinghe,
J., in the course of a care­ful and comprehensive judgment, seem to have
escaped Counsel's attention:

"the course of action we take in the extraordinary circumstances of this case
should not be regarded as a precedent for departing from the rule established
by practice. An exception confirms the rule."

Amerasinghe, J. found that there were no grounds for holding that there were
circumstances which brought the impugned decision within the scope of the
inherent powers of this Court. It was in these circumstances that the matter
was not referred to the original bench. It is wholly unjustifiable now to ask
that the exception be treated **** as being the rule, particularly where the
circumstances are anything but extraordinary. Indeed, what is extraordinary in
this case is the way in which the circumstances have somehow conspired to
delay the decision of the substantive questions.

299

_Moosajees_ _v. Fernando_ does not assist the Petitioners at all. There a
bench of five judges made an order upon a preliminary question of jurisdiction
in certain writ applications; that order did not result in a final order
(allowing or dismissing the applications); at a later stage in those
applications, a differently constituted bench (one of the original five Judges
not being conveniently available) reviewed the earlier or­der, in view of the
"unique circumstance" that in the meantime the error of the former order was
manifested by an intervening decision of the Privy Council (in _Liyanage_ _v.
The Queen._ (3)) The proceedings had not attained finality ‑ because a decree
disposing of the applications had not been entered. Here the proceedings in
the special leave application had attained finality on 28.2.96; the **** only
matter which arose in that proceeding had been finally determined; and nothing
more was required to give that order finality. Learned Counsel argued,
however, that the appellate jurisdiction of this Court also extended to the
con­sideration of the application for leave, and that until the appeal is
finally determined, the order granting leave can be reviewed. Leave to appeal
to the Supreme Court can be granted either by the Court of Appeal under
Article 128(1) or by this Court under Article 128(2). Coun­sel argued that
when the Court of Appeal granted leave, it did so in the exercise of its
appellate jurisdiction. But that seems misconceived. Under Article 138 the
appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal is to correct errors by inferior
Courts. When it grants leave, it does not purport to correct errors either of
inferior Courts or of its own. Obtaining leave is a condition precedent to
invoking the appellate jurisdiction of this Court, and the grant of leave only
involves considering whether the matter is fit for review. It is thus distinct
from the appellate jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal. In the same way, when
the Supreme Court grants leave under Article 128(2), it exercises a
jurisdiction which is anterior to and distinct from its appellate
jurisdiction. The proceedings in respect of leave are thus distinct from the
appeal itself. In any event, even if in a broader sense they can loosely be
regarded as being part of the appellate jurisdiction, yet it has two distinct
stages, involving two distinct issues: the first is whether leave ought to be
granted, and that depends on whether the question is important enough to merit
adjudication by the highest Court, and the second is, at the appeal stage, to
find the right answer to that question. Thus it may happen that even if this
Court thinks that probably the question raised must be answered adversely to
the petitioner, yet the Court may grant leave

**300**

because it is in the public interest that that question should be finally and
authoritatively decided by this Court. The Petitioners' application for
special leave to appeal was concluded on 28.2.96, and hence could not be
referred under Article 132 to a "fuller bench".

In elaborating the Petitioner's third contention, learned Counsel seized the
opportunity to attack the Plaintiff, calling him a self‑con­fessed fraud and a
wrongdoer in control of the company. He may be right or wrong, but the only
issue before the Court was whether there was a substantive question of law
involved; whether the Court of Appeal had the power to stay all further
proceedings in the District Court, including the interim injunction inquiry
and the trial. Obviously, there was; neither in the first application for
review nor in the second did Counsel dispute that. Having granted special
leave to appeal on that question, the Court had then to decide what was to
happen in the meantime should the District Court proceedings be stalled.
Should the _status quo_ immediately prior to the institution of the District
Court ac­tion be maintained ? On 21.3.96 we set down at length our reasons for
making our order of 28.2.96, and learned Counsel had not said a word about
those reasons. Not only are his allegations against the Plaintiff irrelevant
but if they were‑relevant, reference must have been made to them in the board
minutes relating to his removal. When we pointed out that these had not been
produced, Counsel insisted that they had. However, after taking time to peruse
the voluminous brief, he had to confess that they had not been made available
to any of the three Courts which dealt with this case. In any event, by
allowing the District Court proceedings to continue this Court ensured that
the serious questions which arose (some of which we mentioned in our order of
21.3.96) would receive a speedy determination, instead of being delayed
interminably, pending proceedings in this Court and in the Court of Appeal.
Further the interim order which we made was to be of short duration, and would
cease to be operative when the District Court made order in the interim
injunction inquiry.

As for Counsel's complaint about suggestions for settlement, those were not in
respect of the grant of special leave. They were made in order to ascertain
whether, if special leave was granted, whether the parties could agree on how
best to ensure the expeditious disposal of the inquiry and the trial, and to
minimise the possible prejudice to all parties in the meantime. Our
suggestions to consider whether inquiry

**301**

and trial could be taken up together (in order to avoid duplication of
proceedings), and possibly dealt with wholly or mainly on documents, were not
accepted. Our order neither required such consolidation nor excluded oral
proceedings. Further, our order modified the District Court enjoining order by
excluding restraints on the removal of the Plaintiff from the post of Chairman
and on the 2nd Defendant functioning as a director. Thus it is quite incorrect
to say that those suggestions were wholly incorporated in the order. In any
event, making those sugges­tions did not in any way prejudice the Petitioners,
and learned Counsel conceded that if the other ground on which review was
sought failed, this ground did not suffice.

To sum up, the first part of the order which the Petitioners seek to review
for the second time, permits and requires the District Court to decide (and
not to delay) the important questions of law which all parties concede are
involved in the action. The second part of the order, review of which the
Petitioners now seek (although they did not in March 1996) merely permits the
_status quo_ to prevail until the interim injunction inquiry is over. Although
asserting that that order was wrong, Counsel made no effort to show in what
respect our reasoning was faulty. Thus there was no ground for the second
application for review. The application for special leave was finally
concluded when the order of 28.2.96 was made, and it cannot now be reopened
before another bench or be referred by his Lordship the Chief Justice to a
"fuller bench". It has been duly listed before this bench, and no ground for
review has been established. Indeed, the present application for review is
wholly without merit. The change in position after the first application, and
the attempt to bring in extraneous and irrelevant matters, lead to the
conclusion that it was also a misuse of the process of this Court, and there
is cause for the complaint of learned President's Counsel on behalf of the
Plaintiff, that his client has been unduly and unfairly vexed thereby.

The application is dismissed, with costs in a sum of Rs. 20,000/­payable by
the Petitioners to the Plaintiff.

**DHEERARATNE, J.** ‑ I agree.

**WIJETUNGA, J.** ‑ I agree.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/3.html_  

