##  Sumeet Research and Holdings Ltd. v. Elite Radio & Engineering Co., Ltd. -
SLR - 393, Vol 2 of 1997 [1995] LKSC 3; (1997) 2 Sri LR 393 (6 October 1995)

393

SUMEET RESEARCH AND HOLDINGS LTD.  

v.

ELITE RADIO & ENGINEERING CO., LTD.



SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.,

DHEERARATNE, J

AND WIJETUNGA, J

S.C. APPEAL NO. 36/95

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 504/94

D.C. COLOMBO NO 4065/Spl

SEPTEMBER 11, 1995.



Code of intellectual Property Act No. 52 of 1979 - Action for unfair
competition in respect of goods - Defendant's claim as registered owner of
trade mark for the goods - Sections 117, 118 and 142 of the Act - Plaintiff's
entitlement to an enjoining order.

_ _

The plaintiff company was registered in India as the owner of the trade mark
"SUMEET" in respect of mixing machines (Electric) for kitchen use. The
defendant company was for some time the sole agent in Sri Lanka for
importation, distribution and sale of "SUMEET" machines manufactured by the
Power Control Appliances ("PCA") under the authority of the plaintiff. The
defendant's agency was established by an agreement with the 'PC:. Later, the
defendant registered itself as the owner of the trade mark "SUMEET" in Sri
Lanka. The defendant next claimed that it was importing "SUMEET" mixers (for
safe in Sri Lanka) manufactured in India by SMPL Ltd. Plaintiff sued "SMPL" in
India for infringement of the "SUMEET" trade mark and obtained an interim
injunction against "SMPL". The plaintiff also filed two actions in Sri Lanka
one for cancellation of the defendant s trade mark "SUMEET" and this action,
for unfair competition contrary to section 142 Of the Code. The District Judge
issued an enjoining order restraining the defendant from importing and trading
in goods, under the trade mark "SUMEET", not manufactured by the plaintiff.
Thereafter upon the defendants application, the District Court set aside the
enjoining order.



**Held:**



1\. Serious questions arise whether the defendant,



(a) by registering the "SUMEET" mark in Sri Lanka in its own name, during the
subsistence of its agreement with the PCA, and without notifying PCA, and



(b) by importing, advertising and selling mixers in Sri Lanka, which had been
manufactured in India with the "SUMEET" mark in violation of Court orders in
India, had acted contrary to honest practices in industrial and commercial
matters and/or in such a way as to create confusion with goods in respect of
which the plaintiff had intellectual property rights; and the plaintiff has
established a prima facie case in that respect.

**394**



2\. The enjoining order was wrongly set aside.

_  
 _ _Per_ Fernando, J.

  
". . . . . . the protection which a Sri Lankan Court can give the owner of a
trade mark, in respect of his rights arising from registration, does not
extend to an infringement committed outside Sri Lanka; that has no bearing in
the very different question whether a Sri Lankan Court can give relief to the
owner of a trade mark registered in India for an act of unfair competition -
not for breach of Indian registration rights \- committed in Sri Lanka."



**Cases referred to:**

**_ _**

1 _. Stassen Exports Ltd. v. Hebtulabhoy & Co., Ltd., _S.C. Appeal No. 20/89
S.C. Minutes 31st March, 1994.

_ _

2 _. Hexagon Pty. Ltd. v Australian Broadcasting Commission_ (1975) ALR 233,
251-525.

_ _

3 _. Dior v Milton_ (1956) 110 USPO 563, 566 _._

_ _

4 _. Erven Warnink BV v. Townend & Sons _[1979] 2 All ER 927, 931-932.

_ _

5 _. Reddaway v Banham_ (1896) A.C. 199, 211.

_ _

6 _. Amerasekera v. Mitsui & Co., Ltd. _[1993] 1 Sri L. R. 22, at 37.

_ _

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_S. Sivarasa, PC.,_ with _K. M. B. Ahamed, S. Mahenthiran, S. Sriskantha. U.
A. Mawjooth, Sampath Welgampola_ and _N.Y. Gunaseelan_ for plaintiff-
appellant.

_ _

_R. K. W Goonesekera_ with _N. R. Sivendran_ for defendant- respondent.



_Cur. adv. vult._

  
October 6, 1995.  


**FERNANDO, J.**



An ex parte enjoining order was issued by the District Court of Colombo on
16.6.94 restraining the defendant-respondent-respondent ("the Defendant") from
-



(i) importing into Sri Lanka and/or selling and/or dealing in Sri Lanka in
mixers with the trade mark or trade name "SUMEET" or any other similar mark or
name manufactured by any enterprise other than the plaintiff-petitioner-
appellant (the "plaintiff") and certain specified enterprises;

**395**



(ii) advertising in Sri Lanka in a manner which would depict or give the
impression that the "SUMEET" kitchen mixers sold by the defendant, which were
not manufactured by the plaintiff or under its quality control, were
manufactured by the plaintiff and the aforesaid enterprises;



(iii) from reproducing and/or adapting and/or communicating the artistic work
in the mark "SUMEET" in the stylised and artistic manner in which it is drawn
with the letter "S" separately in capital and other letters following it in
simple script joined together (as depicted in the annex P1 to the plaint).



Upon the defendant's application, that enjoining order was set aside on
5.7.94. The Court of Appeal dismissed the plaintiff's application for revision
and leave to appeal. On appeal to this Court, the question is whether the
enjoining order should have been set aside.



# THE PLAINTIFF'S CASE

** **

The plaintiff's case as presented in its plaint dated 15.6.94, supporting
affidavit and annexes, may be summed up as follows:



In April 1970, Mrs. Mathur, the chairperson of the plaintiff Company, was
registered in India as the owner of the trade mark "SUMEET" in respect of
"mixing machines (electric) for kitchen use"; in January 1981 she assigned
that trade mark to the plaintiff; in 1983, the plaintiff entered into two
agreements with Power Control Appliances (Kandia) - ("PCA") - authorising PCA
to manufacture mixers under the SUMEET" trade mark. PCA entered into an
agreement with the defendant in October 1983, by which it appointed the
defendant as sole agent in Sri Lanka for the importation, distribution and
sale of "SUMEET" mixers; that agreement was operative from 1.1.84 for three
years, and was to continue in force thereafter unless terminated; under that
agreement, the defendant imported "SUMEET" mixers from PCA and sold them in
Sri Lanka; the agreement provided for termination by three months notice,
whether before or after 31.12.86, but no notice of termination was given; that
agreement referred to "SUMEET" as being a trade mark, and required the
defendant not to use in connection with sales of the

**396**



mixers any trade mark other than that used by PCA, and to notify any violation
of any trade mark relating to the mixers, but it did not specify the
registered owner.



On 24.11.86, during the initial three-year period, the defendant applied for
registration in Sri Lanka of the trade mark "SUMEET" in its own name, without
notifying PCA or the plaintiff of this application; in February 1988, the
defendant obtained such registration, but neither notified PCA nor terminated
the agreement. Before that, on 29.7.86, the defendant instituted D.C. Colombo
Case No. 2612/Spl against The Geekay Organisation Ltd., which was importing
"SUMEET" mixers, manufactured by PCA, from an exporter in Hong Kong. The
defendant's position was that this was contrary to its "sole agency" agreement
with PCA. It averred that it had been selling "SUMEET" mixers in Sri Lanka
from 1980. On 18.1.89, judgment was delivered dismissing that action on the
ground that the agreement with PCA only prohibited PCA from selling "SUMEET"
mixers to any one else in **Sri Lanka,** but not to purchasers elsewhere, so
that "SUMEET" mixers could lawfully be imported into Sri Lanka from such
purchasers; the present defendant was ordered to pay damages for wrongfully
obtaining an interim injunction.



There is no dispute that during the pendency of litigation in which the
defendant was claiming rights derived from its agreement with PCA, the
defendant obtained registration in Sri Lanka of the "SUMEET" mark; this was
undoubtedly detrimental to PCA's interests. Learned Counsel for the defendant
contended that at that time the defendant believed that the "SUMEET" mark
belonged to PCA, and did not know that it was the plaintiff who was entitled
to rights by registration in India.



It would thus appear, prima facie, that mixers manufactured in India to which
the "SUMEET" trade mark had been lawfully applied with the plaintiff's
authority, were being sold in the Sri Lankan market at least from 1980, by the
defendant as well as by others. On 10.2.92, relying on its registration of the
"SUMEET" mark in Sri Lanka, the defendant instituted another action, against
Easwaran Brothers averring that from 1979 it had been importing "SUMEET"
mixers (for sale in Sri Lanka) manufactured in India by Sumeet Machines (Pvt)

**397**



Ltd. ("SMPL"), from that Company. However, according to what appears to be a
copy of the certificate of incorporation of SMPL (annexed to the plaint), SMPL
had been incorporated only in 1984. It is not known whether the mixers which
Easwaran Brothers were importing and selling were manufactured under the
"SUMEET" mark with the plaintiff's authority.



The plaintiff was thus faced with three problems. SMPL was manufacturing
mixers in India in violation of the rights which the plaintiff had (in India
by virtue of its registration) and these were finding their way into the Sri
Lankan market through the defendant. The plaintiff's "SUMEET" mark had been
registered in Sri Lanka by the defendant, without its knowledge. Finally,
there was a possibility that products lawfully manufactured in India under the
plaintiff's "SUMEET" mark might be kept out of the Sri Lankan market.



Accordingly, the plaintiff instituted proceedings against SMPL in the High
Court of Madras to restrain the manufacture, sale and export of mixers under
the "SUMEET" mark; and in February 1994 the Supreme Court of India granted an
interim injunction against SMPL. In December 1992 the plaintiff instituted
action against the defendant in D.C. Colombo Case No. 3662/Spl for the
cancellation of the defendant's registration of "SUMEET", as well as two other
confusingly similar marks, "SUMMIT" and "SUMMH"; that action is still pending.
Notwithstanding the order of the Indian Supreme Court, mixers with the
"SUMEET" mark, apparently manufactured by SMPL in India, were advertised for
sale by the defendant in February and March 1 Consequently, the plaintiff had
to institute this action alleging, inter alia, unfair competition by the
defendant contrary to section 142 of the Code of Intellectual Property Act,
No. 52 of 1979, ("the Code").



I must repeat that the above is a summary of the plaintiff's case as
appearing, prima facie, from the plaint and its annexes, and are not findings
of fact reached by this Court.



# THE IMPUGNED ORDER



The District Court held that "the main reliefs claimed by the plaintiff in
this action depend on the question whether the trade mark "SUMEET" should be
declared null and void"; that relief had been

**398**



sought in D.C. Colombo 3662/Spl, and therefore any enjoining order should have
been sought in that action; that the advertisements relied on by the plaintiff
"cannot be considered as sufficient to justify the issue of an enjoining order
in view of Case No. 3662/Spl which is still pending". Further, "at least as
far [back as] 1992 the plaintiff was aware that the defendant has been and is
selling mixers with trade mark "SUMEET" and therefore the plaintiff should not
have made an application for enjoining order on the basis that the delay in
issuing interim injunction after inquiry would have been defeated if enjoining
order is not issued" \- meaning, apparently, that undue delay prior to 1994
disentitled the plaintiff to an enjoining order in 1994. Finally, it was
stated that:



"The defendant's counsel also submitted that there was no unfair competition
as the plaintiff is the registered owner of the trade mark "SUMEET" in Sri
Lanka. In support of this contention the defendant's counsel referred to
Stassen Exports Ltd. v. Hebtulabhoy & Co. Ltd.(1) He further submitted that
the public concerned is [the] public of Sri Lanka and that the plaintiff has
no goodwill in Sri Lanka. The cited authority supports the plaintiff."



The Court of Appeal agreed, and upheld that order.



# THE ISSUES FOR DETERMINATION



Special leave to appeal was granted in respect of the following questions:  


1\. Whether the enjoining order should not have been dissolved because a
serious question of law arose as to whether the registered owner of the mark
"SUMEET" in Sri Lanka can be guilty of acts of unfair competition.

  
2\. Whether, in any event, the District Court was right in dissolving the
enjoining order on the ground of laches and/or that the plaintiff could have
claimed the relief sought in the previous action D.C. Colombo No. 3662/Spl.

  
3\. Whether, in any event, the plaintiff was disentitled to an enjoining order
as the only relief prayed for was a permanent injunction.

# 399

#  

# THE "RABEA" CASE

** **

The Court of Appeal quoted two passages from my judgment in Stassen Exports
Ltd. v. Hebtulabhoy & Co., Ltd., and observed:



"Thus by a parity of reasoning the registration of the trade mark "SUMEET" in
India does not give the [plaintiff] protection against the [defendant] who is
the owner of the mark in Sri Lanka. The [defendant] will continue to enjoy the
protection afforded by the Code until such time the [defendant's] registration
is declared null and void."



However, these two passages, dealing, respectively, with the two distinct
topics of "infringement under section 117" and "Unfair competition under
section 142" have not been quoted in full. They are as follows:



"No authority was cited which even suggested that the Code might have extra-
territorial effect. It seems to me that the operation of the rights and the
prohibitions under the Code is confined to the limits of Sri Lanka, **and
hence the use outside Sri Lanka of a registered mark or an infringing sign
would not be a violation of section 117(2) ...** The cases cited . . . are all
consistent with the statute giving protection to the registered owner against
an infringement occurring **within** the jurisdiction in which the mark is
registered, but not outside."



"Further, in none of the authorities cited did a Court give the owner of a
mark or a name redress in respect of an act done, or intended to be done,
outside the territory of the State, within which that mark or name enjoyed
protection. whether by virtue of registration or otherwise. **Hence any act of
unfair competition in Egypt does not fall within the ambit of section 142.  
 **

[Emphasis has been added to the portions omitted in the Court of Appeal
judgment].



The question which arose in that case was whether the plaintiff, the
registered owner in Sri Lanka of the "RABEA" mark for tea, which it

**400**



exported only **to Saudi Arabia** , was entitled to remedies - under section
117 and/or section 142 - in respect of the defendant's exports of tea **to
Egypt** , under an allegedly infringing mark, to a purchaser who was the
registered owner in Egypt of that mark. The Saudi Arabian purchaser did not
sell "RABEA" tea in Egypt. The decision in that case was that the protection
which a Sri Lankan Court can give the owner of a trade mark, in respect of his
**rights arising from registration** , does not extend to an infringement
committed **outside Sri Lanka** ; that has no bearing on the very different
question whether a Sri Lankan Court can give relief to the owner of a trade
mark registered in India for an act of unfair competition - not for breach of
Indian registration rights - **committed in Sri Lanka**.



The second passage quoted followed an express finding that there had been no
**competition** (in Saudi Arabia or Egypt) between the goods of the plaintiff
(who exported only to Saudi Arabia) and the defendant (who exported only to
Egypt); and, further, that there was no element of **unfairness** , since the
defendant's exports were only to the registered owner, in Egypt, of the
allegedly infringing mark (and because neither the plaintiff nor the Saudi
Arabian purchaser had any legal right, business, reputation or goodwill in
Egypt).



These two passages thus set out the conclusions that the Sri Lankan Courts did
not have jurisdiction in respect of infringements and unfair competition **in
Egypt**. Those conclusions cannot, either in law or in logic, be regarded as
authority for the proposition that the Sri Lankan Courts lack territorial
jurisdiction in respect of unfair competition **within Sri Lanka**. As the
learned trial Judge said, "the cited authority supports the plaintiff".



Thus observations based on a misunderstanding of the "RABEA" case led the
Court of Appeal to finally determine the fundamental issue in this case,
holding, in effect, that the plaintiff could not claim relief on the basis of
unfair competition "without first having the registration of the trade mark
registered by the [defendant] set aside". No statutory provision or precedent
justifying such a conclusion was cited in this Court or any of the Courts
below; nor were the provisions of section 118(b) considered.

#  

# 401

#  

# UNFAIR COMPETITION  


(a) Nature and scope



Section 142 of the Code provides:



"142(1) Any act of competition contrary to honest practices in industrial or
commercial matters shall constitute an act of unfair competition.



142(2) Acts of unfair competition shall include the following:



(a) all acts of such a nature as **to create confusion by any means whatsoever
with the establishment, the goods** , services or the industrial or commercial
activities of a competitor."



Section 142(2) goes on to define four more categories of "unfair competition".



It is important to note that the rights of the proprietor of a trade mark are
defined in another Chapter in the same Part (i.e. Part V, which deals with
"Marks, Trade Names and Unfair Competition"). Section 117(1) provides:



"Subject and without prejudice to other provisions of this Part, the
registered owner of a mark shall have the following exclusive rights in
relation to the mark . . ."



Section 118(b) provides:



"The registration of the mark shall not confer on its registered owner the
right to preclude third parties . . . (b) from using the mark in relation to
goods lawfully manufactured, imported, offered for sale, sold, used or stocked
in Sri Lanka under that mark, provided that such goods have not undergone any
change."



While I refrain from expressing any view on the matter, it seems arguable that
the rights conferred by section 117 are not absolute, but are subject to
sections 118 and 142; and that therefore even the registered owner must not
engage in unfair competition.

**402**



Apart from that, what is meant by "contrary to honest practices in industrial
or commercial matters"? If this includes only conduct contrary to obligations
imposed by statute law (criminal or civil) or common law (especially the law
of delict), section 142 would seem to be superfluous - because anyway such
conduct is prohibited by law. It seems arguable, therefore, that section 142
mandates higher standards of conduct - some norms of business ethics - and
does not merely restate existing legal obligations. If so, what those
standards of conduct are would be a matter for determination by the trial
Judge. It is also arguable that the prohibition against unfair competition in
section 142(2) must be interpreted not only in the context of protecting
intellectual property rights, but also of safeguarding the rights and
interests of consumers - by enabling consumers to know what exactly they are
getting, without, for instance, being deceived, confused or misled as to the
manufacturer, the source, the origin, and the quality of goods or services. In
the "RABEA" case, I referred to the following precedents:  


Hexagon Pty Ltd. v Australian Broadcasting Commission(2)

  
"... unfair competition' is an extension of the doctrine of passing off, or,
possibly, is a new and independent cause of action. It consists of
misappropriation of what equitably belongs to a competitor ... in all these
cases, English and American, the court has found an element of fraud or
inequitable conduct on the part of the defendant. The very description of the
tort "unfair competition" leads one to a conclusion that there must be
something underhand or sharp in the conduct of the defendant."

  
Dior v. Milton(3)



". . . this branch of the law ... originated in the conscience, justice and
equity of common-law judges . . . It is a persuasive example of the law's
capacity for growth in response to the ethical, as well as the economic needs
of society. As a result of this background, the legal concept of unfair
competition has evolved as a broad and flexible doctrine with a capacity for
further growth to meet changing conditions ...

**403**



There is no complete list of the activities which constitute unfair
competition. The general principle, however, evolved from all of the cases is
that commercial unfairness will be restrained when it appears that there has
been an appropriation, for the commercial advantage of one person, of a
benefit or property right belonging to another."



Erven Warnink BV v. Townend & Sons(4) where reference was made to the
"premonitory hint" given by Lord Herschell in Reddaway v. Banham,(5) about
misrepresenting one's goods as the goods of someone else:



"I am unable to see why a man should be allowed in this way more than in any
other to deceive purchasers into the belief that they are getting what they
are not, and thus to filch the business of a rival."



In that background it is premature for this Court to attempt a definitive
interpretation of section 142, and its relationship to section 117; but it is
quite clear that serious questions, of mixed fact and law, arise for
consideration in the District Court, with little assistance from local
precedents.



In regard to the facts, learned Counsel for the defendant was not able to
dispute that the plaintiff had established a prima facie case that mixers with
the plaintiff's trade mark, lawfully applied in India, had been in the Sri
Lankan market for many years, and in significant numbers; that the defendant
itself had been importing and selling such mixers from about 1980, although it
had incorrectly represented to the District Court, in another action, that it
had been importing mixers from SMPL since 1979 (implying thereby that it had
never imported from the plaintiff); that while the defendant's agreement with
PCA was subsisting, it procured the registration' of the "SUMEET" mark in Sri
Lanka in its own name, contrary to the interests of PCA, and of the plaintiff
from whom PCA had derived its rights. Arguably, such conduct was not an
"honest practice", if not also a breach of contractual obligations; it was
"something underhand or sharp", whether or not it was a ground justifying
annulment of the registration; and the sale of "SUMEET" mixers by the
defendant in such circumstances could confuse or deceive consumers into the
belief

**404**



that they are getting what they are not, namely the product which the
defendant had previously been selling (i.e. the plaintiff's mixer)

  
**(b) "The goods of a competitor"**



The Court of Appeal erred on the facts as well. Having mentioned the argument
that the plaintiff "has not sold "SUMEET" kitchen mixers directly or through
any agents in this country", it held that since the plaintiff "does not do any
business either directly or through agents in this country, its claim [that it
had reputation and goodwill which was being destroyed by the wrongful acts of
the defendant] lacks substance". It also rejected the submission that the use
of "SUMEET" was likely to mislead the public, upon the assumption that the Sri
Lankan public "are only aware of the trade mark registered by the
[defendant]". Nowhere in its judgment did the Court of Appeal deal with the
real issues relevant to section 142(2) - whether the plaintiff's mixers had
been, and were, in the Sri Lankan market; whether those mixers had acquired a
reputation in Sri Lanka, and thereby created goodwill for the plaintiff; and
whether there was a likelihood of "confusion", as between the goods of the
defendant and those of the plaintiff, created by the acts of the defendant.
Instead, the matter was dealt with on the assumption that "unfair competition"
was just one more way of infringing the rights conferred by registration -
ignoring the alternative possibility that it may well be a broad and flexible
doctrine, capable of growing to meet the changing ethical needs of society,
especially by preventing the commercial unfairness which would result from the
appropriation by one person of the benefit which equitably belongs to another.



Learned Counsel for the defendant submitted that the mixers previously sold
were not the plaintiff's goods; that the defendant believed that it was PCA
which was entitled to rights by registration in India, and knew nothing of the
plaintiff's registration in India; and that unfair competition, if any, was
only in relation to PCA. It seems to me that the expression "the goods of a
competitor", occurring in an enactment concerning intellectual property,
cannot be confined to goods which, considered only as corporeal property, are
"owned" by a competitor; it includes goods in respect of which a competitor
has intellectual property rights. (Although attention was focussed only on

**405**



the words "the goods", it must be noted that section 142(2)(a) refers also to
"commercial activities"; hence even if the mixers were not "the goods",
narrowly defined, of the plaintiff, yet the further question arises whether
what the plaintiff had been doing in relation to the Sri Lankan market
constituted "commercial activities", in respect of which too confusion must
not be created.) The mixers were, arguably, the plaintiff's goods. Further,
since section 142 does not make intention or knowledge relevant, it would seem
that the defendant's belief would make no difference, and it was sufficient if
what was done was in fact "unfair" in relation to the real competitor, whoever
he was. But here the defendant was also aware that someone else had rights in
respect of the goods, even if it can be accepted that it had dealt for several
years with "SUMEET" mixers, and had instituted legal proceedings in 1986,
without troubling to find out who had those rights.



I hold that the plaintiff had established, for the purposes of the enjoining
order, a sufficient interest in "SUMEET" mixers previously sold in the Sri
Lankan market.



# LACHES



The Court of Appeal held that the plaintiff was guilty of undue delay because
it knew in December 1992 (when it instituted Case No. 3662/Spl) that the
defendant was importing mixers from SMPL, but nevertheless waited 18 months,
until June 1994, to file this action claiming injunctive relief:



"The argument that the [plaintiff] considered it appropriate to seek an
enjoining order after it vindicated its right against the rival company in
India is unconvincing and amounts to an admission that the [plaintiff] was in
fact doubtful of its legal rights."



The institution of proceedings in India to vindicate its rights was a proper
assertion of the plaintiff's legal rights, and cannot reasonably be regarded
as acquiescence in the importation and sale of "SUMEET" mixers by the
defendant, or as a waiver of, or an admission of doubt as to, its legal
rights. So long as SMPL unlawfully manufactured "SUMEET" mixers in India,
sales of such mixers could

**406**



take place not only to purchasers in Sri Lanka, but anywhere else in the
world. It was possible to try to deal, piecemeal, with the consequences of
such unlawful manufacture, by means of a multiplicity of legal proceedings in
several jurisdictions outside India; but it was more reasonable, prudent and
effective to try to deal one short, sharp and swift stroke at the root of the
problem, by restraining manufacture in India - in the legitimate expectation
that the infringing product could not thereafter reach other markets, in Sri
Lanka or elsewhere. Thereupon, further legal proceedings in Sri Lanka should
not have become necessary. Thus there was neither undue nor unexplained delay
in instituting proceedings in Sri Lanka.



Indeed, in the absence of at least an interim ruling by the Indian Courts as
to the ownership of the mark, a cause of action to restrain unfair competition
might well have encountered a formidable defence, namely, that the "SUMEET"
mark had been lawfully applied to the mixers in India, and that the mixers had
been lawfully imported into Sri Lanka, and sold under that mark, in terms of
section 118(b).



However, "SUMEET" mixers unlawfully manufactured in India continued to be
imported and sold in Sri Lanka, despite the order of the Indian Courts. Within
three or four months after the impugned advertisements appeared, this action
was filed. The plaintiff was not guilty of ]aches. Its legitimate endeavours
to assert and vindicate its rights were thwarted by illegal conduct on the
part of SMPL, which Sri Lankan Courts should not condone, if honest practices
are to be encouraged.



I hold that there was no delay disentitling the plaintiff to injunctive
relief.



# RELIEF BARRED BY DC COLOMBO 3662/Spl



Having expressed views, prematurely, and without full consideration, that the
claim based on unfair competition could not succeed unless the defendant's
registration was first annulled, both Courts below took the view that the
application for injunction should have been made in D.C. Colombo 3662/Spl, and
that there was some identity of pleading, in regard to unfair competition, in
the two **  
 **

**407**

actions, and that therefore an enjoining order should not have been issued in
this action.



It would appear that "unfair competition" has some relevance to the annulment
of a registration. Section 130 of the Code empowers the Court to declare a
registration null and void "if such registration is precluded under the
provisions of sections 99 and 100". Section 100 provides:



"100(1) A mark shall not be registered .



(b) which resembles, in such a way as to be likely to mislead the public, an
unregistered mark used earlier in Sri Lanka by a third party in connexion with
identical or similar goods or services If the applicant is aware, or could not
have been unaware, of such use; ...



(e) which infringes other third party rights or is contrary to the provisions
of Chapter XXIX relating to the prevention of unfair competition,



(f) which is filed by the agent or representative of a third party who is the
owner of such mark in another country, without the "authorization of such
owner, unless the agent or representative justifies his action."



Although some of the ingredients may be common, the cause of action for
annulment of a registration seems to be quite distinct from that in respect of
unfair competition. Redress may thus be available for unfair competition even
while the registration of the "confusing" mark remains, and without its
annulment. For example, the plaintiff might have been content to allow the
defendant to enjoy the benefits of its registration so long as it did not
create confusion with the plaintiff's goods - and in that way the defendant
might have registration rights as against all others. These matters remain to
b decided.



I hold that the plaintiff's pleadings in D.C. Colombo 3662/Spl, and its
failure to seek an enjoining order in that case, did not disentitle it to an
enjoining order in this case.

# 408

#  

# OTHER OBJECTIONS



When special leave to appeal was granted, learned President's Counsel who then
appeared for the defendant submitted that in any event the plaintiff was not
entitled to an enjoining order because the only substantive relief prayed for
was a permanent injunction. This contention cannot succeed. Section 179 read
with section 142(3) of the Code suggests that the proper remedy, and sometimes
the sole remedy, for unfair competition is a permanent injunction. Further, in
this case the plaintiff also claimed damages for loss already incurred prior
to action, as well as the annulment of the registration of two other
deceptively similar marks ("SUMITH" and "SAMIT"). This contention was not
considered by either of the Courts below, and was not pursued at the hearing
by learned Counsel for the defendant.



However, adverting to the plaintiff's claim for damages, the Court of Appeal
held, contrary to the fact, that the plaintiff had not pleaded that it would
suffer irreparable or continuing loss, that by claiming a sum of Rs. 50
million as damages on account of loss already suffered, it had thereby
quantified its loss, and that "once loss is quantified, the need for an
enjoining order restraining the [defendant] does not arise". But the plaintiff
did not attempt to quantify its future loss (as in the precedents cited on
behalf of the defendant). In any event, a claim for damages is not an
inflexible bar to the grant of injunctive relief, and I would respectfully
adopt the observations of Amerasinghe, J. in Amerasekera v. Mitsui & Co.
Ltd.(6), the question is whether it is unjust, in all the circumstances, to
confine a plaintiff to damages for the breach of contract.



# CONCLUSION



Serious questions arise whether the defendant,



(a) by registering the "SUMEET" mark in Sri Lanka in its own name, during the
subsistence of its agreement with PCA, and without notifying PCA, and



(b) by importing, advertising and selling mixers in Sri Lanka, which had been
manufactured in India with the "SUMEET" mark in violation of Courts orders in
India,

**409**



had acted contrary to honest practices in industrial and commercial matters
and/or in such a way so as to create confusion with goods in respect of which
the plaintiff had intellectual property rights; and the plaintiff has
established a prima facie case in that respect. I hold that the learned trial
Judge erred in dissolving the enjoining order on the grounds that the
plaintiff should first have obtained the cancellation of the defendant's
registration, that the plaintiff was disentitled to relief because of laches
or delay, and that the only substantive relief prayed for was a permanent
injunction.



The enjoining order was wrongly set aside. It has taken more than one year to
restore it. The plaintiff must therefore be put back, as nearly as possible,
in the position in which it would have been if the enjoining order had been
allowed to continue until the interim injunction inquiry was over - which,
Counsel informed us, has not yet happened.



The appeal is allowed, and the judgment and orders of both Courts below are
set aside; the enjoining order made on 16.6.94 by the District Court is
restored. The defendant will on or before 10th November 1995 file in the
District Court a statement giving full particulars (including cost and selling
prices) as to its stock of mixers with the "SUMEET" mark (and similar marks)
as at 4.7.94, its imports and sales of such mixers between 4.7.94 and today,
and its balance stock as at today. If the learned trial Judge allows the
plaintiff's application for an interim injunction, the defendant will also
deposit to the credit of this case a sum of 15% of the proceeds of sale of
such mixers sold between 4.7.94 and today, on account of profits earned by
such sales; this sum, and any interest accruing thereon, will be available for
satisfaction or part-satisfaction of any judgment which the plaintiff may
ultimately obtain. Any surplus will be refunded to the defendant. It will be
open to the District Court to permit the defendant, in lieu of such deposit,
to secure the payment of this sum, by means of a Bank guarantee or otherwise.
The plaintiff will be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 50,000/- in all three
Courts.



**DHEERARATNE, J.** \- I agree.

** **

**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1995/3.html_  

