##  Sriyawathie v. Superintendent Hapugastenne Estate and Others - SLR - 1,
Vol 1 of 1997 [1994] LKSC 3; (1997) 1 Sri LR 1 (3 May 1994)

1

SRIYAWATHIE

**v.**

**SUPERINTENDENT HAPUGASTENNE ESTATE AND OTHERS**

**  **

SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.,

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

KULATUNGA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 22/93

H. C. KANDY NO. 74/91 (REV.),

L. T. HATTON NO. 10/7765/89

MARCH 29, 1994.



Industrial Disputes Act - Section 31D and 31DD as amended by Act No. 32 of
1990 - Appellate and revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court over orders of
a Labour Tribunal - Articles 105(1) (C), III (1), 138, 154P and 125 of the
Constitution - Interpretation of the Constitution - Appeal to the Supreme
Court from High Court.



It was argued on behalf of the appellant, a clerk employed on an estate that
the High Court of the Central Province cannot entertain her employer's
application, to set aside by way of revision, an order of the Labour Tribunal
in that -



(a) Notwithstanding the Provisions of Act No. 19 of 1990, the High Court had
no power to entertain the application as the said Act purports to erode the
exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal vested by Article 138 of the
Constitution by adding to the jurisdiction conferred by Article 154 P(3) (b)
of the Constitution.



(b) The Judges of the High Courts of Provinces have not been duly appointed
for want of legislation contemplated by Article lII (1) of the Constitution
(as amended by the 11th amendment to the Constitution) conferring powers on
the "High Court of Sri Lanka" established by Article III(1).



**Held:**



(1) Section 31 DD of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended permits an appeal
to the Supreme Court from a final order of the High Court, made in the
exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction, in relation to an order
of a Labour Tribunal. As the order of the High Court is not a final order, the
appellant has no right of appeal.



(2) The High Court has jurisdiction to review orders of labour Tribunals by
way of appeal or revision in terms of the provisions of the High Court of the
Provinces (Special Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990 read with Section 31D of the
Industrial Disputes Act as amended.

**2**

  
(3) The Court referred to in Articles 105(1) (c), III (1) and 154(2) of the
Constitution is one and the same Court Viz. the High Court of the Republic of
Sri Lanka. The Judges of the High Courts of the Provinces have been properly
appointed.  


**Cases referred to:**

      1\. _Swastika Textiles Industries Ltd., v Dayaratne_ (1993) 2 Sri L.R. 348. 

_2\. Martin v Wijewardena_ (1989) 2 Sri L.R. 409.

_ _

_3\. Wadigamangawa v Wimalasuriya_ (1981) 1 Sri L. R. 287.

_ _

_4\. Piyadasa Gunaratne v. Allen Thambinayagam_ (1993) 2 Sri L.R. 355.

_ _

_5\. Siriwardena v. Air Ceylon (1982) 2 Sri L.R. 544 (CA);_ (1984) 1 Sri L.R.
286 (SC)



6\. Seeta Wijetunge v. Meeyan S.C. Appeal No. 55 of 1988 S.C. Minutes of 1st
December, 1989.





**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court, Kandy.



_S. K. Sangakkara_ with _J. C. Boange_ for appellant.

_ _

_Asoka de Silva, D.S.G_ with _U. Egalahewa_ for respondents.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._





May 3, 1994.

**KULATUNGA, J.**



The services of the appellant, a clerk employed on an estate which is
presently being managed by the 5th respondent (Sri Lanka State Plantations
Corporation) were terminated on 19.04.89 by the management. She made an
application to the Labour Tribunal. Before the commencement of the inquiry she
moved to amend her application to add the 4th and 5th respondents and a prayer
for reinstatement. This was allowed by the Tribunal. The 2nd and 3rd
respondents (The Janatha Estate Development Board No. 1 Dikoya and the Janatha
Estate Development Board Colombo, respectively) applied to the High Court of
the Central Province to set aside the said order of the Labour Tribunal, by
way of revision (in the exercise of the revisionary jurisdiction vested in
that Court by S. 3 of the High Gout of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act
No. 19 of 1990. The procedure for the exercise of such jurisdiction is found
in S.5 of the

**3**

  
said Act and S. 31D(4) and (7) of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended by
Act No. 32 of 1990.





The appellant raised a preliminary objection to the High Court entertaining
the revision application, on the following grounds.



(a)     that notwithstanding the provision of Act No. 19 of 1990, the High
Court has no power to entertain the said application in that the said Act (not
being a constitutional amendment or an Act passed with the requisite special
majority) purports to erode, the exclusive jurisdiction of the Court of Appeal
vested by Article 138 of the Constitution by adding to the jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Court by Article 154P (3) (b) of the Constitution; and
that the decision of this Court in Swastika Textile Industries Ltd. v.
Dayaratne (1) which upheld the jurisdiction of the High Court to review orders
of Labour Tribunals by way of appeal or revision in terms of the provisions of
Act No. 19 of 1990 read with S.31D of the Industrial Disputes Act as amended
**is per incuriam.** It was argued that the attention of this Court had not
been drawn to the decision in Martin v. Wijewardena (2) and the dicta of
Samarakoon C.J. in Wadigamangawa v Wimalasuriya (3).



(b)   that the Judges of the High Courts of the Provinces have not been duly
appointed under the Constitution. It was submitted that under A.154P(2) Judges
of the High Court of Provinces have to be nominated from among the Judges of
the **High Court of Sri Lanka** established by A. III(1) of the Constitution
(as amended by the 11th Amendment to the Constitution) to exercise "such
jurisdiction and powers as the Parliament may by law vest or ordain"; that
pending such legislation, Judges cannot be appointed to the "High Court of Sri
Lanka"; that the Court which is still operative is the **High Court of the
Republic of Sri Lanka** referred to in A.105(1) (c); and hence the Judges of
the High Courts of the Provinces have not been properly appointed.



    (c) The High Court overruled the preliminary objection whereupon the appellant applied to the High Court for leave to appeal to  this Court, "in terms of S.9 of Act No. 19 of 1990". The High Court granted leave which enable this appeal. ** **



**4**

  
In Piyadasa Gunaratne v. Alan Thambinayagam(4) this Court held that S.9 of Act
No. 19 of 1990 does not permit direct appeals to this Court from orders made
in the exercise of revisionary jurisdiction of the High Court of a Province.
S.9 permits an appeal from a final order or judgment etc; made in the exercise
of the appellate jurisdiction of that Court which involves "a substantial
question of law". with the leave of the High Court. S. 31 DD of the Industrial
Disputes Act as amended permits an appeal from a final order of the High Court
made in the exercise of its appellate or revisionary jurisdiction, in relation
to an order of a Labour Tribunal with the leave of the High Court or the
Supreme Court.



In view of the aforementioned decision and the fact that the appellant has
purported to appeal under S.9(a) of Act No. 19 of 1990 this Court inquired
from Mr. Sangakkara learned Counsel for the appellant, during the hearing
before us, whether this appeal can be maintained, if not whether it is
possible to support it under S.31 DD of the Industrial Disputes Act. Mr.
Sangakkara was not prepared to give a clear answer but thought that the
appellant had a problem. He submitted that this Court can entertain the appeal
in the exercise of its "inherent jurisdiction".



It is correct that the appellant has a problem (which I think is
insurmountable) whether the appeal is attempted under S.9 of Act No. 19 of
1990 or S.31 DD of the Industrial Disputes Act because the order appealed from
is not a final order as required in both such sections but only an interim
order. The High Court merely overruled the preliminary objection and this
would not finally dispose of the rights of parties "leaving nothing more to be
done" Siriwardena v Air Ceylon Ltd.(5); Seeta Wijetunge v Meeyan (6). In the
instant case, the High Court has yet to decide the case on its merits and
hence the order is not final. As such the appellant has no right of appeal.
This Court has "no inherent jurisdiction" to entertain the appeal. The
respondents have not raised any preliminary objection to the appeal. However,
such conduct cannot give jurisdiction to this Court.



What I have stated above is sufficient to dispose of this appeal. However, in
view of the fact that we have heard Counsel on important questions relating to
the interpretation of the Constitution which are

**5  
 **

otherwise within our exclusive jurisdiction under A.125 of the Constitution I
would express my views on these questions before making my order on the
appeal.



I cannot accept the submission that the decision in Swastika Textile
Industries Ltd. case (Supra) is per incuriam. The ratio in Martin v.
Wijewardena (Supra) cited by the appellant's Counsel in support of his
argument is that a right of appeal is a statutory right and must be expressly
created and granted by Statute; and that A.138 is only an enabling article
which confers the jurisdiction to hear and determine appeals to the Court of
Appeal. The right to avail of or take advantage of that jurisdiction is
governed by the several statutory provisions in various legislative
enactments. The question of jurisdiction of the High Court of a Province in
terms of A. 154P (3) and the relevant statutes was not in issue in that case.
The decision in Wadigamangawa v. Wimalasuriya (Supra) deals with the rights of
a person who challenges the election of a Member of Parliament. It has no
bearing on the question of the jurisdiction of a Provincial High Court. It has
been cited by Counsel in view of certain dicta by Samarakoon C.J. (who with
two other Judges dissented from the majority judgment) that the Constitution
prevails over ordinary law, in the context of that case. As such the decision
of the High Court that it was bound by the ruling in the Swastika Industries
case is correct.



The other submission is that the Judges of the High Courts of the Province
have not been properly appointed and hence have no competence to exercise
jurisdiction in the case. This submission is based on the theory that "The
High Court of Sri Lanka" referred to in A. III (1) of the Constitution is
either a new Court or a substitution for the "High Court of the Republic of
Sri Lanka" referred to in A.105 (1) (c); and that pending the enactment of
legislation relating to the jurisdiction and powers of the "High Court of Sri
Lanka" Judges cannot be appointed to that Court and consequently the Judges of
the High Courts of the Provinces cannot be validly nominated under A. 154(P)
(2). It seems to me that the object of the amended A.III(1) is to put an end
to the character of the High Court as a "Court of first instance exercising
criminal jurisdiction" (which was the description of that Court prior to the
amendment). In view of the amendment it may now be invested with civil
jurisdiction as well. As it is no longer

**6  
 **

described as a "Court of first instance" it could, subject to the
Constitution, be even invested with appellate, revisionary or supervisory
jurisdiction". (This interpretation finds support in the provisions of A.138
as amended by the 13th Amendment). If in enacting such amendment, the
reference to the "Republic" has not been repeated, it may be an oversight.



As far as I am aware, there are no judges of "the High Court of Sri Lanka";
for they still receive their appointment as "Judges of the Republic of Sri
Lanka"; and they are in turn nominated as Judges of the High Courts of the
Provinces. The original criminal jurisdiction presently exercised by the High
Court of the Provinces is the jurisdiction provided by the Judicature Act No.
2 of 1978. There is no intention to establish a new Court or to substitute a
Court for the High Court referred to in A.105 (1) (c). The High Court referred
to in that Article continues subject to the modification, in view of the
amended A.III(1), that it has ceased to be a "Court of first instance
exercising criminal jurisdiction". No legislation was enacted to confer any
new jurisdiction on the High Court subsequent to the amendment of A.III(1).
However, the 13th Amendment included provision empowering the High Courts of
the Provinces to exercise appellate, revisionary and supervisory jurisdiction.
The Provisions of S.2(2) and (3) of Act No. 19 of 1990 indicate that in other
respects Parliament itself intended the continued exercise by these Courts of
the same powers as were enjoyed by the High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka
under the Judicature Act.



In the circumstances, the Court referred to in Articles 105(1) (c), III(1) and
154P (2) is one and the same Court viz. the High Court of the Republic of Sri
Lanka. It also appears that in the light of A. 1 of the Constitution, "the
High Court of Sri Lanka" referred to in A. III(1) must be deemed to be "the
High Court of the Republic of Sri Lanka". There is no justification either in
law or common sense to take the view that the Judges of the High Courts of the
Provinces have not been properly appointed.



For the foregoing reasons, I reject the appeal and affirm the of the High
Court. It is a matter of regret that in view of the taken on behalf of the
appellant, consideration of relief

**7  
 **

against her dismissal in 1989 has been inordinately delayed. In view of this
and in view of the provisions of S. 31D(7) of Act . 32 of 1990 the High Court
of the Central Province is directed, to hear and determine the respondents'
application on the merits within 6 months of the receipt of the record herein.
I make no order as to costs.





**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C. J.** \- I agree.



**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.  


_Appeal rejected._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/3.html_  

