##  Amarasinghe and Others v. The Attorney General and Others (Colombo
Katunayake Expressway Case) - SLR - 376, Vol 1 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 3; (1993) 1
Sri LR 376 (15 March 1993)

**376**

**AMARASINGHE AND OTHERS** **  
v.** **  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL AND OTHERS  
(COLOMBO - KATUNAYAKE EXPRESSWAY CASE)**

SUPREME COURT.  
FERNANDO, J.  
GOONEWARDENE J. AND

PERERA J.  
S.C. (SPL) NO. 6/92,  
JANUARY 21st AND 22nd, 1993.

_     Certiorari and Prohibition \- Declaration made by President under
section 2 of the Urban Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of
1990 - Recommendation of Minister - Opinion of President - Construction of
Colombo - Katunayake Expressway \- Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) -
Acquisition - Writ Jurisdiction - Pre-requisite of a hearing - Natural justice
- National Environmental Act No. 47 of 1980 as amended by Act. No. 56 of 1988,
sections 23 AA and 23 BB - Opportunity for raising objections \- Resettlement
of persons affected._

The petitioners are residents and owners along with others of the lands and
buildings which were declared by the President under section 2 of the Urban
Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990, on the
recommendation of the Minister, as being urgently required for carrying out an
Urban Development project namely the construction of the Colombo - Katunayake
expressway connecting the port of Colombo with the Katunayake International
Airport. This was after a feasibility study by a Japanese Agency. On 03.5.1991
the Urban Development Authority (2nd respondent) signed a consultancy
agreement with the Japan Bridge and Structure Institute Inc. (JBSI) for
certain

377

services including review and update of the previous feasibility study, the
preparation of the detailed design, the carrying out of a comprehensive
environmental impact assessment (EIA) of the project and the preparation of
the implementation project and tender documents. The Cabinet approved the
project and the 2nd respondent (UDA) had been requested to go ahead with the
work schedule. The land required for the expressway had to be acquired under
the Land Acquisition Act. A Supplementary EIA had also to be prepared and
submitted to the 3rd respondent (Central Environmental Authority (CEA) and if
found satisfactory, would be made available to the public and no action would
be taken to obtain possession of the lands required (e.g. by means of an order
under section 38, proviso (a) of the Land Acquisition Act) until the lapse of
30 days after the EIA is made available for public scrutiny. Resettlement of
persons affected (nearly 2500 families) was to be given adequate
consideration.

**Held**

1\. A valid order under section 2 of the Urban Development Projects (Special
Provisions) Act No. 2 of 1990 requires the following elements:

(a) A recommendation by the Minister (here the Minister was the President
himself).

(b) An opinion formed by the President

(i) in relation to an urban development project,

(ii) that lands are required for the purposes of such project,

(iii) that this requirement is urgent, and

(iv) that such project would meet ' the just requirements of the general
welfare of the People '. project.

2\. The Expressway project is undoubtedly an urban development

3\. Section 3 of Act No. 2 of 1990 does not affect the jurisdiction by Article
140 of the Constitution which in terms of section 4 (1) has been transferred
to the Supreme Court.

4\. Although section 7 (1) of the Act No. 2 of 1991 empowers the Government or
any other person to obtain possession of any lands, such possession can be
taken only when the lands are vested by virtue of proceedings under the Land
Acquisition Ad or other statutes.

5\. A hearing was not a pre-requisite for making a recommendation. The
President cannot make a recommendation to himself and it is sufficient for him
to form an opinion on the available material.

378

6\. The President's opinion as urgency was not vitiated by any excess of
jurisdiction or error of law. There was adequate material on which he could
form his opinion.

7.(a) A hearing before forming an opinion that the order would meet the just
requirements of the general welfare of the people would be impracticable and
would need some sort of local referendum to ascertain the views of all those
having a legitimate interest.

(b) Persons affected will have an opportunity of submitting objections when
steps are taken under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act.

(c) The Minister in making a recommendation and the President when making an
Order under section 2 of Act No. 2 of 1990 are determining policy, based on
evidence of a general character; there is no lis. The obligation to give a
hearing arises only later, when objections are submitted, and when there is a
lis; at that stage evidence as to the local situation, and the effect on
individuals, has to be adduced and weighed.

8\. The jurisdiction of the Court is not to determine whether or not the
expressway is necessary, and if so, which alternative is most suitable. It is
for the Executive under the laws enacted by Parliament, to make those
decisions. The writ jurisdiction authorises the Supreme Court to examine
whether jurisdiction has been exceeded, whether there is error of law and
whether there has been procedural due process. The merits of a decision cannot
be questioned merely because the Court considers that some other decision
would have been better. The Court can interfere only if it is unreasonable.
The available material does not in any way indicate that the decision to build
the expressway was unreasonable; but on the contrary, that it was necessary
and urgent; and there is nothing whatever to suggest that the selection of the
particular route or the rejection of alternative options, was unreasonable.

9\. Sections 23AA and 23BB of the National Environmental Act No. 47 of 1980
amended by Act No. 56 of 1988 adequately protect the public interest in regard
to environmental considerations by preventing the implementation of a project
until an EIA is submitted and approval obtained. There will thus be a further
opportunity for all interested persons to raise their objections when the
amended EIA is made available for public scrutiny. The section 2 Order s
cannot therefore be impugned on this ground.

10\. Although nearly 2500 families would be affected, in the context of
population of the district, and the areas concerned, that cannot per se be
regarded as -unduly high, particularly if satisfactory steps are taken for
resettlement.

11\. It was not unreasonable for the President to have concluded when he made
the section 2 order, that the expressway is in the national interest.

379

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale [1971] 75 NLR 67._  
_  
2\. Visuvalingam v. Liyanage [1984] 2 Sri L.R. 123._  
_  
3\. Wickremabandu v. Herath [1990] 2 Sri L.R. 348._  
_  
4\. Weeraratne v. Colin-Thome [1988] 2 Sri L.R. 151, 167-169._  
_  
5\. Fernandopulle v. Minister of Lands and Agriculture (1978) 79(2) N.L.R.
115._

**APPLICATION** for writs of Certiorari and Prohibition.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera with Lalanath de Silva and Manohara de Silva_ for
petitioners.  
_  
K. C. Kamalasabaysan Deputy Solicitor-General with Miss. A. Navaratne_ for
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 15, 1993.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

On 21.01.92 the President made an Order ("P1 ") under section 2 of the Urban
Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980

" By virtue of the powers vested in me under Section 2 of the Urban
Development Projects (Special Provisions) Act, No. 2 of 1980, l, Ranasinghe
Premadasa, President, upon the recommendation of the Minister in charge of the
subject of Urban Development, being of opinion that the lands specified in the
Schedule hereto are urgently required for the purpose of carrying out an urban
development project, do by this Order declare that the said lands are required
for such purpose".

The Schedule to that Order referred to all lands situated within several
specified Grama Seva Niladhari Divisions, which fell within six different
A.G.A.'s Divisions. The Petitioners are residents of, and owners of lands and
buildings within the areas described in P1; they say that they are some among
about 2,500 families affected by P1. They seek Certiorari to quash the
Minister's recommendation referred to in P1, and the President's declaration
contained in P1, as well as Prohibition to restrain the Road Development
Authority (the 2nd Respondent) from taking steps to construct the Colombo-
Katunayake expressway (" the expressway ") connecting the Port

380

of Colombo with the Katunayake International Airport along the route depicted
in the Plan marked P2A. That expressway is the Urban development project
referred to in P1. The Order P1 having been made by the President, the
Attorney General (in terms of Article 35(3) of the Constitution), has been
made the 1st Respondent. The Central Environmental Authority established under
the National Environment Act, No. 47 of 1980, and the Urban Development
Authority established under the Urban Development Authority Act, No. 41 of
1978, have been made the 3rd and 4th Respondents, but no relief has been
sought against them.

**HISTORY OF THE EXPRESSWAY PROJECT**

In 1982, at the request of the Government of Sri Lanka, the Government of
Japan agreed to conduct a feasibility study in regard to the expressway, and
entrusted that study to a Japanese Agency; that Agency, in its report made in
January 1984, recommended the construction of an expressway to the east of the
existing Colombo-Negombo road. The Petitioners have annexed ("P2") the
contents pages of that report, and no more; although they say that " the said
report was never made public nor was the public given free access to the same
", they add that they " have gained access to parts of this report only very
recently ". They state that the report dealt with traffic surveys and
projections, and included a project financial and economic evaluation, and
contained " final route drawings " for the proposed expressway; but did not
contain "a socioeconomic analysis wherein data collected, through field
surveys, of the people affected by the proposed expressway was analysed "; "
nor did the economic and financial evaluation consider or take into account
the social and environmental costs involved in the construction of the
expressway nor were fundamental alternatives to the proposed expressway
considered..... what was shown as alternatives were route alternatives which
did not depart significantly from the pre-determined final alignment ".

The Director, Special Projects, of the 2nd Respondent, and the Chairman of the
4th Respondent, have sworn affidavits to the effect that the report was a
feasibility study not intended for publication; that it contained a solo-
economic analysis to arrive at traffic projections for the future; that four
alternative routes were

381

considered......... after careful field reconnaissance, collection of data and
information, detailed study of the relevant conditions, including photography,
sociology, land use and distribution of facilities "; that " the final
alignment was not pre-determined but was chosen after considering the four
alternatives "; that " social and environmental effects of the construction
were considered in the evaluation of the project; and that the report was
prepared under the guidelines set by an Advisory Committee which consisted of
a large number of Sri Lankan Government officials and other experts, (whose
names were set out in the report). Some extracts from the report were produced
in support.

It is unfortunate that the entire report (running into about 200 pages), or at
least more substantial extracts, were not produced. It was open to the
Petitioners to have asked for an order for production, if they had not had
sufficient access to the report. From the contents pages (P2) it appears that
the feasibility study covered inter alia " present transport conditions ", "
projection of traffic demand ", " relationship of expressway and railway ", "
survey of alternative routes ", " environmental consideration ", " economic
cost ", " benefit calculation ", " economic analysis ", conclusions and
recommendations. According to the extracts produced by the Respondents, the
Chapter on " Environmental Consideration " considered inter alia " physical
indicators of assessment ":

a) Topography and geology

b) Hydrology (drainage, floods)

c) Metereology (climate and weather)

d) Traffic nuisances (noise, air pollution, vibration and other nuisances)

e) Traffic accidents 410

f) Construction nuisances

as well as social and economic indicators of assessment

g) Transport mobility and accessibility

h) Land use potentiality

i) Population distribution

J) Tourism

382

k) Regional spectacle

l) Community cohesion

m) Resident displacement

n) Industrial and agricultural production

o) Land price

p) Prices of commodities

It was for the Petitioners to substantiate their allegations that the report
was defective; the available material neither indicates that the above factors
were not adequately considered, nor suggests that there was any significant
error.

On 3.5.91 the 2nd Respondent signed a consultancy agreement with the Japan
Bridge and Structure Institute Inc. ("]BSI") which was required to provide
certain services, including the review and update of the previous feasibility
study, the preparation of the detailed design, the carrying out of a
comprehensive environmental impact assessment ('EIA") of the project, and the
preparation of the implementation program and tender documents. The 3rd
Respondent issued the terms of reference ("P4") for the EIA. A note at the end
of P4 refers to " a number of meetings " held to discuss the terms of
reference, the outcome of which was reported at the Eighth Coordination
Meeting for the project. The minutes of the Thirteenth Coordination Meeting
held on 21.8.92 have been produced as ("4R4"), and from this it appears that a
large number of Government agencies, including the 3rd Respondent, were
represented on that Committee; an EIA prepared by ]BSI was considered at that
meeting, at which it was confirmed that the Cabinet had approved the project
and that the 2nd Respondent had been requested to go ahead with the work
schedule. Further -

" The General Manager stated that priority will have to be given to carry out
the surveys and finding alternative accommodation for people who will be
affected.........."

" The General Manager also requested the RDA to immediately commence work to
peg the center line and, based on the center line to define a corridor (the
normal section required will be 100m. but expected borrow area will require
extra land) for the Survey Department to commence the survey..........."

383

" The General Manager requested the UDA to look at the development plan in the
area and in relation to this how settlement of families is going to take place
and NHDA to do the infrastructure work......"

" Acting Director (NRM) of the CEA stated that the Environmental Assessment
Report prepared by the Consultants, which is due to be open for a 30 day
period of public comments lacks certain information. She was of the opinion
that the report should be updated prior to making it available for public
comments. She stated that

\- The resettlement aspect has not been covered adequately.

\- How to deal with the various categories of people coming under this project
and the assurance given will have to be incorporated in this report.

The General Manager requested CEA to initiate a letter indicating their
comments and inadequacies observed by them, and RDA will identify ways of
dealing with the suggestions. The EAR will not be open for public comments
pending these alterations.

However, the General Manager, stated that the Consultants may proceed with
their work, pending the results of the EAR."

By letter dated 4.9.92 ("4R5") the 3rd Respondent sent to the 2nd Respondent
the terms of reference ("4R5A") for resettlement aspects which had not been
adequately 'addressed in the EIA, and called for a supplementary report. Those
terms required a detailed study of the area affected by the development and
the sites involved in resettlement of the people affected, the population
characteristics, the existing facilities, the major economic activities in the
area, rehabilitation policy, land availability for relocation, and alternative
sites for relocation

The affidavit of the Director, Special Projects, of the 2nd Respondent states

384

" From October to December, 1992, National Housing Development Authority
carried out an enumeration of all the householders that would be affected by
the expressway. It was reported that the first petitioner has not co-operated
with the enumerators and has refused to provide any information to them. It
was the intention of the 2nd Respondent to hold meetings with affected parties
and two meeting were held in December, 1992. More meetings are expected to be
held. 3rd Respondent has examined the Environmental Assessment Report prepared
in March, 1992, as part of Detail Engineering, and had recommended that human
settlement aspects should be studied in further detail. This supplementary
environmental impact assessment study has been entrusted to a firm of
consultants and it is still under preparation. Once completed, the Report of
this study will be submitted to 3rd Respondent for comments and if
satisfactory, the report will be available for scrutiny by members of the
public ".

He, as well as the Chairman of the 4th Respondent, state that proceedings will
be taken under the Land Acquisition Act to acquire the required lands. The
learned Deputy Solicitor General categorically assured us, in the course of
his submissions, that the supplementary EIA would be submitted to the 3rd
Respondent, and if found satisfactory, would be made available to the public;
and that no action would be taken to obtain possession of the lands required
(e.g. by means of an order under section 38, proviso (a), of the Land
Acquisition Act) until the lapse of 30 days after the EIA is made available
for public scrutiny.

The section 2 Order was published in the Gazette Extraordinary No. 738/4 of
26.10.92, and the Petitioner filed this application on 25.11.92. It was
supported on 4.12.92, but fixed for hearing only for 21.1.93; although it was
taken up for hearing on that day and concluded on 22.1.93, it was not
possible, because many complex questions arose, to make our order within the
period of two months stipulated by section 4(2) of the Urban Development
Projects (Special Provisions) Act.

385

**JUSTICIABILITY**

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that although section 2 referred
to the President's " opinion " in subjective terms, it was nevertheless
subject to review on the basis set out in _Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ (1),
_Visuvalingam v. Liyanage_ (2), and _Wickramabandu v. Herath_ (3). He did not
contend that that opinion had not in fact been entertained by the President,
or had been formed in bad faith, or was a mere pretence. His submission was
that -

(a) there was a failure of Natural Justice, in that there had been no hearing
prior to the recommendation and the opinion referred to in section 2, and

(b) there had been an excess of jurisdiction and/or a failure to consider
relevant material and/or that the President did not have adequate material on
which he could properly have formed an opinion.

As the learned Deputy Solicitor General did not contend that the Order was not
justiciable, we do not have to consider that question.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners contended that in order to determine the
character of an Order under section 2 it was necessary to consider its
consequences : firstly, the ouster of jurisdiction effected by sections 3 and
4, and secondly, the liability of an owner to summary deprivation of
possession under section 7.

A valid order under section 2 requires the following elements

(1) a recommendation by the Minister (and it is common ground that the
President was himself the Minister concerned);

(2) an opinion formed by the President -

(i) in relation to an urban development project,

(ii) that lands are required for the purposes of such project,

(iii) that this requirement is urgent, and

(iv) that such project would meet " the just requirements of the general
welfare of the People ".

386

Whether the expressway project is desirable, prudent, or otherwise,
undoubtedly it is an urban development project "; and it is clear that for the
particular expressway that has been proposed, some parts of the lands,
described in the Schedule to the Order, are required. I need therefore to
consider only the remaining elements.

It is convenient to reproduce here the relevant sections

"2\. Where the President, upon a recommendation made by the Minister in charge
of the subject of Urban Development, is of opinion that any particular land
is, or lands in any area are, urgently required for the purpose of carrying
out an urban development project which would meet the just requirements of the
general welfare of the People, the President may, by Order published in the
Gazette, declare that such land is or lands in such area as may be specified
are, required for such purpose.

3\. No person aggrieved by an Order made or purported to have been made under
section 2 of this Act, or affected by or who apprehends that he would be
affected by any act or any step taken or proposed to be taken under or
purporting to be under this Act or under or purporting to be under any other
written law, in or in relation to any particular land or any land in any area,
shall be entitled \-

(a) To any remedy, redress or relief in any court other than by way of
compensation or damages;

(b) to a permanent or interim injunction, an enjoining order, a stay order or
any other order having the effect of staying, restraining, or impeding any
person, body or authority in respect of -

(i) any acquisition of any such land or any land in such area;

(ii) the carrying out of any work on any such land or in any land in any such
area;

(iii) the implementation of such project in any manner whatsoever.

387

4(1) The jurisdiction conferred on the Court of Appeal by Article 140 of the
Constitution shall, in relation to any particular land or any land in any area
in respect of which an Order under or purporting to be under section 2 of this
Act has been made, be exercised by the Supreme Court and not by the Court of
Appeal.

(2) Every (such) application .......... shall be made within one
month......... and the Supreme Court shall hear and finally dispose of such
application within two months........

7(1) Where it becomes necessary for the Government or any person, body or
authority, for the purpose of carrying out or assisting in the carrying out of
any Urban Development Project, to take possession of any particular land or
any land in any area in respect of which an Order under or purporting to be
under section 2 of this Act has been published, it shall be lawful for the
Government or any such person, body or authority, to take steps under the
provisions of the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, and accordingly \-

(a) the expression " State land " as defined in such Act shall include any
land vested in or belonging to any such person, body or authority or which
such person, body or authority is entitled to dispose of; and

(b) the expression " competent authority " shall include such person or the
principal executive officer of such body or authority.

(2) Every application under the State Lands (Recovery of Possession) Act, in
respect of any particular land or any land in any area in respect of which an
Order under or purporting to be under section 2 of this Act has been
published, shall be finally disposed of within thirty days....... and the
court shall make all such orders as are necessary to ensure that all persons
are ejected from that land within sixty days of the making of such application
".

388

**OUSTER OF JURISDICTION: SECTIONS 3 AND 4**

It was contended on behalf of the Petitioners that section 3 not only took
away the jurisdiction of the District Court to grant declarations and
injunctions in respect of an order under section 2, but even the jurisdiction
of the superior courts; that " any court " included the Supreme Court. My
observations in Weeraratne v. Colin-Thome (4), were referred to that the scope
of the ouster provided for by section 9 (2) of the Special Presidential
Commissions Law, No. 7 of 1978, was enlarged by section 18 (A) 2 of the
amending Act No. 4 of 1978 so as to preclude " any court " \- and this would
include the Supreme Court - from staying, suspending or prohibiting the
holding of any proceeding ". Those observations were only obiter, as the power
of this Court to make an interim order was not in issue. However, Law No. 7 of
1978 (and section 9(2) in particular) was pre-Constitution legislation, which
was kept in force by Article 168(1), and the Bill in respect of Act No. 4 of
1978 was referred to this Court with a certificate that it was intended to be
passed by the special majority required by Article 84, (and thus would have
effect notwithstanding inconsistency with Article 140). Further a section 18A
(2) of that Statute disclosed an intention to affect the jurisdiction
conferred by Article 140, quite unlike section 3 which is phrased in very
different terms. Section 3 must therefore be interpreted, as far as possible,
in a manner consistent with Article 140. If " any Court " in section 3 (a) is
interpreted as including the Supreme Court, the only relief which that
provision permits would be compensation or damages; that view would render
section 4 nugatory because Article 140 does not refer to those remedies.
Clearly therefore section 3 (a) read with section 4 - quite apart from the
constitutional question - was not intended to apply to the superior courts.
Section 6 puts this beyond doubt, because " nothing contained in section
3.......... shall. affect the powers which the Supreme Court may otherwise
lawfully exercise [under] section 4 (1)', i.e. the jurisdiction (conferred by
Article 140) and transferred by section 4(1) to the Supreme Court. The learned
Deputy Solicitor General conceded that section 3 did not affect the
jurisdiction conferred by Article 140.

I hold that section 3 does not affect the jurisdiction entrenched by Article
140, which has (n terms of the First Amendment), been transferred to this
Court by section 4(1).

389

**SUMMARY DEPRIVATION OF POSSESSION: SECTION 7**

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that section 7(1) empowers the
Government, or any other person, to obtain possession of any lands, in respect
of which a section 2 Order has been made, under the State Lands (Recovery of
Possession) Act; a landowner could thus be summarily dispossessed at any time
after a section 2 Order. However, section 7 merely authorises the Government
or any other person " to take steps " under that Act. In view of the
definition of " State land " at that time notices could have been issued under
that Act only in respect of land to which the State was lawfully entitled or
which may be disposed of by the State and lands under the control of certain
specified authorities; and it was only a " competent authority " who could
issue such notices and take other steps. The effect of section 7 (1) was to
enable a " person, body or authority " to take steps, even though not a "
competent authority ", and paragraph (a) was enacted in order to widen the
description of " State land "to include " any land vested in or belonging to
any such person, body or authority hence notices can be issued and possession
obtained only after the lands referred to in the section 2 Order became duly
vested in the State or such other person, body or authority. The learned
Deputy Solicitor General agreed with this construction of section 7, and
submitted that possession could not be taken under that Act before the lands
were vested by virtue of proceedings under the Land Acquisition Act or other
statutes.

A section 2 Order thus does not have the drastic consequences suggested by
learned Counsel for the Petitioners, and it is on that basis that the validity
of the section 2 Order has to be examined.

**MINISTER'S RECOMMENDATION**

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that although the President was
also the Minister concerned, there should nevertheless have been a
recommendation, and that this should have been made after hearing the views of
those affected by and/or opposed to the project; and also that the
recommendation should have made reference to those views in order to enable
the President to form an opinion after considering every aspect of the matter.

390

I hold that a hearing was not a pre-requisite for making a recommendation, for
the same reasons which I have set out later in this judgment for holding that
the President was entitled to form an opinion without a prior hearing. It is
constitutionally permissible for the President to refrain from assigning a
particular subject or function to a Minister, whereupon it would remain in his
charge (under Article 44 (2)). I cannot interpret section 2 as requiring the
President to make a recommendation to himself, and thereafter to form an
opinion upon the same matter; if his opinion was the same as his
recommendation, the latter would be superfluous; and it is absurd to think
that his opinion could have differed from his recommendation. I hold that the
President was not legally required to make a recommendation to himself, and it
was sufficient for him to form an opinion on the available material. The Order
has been drafted with less than ordinary care and precision, and mistakenly
refers to a non-existent " recommendation of the Minister........; however, in
the circumstances this is a superfluity which does not vitiate the Order.

**URGENCY**

Urgency is always relative; sometimes action may be required within hours; for
an enormous project, such as this expressway, urgency may be a matter of
months or years. Considering that the project had been in contemplation at
least from 1983, and had already been delayed for almost ten years, it is not
unreasonable to consider, in the light of increases in population, traffic,
economic activity, etc., that speedy implementation was imperative. I hold
that the President's opinion as to urgency was not vitiated by any excess of
jurisdiction or error of law; and that there was adequate material on which
that opinion could have been formed.

**JUST REQUIREMENTS OF THE GENERAL WELFARE OF THE PEOPLE**

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners submitted that in forming an opinion that
the expressway would meet the just requirements of the general welfare of the
People, the President was obliged -

391

(a) to give a hearing to the people likely to be affected by the project;

(b) to consider alternatives to the project;

(c) to consider environmental and socio-economic factors; and

(d) to have regard to the large number of people affected and the need for
their relocation.

The " People " referred to in section 2 includes not only such " People " as
may be affected by the project, but the " People " of Sri Lanka. The phrase
under consideration is virtually identical to that occurring in Article 15 (7)
of the Constitution. It must include the national interest in general. In any
event, any supposed requirement of a hearing must apply also to those likely
to benefit from the project. Thus a hearing is obviously impractical, as some
sort of a local referendum would be needed to ascertain the views of all those
having a legitimate interest in the project. The Order has, of itself, no
adverse impact on the citizen's property, liberty or livelihood; it does not
deprive him of, or affect, the title to, or possession of, his property; his
legal remedies under Article 140 are unimpaired; he is not subjected to any
disadvantage whatsoever; and he will have an opportunity of submitting
objections when steps are taken under section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act. I
am of the view that the Minister in making a recommendation, and the President
when making an Order, under section 2, are determining policy, based on
evidence of a general character; there is no lis. The obligation to give a
hearing arises only later, when objections are submitted, and when there is a
lis; at that stage evidence as to the local situation, and the effect on
individuals, has to be adduced and weighed.

It is of course possible that land-owners may be deprived of their right to
submit objections if, instead of making an order under section 4, the relevant
Minister makes an order under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act, and soon
thereafter an order under section 38, proviso (a). However, in the present
case the land that is actually required for the expressway (and therefore land
the possession of which is urgently required) cannot be determined from the
schedule to the section 2 Order, since that schedule admittedly includes more
land than needed. To determine what portions of land are required, it will be
necessary to enter those lands, survey and take and mark levels, set out and
mark

392

the boundaries of the proposed expressway, and do other necessary acts. An
Order under section 2 of the Land Acquisition Act would be needed to do all
this. It is only thereafter that the Minister would know which particular
lands are required, and that possession must be taken urgently. The learned
Deputy Solicitor General concedes that an order under section 38, proviso (a)
can be challenged by certiorari, as held in _Fernandopulle v. Minister of
Lands and Agriculture_ (5).

The extracts produced from the 1984 report show that alternatives were
considered - not only the alternative routes but the railway as well. In the
absence of other relevant portions of the report, it is impossible for us to
say either that the material was inadequate or that the rejection of the
alternatives was unreasonable. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner further
submitted that one of the alternatives that should have been considered was
the " no action " alternatives - to leave the status quo unchanged. Our
jurisdiction is not to determine whether or not the expressway is necessary,
and if so, which alternative is the most suitable. It is for the Executive,
under the laws enacted by Parliament, to make those decisions. The writ
jurisdiction authorises this Court to examine whether jurisdiction has been
exceeded, whether there is error of law, and whether there has been procedural
due process. The merits of a decision cannot be questioned merely because we
consider that some other decision would have been better; we can interfere
only if it is unreasonable.

The available material does not in any way indicate that the decision to build
the expressway was unreasonable; but on the contrary, that it was necessary
and urgent; and there is nothing whatever to suggest that the selection of the
particular route, or the rejection of the alternative options, was
unreasonable.

Any expressway would inevitably cause a certain amount of inconvenience, (or
loss or prejudice) to one group of citizens or another, depending on its
location. Neither the fact that a particular route causes inconvenience to
some people, nor the selection of one route (which causes inconvenience, or
inconvenience to a greater number of people), in preference to another route,
constitutes proof of unreasonableness. In any event, the Petitioners have not
even attempted to show that some other route would be better for any reason
whatsoever.

393

The next contention on behalf of the Petitioner was based on Part IV C of the
National Environmental Act, No. 47 of 1980, introduced by amending Act No. 56
of 1988. Section 23AA requires that approval be obtained for the
implementation of all " prescribed projects ", from the appropriate " project
approving agencies Â°. Under section 231313, for the purposes of granting such
approval; project approving agencies are required to call for an Environmental
Impact Assessment report ("EIA"), which is defined in section 33. It was
submitted that a section 2 Order could not have been made in respect of the
expressway before an EIA had been prepared, and that an essential component of
an EIA was an " environmental cost-benefit analysis " \- something much more
than mere financial cost-benefit analysis. This contention cannot succeed.
Those provisions apply only to " project approving agencies " and " prescribed
projects ", as determined by the Minister by Orders under sections 23Y and
23Z; no such Orders had been made. Further, section 33 makes it clear that the
submission of an environmental cost-benefit analysis is required only if such
an analysis has in fact been prepared.

It was then urged that draft regulations under section 32, covering these
matters, have been prepared and that the section 2 Order had been made hastily
before the regulations could be gazetted, not because of any real urgency, but
simply to prevent the expressway project becoming subject to those
regulations. This is highly speculative, and is not supported by any evidence.
The implementation of the project could reasonably have been considered
urgent; even if regulations had been made the expressway might not have been
declared to be a prescribed project; and finally the scheme of the Act does
not contemplate that an EIA should have been prepared and finalised before a
section 2 Order in respect of the project. Sections 23AA and 23BB adequately
protect the public interest in regard to environmental considerations by
preventing the implementation of a project until an EIA is submitted and
approval obtained.

However section 10 (h) does provide certain safeguards, even though the
expressway is not a prescribed project. One of the powers, functions and
duties of the Central Environmental Authority ("CEA") is to require the
submission of proposals for new projects " for the purpose of evaluation of
the beneficial and adverse impacts of such proposals on the environment ".
Section 24B authorises the CEA

394

to issue directives in respect of a project " which is causing, or is likely
to cause, damage or detriment to the environment, regarding the measures to be
taken to prevent or abate such damage or detriment "; upon failure to comply
with such directives the CEA may apply to a Magistrate to order the temporary
suspension of such project until such measures are taken. The Respondents have
stated that no action will be taken to obtain possession of the lands required
for the project until an EIA, satisfactory to the CEA, had been prepared and
made available for public scrutiny for 30 days. While that would be the
appropriate stage at which to consider public representations as to
environmental factors, I must emphasise that the documents produced indicate
that some consideration has already been given to these matters. Noise, fumes
and other forms of air pollution are inevitable with any road or railway; the
" no action " alternative, which would leave the existing road as it is, will,
as traffic increases with time, increase pollution, as well as expense, delay
and inconvenience to all users of that road and residents; widening that road
will entail much greater expense for land acquisition, and will affect a much
larger number of residents, with no appreciable reduction in pollution. The
construction of an alternative road will necessarily reduce traffic, and
consequently also pollution, congestion and delay in respect of the existing
road. While the expressway will inevitably cause some amount of noise
pollution, an inconvenience to residents in the- vicinity, yet these will be
comparatively very much smaller in number; the documents produced also show an
awareness of the need to reduce noise and pollution by preventing the
construction of buildings immediately adjacent to the road and by erecting
suitable fences and barriers. It appears to me therefore that environmental
factors have already been considered, and that there will be a further
opportunity for all interested persons to raise such matters when the amended
EIA is made available for public scrutiny. The section 2 Order cannot
therefore be impugned on this ground.

Learned Counsel for the Petitioners focussed attention on one factor in
particular - the need for resettlement of a large number of persons who would
be displaced from their homes by the express way. This has already been
considered, and in 4R4, inadequacies have been specifically pinpointed, and a
supplementary EIA has been called for in accordance with the terms of
reference, 4R5A. The Petitioners contend that 2,500 families will be affected
: in the context of population of the district, and the areas concerned, that
cannot

395

per se be regarded as unduly high, particularly if satisfactory steps are
taken for resettlement.

It is not for this Court to determine whether, upon a consideration of all
these factors, the disadvantages outweigh the advantages of the expressway, or
whether in its view the expressway meets the just requirements of the general
welfare of the People. There is adequate material to show that these factors
have been considered, and will be considered further in accordance with the
relevant statutory provisions; that the public will have an opportunity to
express their views; and that it was not unreasonable for the President to
have concluded, when he made the section 2 Order, that the expressway is in
the national interest.

For these reasons the Petitioners application for Certiorari and Prohibition
is refused. The questions raised by the Petitioners in regard to environmental
considerations demonstrate that they have been motivated primarily by concern
for the public interest, and for that reason I make no order for costs.

The 1st Petitioner has another grievance personal to himself. It appears from
his correspondence with some of the Respondents that at the time of the 1984
study, surveyors had demarcated the centre line of the proposed highway by
means of cement pegs; his property was not affected. However, a priest who had
thereafter been expelled from a nearby temple then put up a building upon a
land which was affected by the centre line; in 1988 the priest planted a Bo-
sapling next to the centre line pegs upon that land. In February 1992 the
surveyors entertained the protests of the priest, and moved the centre line on
to the 1st Petitioner's land. These matters are not relevant to the questions
which arose for determination, and quite properly were not agitated by learned
Counsel for the Petitioners; the 1st Petitioner will be free to raise these
matters in the appropriate proceedings.

**GOONAWARDENA, J.** \- I agree.

  
**PERERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application refused._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/3.html_  

