##  A.D.H.Perera v. Gunawardena - SLR - 27, Vol 2 of 1993 [1991] LKSC 3;
(1993) 2 Sri LR 27 (8 July 1991)

27

A. D. H. PERERA **  
v.  
GUNAWARDENA **

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.

AMERASINGHE, J. AND

WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
SC APPEAL 27191  
CA NO. 1052/90  
DC MT. LAVINIA NO. 1352/RE  
JULY 08, 1991.

_     Appeal - Execution pending appeal - Substantial loss - Judicature Act,
s. 23. _

An application for writ of execution to eject the defendant-appellant was
allowed on security being furnished although an appeal had been filed. Acting
in revision the Court of Appeal reversed the order permitting execution.

**Held**

(1) As the defendant-respondent had failed to satisfy the Court that
substantial loss may result unless execution was stayed, the plaintiff was
entitled to execution pending appeal.

(2) While some consideration of the degree of hardship to the judgment-
creditor may perhaps be relevant especially in borderline cases, there is
certainly no burden on him to establish comparatively greater hardship as a
condition of the grant of execution. The burden is on the judgment-debtor to
satisfy the Court that the loss would be substantial.

28

(3) The owner of a business is not entitled to the maximum tenure that the law
allows. Such a proposition would effectively deny execution pending appeal and
introduce a new test under the guise of interpretation.

(4) Mere assertions of the judgment-debtor's opinion that serious loss would
result, unsupported by averments of fact in regard to the nature of the
business, its turnover and profits (or losses), the difficulties and expenses
which relocation would occasion and similar matters, are insufficient. The
material upon which such assertions were based should have been made available
to enable the Court to assess the loss, and to determine, in relation to the
judgment-debtor, whether such loss was substantial, and also to determine the
quantum of security. While generally goodwill does attach to a business, there
is no presumption that every business has a goodwill and certainly not as to
the extent of the goodwill.

**Case referred to**

_Charlotte Perera v. Thambiah (1983) 1 Sri LR 352._

**APPEAL** from order of Court of Appeal.

_P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C. with W. P. Gunatilleke, C. Nilanduwa and U. S.
Sooriyarachchi for plaintiff-respondent-appellant.  
_  
_A. K. Premadasa, P.C. with Faiz Mustapha, P.C. and Miss F. Abeyratne for sub-
defendant-petitioner-respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 05, 1991.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The plaintiff-respondent-appellant (the "appellant*) instituted this action on
15.1.1981 against the original defendant for ejectment from business premises
No. 97, Stanley Tillakaratne Mawatha, Nugegoda, which are admittedly excepted
premises.

The original defendant died on 11.11.1981, and in 1982 the appellant applied
to substitute the widow ; she objected to substitution on the ground that the
business carried on at the premises had been a partnership business between
the defendant and his daughter the substituted defendant-petitioner-respondent
(the respondent ") who was continuing to carry on that business in the
premises, and that it was the daughter who should be substituted. Thereupon
the appellant applied to substitute the respondent, who was duly substituted
and filed her answer on 25.7.1983. On 3.5.1985 the respondent filed an amended
answer averring that the

**29**

 defendant had left a Last Will No. 260 dated 5.11.1981 attested by Jauffer
Hassen, Attorney-at-Law and Notary Public, and claiming that her mother, as
the executrix named in the Last Will, should have been substituted in place of
the defendant, Jauffer Hassen was the Attorney-at-Law who had filed proxy on
behalf of the original defendant, and proxy and answer for the respondent; it
seems that he had also appeared for the widow.

The trial commenced on February, 1989. On 10.2.89 and 27.2.89 several issues
were raised. One group of issues raised the question whether the deceased
defendant had left a Last Will under which the widow was named executrix, and
if so whether the action was maintainable against the respondent. Upto this
stage, no reference was made to the grant of probate or the institution of a
testamentary case. Issues relating to other defences were also raised by
Counsel for the respondent, but on 13.3.89 he withdrew all these issues,
leaving only the issues relating to substitution.

On 3.1.90 the learned District Judge gave judgment in favour of the appellant,
for ejectment, arrears of rent and damages in a sum of Rs. 48,200, continuing
damages and costs. The respondent filed a notice of appeal. On 3.5.90, the
appellant applied for execution pending appeal under section 763 of the Civil
Procedure Code ; the respondent filed objections, with a supporting affidavit,
averring that the respondent was a spinster of 28 years, that she was carrying
on a business called New Lanka Shoe Palace at the premises, that the income
from that business was her only means of livelihood, and the said business
would be completely ruined if the writ was executed, that the respondent had
no alternative premises and all efforts to obtain alternative premises had
failed ; that the issues on which the case was decided, and the question
whether it was section 398 or section 404 of the Civil Procedure Code which
was applicable in respect of the substitution effected in this case, involved
important questions of law.

The matter was taken up for inquiry on 21.8.1990; no evidence was led, and the
parties were content to rely on their affidavits and written submissions. On
22.10.1990 the learned District Judge allowed the appellant's application for
execution pending appeal, on security being furnished. The respondent applied
to the Court of Appeal to revise that order, and that application was allowed
15.1.91. The appellant now appeals against that order with special leave.

30

Three matters were urged in the Court of Appeal. After judgment was reserved,
both parties submitted additional material in regard to alternative
accommodation allegedly available to the respondent, namely shop premises
obtained by her in 1987 at the Nugegoda supermarket. The Court of Appeal
declined to go Into that question, which we too need not consider in view of
our decision on the other questions.

Secondly, it was contended on behalf of the respondent that a substantial
question of law was involved in the appeal. The Court of Appeal did not
consider this submission which it regarded as a mere technicality intended to
delay proceedings.

It was the third aspect which the Court did consider : ' the question of
relative hardships and the irreparable loss to the respondent ' ; It was held
that the ejectment of the respondent would cause irreparable loss, because-

It is a fact that the premises in question is a business premises as conceived
by law. The petitioner's father has established a business in the shoe trade.
It is an incontrovertible fact that goodwill attaches to a business. It is a
valuable accrual to a business. Not the least important element in this factor
is the location of the business itself. The owner of such business is entitled
in the circumstances to have the maximum tenure that the law could permit him
to avail of. The learned trial Judge has in my view not addressed his mind to
(this) important factor. '

It was further held that :

" a competing claim of urgency or substantial loss as a result of delay in
being quieted in possession has not been made out before the learned trial
Judge by the plaintiff. He has in fact not given cogent reasons to justify
comparatively greater hardship on the part of the plaintiff. '

Learned President's Counsel for the respondent very properly conceded that the
Court of Appeal was in error in considering that " irreparable loss " to the
judgment-debtor, and " comparatively greater hardship " to the judgment-
creditor, were the relevant factors. Execution pending appeal may be stayed
under section 763 where the judgment-debtor satisfies the Court that "
substantial

31

 loss to him may otherwise result ( _Charlotte Perera v. Thambiah_ (1), while
some consideration of the degree of hardship to the .judgment-creditor may
perhaps be relevant, especially in borderline cases, there is certainly no
burden on him to establish comparatively greater hardship as a condition of
the grant of execution. He contended that the objections and affidavit filed
by the respondent had not been controverted by a counter-affidavit, and that
the parties had invited the Court to make an order upon the application for
execution on the basis of affidavits and written submissions ; that the
appellant thereby accepted the truth of the averments in the respondent's
affidavit, in which she had averred that the income from the business was her
sole means of livelihood, that the business would be completely ruined if she
was ejected, and that even if she was restored to possession after winning the
appeal the business could not thereafter be rehabilitated ; therefore, he
submitted, substantial loss had been proved.

It was certainly open to the parties to agree to the Court making its order on
the basis of affidavits ; however, in the absence of an express admission it
cannot be presumed that the parties accepted one affidavit or the other as
correct. Here, the appellant's affidavit averred, for various reasons, that
execution pending appeal would not cause substantial loss to the respondent ;
the respondent averred that execution would ruin her business. This conflict
in the affidavits could not be resolved by assuming, despite the absence of a
recorded admission, that the contents of the later affidavit (of the
respondent) were impliedly admitted by the appellant. While ejectment from any
premises, residential or business, would cause loss, the burden is on the
judgment-debtor to satisfy the Court that such loss would be substantial. In
any event, mere assertions of the judgment-debtor's opinion that serious loss
would result, unsupported by averments of fact in regard to the nature of the
business, its turnover and profits (or losses), the difficulties and expenses
which relocation would occasion, and similar matters, are insufficient. The
material upon which such assertions were based should have been made available
to enable the Court to assess the loss, and to determine, in relation to the
judgment-debtor, whether such loss was substantial; and also to determine the
quantum of security. While generally goodwill does attach to a business, there
is no presumption that every business has goodwill, and certainly not as to
the extent of such goodwill. The Court of Appeal considered that the trial
Judge erred in failing to consider the question of goodwill, but in the
absence of any evidence

32

regarding goodwill the trial Judge could not have come to any finding in that
respect. The Court of Appeal also erred in holding that the owner of such
business is entitled to the maximum tenure that the law allows ; such a
proposition would effectively deny execution pending appeal to every judgment-
creditor in respect of business premises : not because substantial loss has
been proved, but because the premises are business premises. This would be
replacing the test enacted by the legislature with a different test devised by
the Courts under the guise of interpretation.

The respondent having failed to satisfy the Court that substantial loss may
result unless execution was stayed, the appellant was entitled to execution
pending appeal.

Learned President's Counsel for the respondent submitted that the respondent's
appeal against the decree of ejectment involved an important and substantial
question of law, as to whether the respondent had been propertly substituted,
and that execution should have been stayed under section 23 of the Judicature
Act. Under that section, the Court has a discretion, if it " shall see fit ",
to make an order staying execution. The failure to disclose the existence of
the Last Will, the delay in applying for probate, the widow's objections to
substitution, and the withdrawal of all the issues relating to the substantive
defences, were all circumstances relevant to the exercise of the discretion
under section 23, and it is not surprising that the Court of Appeal regarded
these as dilatory tactics. Since the respondent has failed to establish the
loss and prejudice that would be caused if execution was allowed, it can
hardly be said that the refusal to exercise the discretion under section 23
was in any way illegal or improper. No prejudice is caused, for, as held in
Charlotte Perera's case, there is adequate provision to restore an evicted
judgment-debtor to occupation if he succeeds in his appeal.

I therefore set aside the judgment and order of the Court of Appeal, and
restore the order of the District Court. The appellant will be entitled to
costs in a sum of Rs. 5,000.

**AMERASINGHE, J. -** I agree.

  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/3.html_  

