##  Brooke Bond (Ceylon) Limited. v. Gunasekera - SLR - 71, Vol 1 of 1990
[1989] LKSC 3; (1990) 1 Sri LR 71 (6 June 1989)

**

71

BROOKE BOND (CEYLON) LIMITED  
v.  
GUNASEKERA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
ATUKORALE, J., H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. AND BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. APPEAL No. 40/87; - C.A. APPLICATION No. 614/87: -  
D.C. MT. LAVINIA 2281/ RE.  

OCTOBER 18, 1988 & JANUARY 18, 19, AND 20, 1989.

_

Execution proceedings - Appeal - Execution pending appeal - Interim order of
restoration after execution - Jurisdiction to entertain application for writ
before expiry of time limit for appeal or until filing of petition of appeal -
Time allowed for appeal - Civil Procedure Code. sections 761, 763, 754 (3),
755 (3).

_

The Plaintiff - appellant sued the defendant for ejectment from certain
premises on the basis that he was an over holding licensee. After trial
judgment was entered on 19.1.1987 for plaintiff in ejectment, damages (Rs.
5000/=) and continuing damages (Rs. 2000/= p.m.). The defendant appealed and
that appeal is pending (notice of appeal on 5.2.87 and petition on 16.3.87).
The plaintiff also appealed (notice on 5.2.1987) against the part of the
judgment awarding him continuing damages at Rs. 2000/= p.m. This appeal is
also pending. On 6.2.87 i.e. the day after the defendant filed notice of
appeal the plaintiff applied for writ of ejectment. The defendant filed
objections and asked for stay of execution pending appeal on sufficient
security being deposited. On 25.5.87 plaintiff's application for writ of
ejectment pending appeal was allowed. On the same day writ was executed and
the

**72**

defendant evicted. On 2.6.87 the defendant moved the Court of Appeal in
revision to quash the order of eviction and praying for an interim order
restoring him to possession pending final disposal of the application for
revision. The Court of Appeal on 10.6.87 granted the interim order. The
plaintiff applied to the Supreme Court for special leave to appeal. A stay
order was granted in respect of the Appeal Court interim order. It was argued
that under section 761 of the C.P.C. the Court had no jurisdiction to
entertain the application for writ because when it was filed the time allowed
for appealing (60 days) from the judgment and decree had not expired.

**

Held

**

For the purposes of section 761 of the Civil Procedure Code the time allowed
for appealing from an appealable decree is 14 days being the time allowed for
the giving of notice of appeal. An appeal is preferred against such a decree
upon the lodging of appeal within 14 days in terms of section 754 (3).

Per Atukorale J.

' Section 761 should not be construed in such a way as to lightly interfere
with a decree - holder's right to reap the fruits of his victory as
expeditiously as possible Further it is the notice of appeal that has now to
be duly stamped and not the petition of appeal ......... .. The petition of
appeal is exempt from stamp duty".

**

Cases referred to

**_

(1) Careem and another v. Amerasinghe 1 Sri Kantha Rep. 25_  

_

(2) Vithane v. Weerasinghe and another (1981) Sri L. R. 52

_**

APPEAL** from an order of the Court of Appeal.

_

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q.C. with E. Ratnayake, Miss T. Keenawinna and Harsha
Amerasekera_ for the Plaintiff - Appellant  

_

P. A. D. Samarasekera, P.C. with W. D. D. Weerasinghe_ for the Defendant -
Respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

June 6, 1989

**ATUKORALE, J.

**

This is an appeal arising out of an interim order made by the Court of Appeal
restoring the defendant (who is the respondent to this appeal) to certain
promises pending the final disposal of his application to revise the order for
his ejectment made by the District Court in execution proceedings pending
appeal. The facts in so far as they are relevant for our purposes are as
follows. The plaintiff (who is the present appellant) filed action in the
District Court seeking to eject the defendant from the premises on the basis
that he was an over holding licensee. After trial the learned District Judge
held with the plaintiff and ordered the ejectment of the defendant with
damages in a sum of Rs. 5,000/- with continuing

**73**

damages at Rs. 2,000/- per month. The judgment of the District Court was
pronounced on 19.1.1987. The defendant duty filed a notice of appeal on
5.2.1987 in terms of s. 754 (3) of the Civil Procedure Code (hereinafter
referred to as the Code) and a petition of appeal on 16.3.1987 in terms of s.
755 (3). This appeal of the defendant is stilt pending in the Court of Appeal.
The plaintiff himself filed a notice of appeal as well as a petition of appeal
on 5.2.1987 against that part of the decree awarding him continuing damages at
Rs. 2,000/- per month. This appeal of the plaintiff is also pending in the
Court of Appeal. Although in the course of the present proceedings before the
Court of Appeal a certain amount of reliance appears to have been placed on
the fact that on 5.2.1987 the plaintiff had duly lodged an appeal it was
conceded before us that this appeal of the plaintiff would have no bearing on
the question that arises for our determination in this appeal before us. On
6.2.1987 i.e. the day after the defendant filed the notice of appeal, the
plaintiff instituted an application for execution of the decree by the issue
of a writ of ejectment against the defendant. The defendant filed objections
to this application and asked that writ of ejectment be stayed pending appeal
on sufficient security being deposited. After inquiry the learned District
Judge by his order dated 25.5.1987 allowed the plaintiff's application for
writ of ejectment. On the very same day the writ was executed and the
defendant ejected from the premises by the Fiscal. On 2.6.1987 the defendant
filed an application in the Courts of Appeal (No. 614/87) seeking, by way of
revision to quash this order of the learned District Judge and praying for an
interim order restoring him to possession of the premises pending the final
disposal of his revision application. The motion for interim relief was taken
up for argument on 10.6.1987 on which date, after hearing both parties, the
Court of Appeal made order granting the interim relief prayed for by the
defendant. On the same day the plaintiff filed an application in this Court
for special leave to appeal from the interim order made by the Court of
Appeal. On 12.6.1987 he obtained before a single Judge in chambers an order
staying the execution of the interim order of the Court of Appeal until such
time as the application for special leave to appeal was supported in Court. On
24.6.1987 this Court granted special leave to appeal and also directed that
the stay order issued by the single Judge in chambers be extended until the
disposal of the appeal. It is this appeal that has come up for hearing before
us.

A perusal of the order of the Court of Appeal discloses that the basis upon
which it granted interim relief to the defendant was the acceptance

**74**

by it prima facie, of the submission advanced on behalf of the defendant that
the District Court had no jurisdiction to entertain the application for writ
made to it on 6.2.1987 for the reason that when it was filed on that date the
time allowed for appealing from the judgment and decree of the District Court
(delivered on 19.1.1987) had not expired. It was urged on behalf of the
defendant in the Court of Appeal (as well as before us) that the time allowed
for appealing from an appealable decree of the District Court was 60 days,
which is the period allowed for filing the petition of appeal, and that s. 761
of the Code prohibited the institution by the judgment - creditor or the
entertainment by Court of an application for the execution of such a decree
before the expiration of 60 days from the date of the decree or until such
time as the petition of appeal was filed within such period. Apparently the
Court of Appeal was prime facie satisfied that there was substance in this
contention urged on behalf of the defendant. It, however, made no final
decision on this point.

At the hearing before us it was contended by learned Queen's Counsel appearing
for the plaintiff that the time allowed for appealing from an appealable
decree is 14 days from the date of the decree being the period prescribed for
the presentation of the notice of appeal and that an appeal is preferred or
lodged from a decree upon the giving of notice within this period to the Court
of first instance. We had the benefit of a full argument on both sides
relating to the point at issue between them and as such it seems to me both
expedient and necessary that we should decide this point finally in this
appeal.

S. 761 of the Code reads as follows :

"No application for execution of an appealable decree shall be instituted or
entertained until after the expiry of the time allowed for appealing therefrom

Provided, however, that where an appeal is preferred against such a decree,
the judgment - creditor may forthwith apply for execution of such decree under
the provisions of section 763."

In the instant case it is not denied that the judgment pronounced by the
learned District Judge on 19.1.1987 constituted an- appealable decree. The
issue before us revolves on the correct construction of the words "until after
the expiry of the time allowed for appealing therefrom" i.e. from the
appealable decree and the words "where an appeal is preferred

**75**

against such a decree" appearing in s. 761 reproduced above. In short two
questions arise for our determination, namely, when does the time allowed for
appealing from an appealable decree expire and when and how is an appeal
preferred against such a decree.

It may be useful at this stage to refer to and trace the history of the
legislation pertaining to execution of decrees pending appeal. The Civil
Procedure Code in force as on 31.12.1973 immediately prior to the repeal of
Part VIII (including Chapter LIX relating to execution of decrees pending
appeal) by the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973 - hereinafter
referred to as the 1973 Code for convenience - by s. 761 provided as follows:

"Execution of a decree shall not be stayed by reason only of an appeal having
been preferred against the decree; but, if any application be made for stay of
execution of an appealable decree before the expiry of the time allowed for
appealing therefrom, the Court which passed the decree may for sufficient
cause order the execution to be stayed:

Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the Court
making it is satisfied -

(a) ......

(b) ......

(c) ......

This section read along with s. 763, as it stood then, which stipulated that
in the event of an application being made by the judgment-creditor for
execution of a decree which is appealed against, the judgment-debtor shall be
made a respondent clearly showed that in so far as the judgment creditor was
concerned there existed no restriction as to the time within which he could
institute an application for execution of an appealable decree. It was open to
him to do so immediately upon the entering of the decree - before the expiry
of the time allowed for appealing or before the filing of an application for
stay of execution - even on the very day of the pronouncement of the judgment.
There existed no bar to the entertainment of such an application. Nor was
there a requirement that the judgment debtor should be made a party respondent
to such an application. A practical consequence of this legal position was
that very frequently there arose, immediately upon the judgment being
delivered by the original

**76**

Court, a race between the judgment-creditor and the judgment-dabtor, the
former rushing to Court in an endeavour to obtain execution of the decree
before the latter could file in court an application for stay of execution and
vice versa. S. 754(1) of the 1973 Code provided that every appeal to the
Supreme Court from a judgment, decree or order of any original Court shall be
made in the form of a written petition to it in the name of the appellant and
shall be preferred to it as provided thereinafter. An appeal had thus to be in
the form of a written petition and had to be preferred in the manner
prescribed in the relevant provisions subsequent to s.754 (1). According to
s.754 (2) the petition of appeal had to be presented to the original Court
within a period of 10 days in the case of an appeal from the decree of a
District Court, the period of 10 days being computed as set out in that sub-
section. If presented in terms thereof the court had to receive it and deal
with it as stipulated in the subsequent sections. If not so presented the
court had to refuse to receive it. When the petition of appeal was received by
the Court under that sub-section, the petitioner' was required by s.756 (1) to
give forthwith notice to the respondent that he would on a day to be specified
therein and, in the case of an appeal from a decree of the District Court,
within a period of 20 days of the date of the delivery of the judgment or
order, tender security for the respondent's costs of appeal and that he would
deposit a sufficient sum of money to cover the expenses of serving notice of
appeal on the respondent. If the security was accepted and the deposit made
within the period of 20 days, then the court must immediately issue notice of
appeal (together with a copy of the petition of appeal) for service on the
respondent through the Fiscal. Thereafter the court had to transmit the
petition of appeal with the papers and proceedings relevant to the appeal to
the Supreme Court. Thus whilst s.755 and s. 758 (1) of the 1973 Code
prescribed the form of the petitions of appeal, s.754 (2) and s.756 prescribed
the time and manner of preferring an appeal to the Supreme Court. Thus, in my
view, under the 1973 Code an appeal was preferred against the judgment, decree
or order of the District Court only upon compliance with the aforesaid
provisions.

There had, therefore, to be compliance with two time-limits before an appeal
could be field to have been preferred to the Supreme Court, namely, the
presentation of the petition of appeal within 10 days as required by s. 754(2)
and the furnishing of security and the making of the deposit within 20 days as
required by s.756 (1). Both such periods were to be computed from the date
when the decree or order appealed against

**77**

was pronounced in the manner set out in those two subsections. Hence a would-
be appellant who complied initially with s. 754(2) was allowed time up to a
total period of 20 days for compliance with s. 756(1). It is only when there
has been compliance with both time-limits that notice of appeal is ordered by
Court to be served on the respondent. If there was compliance with s.754 (2),
but 'the petitioner' failed or omitted to comply with s.756 (1), then the
petition of appeal' must be held to have abated and no further steps were
necessary \- s. 756(2): The scheme of the 1973 Code therefore shows that an
appeal was preferred to the Supreme Court only where there was due compliance
with the steps enumerated by sections 754(2) and 756(1) within the periods of
limitation prescribed therein. It is, therefore, my view that the words
'before the expiry of the time allowed for appealing" from the decree in s.761
of the 1973 Code means and includes the period of 10 days allowed for
presenting the petition of appeal in terms of s. 754(2) and, when there has
been due compliance therewith, the period of 20 days allowed for the
furnishing of security and the making of the deposit in terms of s.756 (1).
Where, however, a would-be appellant fails to comply with the provisions of
s.754 (2), the time allowed for appealing would expire on the lapse of the
period of 10 days. These words cannot, in my view, be confined to mean only
the time prescribed for the presentation of the petition of appeal. If this
was the intention of the legislature it could have been so expressed simply
and unequivocally by the use of the words "before the expiry of the time
allowed for presenting the petition of appeal" - words which, by way of
contrast, have been used in the proviso to s.755. It is also borne out by
s.756(3) which stipulated that when a petition of appeal has been received
under s.754(2) but 'the petitioner' has failed to give the security and to
make the deposit as provided for by s.756(1), then the petition of appeal'
shall be held to have abated. This phraseology indicates that the receipt of
the petition of appeal by itself does not constitute an appeal.

Sections 753 to 778, including the aforementioned sections, of the 1973 Code
were repealed by s.3(1) (b) of the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of
1973, with effect from 1.1.1974. Chapter IV of this Law is captioned APPEALS
PROCEDURE and consists of sections 315 to 356, which have been classified,
inter alia, under the following sub-headings, namely, Right of Appeal
(sections 316 and 317); [Lodging of Appeals (sections 318 to 328); Pre-hearing
Proceedings (sections 329 to 338) and Hearing of Appeals (sections 339 to
347)]. A distinction was drawn for the first time in regard to the right of
appeal from judgments on the one hand

**78**

orders on the other, of original Courts. S.318, appearing under the subheading
Lodging of Appeals, enacted that an appeal against a judgment may be lodged by
giving notice of appeal to the original Court within such time and in the form
and manner prescribed therein. Sections 320, 321, 322 and 323 set out the time
(within 14 days), the manner and the form of the lodging of the notice of
appeal. Generally whilst s. 320 prescribed the time, s.321 and s.322
prescribed the manner and s.323 the form of the notice of appeal. The notice
had to be given within 14 days from the date on which the judgment was
pronounced as computed in s.320. It had to be accompanied by security for the
respondent's costs of appeal or an acknowledgment of waiver of security by the
respondent or his registered attorney and proof of service on the respondent
or such attorney of a copy of the notice of appeal - s.321. Section 323,
providing for the form of the notice of appeal, stipulated that it should
contain the particulars prescribed by rules of court, that it should be signed
by the appellant or his registered attorney and that it should be duly
stamped. The rules of Court - Supreme Court Appeals Procedure Rules, 1974,
published in the Gazette Extra-Ordinary dated 23.1.1974 - did not require the
grounds of appeal to be specified in the notice of appeal. S.330, appearing
under the sub-heading Pre-Hearing Proceedings, required the "appellant" to
lodge in triplicate in the Supreme Court written submissions in support of his
"appeal" with proof of service of a copy thereof on the respondent or his
registered attorney. If the "appellant" failed to do so his "appeal" was
deemed to have abated. It is relevant to note that the filing of written
submissions was a step in pre-hearing proceedings before the Supreme Court
subsequent to and independent of the lodging of the notice of appeal in the
original Court. It is a stage that was reached only after an appeal had
already been lodged. It presupposes the existence of an appeal. Once the
notice of appeal was accepted by the original Court all further proceedings in
the action (which would include execution proceedings) were stayed - s.325. An
analysis of the above provisions of the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44
of 1973, shows that an appeal from a judgment was preferred by the lodging of
a notice of appeal as provided for in s.318 whereupon execution proceedings,
if any, were automatically stayed.

The 1973 Code which was repealed by s. 2 of the Administration of Justice
(Amendment) Law, No. 25 of 1975, with effect from 01.01.1976 was again revived
and brought back into operation by virtue of the provisions of sections 2, 3
and 4 of the Civil Courts Procedure (Special

**79**

Provisions Law, No. 19 of 1977, which came into operation on 15.12.1977. The
Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Law, No. 20 of 1977, which also came into
force on the same date, by s. 109 repealed sections 754 to 756 of the revived
Code and substituted therefor 3 new sections. It also repealed S. 761 of that
Code and substituted] therefor a new s.761 which I have reproduced at the
beginning this judgment. Subsections (1) and (2) of the new s. 754 retained
the distinction between judgments and orders introduced by the said Law No. 44
of 1973. Subsection (3) of this new section made provision for the lodging of
an appeal to the Supreme Court (now to the Court of Appeal) from the judgment
or decree of an original Court within such time and in the form and manner
thereafter provided. Although cast in different phraseology this subsection is
substantially the same as s. 318 of Law No. 44 of 1973. In my view it embodied
the concept introduced by the latter section of preferring an appeal by the
lodging of a notice of appeal. Sub-section (4) of this new s. 754 and sub-
sections (1) and (2) of the new s. 755 of the present Code stipulating the
time within which and the form and manner in which the notice of appeal has to
be presented to the original court are identical with the corresponding
provisions of Law No. 44 of 1973 and the rules of Court made there under. As
under those rules of Court, there is, under s. 755 (1), no requirement that
the notice of appeal should contain the grounds of appeal. Thus s. 754(2) and
(3) of the present Code in effect did away with the provisions contained in
the 1973 Code for the preferring of an appeal by way of, firstly, presenting a
petition of appeal within 10 days and, secondly, furnishing security and
making a deposit within 20 days. If s. 754(3) and (4) and s. 755 (1) and (2)
of the present Code stood by themselves, adopting and embodying as they do in
almost identical terms the corresponding position under Law No. 44 of 1973 and
the rules made there under, it would appear to be quite clear that an appeal
to the Supreme Court (now to the Court of Appeal) has to be preferred by
lodging the notice of appeal to the original Court within 14 days of the date
of delivery of the judgment or decree. Then there can be no doubt that the
expression until after the expiry of the time allowed for appealing' from the
decree can but only mean until after the expiry of 14 days from the date of
the decree. If within this period an appeal is preferred by the judgement
debtor by duly giving notice of appeal, then the judgment-creditor is
entitled, in terms of the Proviso to s, 761, to apply forthwith (even before
the expiry of the 14 days) for execution of the decree. Has this legal
position in any way been altered by the provisions contained in s. 755 (3) of
the present Code requiring every appellant to present to the original

**80**

court within 60 days from the date of the judgment or decree appealed against
a petition of appeal setting out, inter alia, the grounds of objection to such
judgment or decree? It was argued before us by learned President's Counsel
appearing for the defendant that the filing of the petition of appeal
constituted an essential step in the process of preferring an appeal, a
process which is incomplete until and unless the petition is filed. The
grounds of appeal set out in the petition of appeal, it was urged, formed the
essence and soul of an appeal. A decree, learned President's Counsel
maintained, became a decree appealed against only when both the notice of
appeal as well as the petition of appeal were filed in compliance with the
relevant sections. It was thus his contention that in the instant case as the
period of 60 days had not lapsed and no petition of appeal had still been
filed, the time allowed for appealing from the decree of the District Court
had not expired nor had an appeal been preferred therefrom at the time the
application for execution was made. As the application had thus been made in
contravention of the statutory bars imposed by s. 761, not only was its
institution bad in law but also the court had no jurisdiction to entertain the
same and as such the proceedings and the order made in pursuance thereof were
a nullity.

It is doubtless correct, as submitted by learned President's Counsel, that
under the present Code the petition of appeal is required to set out the
grounds of appeal and that it is upon its presentation that the original court
has to forward along with it, all the relevant papers and proceedings to the
Court of Appeal where upon the Registrar has to number the petition and enter
the same in the Register of Appeals and to notify the same to the parties
concerned, vide s. 756 (1). The position was different under the corresponding
section - s. 329 (1) -of Law No. 44 of 1973 according to which it was on the
receipt of the notice of appeal (there being no provision there under for the
filing of a petition of appeal) that the Registrar had to number the same and
enter it in the Register of Appeals and to notify the parties concerned of the
same. However upon a close and careful scrutiny of the relevant sections of
the present Code both by themselves and in the fight of the statutory changes
that had preceded them and which I have outlined earlier, I have formed the
view that in ascertaining, for the purposes of s.761, the time allowed for
appealing from the decree and whether an appeal had been preferred therefrom,
regard must be had solely to the lodging of the notice of appeal and not to
the filing of the petition of appeal. In my view the plain and natural meaning
of the simple and clear language in which s.754(3) of the present

**81**

Code is couched can admit of no doubt that an appeal is lodged or preferred
upon the due presentation of the notice of appeal as stipulated therein. As
pointed out by me already this was the position under Law No. 44 of 1973 which
effected a clear and distinct change from that which prevailed under the 1973
Code. Moreover no valid reason had been adduced on behalf of the defendant as
to why the legislature should have extended the time allowed for appealing
from 20 days under the 1973 Code and 14 days under Law No. 44 of 1973 to as
much as 60 days under the present Code as urged by learned President's
Counsel. Nor is there any cogent reason for depriving a judgment-creditor or
decree-holder of the right and opportunity of initiating execution proceedings
for a period which, upon the contention of learned President's Counsel, may
extend to as long as 60 days. S.761 should not be construed in such a way as
to lightly interfere with a decree-holder's right to reap the fruits of his
victory as expeditiously as possible. Further it is the notice of appeal [that
has now to be duly stamped and not the petition of appeal] as under the 1973
Code. The petition of appeal is now exempt from stamp duty. A failure to
present the notice of appeal in conformity with s. 754 (4) of the present Code
debars the court from receiving it. But no such sanction seems to attach to
the failure to file the petition of appeal within 60 days. Nor is the
appellate court in deciding an appeal confined to the grounds of objection set
down in the petition of appeal - s.758(2). These facts indicate that the
present Code attaches much more significance and emphasis to the notice of
appeal than the petition of appeal. The provision contained in s,765 of the
present Code enabling the Court of Appeal to admit and entertain, in certain
circumstances, a petition of appeal from a decree of the original court
although the provisions of s.754 relating to the lodging of a notice of appeal
have not been observed postulates that the lodging of a notice of appeal in
terms of s.754 is tantamount to the filing of an appeal. All these facts and
circumstances show unmistakably that the normal and regular appeal is by way
of lodging a notice of appeal under s.754.

Learned President's Counsel relied much on the decision of the Court of Appeal
in Careem and another v. Amerasinghe (1) to support his contention. In that
case the Court of Appeal observing that the process of appealing now involved
two stages, namely the first stage of giving notice of appeal and the second
stage of [the filing of the petition of appeal,] held that there was no
warrant in the language used in s.761 to restricting the time allowed for
appealing to the first stage i.e. the giving

**82**

of notice of appeal within 14 days. The Court held that according to the
scheme of the present Code an appeal was preferred only upon the filing of the
petition of appeal. In reaching this conclusion the Court relied on certain
observations of Wanasundera J. in the judgment of the Supreme Court in Vithane
v. Weerasinghe and another (2). These observations of Wanasundera J.
pertaining to the provisions relating to appeal were made not in reference to
the point arising for our consideration in the instant case but in connection
with the objection taken in that case that the petition of appeal not having
been filed within 60 days the appeal was bad as being out of time, an
objection which was raised in and upheld by the Court of Appeal which made
order abating the appeal on the basis that it was powerless to grant any
relief. So that the primary, if not sole, question to which Wanasundera J.
addressed his mind was in regard to the nature of the scope and extent of the
power of the Court of Appeal to grant relief, under s. 759(2), for lapses on
the part of an appellant in complying with the provisions pertaining to
appeals. He held that its terms were wide enough to cover a case of non-
compliance with the second stage of the appellate procedure and that s. 765
which empowered the Court of Appeal to admit and entertain an appeal
notwithstanding lapse of time had no application to such a non-compliance and
was limited only to the first stage. The Supreme Court held that the Court of
Appeal in such a case had the power to grant relief and was not obliged to
abate the appeal as erroneously held by it. There are in the judgment of
Wanasundera J. clear expressions which in fact support the position contended
for by learned Queen's Counsel for the plaintiff in the instant case. For
instance in the second paragraph itself of his judgment Wanasundera J.,
referring to the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Law, No. 20 of 1977, states:

"it now provides, in the first instance, for lodging an appeal by notice of
appeal within 14 days of the date of judgment." (the emphasis is added).

Again at page 56 in reference to sections 754 and 756 of the present Code he
states:

"The time limits in these two sections are in respect of, first the lodging of
the appeal by giving notice of appeal and, second the filing of an application
for leave to appeal." (Emphasis is added).

Viewed in the light and context of the matter that arose for decision of the
Supreme Court in that case and the passages quoted by me above,

**83**

I am of the opinion that when Wanasundera J. in the course of his judgment
used expressions such as "the present provisions relating to appeals" and "the
appellate procedure which obtains today" and "the process of appealing
involving two stages" they cannot in any way be taken to have any relevance on
the point arising for our consideration in the instant appeal. These
expressions have been used by him in the course of any analysis of the entire
pre-hearing appellate procedure from the stage of presenting the notice of
appeal up to the stage of filing of the petition of appeal under the present
Code and the stage of the lodging of written submissions in the Supreme Court
under Law No. 44 of 1973 which he observed was, in this respect, the
forerunner of the appellate procedure obtaining today under the present Code.
In the circumstances I am, with respect, unable to agree that the judgment of
Wanasundera J. in Vithane v. Weerasinghe and Another (supra) is of much
assistance in the determination of the question before us. I am of the view
that the decision of the Court of Appeal in Careem and Another v. Amerasinghe
(supra) in so far as it holds that under s. 761 of the present Code no
application for the execution of an appealable decree can be instituted by a
judgment-creditor or entertained by a court until after the expiration of 60
days (which is the time allowed for tiling the petition of appeal) and that an
appeal is preferred against such a decree not upon the giving of notice of
appeal within 14 days in terms of s.754 (3) but upon the giving of such notice
and the filing of the petition of appeal within 60 days as required by s.
755(3) is wrong and must be overruled. I hold that for purposes of s. 761 the
time allowed for appealing from an appealable decree is 14 days (the time
allowed for the giving of notice of appeal) and that an appeal is preferred
against such a decree upon the lodging of the notice of appeal within 14 days
in terms of s. 754(3).

In view of the above finding I do not think it necessary to refer to or
consider the other matters urged on behalf of the [plaintiff by learned]
Queen's Counsel such as, for instance, whether upon the facts and
circumstances of this case the revisionary powers of the Court of Appeal could
be invoked or exercised for the grant of interim relief of the nature sought
for by the defendant is this case and whether it was open to the defendant to
raise, for the first time in the Court of Appeal, the question of the
competency of the District Court to entertain an application for execution
without having raised the same at the inquiry before the District Court.

**84**

For the above reasons the appeal is allowed, the order of the Court of Appeal
dated 10.6.1987 is set aside and the Application in Revision (No. 614/87)
pending in the Court of Appeal is dismissed. The Court of Appeal is also
directed to accelerate the hearing of both appeals against the judgment and
decree of the learned District Judge dated 19.1.1987. The plaintiff will be
entitled to costs of this appeal fixed at Rs. 2100.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. -** I agree.

**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.

_**Interim Order of Court of Appeal set aside.  
Application in Revision dismissed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/3.html_  

