##  R v. Pallegama Gnanarathana v. Rev. Gaikiriyagama Soratha - SLR - 99, Vol
1 of 1988 [1988] LKSC 3; (1988) 1 Sri LR 99 (2 February 1988)

**

99

REV. PALLEGAMA GNANARATHANA  
v.  
REV. GALKIRIYAGAMA SORATHA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA C.J., ATUKORALE J.,  
L. H. DE ALWIS J., SENEVIRATNE J. AND  
H. A. G. DE SILVA J,  
S.C. APPEAL No. 42/87.  
C.A. APPEAL No. 292/79(F).  
D.C. ANURADHAPURA CASE No. 9259.  
AUGUST 31, SEPTEMBER 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 23, 24,  
OCTOBER 5 AND 7, 1987.

_

Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law - Mode of succession to Atamasthanadhipathiship of
Atamasthana - Sisyanu sisya paramparawa or appointment by Atamasthana
Committee on nomination by the head of Nuwarawewa family? - Siwuru paramparawa
- Sanghika property - appointment by writing by Atamasthanadhipathi - Custom
and usage - Burden of proof - Mixed question of fact and law raised for the
first time in appeal.

_

Atamasthanaya in Anuradhapura is the aggregate name for the eight principal
places of worship in Anuradhapura, the holiest of which is the Sri Maha
Bodhiya referred to as the Bomaluwa or Udamaluwa and the others Ruwanveliseya,
Thuparamaya, Mirisawetiya, Jetawanaramaya, Abhayagiriya, Mahaseya and
Lankaramaya. The Chief

**100**

Priest of this group of 8 temples is known as the Atamasthanadhipathi or
Anunayake of the Atamastana and resides customarily at Bomaluwa Vihare. Sri
Sumana Revata Nayaka Thero functioned as the Atamasthanadhipathi from 1944 and
upon his death on 20.11.1977 a dispute arose as to the succession to him. The
plaintiff priest claimed the Atamasthanadhipathiship on the basis that he was
the most senior pupil of the deceased priest claiming that the applicable rule
is the rule of pupillary succession known as Sisyanu sisya paramparawa. The
defendant priest claimed the Atamasthanadhipathiship by virtue of nomination
by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family and appointment by the Atamasthana
Committee in accordance with long established custom or usage. Further the
defendant was also a pupil of the deceased priest and appointed to the post in
writing by him.

**

Held -

**

(1) Succession to the Atamasthanadhipathiship can be presumed to be by the
rule of sisyanu sisya paramparawa only where the customary mode of succession
by nomination of the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family and approval by the
Committee comprising the three. Ratemahattayas of Nuwara Kalaviya and the
seventeen Koralas of Nuwara Kalaviya is not proved.

(2) The custom (or usage or mode of election or nomination-per Seneviratne,
J.) according to which the Atamasthanadhipathi is appointed upon a nomination
by the head of the Nuwarawewa family and an election by a body of electors
comprising the Ratemahattayas and Koralas and later upon the passage of the
statutes of 1905 and 1931 relating to Buddhist Temporalities, from 1.2.1907
onwards by an Atamastana Committee whose membership was basically drawn from
the same sources as before, was well recognised and accepted and invariably
followed except for explicable reasons, on two occasions.

(3) Although the temple is sanghika property the office of viharadhipathi is
not sanghika property and the right to the office depends primarily on the
terms of the original dedication.

(4) What the Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law on any matter is has to be
established on evidence as a matter of fact. It is not a pure question of law
but of fact and law. Hence it was not open to the Court of Appeal to have
permitted argument for the first time on the question whether laymen could
participate in the appointment of a viharadhipathi.

(5) _Per Seneviratne, J._ "D13 the document by which the defendant priest
claimed that the atmasthanadhipathiship came to him by a written appointment
from his dead tutor priest was not attacked as a forgery in the trial Court.
It was not open to the Appeal Court to proceed to make findings on this
question after itself comparing signatures. Further the Court of Appeal
thought D13 was not listed by the defendant priest when in fact it was."

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

E. S. Amerasinghe, P.C._ with _H. L. De Silva,_ _P.C., K. N. Choksy, P.C., P.
A. D. Samarasekera, P. C., D. H. N. Jayamaha, M. B. Peramuna_ and _Miss D.
Guniyangoda_ for defendant - appellant.

_

Dr. H. W Jayewardene, Q.C., N. R. M. Daluwatte, P.C., L. C. Seneviratne, P.
C., Walter Wimalachandra, S. C. B. Walgampaya_ and _Miss J. Keenawinne_ for
plaintiff-respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**101**

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1)  _Ratnapala Unnanse v. Kevitigala Unnanse (1879) 2SCC 26._

(2) _Sumanatissa v. Guneratne (1937) 39 NLR 251.

_

(3) _Morantuduwe Sri Naneswara Dhammananda Nayake Thero v. Buddegama
Piyaratana Nayaka Thero (Maligahakanda Case) (1958) 59 NLR 412 S.C. affirmed
by P. C. - see (1963) 65 NLR 196 (4 below)._

(4) _Morontuduwe Sri Naneswara Dhammananda Nayaka Thero v. Kalukondayawe
Pannasekera Nayaka Thero and others (1963) 65 NLR 196(PC).

_

(5)  _Piyananda Terunnanse v. Uyangoda Sumanajothi Terunnanse (1963) 66 NLR
178, 180

_

(6) _ Unnanse v Unnanse (1921) 22 NLR 323._

(7) _ Dharmapala Unnanse v. Medagama Sumana Unnanse (1910) 2 Cur LR 83.

_

(8) _ Mapalene Dhammadaja Thero v. Rotumba Wimalajothi Thero (1977) 79 (1) NLR
145._

(9) _ Gunanada Unnanse v. Dewarakkitha Unnanse (1924) 26 NLR 257, 274.

_

(10) _ Dantura Unnanse v. Government of Ceylon (Board of Commissioners of
Kandy-4.6.1828 and 8.8.1829) 1869-1871 Vanderstaateni's Reports \- Appendix E,
XLI.

_

(11) _ Eriminne -Unnanse v. Senabawe Unnanse (1869-1871) Vanderstraaten's
Reports - page XII, XLV Appendix D (5.5.1833 confirmed by S.C. on 21.10.1833).

_

(12) _ Wellegama Dhamma Jothy Unnanse v. Wellegama Sarananda Unnanse and
Sangaratana Unnanse and two others (1882) 5 SCC 8.

_

(13) _  Sangharatana Unnanse v. Weerasekera (1903) 6 NLR 313.

_

(14) _ Saranankara Unnanse v. Indajoti Unnanse (1918) 20 NLR 385, 396.

_

(15) _ Adam's Peak case (Siripada case) (1871) Vanderstaaten's Reports p. 215.

_

(16) _ Okandeyaye Wangeesa Thero v. Mulgirigala Sunanda Thero (Mulgirigala
Case) (1962) 65 NLR 388, 392.

_

(17) _ Dharmarakkita v. Wijitha (1940) 41 NLR 401.

_

(18) _ Piyananda Thero v. Indanada Thero CA 864/75(F)-DC Galle No. 8091/L-CA
Minutes of 24.10.1986.

_

(19) _  Terunnanse v. Terunnanse (1927) 28 NLR 477.

_

(20) _ Premaratne v. Indasara (1938) 40 NLR 235._

(21)  _Kirikitta Saranankara v. Medagama Dhammananda (1954) 55 NLR 313.

_

(22) _ Watugadera Amaraseehe Thero v. Tittagalla Sasantilleke Thero (1957) 58
NLR 289.

_

February 2, 1988

**

ATHUKORALE, J.

**

This appeal has, on the directions of His Lordship the Chief Justice, been
heard by a Bench of five Judges as it involves questions of some importance
pertaining to the mode of succession to the office of the Chief Priest of the
eight sacred places of Buddhist worship in

**102**

Anuradhapura collectively called and known as the Atamasthana. The Atamasthana
comprises the following 8 temples or places of worship:

(1)  Sri Maha Bodhinwahanse or Udamaluwa or Bomaluwa Viharaya,

(2)  Ruwanveliseya,

(3)  Thuparamaya,

(4)  Mirisawetiya,

(5)  Jetawanaramaya,

(6)  Abhayagiriya,

(7)  Mahaseya, and

(8)  Lankaramaya.

The Chief Priest of this group of 8 temples is called and known as the
Atamasthanadhipati (also referred to as the Anunayake of the Atamasthana) who
is customarily resident at Bomaluwa Vihare, which being the site of the Sacred
Bo Tree, constituted the principal temple of the group. The origin of the
office of Atamasthanadhipathi is obscure. The Atamasthanadhipathi is by virtue
of his office nominated and appointed the chief priest or viharadhipathi of
each of the other temples of the group.

The respondent filed this action in the District Court of Anuradhapura
seeking, inter alia, a declaration that he is the Atamasthanadhipathi. He
pleaded that succession to the said office devolved according to the rule of
pupillary succession known as sisyanu sisya paramparawa. The appellant in his
answer denied that this rule of pupillary succession determined succession to
this office and averred that succession thereto was according to an old and
well established custom of appointment by the Atamasthana Committee upon a
nomination made by the head of the Nuwarawewa family. Thus the substantive
point of contest between the parties was with regard to the determination of
the mode of succession to the Atamasthanadhipathiship - whether it was on the
basis of the rule of pupillary succession known as sisyanu sisya paramparawa
as maintained by the respondent or whether it was upon an appointment made by
the Atamasthana Committee on a nomination by the head of the Nuwarawewa family
in accordance with an old and well established custom as maintained by the
appellant.

The following matters were common ground, namely, that the Atamasthana is
sanghika property, the terms of its original dedication to the Sangha being,
however, not known, that Pahala Talawe Sri

**103**

Sumana Medankara Nayaka Thero (hereinafter referred to as Medankara Nayaka
Thero) was and functioned as Atamasthanadhipathi from 1885 until his death in
1908 ; that after his death Pallegama Ratanapala Nayaka Thero (hereinafter
referred to as Ratanapala Nayaka Thero) functioned as Atamasthanadhipathi from
1908 until his death in 1944; that after his death Sri Sumana Revata Nayaka
Thero (hereinafter referred to as Revata Nayaka Thero) functioned as such from
1944 until his death on 20.11.1977 and that the appellant acted in the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi for a short period immediately prior to the death of the
said Revata Nayaka Thera who at the time was very feeble and sick.

It was the contention of the respondent that in the case of every instance set
out above whereby a priest succeeded to the office of Atamasthanadhipathi it
was the senior pupil who automatically succeeded to his tutor on the latter's
death. The point of contest between the parties relating to the mode of
succession to the office of Atamasthanadhipathi was pinpointed in issue No. 1
raised on behalf of the respondent and issues Nos. 7 to 9 raised on behalf of
the appellant. However, during the course of the trial the appellant relying
on a writing (D13) by which he was allegedly appointed Atamasthanadhipathi by
and in succession to his tutor (the said Revata Nayaka Thero) raised, without
objection, a further issue (No. 10a) as to whether even if the rule of sisyanu
sisya paramparawa applied he had upon D13 been appointed Atamasthanadhipathi
by his tutor. The respondent challenged the genuineness of this writing on
several grounds without, however, having raised any specific issues thereon. I
must add that at the trial it was conceded that the respondent was the senior
pupil of the late Revata Nayaka Thero.

The learned District Judge after trial found as a matter of fact that
succession to the office was governed by an old and well established custom of
nomination by the head of the Nuwarawewa family and election by the
Atamasthana Committee as evidenced by documents D3 to D12 and not according to
the sisyanu sisya paramparawa rule of succession. He also held that, in any
event, Revata Nayaka Thero by his writing D13 had appointed the appellant as
his successor. Accordingly on both grounds he answered the relevant issues in
the appellant's favour and dismissed the respondent's claim. He declared the
appellant the lawful Atamasthanadhipathi. It is not in dispute before us that
the evidence in the case, as far as the ancient records

**104**

went, established that Ipolegama Thero was, a very long time ago, the
Atamasthanadhipathi, that he was disrobed by the Malwatte Chapter in 1843 and
that he was succeeded in office by the following priests in their respective
order, each of them holding office for the periods specified against them:
Ulapathagama Buddharakkita Thero; Pailegama Revata Thero (1844-1863); Kaluebe
Dhammarakkita Thero (1863-1872) ; Halmillewe Ratanapala Thero (1872-1885)
followed by the aforesaid Medankara Nayaka Thero (1885-1908), Ratanapala
Nayaka Thero (1908-1944) and finally by the said Revata Nayaka Thero
(1944-1977) on whose death on 20.11.1977 the present dispute arose.

There being, admittedly, no direct evidence of the actual terms of the
original dedication of the Atamasthana to the Sangha it was urged by learned
Queen's Counsel for the respondent and conceded by learned President's Counsel
for the appellant that evidence of usage or custom, if any, relating to the
mode of succession to the office of Atamasthanadhipathi would be relevant and
may be considered only as constituting proof of the terms of the original
dedication, failing which the general rule of papillary succession known as
sisyanu sisya paramparawa will apply unless it is established that the special
rule known as siwuru paramparawa determines the mode of succession. That this
represents the correct legal approach is evident from the judgment of Sir John
Phear C. J. in _Ratnapala Unnanse v. Kewitiagala Unnanse_ (1) which has been
accepted as the leading authority on this point. In the course of his judgment
the learned Chief Justice set down the following principles:

"(1) That the general rule of succession to temple property has two branches,
viz., the sisya paramparawa and the siwuru paramparawa; and that it is the
first branch of the rule which is to be presumed to apply to a given case, in
the absence of evidence that it is the other.

(2)  That there are exceptional cases in which the succession of the temple
property is in the appointment of the Government or even of private
individuals.

(3)  That it is the terms of the original dedication that primarily impose the
rule which is to govern the case.

(4) That in the absence of direct evidence of those terms, usage may be looked
to, and accepted as evidence thereof.

**105**

These principles which have been gathered by the learned Chief justice from
previous decisions have been consistently followed and applied in subsequent
cases. In _Sumanatissa v. Guneratne_ (2) Fernando A. J., referring to the
above principles, observed as follows:

"If I may venture to formulate the position as governed by these principles as
applying to the present case, the law is that the rule of succession is
governed by the terms of the original dedication, or by one of the two rules
of succession, and if the terms of the original dedication cannot be proved by
direct evidence, the Court may accept evidence of usage as proving the terms
of the original dedication. If the terms of the original dedication cannot be
proved either by direct evidence or by the evidence of usage, then it must be
presumed that the Sisyanu sisya paramparawa rule of succession applies unless
it can be established that the succession is governed by the Siwuru
paramparawa."

Other cases in which the -above principles have been adopted and applied are
_Morontuduwe Sri Naneswara Dhammananda Nayaka Thero v. Baddegama Piyaratana
Nayaka Thero (S.C.)_ (3); _Morontuduwe Sri Naneswara Dhammananda Nayaka Thero
v. Kalukondayawe Pannasekera Nayaka Thero (P.C.)_ (4) and _Kamburugamuwa
Piyananda Terunnanse v. Uyangoda Sumanajothi Terunnanse_ (5). Applying the
above principles to the instant case, it is clear that, in the absence of
direct evidence of the terms of dedication of the Atamasthana to the Sangha,
the burden of proving a custom or usage which may be acceptable to court as
evidence of the terms of the original dedication is on the appellant.

To discharge this burden the appellant relied solely on documentary evidence,
namely, the documents marked D3 to D12. I shall now refer to their contents in
chronological order. _D5 dated 25.07.1871_ is a record made by the Government
Agent of an interview held by him with Nuwarawewa Banda (who was claiming to
be the head of the Nuwarawewa Family) and the 3 Ratemahattaya's of the
Western, Eastern and Southern Divisions regarding the election of the Chief
Priest of the Atamasthana. The relevant passages of this document are as
follows:

"The annexed letters and papers will show all that has taken place here
recently regarding the election of a Chief Priest-

According to the instructions given by Mr. Dyke after communicating with
Government the nomination of Chief Priest was vested in the Head of the
Nuwarawewa family and the election of

**106**

the Headmen as representatives of the people. Whether the election was to be
considered a mere form confirming as of course the nomination made by the Head
of the Nuwarawewa family or whether the Headman were to be allowed to exercise
the rights of rejecting (?) a candidate so nominated was not stated. In 1863
when the late Chief Priest was elected after Government gave up all
interference in the concerns of the Temple and the appointment of the Priest
(there was no representative of the Nuwarawewa family and no nomination
therefore by its Head) the Headmen took upon themselves to elect a Priest
without such nomination and he was recognised as Chief Priest by Government.
The election thus made appears to me to have been illegal. The Headmen however
wished it to be looked on as a precedent on which to carry out the recent
election.

There has been as shown by the annexed papers a great deal of illegality
created by the recent proceedings and as I have explained to the people, I
believe both elections recently held viz: the nomination and so called
election by Nuwarawewa Bands and the election without nominating by the
Headmen to be illegal . . . . . . . I informed the Ratemahatmayas and the so-
called Head of the Nuwarawewa family (Bands) that in my opinion in order to
constitute a legal election there must be a nomination by the Head of the
Nuwarawewa family and an election by the Headmen as representative of the
people and neither of the elections recently held did both these ........."

D6 dated 12.9.1881 is a minute made by J. F. Dickson, Government Agent,
Anuradhapura, upon a report dated 10.5.1881 received by him from the
Ratemahatmaya of Nuwara Kalaviya and Thimbiriwewa Mudaliyar regarding
allegations made against the Chief Priest of the Bomaluwa of having
misappropriated the offerings made at the Bo Tree and of neglecting the duties
of his office. The minute after setting out briefly the findings of the report
adverse to the Chief Priest proceeds to state as follows:

"The Ratemahatmaya and the Mudaliyar submit that by allowing the present
Anunayake to hold office the Vihara Establishment (i.e. the Establishment of
the Bo-tree) will be ruined. They therefore wish that he be dismissed from his
office and beg that the Government Agent be pleased to recommend to Government
that the Unnanse's act of appointment be cancelled ....... The ruling
authorities on the

**107**

question of the removal and appointment of the Chief Priest of the Bo-tree are
to be found in the correspondence between the Government Agent of Jaffna and
the Colonist Secretary froth 1843 to 1864 during the administration of Mr.
Dyke; in Sir John Pakington's Despatch No. 123 of 4th December 1852; and in
the judgment of the Supreme Court on the Adam's Peak ease which will be found
printed in the Report of the Service. Tenures Commissioners for 1871
(Administration Reports 1891) pp. 372-375.

From these authorities it would appear that the Chief Priest must be a member
of the Malwatte Establishment, and that the election to the office of the
Chief Priest is vested in-

(1) The head of the Nuwarawewa family

(2) The three Ratemahatmayas of Nuwara Kalaviya

(3) The Seventeen Koralas of Nuwara Kalaviya.

_

Note._ \-  The rights of the family in regard to this appointment were
recognised and secured to Nuwarawewa Bands of Bulankulame by the decision of
the D.C. of Anuradhapura in Case No. 156.

and before the Governor is requested to issue the Certificate of recognition,
it is necessary that the election should be assented to by the people
generally.

The Chief Priest is subject to his College, the Malwatte Vihara as regards his
conduct as priest and if he were disrobed by his college would ipso facto
cease to hold the office of Chief Priest, but his college cannot remove him
from his office for misconduct prejudicial to the rights or interests of the
temple.

The power to remove a Chief Priest for such misconduct is vested in the Board
of Electors.

Questions relating to this appointment have occurred from time to time after
the lapse of several years and as some difficulty has been experienced and
delay has occurred in tracing the authorities on the point it may be
convenient here to note for future reference the leading authorities which
have guided the Government Agent in the present case.

**108**

By letter No. 168 of 24th July 1843 the Colonial Secretary writing to the
Government Agent of Jaffna stated that there was no ground for the Governor's
interference with the proceedings of the Chief Priest and others of the
Malwatte Vihare under which Ipalagama Unnanse was disrobed. His office of
Chief Priest is therefore vacant. The gift is however not vested in the
Governor but in the Nuwarawewa family with the approbation of the inhabitants.

The Government Agent of Jaffna by letter No. 218 of 13th August 1844 reported
to the Colonial Secretary that great delay had occurred in electing a
successor to Ipalagama Unnanse by the attempts of different parties to evade
carrying out of the instructions of Government as to the mode of election. The
family have endeavoured to evade the condition of the assent of the other
parties, both they and the principal headmen to evade that of the assent of
the people and some of the headmen have endeavoured to procure in an indirect
way the recognition of a condition that the assent of the priests of the
Malwatte at Kandy is necessary to the appointment.

On receipt of the instructions issued by Government under Sir John Pakington's
Despatch the Government Agent of Jaffna pointed out by letter No. 60 of 12th
April 1853 that it was declared by the Colonial Secretary's letter No. 168 of
24th July 1843 that the right of election was (not in the priests) but in the
head of a particular family jointly with the people as represented by these
headmen. To this the Colonial Secretary replied by letter No. 60 of 7th June
1853 that the parties with whom previously the right of election was vested
are to elect. It is not the intention of Government to make any alteration in
the existing practice.

This decision was quoted as the ruling authority by the Government Agent of
Jaffna in his letter of 22nd September 1864 to the Colonial Secretary and was
acted upon by the issue of a certificate of recognition in favour of Kaluebe
Unnanse under letter No. 220 of 7th October 1864.

In the Adam's Peak case District Court Ratnapura No. 9353) which arose on the
removal from his office by the Board of Electors of Galgama Unnanse and the
issue by the Government of a Certificate regarding the appointment of
Hikkaduwe Sumangala who was elected in the place of Galagama Unnanse, it was
decided that the Plaintiff having broken the condition of his appointment as
High

**109**

Priest of Adam's Peak, and having been guilty of gross acts of misconduct and
malversation was justly liable to be deprived of the said priesthood, and that
he was properly deprived thereof by a convocation of the benefited Malwatte
priests of the District of Sabaragamuwa having authority to do so, and that
the election of the Defendant was good and valid.

Applying these authorities to the present case it appears to the Government
Agent that the High Priest of the Bo-tree can be removed from his office by
the Board of Electors for misconduct or malversation in the management of the
Establishment of which he is the head but that such removal can only be
cleared by the recognised Board of Electors, namely,

(1) The Head of the Nuwarawewa family ,

(2) The 3 Ratemahatmayas of Nuwara Kalaviya

(3) The 17 Korallas of Nuwara Kalaviya ..."

D8 dated 31.11.1885 is a letter addressed by the aforesaid Medankara Nayaka
Thero to Bulankulame Bandara Mahatmaya "who has become the head of the Nuwara
family" and to the other persons referred to therein all of whom were due to
assemble at the Bo-maluwa temple as the Sammuthi Sabawa (Conventional
Committee) for the purpose of selecting a member of the Sangha to the office
of Anunayake of the Atamasthana. The writer himself describes the letter as an
application to the Conventional Committee. He specifies therein the sacerdotal
line that was appointed and functioned as Atamasthanadhipathi as having been
in the following order: from 1844 till his death in 1863 Pailegama Revata
Thero, a member of the Arangawasi Maha Madagalle paramparawa and pupil of
Ulpothegama Buddharakkita Nayaka Thero; from 1863 until his death in 1872
Kaluebe Dhammarakkita Thero, a member of the same paramparawa ; and from 1872
until his death in 1885 Induruwe Halmillawewe Ratanapala Thero, a pupil of the
said Pailegama Revata Thero. The letter then proceeds to state that the said
office now being vacant, the applicant who is the senior pupil of the said
Halmillawewe Ratanapala Thero requests that he be appointed to the same being
an heir thereto by virtue of the tutor paramparawa and as he, having learnt
the doctrine of the Buddha Dharma and its practices under renowned and erudite
tutor priests, for a period of about 20 years after being ordained at
Anuradhapura Maha Viharaya, has been conducting himself in

**110**

accordance with the tenets of Buddha Dharma and the advice given by his tutor
priest and as he has worked resolutely and with determination for the
upliftment of this place (of worship) and as his tutor paramparawa has been
holding the said office from 1844 to 1885.

D10 dated 24.4.1886 is the Aktapatra (act of appointment) issued by the
Government to the applicant recognising his election in due form.

D3 dated 28.12.1908 is the application made by Pallegama Ratanapala Nayaka
Thero seeking appointment to this post. It is addressed to the 3 'Disapathi-
thumas' (Bulankulama, Morawewa and Ratwatte), the Gamsabapathi (Headmen) of
Ralapanawewa who are the Buddhist 'Radala-methithuman' (aristocratic
gentlemen) all of whom are the Committee Members of the Atamasthana Committee.
It recites that the applicant's tutor priest, Medankara Nayaka Thero, died on
27.10.1908 whilst holding the office of Atamasthanadhipathi; that their tutor
paramparawa has been descending uninterruptedly from the time of Maha
Madagalle Maha Thero; that from the time of the Sinhalese kings the
'radalawarun' (aristocrats) of the two walauwas known as Nuwarawewa and
Bulankulamewewa have appointed the Chief Priest to conduct religious services
at the Anuradhapura Jaya Sri Maha Bodhiya and other chaitiyas and have been
getting these services performed through those chief priests; that after the
demise of the Sinhala Kings the British Government, with a view to continuing
the old customs without a break, got the Atamasthana Committee consisting of
the Chief Radalamahatun of the said two walauwas together with the other
respectable Buddhist Radalawarun of Nuwara Kalaviya to assemble, and together
with the consent of the committee made appointments to the Atamasthana office;
and that in this manner Pailegama Nayaka Thero, Kaiuebe Nayaka Thero, Induruwe
Halmillewe Ratanapala Nayaka Thero and the applicant's tutor Medankara Nayaka
Thero have been holding the post of Atamasthanadhipathi without interruption
according to sisyanu sisya paramparawa. The applicant states that he
understands that a meeting of the Atamasthana committee is to be held for the
purpose of filling the said Atamasthana vacancy caused by the death of his
tutor Medankara Nayaka Thero . Pointing out that he has been robed as the
first pupil of his tutor priest and that as he has been ordained at the Maha
Nuwara Pushparamaya Viharaya he has all the right according to sisyanu sisya

**111**

paramparawa to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi to which his deceased tutor was
appointed and also for other numerous reasons mentioned therein by him
including his ability to perform all the functions pertaining to the said
office, he requests that upon a careful and sympathetic consideration of the
above mattes by them he be appointed () to the same. D 11 dated 21.2.1909 is
the Aktapathra issued by the Government to him recognising his election in due
form. D4 dated 1.8.1942 is the letter addressed by Paliegama Ratanapaia Nayaka
Thero to the head of the Nuwarawewa family, B. P. Bulavkuiame Disapathi, the
Chairman of the Atamasthana Committee, informing him that he has been holding
the office of Atamasthanadhipathi for a period of 13 years but that as he is
now sick he wishes to resign from the said office and requesting that a person
of the Bo-maluwe paramparawa be appointed.

D9 is the minutes of the meeting of the Atamasthana Committee held on
1.9.1943. The letter of resignation D4 of Ratanapala Nayaka Thero was read,
discussed and accepted by the Committee. On the proposal of Bulankulame
Disapathi that Revata Thero, being a priest of the same Bo-maluwa paramparawa,
was suitable for appointment, Revata Thero was unanimously appointed to the
office of Chief Priest of the Atamasthana. D12 dated 30.4.1943 is the
Aktapatra issued to him by the Government recognising his election in due
form.

D1 dated 14.9.1977 is a letter addressed to the Chairman of the Atamasthana
Committee by Revata Nayaka Thero intimating that as he is ill a suitable
person from the Bo-maluwa Sangha paramparawa be appointed () to act for him
for a period of six months. D2, the minutes of the special meetings of the
Atamastana Committee dated 14.9.1977 show that Revata Nayaka himself proposed
the name of the appellant (no doubt with the concurrence of the Chairman, M.
Bulankulame) for the acting appointment which the Committee unanimously
resolved to accept and the appellant was appointed to act as
Atamasthanadhipathi for a period of six months.

Of the 3 Aktapathras referred to above, namely, D10 of 1886, D11 of 1909 and
D12 of 1943 issued by the Government recognising the election in due form of
Medankara Nayaka Thero, Ratanapala Nayaka Thero and Revata Nayaka Thero
respectively to the office of Atamasthanadhipathi, whilst D10 recites that
Medankara Nayaka

**112**

Thero, was elected in due form by the Nuwarawewa Nilame, Ratemahatmaya, Korala
and Arachchila of the Nuwara Kalaviya the other 2 Aktapatras recite that the
other two Chief Priests were elected in due form by the Atamasthana Committee.
D2(d), the minutes of the Atamasthana Committee meeting held on 28.11.1977,
almost a week after the death of Revata Nayaka Thero, indicates that the
meeting was presided by Mahinda Bulankulame and attended by the appellant and
the respondent. The Public Trustee especially participated at the meeting. It
is further recorded that at this meeting the secretary submitted to the
committee a letter dated 19.11.1977 (D13) from Revata Nayaka Thero, appointing
the appellant whom he had appointed on 14.9.1.977 to act for him in the said
office, as Atamasthanadhipathi. It also records that upon a proposal made by
the respondent himself and seconded by Mahinda Bulankulame, the appellant was
appointed as the permanent Atamasthanadhipathi.

The Court of Appeal after a consideration of the above documents (D3 - D 12)
and the statutory impact thereon of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinances of
1905 and 1931 reached the finding that the custom relied upon by the appellant
as governing succession to the office of Atamasthanadhipathi was bad as it
lacked the essential ingredients of certainity and continuity and that it was
also illegal. The Court held that the appellant had therefore failed to
discharge the burden of establishing the custom which he alleged.

The main submissions made by Mr. Amerasinghe, learned President's Counsel for
the Appellant, are that the Court of Appeal erred in its perception and
evaluation of the meaning and effect of the above documents thereby arriving
at a wrong conclusion on the issues relating to custom, that the documents
clearly proved the existence of a customary procedure for the selection and
appointment of the Atamasthanadhipathi and that this fact by itself was
sufficient to displace the presumption of the applicability of the sisyanu
sisya paramparawa rule of succession upon which the claim of the respondent
was based. He contended that the Court of Appeal erred in law in forming the
opinion that the custom sought to be established upon the documents had of
necessity to conform to and comply with the legal requisites of a custom or
usage having the force of a general law. He urged that the finding of the
Court of Appeal that according to the documents the customary procedure
referred to therein was not certain and/or continuous and that, in any event,
it was illegal were

**113**

unsustainable. He also complained that the case for the respondent as
presented in the District Court was substantially altered in the course of the
argument in the Court of Appeal in two material aspects in spite of
objections. Firstly whilst the respondent's case in the District Court was a
bare denial of the fact of the existence of the customary procedure relied
upon by the appellant, in the Court of Appeal the case set up by him in the
course of the hearing was that the customary procedure to be valid must comply
with certain legal requisites which make it acquire the force of a general
law. Secondly, for the first time in the Court of Appeal it was submitted on
behalf of the respondent that the Buddhist ecclesiastical law did not permit a
layman to dominate or appoint the chief priest of a temple that had been
dedicated to the Sangha. He pointed out that at the trial there was no issue
formulated on the question of the legality of the alleged customary procedure
according to Buddhist ecclesiastical law. This not being a pure question of
law but a question of fact and law he submitted that the Court of Appeal
should not have permitted the respondent to raise this question for the first
time in appeal.

I shall first of all address my mind to the finding of the Court of Appeal
that the documents produced in evidence by the appellant failed to establish
that the custom alleged by him was either certain or continuous-a finding
which was very strenuously sought to be challenged as well as supported before
us by respective learned counsel appearing for the parties. Very briefly the
view that the Court of Appeal seems to have taken on this point upon the
documentary evidence is that the essential ingredients of a custom or usage
referred to in documents D5 and D6 have not been shown to have been observed
or complied with in a single instance. D5 of 1871 is the earliest document
produced in evidence in the case. It is an official document being a
contemporaneous report made by the Government Agent, Anuradhapura of along
interview he had with the three Ratemahattayas and a person called Nuwarawewa
Banda who then was claiming to be the head of the Nuwarawewa family. The
subject matter of the interview revolved on a matter of public or general
interest, namely, the election of the Chief Priest for the Atamasthana
regarding which the Government Agent and the persons with whom he had the
interview would, no doubt, have been much concerned. The report affirms that
according to the instructions given by Mr. Dyke after communicating with the
Government the nomination of the Chief was vested in the head of the
Nuwarawewa family and the

**114**

election in the headman as representatives of the people. It states that the
letters and papers (annexed thereto) showed what had in fact taken place
recently regarding the election of the Chief Priest. In 1863 when the late
Chief Priest was elected (this seems to be a reference to the election of
Kaluebe Dhammarakkita) there was no male representative of the Nuwarawewa
family living at the time and therefore no nomination by the head and the
headmen proceeded to elect a Chief Priest without such nomination and the
appointment was recognised by the Government. The Government Agent in his
Report describes this election as illegal. The headmen, however, taking this
as a precedent seem to have elected again without any nomination from the head
of the Nuwarawewa family, a Chief Priest in 1871 also, i.e. on the death of
Kaluebe Dhammarakkita Thero; whilst Nuwarawewa Banda, claiming to be the head
of that family, appears to have nominated and elected a priest by himself. The
Government Agent expresses the opinion that both elections-the nomination and
the so called election by Nuwarawewa Banda as well as the election without a
nomination, by the headmen are illegal. The letter of Mr. Dyke dated 18.7.1860
which has been annexed to the report confirms the death of the young
Nuwarawewa Chief (Bulankulame Banda) "whose name has been frequently before
the Government in connection with the question as to his hereditary rights in
respect of the appointment of a priest to the temple of Anuradhapura." D6, on
the other hand, is a document relating primarily to the right of removal of
the Chief Priest from his office. It is an official minute made by J. F.
Dickson, Government Agent of Anuradhapura, on 12.9.1881. The grounds urged for
his removal are misconduct and malversation detrimental to the welfare of the
temple. The minute whilst reaffirming that the election of the Chief Priest is
vested in the head of the Nuwarawewa family, the three Ratemahattayas of
Nuwara Kalawiya and in the seventeen korales of Nuwara Kalawiya states that
the power of removal of the Chief Priest from office is vested in the same
Board of Electors except, of course, in the circumstance of his being disrobed
by his (Malwatta) chapter whereupon he would ipso facto cease to be the Chief
Priest. It seems to me that learned President's Counsel was quite right in his
submission that D5 and D6 on their face unequivocally refute the applicability
of the sisyanu sisya paramparawa, rule of succession to the office of Chief
Priest of the Atamasthana. There is not even a passing reference to this rule
in either of the documents. They are inconsistent with and negative, at least
during the period preceding 1881, the applicability of this rule for the

**115**

purpose of determining succession to this office, a fact which in the present
case appears to render the presumption in favour of its applicability a little
more than fiction. The two documents make it abundantly clear that the powers
of appointment to as well as removal from the office of Chief Priest are
vested in the Board of Electors which at the time comprised the head of a
particular family and certain officials as representing the people. The
opinions expressed by the Government Agent in D5-D6 are their official, not
personal, views and are entitled to much weight. They are based upon a
consideration of official records and have been arrived at in the discharge of
their official duty relating to a matter of general interest pertaining to the
appointment of and removal from the office of Chief Priest of Atamasthana,
which is one of the most venerated places of Buddhist worship in the country.
It seems to me to be totally unrealistic to assume or to infer that the
instructions of Mr. Dyke referred to in D5 were in defiance of or in conflict
with the practice or usage that prevailed up to that time of determining
succession to the office of Chief Priest. On the contrary it is quite
legitimate to infer that Dyke's instructions given after communication with
the Government were in accordance with the practice that existed at the time.
It is inconceivable that those instructions should have sought to introduce or
substitute a new method of determining the succession to such an important
office. A radical change in the existing practice would doubtless have evoked
a storm of protest from the Buddhist clergy and the laity. Although D5
describes the election in 1863 and the recent election in 1871 as illegal, yet
so far as the election in 1863 was concerned it has to be borne in mind that
at the time there was no representative of the Nuwarawewa family alive and
thus no one to make a nomination-vide Dyke's letter of 1860. The position
appears to have been the same in 1871 when the office of Chief Priest fell
vacant once again upon the death of Kaluebe Dhammarakkita Thero. Nuwarawewa
Banda's claim to be the head of the family was on that occasion in dispute. On
both occasions the failure to observe very strict compliance with the
customary electoral procedure set down in D5 and D6 with regard to the
appointment of the Chief Priest has been due to unavoidable circumstances, in
that there was either no or no accepted head of the Nuwarawewa family alive at
the time to make a nomination as a result of which the headmen appear to have
exercised the right of election as well. It seems to me that in the
circumstances there has been no deliberate attempt by the headmen to disturb
the mode of election envisaged in Dyke's instructions. One or two

**116**

exceptional instances of partial non-observance due to unforeseen
circumstances of a custom cannot tender it bad for uncertainty. In assessing
the validity and binding force of the custom relied upon by the appellant it
is, in my view, very necessary that the contents of e documents. D5-D6 should
be read and construed not by themselves but in conjunction with and in the
light of the other documentary evidence adduced by him. The most cogent
evidence of custom could only be obtained by an examination of particular
instances in which it has been acted upon. Two of the documents, namely; D8
and D3, are applications made by two priests who in pursuance thereof were
appointed as Chief Priest on two consecutive occasions. D8 of 1885, the
application of Medankara Nayake Thero to the head of the Nuwarawewa family and
others due to assemble as the sammuthi sabha for selecting and appointing a
member of the Sangha to the post of Atamasthanadhipati, is the very first
document under the hand of a priest aspiring to be and securing appointment as
Chief Priest. It undoubtedly constitutes an acknowledgment by him of the fact
that the Chief Priest is appointed by a committee which at that time comprised
the head of the Nuwarawewa family, the three Ratemahattayas and the Koralas.
It affirms that in the case of three preceding chief priests of the
Atamasthana they were also appointed to their respective offices during the
period 1844 to 1885. The applicant states that as the office is now vacant,
he, being the senior pupil of the late Chief Priest, makes this application
for appointment to the post. D3 of 1908 is a similar application made by
Ratanapale Nayake Thero, the first pupil of the late Medankara Nayake Thero,
for appointment to the office of Atamasthana Nayaka. As stated above it is
addressed to the persons expressly named therein who are said to be members of
and are functioning as the Atamasthana committee. After reciting the practice
prevalent during the times of the Sinhala kings of appointing the Chief Priest
and that after their demise the British Government, with a view to continuing
the old customs without a break got the Atamasthana committee to assemble and
together with the consent of the committee made appointments to the
Atamasthana office and that in this manner the preceding four chief priests
including Pallegama Revata (1844-1863) and Kaluebe Dhammarakkita (1863-1872)
aforesaid have been holding the post of Atamasthanadhipati without
interruption according to sisya sisyanu paramparawa, the appellant, having
come to know that a meeting of the Atamasthana committee is going to be held
for the purpose of filling the vacancy caused by the death of his tutor
priest, requests that

**117**

he be appointed to the post. Equally important is D4 of 1942 which is a letter
by Ratanapala Nayake Thero addressed to the head of the Nuwarawewa family
(P.B. Bulankulame Disapati) the Chairman of the Atamasthana committee,
expressing his desire to resign from the office of chief priest and requesting
that a suitable priest of the Bomaluwe paramparawa be appointed. In pursuance
of this request Revata Nayake Thero was unanimously appointed the Chief Priest
at a special meeting of the Atamasthana committee on a proposal made by the
said Bulankulame Disawe-vide D9. Finally as recently as September 1977 Revate
Nayake Thero, the last holder of this office, by his letter D1 also addressed
to the chairman of Atamasthana committee requests that a suitable priest from
Bomaluwa Sangha paramparawa be appointed to act for him for a period of six
months. In pursuance of this request at a meeting of the Atamasthana committee
the appellant was appointed to act in the office-vide D2. This meeting was
presided over by Mahinda Bulankulame who the respondent himself admitted in
the course of his evidence was at that time the head of the Nuwarawewa
family-a fact on which the Court of Appeal has misdirected itself. A careful
scrutiny of the totality of the documentary evidence relied upon by the
appellant, in particular D8, D3-D4, leads one to the irresistible conclusion
that succession to the post of Chief Priest of the Atamasthanaya is
determinable not on the rule of pupillary succession but by virtue of
appointment, pupillage of the bomaluwa paramparawa being a requisite
qualification and seniority being only an added qualification for such
appointment. In spite of the valiant endeavour made by learned Queen's Counsel
to show that the documentary evidence pointed to the fact that succession to
this office was governed by the rule of sisyanu sisya paramparawa; I am
satisfied that the documentary evidence amply warrants the finding that there
was and still is a custom according to which the Atamasthanadhipati is
appointed upon a nomination made by the head of the Nuwarawewa family and an
election by a Body of Electors which comprised earlier of the sammuthi sabha
and presently of the Atamasthana committee. In my view the only variation or
modification in the custom has been in respect of the composition and not the
function of the Board of Electors which, apart from the

**118**

head of the Nuwarawewa family, earlier comprised ratemahattayas and koralas
and later upon the establishment of the Atamasthana committee under the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinances 1905 and 1931 comprised the members thereof.
Such minor variations in the composition of a part of the Electoral Body are
natural and inevitable consequent upon the social changes that necessarily
take place with the passage of time. But the essence of the customary
procedure of selecting a chief priest in pursuance of the nomination by the
head of the Nuwarawewa family and the election of that nominee by the body
exercising the right to elect remains intact. The evidence indicates that
these variations in the composition of the Electoral Body have been accepted
and acquiesced in by all the chief priests who were appointed successively to
the office since the enactment of the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance in
1905. In the light of the conduct of, at least, the last three successive
chief priests in the background of the unquestionable and unimpeachable
documents referred to above it is too late in the day for the respondent to
dispute either the existence or the validity or binding force of the custom
upon which the appellant relied. In fact the conduct of the respondent himself
in having proposed, apparently at the instance of Mahinda Bulankulame, the
name of the appellant for the acting and permanent appointment is explicable
only on the basis that he himself accepted and acted in the belief that there
was such a valid custom governing appointment to the office of Chief Priest.
In the light of all the above facts and circumstances I am of the opinion that
the appellant has succeeded in establishing that there was a custom or usage
of nominating and electing the Atamasthanadhipati, a custom which has been
proved to be so very old and so well established that it could reasonably be
accepted as evidence of the terms of the original dedication of the
Atamasthana. I am further of the opinion that all the essential attributes of
a custom or usage have been proved by the appellant and that the Court of
Appeal erred in its findings that the custom was bad for want of certainty
and/or continuity.

I shall now turn to the question of the legality of this custom. The Court of
Appeal held that a dedication is Sanghika, of a temple, being one to the
entire priesthood for all time for the purpose of

**119**

perpetuating the Sasana, the laity cannot touch it; that it is settled law
that the laity have no right to appoint the viharadhipati of a Sanghika
temple; that the Buddhist ecclesiastical law does not recognise such a
practice or custom and that a custom contravening a settled law cannot be
given legal recognition. The authority relied upon by the Court of Appeal to
show that it is settled law that a layman cannot appoint the Chief Priest of a
temple dedicated to the Sangha is a decision of that Court itself in C.A. No.
864/75(F) - D.C. Galle 8091 /Z - C.A. Minutes of 24.10.1986 from which special
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court was refused by the Supreme Court. I think
the Court of Appeal was in grave error when it assumed that the office of
viharadhipati is sanghika property because the temple itself is sanghika. What
is dedicated to the Sangha is the property comprising of the temple and its
appurtenances. It has no relevance or bearing at all on the office of the
Viharadhipati of the temple. As stated above, the right to this office depends
primarily on the terms of the original dedication. The decision in _Ratnapala
Unnanse v. Kewitiagala Unnanse_ (supra) envisaged as far back as 1879 the
existence of temples, dedicated to the Sangha in respect of which the lay
founder or dedicators could retain for themselves the right of appointing or
nominating incumbents - vide also _Unnanse v. Unnanse_ (6). The latter case
contemplates the legal possibility of a layman appointing the viharadhipati of
a Sanghika temple. In _Dharmapala Unnanse v. Medagama Sumana Unnanse_ (7)
Pereira A.J., observed that "it is undoubtedly open to a person who at his own
expense founds and endows a vihara to make provision by deed or otherwise
regulating the succession to the institution." In the judgment of the Court of
Appeal in the aforesaid case C.A. No. 864/75 (F) no authority has been cited
for the proposition enunciated therein. I am with respect unable to accept the
view of the Court of Appeal. The fact that the Supreme Court had, without
assigning any reason, refused to grant special leave to appeal from that
judgment does not necessarily mean that the Supreme Court adopted or affirmed
the view taken by the Court of Appeal on this point. There is also no warrant
for the proposition that layman cannot touch sanghika property. Learned
President's Counsel has drawn our attention to several sections of the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinances of 1905 and of 1931 which contain express
provision for layman to administer and manage properties belonging to sanghika
temples. The legislative history pertaining to

**120**

Buddhist temporalities from 1889 shows that till the passing of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance of 1931 the trustees in whom the management and
control of the temporalities granted to the sangha were vested were in fact
layman, although the incumbent had control and administration of the viharaya
itself. Incumbents were excluded from holding the office of trustee. There was
a departure from this position in 1931 which was in consequence of the abuse
of the trust reposed in the lay trustees. The 1931 Ordinance permits the
viharadhipati in certain cases to nominate himself as trustee instead of
appointing a lay trustee. The Court of Appeal also appears to have taken the
view that a custom whereby the chief priest of a temple could be appointed by
the laity is contrary to Buddhist ecclesiastical law. Its judgment, however,
contains no exposition of the relevant ecclesiastical law. It has also held
that the contents of Buddhist ecclesiastical law, on a particular matter is a
pure question of law and, as such, it could be raised for the first time in
appeal. I do not agree with this view of the Court of Appeal. As pointed out
by learned President's Counsel, what the Buddhist Ecclesiastical law on any
matter is has to be estasblished on evidence as a matter of fact. It is not a
pure question of law but of fact and law. Apart from those disputed questions
of Buddhist ecclesiastical law which have already been settled by judicial
decisions, other questions such as the one under consideration involving as
they do questions of fact have to be established in evidence adduced at the
trial like any other fact. As such I hold that the Court of Appeal erred in
permitting the respondent, in spite of objections thereto, to raise this point
for the first time in appeal as a pure question of law.

In view of the above findings by me I do not think it is necessary for me to
consider the alternative claim of the appellant based on the writing D13. In
the result I allow the appeal, set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal,
dismiss the respondent's action and declare the appellant to be the lawful
Atamasthanadhipathi. The appellant will also be entitled to costs of all three
courts.

**121**

**

SHARVANANDA, C. J.,** \- I agree.

**

L. H. DE ALWIS. J.,** \- I agree.

**

SENEVIRATNE, J.

**

Soratha Thero, the plaintiff has filed this action on 31.1.1978 praying for a
declaration that "the plaintiff is the _Anuradhapura Atamasthanadhipathi"_
(emphasis mine, and comment will be made re this prayer later). The plaintiff
filed a Replication dated 24.7.78, and in paragraph (2), the plaintiff averred
that he has succeeded to the "Bomaluwe Viharadhipathiship and
Atamasthanadipathiship". In paragraph (6) of the Replication the plaintiff
states that he is the lawful "Atamasthanadipathi". The term "Atamasthanaya" in
Anuradhapura is the aggregate name for the eight principal places of worship
in Anuradhapura, the holiest of which is the Sri Maha Bodhiya referred to as
the Bomaluwa. The original name for these eight places has been merely
descriptive of its importance i.e.- Atamahasthanaya, which word by passage of
time has become contracted to Atamasthanaya. These eight places of worship in
respect of which there is one Chief called the Atamasthanadipathi are as
follows:

(1)  Thuparamaya built by King Devanampiyatissa (247-207 B.C)-was the first
dagoba built in Anuradhapura after the introduction of Buddhism to Sri Lanka
by the mission of Arahat Mahinda middle of 3rd Century B.C.,

(2)  Sri Maha Bodhiya or Bomaluwa.-This was the place where the present sacred
Bo-tree brought to Sri Lanka by Bhikkuni Sanghamitta, was planted. The Bo-tree
was brought 16 years after the visit of Arahat Mahinda and was accepted by
King Devanampiyatissa. The Bodhiwansa (written 10 Century A.D.) which relates
an account of the bringing of the Bo-tree states that eight princes came with
the Bo-tree and one of them was Bodhigupta to whom King. Devanampiyatissa
conferred the title- "Chief trustee/Custodian", and Bodhigupta was assigned
the custody and caretakership of the sacred Bo-tree (Bodhiwansa edited by
Kotagama Vachissara Thero, Pages 242-245. )

It is said that the Nuwarawewa family claims descent from Bodhigupta and also
claims its connection to the Sri Maha Bodhiya from him.

(3) Lowamahapaya - A storeyed building constructed by King Dutugemunu, (101-77
B.C.).

**122**

(4)  Ruwanwelisaya - This Dagoba was, at that time the world's biggest Dagoba,
constructed by King Dutugemunu. (101-77 B. C.).

(5)  Mirisawetiya - A Dagoba and an Aramaya constructed by King Dutugemunu.
(101-77 B. C.). It is recorded in history that during the Anuradhapura period
at least 500 monks resided in this Aramaya.

(6)  Abhayagiriya - A Dagoba constructed by King Gajabahu in the year (114
A.D). Prior to this Dagoba being constructed King Walagambahu had constructed
a Viharaya at Abhayagiriya in the first century B.C.

(7)  Jethavanarama - A Dagoba constructed by King Mahasena (276 A.D.).

(8)  Lankarama Dagoba built by King Walagambahu (Vattagamini-Abhaya)-First
Century B.C.

Pahalatalawe Halmillewe Sri Sumana Rewetha Nayaka Thero was the
Atamasthanadipathi from 1.9.43 till his death on 20.11.1977. The plaintiff
Soratha Thero is the senior pupil. The defendant Gnanarathana Thero is the
junior pupil. The plaintiff has stated in his plaint that "the succession of
Atamasthanadipathi at Anuradhapura, the subject matter in this case is by rule
of papillary succession". The plaintiff has set out in his plaint the
papillary succession according to the seniority from Pahala Talawe Sri Sumana
Medankara Thero. Atamasthanadipathi (1885-1908), Pahala Talawe Sri Sumana
Medankara Thero Atamasthanadipathi Pallegama Ratanapala Thero (1908-1944), who
was succeeded by the above-named Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero Atamasthanadipathi
from 1.9.43 till his death on 20.11.1977. The plaintiff's case is that after
the death of the said Sri Rewatha Nayaka Thero, as his senior pupil he
succeeded to the post of Atamasthanadipathi. The plaintiff has further averred
(see paragraph 7 of the plaint filed in Sinhala-the English translation filed
is not correct. and accurate), that the defendant who has no right to the post
of Atamasthanadipathiship is claiming that the deceased monk Rewatha Thero had
made a writing the day prior to his death appointing him to the post of
Atamasthanadipathi, and as such he is making claims to the said post. The
plaintiff has stated that the alleged writing relied on by the defendant is
not a valid writing for reasons stated in paragraph 8 of the plaint; as such
the plaintiff seeks a declaration that he is the Atamasthanadipathi.

**

123

**

The defendant has stated in the answer (Paragraph 8) that-

( _a_ )  According to well established custom followed for a very long period
of time the appointment to the said post of Atamasthanadipathi was done on
original nomination by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family and a Committee of
the following persons-

(i)  Chief of the Nuwarawewa family,

(ii)  The three Rate Mahattayas of Nuwara Kalawiya,

(iii)  The Seventeen Koralas of Nuwara Kalawiya.

( _b_ )  Once the appointment made on the original nomination is notified to
the Government, an Akthapathra was offered to the said priest as the
Atamasthanadipathi. According to the custom that prevailed the priest
appointed should be a pupil of the priest who held the said post.

( _c_ )  The Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No. 8 of 1905, under the proviso
to Section 5 for the first time recognised the Atamasthana, and provided for a
Atamasthana Committee consisting of six members, one of whom was the Head of
the Nuwarawewa family. This Committee continued to exercise the practice of
appointing the Atamasthanadipathi, on being nominated by the Chief of
Nuwarawewa family.

( _d_ )  Even after the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No. 19 of 1931, the
Atamasthana Committee created by this Ordinance continued to make the
appointment of the Atamasthanadipathi on the nomination of the Chief of the
Nuwarawewa family.

( _e_ )  After the death of Sri Sumana Rewatha Nayaka Thero, the Atamasthana
Committee met on 28.11.77 and upon the nomination of the Chief of the
Nuwarawewa family and on the proposal of the plaintiff the defendant was
appointed Atamasthanadipathi. The defendant has further stated that prior to
his death, the said Rewatha Thero, proposed the name of the defendant to be
his successor, and it was communicated to the Atamasthana Committee.

The plaintiff has filed a Replication dated 24.7.75 stating that on the death
of Pahala Talawe Sri Sumana Medankara Nayaka Thero, his senior pupil Pallegama
Ratanapala Thero succeeded to the _Bomaluwa_

**124**

_Viharadhipathiship and Atamasthanadipathiship._ The plaintiff has further
stated that the Nuwarawewa family and the other Chiefs mentioned by the
defendant had no right or authority to nominate for the post of
Atamasthanadipathi. The Atamasthana Committee created by the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance had the right to manage the temporalities of the
Atamasthanaya, and had no control over the succession to the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi. Succession to the Atamasthanadhipathi post was governed
by the pupillary succession rule. The succession to this post _automatically
goes to the chief priest of the Bomaluwa Viharaya Paramparawa._ The alleged
nomination of the defendant by Revvatha Nayake Thero as stated in the plaint
was unlawful and void. The plaintiff has further stated that when the
Atamasthana Committee assembled on 28th November, 1977 the plaintiff proposed
the defendant to act for the balance period for which he had been appointed by
Rewatha Thero. At the trial three admissions were recorded, and what is now
relevant is admission No. 3, which is as follows:-

"Atamasthanaya is sanghika property".

This admission is very important as in appeal the plaintiff has strongly based
his case on this admission. At the trial several issues were raised, and I
shall only set out the issues now relevant to this appeal.

**

Issues of Plaintiff -

**

(1)  Is the succession to Atamasthanadhipathiship governed by pupillary
succession rules?

(6)  Does the succession to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi go to the Chief
Priest of Bomaluwa Viharaya Paramparawa?

The learned District Judge answered both these vital issues of the plaintiff
in the negative.

Issues raised by the Defendant-

(7)  According to the very old established custom, was the appointment of the
Atamasthanadhipathi firstly by nomination by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa
family and approval by a committee consisting of persons set out in paragraphs
8 ( _a_ ) and 8 ( _b_ ) of the answer?

**125**

(8)  After the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No. 8 of 1905 came into
operation and after the Ordinance No. 19 of 1931 (Cap. 318) came into
operation, did the Committee consisting of persons referred to above, who had
the power to appoint to the post, use their power of appointment through the
Atamasthanadhipathi Committee set up under the provisions of the two said
Ordinances?

(9)  After the death of Halmillewe Sri Rewatha Thero according to the custom
and procedure referred to above, was the defendant appointed
Atamasthanadhipathi at the Atamasthana Committee meeting held on 28.11.77?

(10)  Did Rewatha Thero propose the name of the defendant priest, who is a
pupil of his to be the Atamasthanadhipathi by a letter dated 19.11.1977 (D13)?

(10A)  If issue No. 1 is answered in the affirmative, however, in view of the
facts in issue No. 10, has the defendant priest being appointed in writing on
19.11.1977?

The learned District Judge answered all the issues raised by the defendant in
favour of the defendant. As regards the main issue in the case raised by the
defendant, issue No. 7 - the learned District Judge answered it in the
affirmative firmly holding as follows:- "that there was a custom prevailing
for over 100 years for the appointment of the Atamasthanadhipathi in manner
set out by the defendant". Having made that finding the learned District Judge
has firmly held as follows:- "I hold that the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family
and the Rate Mahattayas by well established custom had the authority to make
the appointment". As regards issue No.10 raised by the defendant on the
document dated 19.11.77 (D13), the learned District Judge has held that
Rewatha Thero signed that document knowingly and having accepted the contents
therein and as such he has held that the document (D13) had the effect of a
valid nomination of the defendant by Rewatha Thero to succeed him. Having come
to this conclusion the learned District Judge dismissed the plaintiff's
action.

he plaintiff appealed to the Court of Appeal against the judgment of the
learned District Judge. In the Petition of Appeal so filed, there is a very
revealing paragraph - to wit paragraph 7 ( _d_ ) (1) -

**126**

I number paragraph 7 ( _d_ ) (1) in sub-paragraphs as follows -

"( _a_ )  It is respectfully submitted that there is evidence that for well
over 100 years the pupil priest succeeded to the post of the Tutor Priest and
both the plaintiff appellant and the defendant appellant have accepted this
position.

( _b_ )  The nomination by the Chief of the Nurwarawewa family and the
appointment by the Rate Mahattayas and Koralas prior to that, and recently the
appointment by Atamasthana Committee was of general acceptance.

( _c_ )  It is respectfully submitted that when a successor is appointed the
papillary succession rule was followed."

This paragraph directly admits that for well over 100 years the appointment of
Atamasthanadhipathi was in the manner set out under paragraph ( _b_ ) above,
which is the case of the defendant. As shown later it will be seen that
excepting in one instance it was the senior pupil of the Atamasthanadhipathi
that has been appointed as the successor. The learned President's Counsel for
the defendant-petitioner submitted that this manner of selection of the senior
pupil was not an acceptance of pupillary succession, but a monk being the
senior pupil has been considered as a qualification for appointment. This
submission is not a strange one as for example in the field of administration
and that of the Judiciary seniority is always considered a qualification for
appointment though there may be exceptions. In the succession to the
Atamasthanadhipathiship which has been traced by the defendant from Ipalogama
monk in 1843, there has been an Atamasthanadhipathi Kaluebe Dhammarakkitha
(1863-1872), who was not even a pupil of his predecessor Pailagama Rewatha
Thero. After that the senior pupil of Pailagama Rewatha Thero has been
appointed. (See Application of Sri Sumana Medankara Thero dated 3.12.1885.
(D8) and the Application of Pallegama Ratanapala Thero dated 28.12.1908 (D3)).
The essence of the defendant's case has been admitted by the plaintiff-
appellant in paragraph (2) of 7 ( _d_ ) as set out above. This manner or mode
of appointment which as I shall state later was of inveterate usage. In
paragraph (2) of 7( _d_ ), there is another admission of great value to the
defendant's case. It has been submitted that even though a body headed by the
Chief of the Nuwarawewa family appointed the Atamasthanadhipathi the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance No. 8 of

**127**

1905 Section 5 proviso created an Atamasthana Committee. That Committee was
vested with certain statutory powers re temporalities but had no right or
power to appoint a Atamasthanadhipathi. Yet the 1905 Ordinance Committee did
so in the appointment of Pallegama Ratanapala Thero (1908-1944). Later the
Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance of 1931, Atamasthana Committee also did so in
the appointment of Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero on 1.4.43, and now the appointment
of the defendant Pallegama Gnanaratana Thero on 28.11.77. In paragraph 7 ( _d_
) (2), the plaintiff-appellant himself admits that "the appointment by the
Atamasthana Committee was of general acceptance". This is the only premise on
which the appointments by the Atamasthana Committees created in 1905, and 1931
can be explained. My view is that as both these Ordinances made the Head of
the Nuwarawewa family a member of the Atamasthana Committee, the
practice/usage, of the Atamasthanadhipathi being appointed by a body of Rate
Mahattayas and Koralas headed by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family, get
attached to the statutory Atamasthana Committee by general acceptance or shall
I say consent of all parties.

The Court of Appeal in C.A. 292/79 ( _F_ ), C.A. Minutes of 11.5.1987 set
aside the judgment of the learned District Judge and held that -

( _a_ ) The succession to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi was governed by the
rule of sishyanu sishya paramparawa.

( _b_ )  The Court of Appeal held that the writing of 19.11.1977 (D13) by
which the defendant claimed that he was nominated by Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero
was a suspicious document and not an actor deed of the said Thero, and as such
the defendant got no rights from that document.

( _c_ )  But on one point the Court of Appeal upheld the case of the
defendant. It held that assuming that the writing of 19.11.1977 (D13) was a
valid document, it had the effect of making a proper nomination of the
defendant as successor to the deceased Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero, on the
premises that the right of succession was governed by the rule of sishyanu
sishya paramparawa.

The basis on which the Court of Appeal has held that succession to the
Atamasthanadhipathiship was governed by the rule of sishyanusishya paramparawa
was that that the defendant had failed to prove "the custom" of nomination and
appointment by a body, the chief of

**128**

which body was the head of the Nuwarawewa family. As regards they writing
dated 19.11.1977 (D13), the Court of Appeal held that the making of that
writing was surrounded by suspicious circumstances, and there was only a sole
witness to its execution to wit - Jayantha Dissanayake. And on examination of
the signature of the deceased Thero, by the learned Judges of the Court of
Appeal, in course of they hearing of the appeal, the Court has formed the view
that the signature of the late Rewatha Thero in (D13) differed from the
admitted signature of the late Thero in document (D1) of 14.9.1977.

The appeal has been made to this Court against all matters in respect of which
the Court of Appeal has held against the defendant-respondent-petitioner. At
the hearing of this appeal by this Court, three objections have been raised-

(1)  Learned Counsel for the defendant-respondent-petitioner objected to the
learned Queen's Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent making submissions, that
the laity cannot, appoint a Viharadhipathi to Sanghika property, on the ground
that this matter had not been urged in the original Court. This very objection
has been raised in the Court of Appeal and has been overruled.

(2)  Learned Counsel for the defendant-respondent-petitioner objected to an
application made in this Court to amend the plaint.

(3)  In the course of the argument the learned President's Counsel for the
defendant-respondent-petitioner made submissions that the
Atamasthanadhipathiship, the matter in dispute in this case was not the usual
Viharadhipathiship in respect of which authorities have been cited, that the
Atamasthanadhipathiship must be considered as an office or post, and as such
the principles belied on by the respondent will not apply.

An objection was taken to this point (3) being raised for the first time in
this Court. As regards the objection No. 1 above, it must be stated that this
point of law has been raised in the Court of Appeal and allowed. As the matter
has been fully argued in the Court of Appeal and the parties have made
complete submissions on this matter in this Court also the objection cannot be
considered. As regards objection No. 2, the matter of amendment of the plaint
does not arise in view of

**129**

the order I will make in this judgment. The matter referred to in this
objection No. 3 has been argued by eminent counsel, and as such it cannot be
said that parties have been taken by surprise. As such this objection cannot
be allowed.

The main question which has been urged in the District Court, in the Court of
Appeal, and now urged in this Court is the mode of succession to what has been
called "the post of Atamasthanadhipathi in Anuradhapura". It has been revealed
in this case that the Atamasthanadhipathiship involves the Viharadhipathiship
of the Bomaluwa Viharaya (Sri Maha Bodhiya) and that the Atamasthanadhipathi
has the right of appointing the Adipathis to the other seven connected
Viharas. The other seven connected Viharas did not have a line of succession
to the Viharadhipathiship in respect of any of these Viharas. I must at this
stage state that there was a contention on two matters relating to the
Atamasthanadhipathiship to wit-

(1)  Learned Queen's Counsel for the plaintiff submitted that the holder of
the Viharadhipathiship of the Bomaluwa was always by virtue of that
Atamasthanadhipathi.

(2)  Learned President's Counsel for the defendant submitted that the
Atamasthanadhipathi by virtue of that office becomes the Viharadhipathi of the
Bomaluwa Viharaya.

It will be noted that as stated earlier in the Replication filed, the
plaintiff refers to the Bomaluwa Viharadhipathiship and the
Atamasthanadhipathiship and moves that he be declared the Atamasthanadhipathi.
This contention has some effect on the consideration of the mode of succession
to the Atamasthanadhipathiship. In the course of my judgment I shall deal with
this aspect.

The defendant has filed a pedigree of succession beginning from 1843. The
material for this pedigree has been obtained from two documents produced in
this case - application of Medankara Thero dated 3.12.1885 (D8), and
application of Pallegama Ratanapala Thero dated 28.12.1908 (D3). The
succession set out by the defendant, which he says were appointments by a body
headed by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa or Bulankulama family is as follows:-

Ipalogama Thero - disrobed 1843 by the Malwatte. Chapter for ecclesiastical
misconduct (D6) was succeeded as follows:-

Pailagama Rewatha Thero, (1844 - 1863). (D3)

**130**

Kaluebe Dhammarakkitha Thero (1863 - 1872) (D8) and (D3). Uduruwe Halmillewe
Ratanapala Thero, (1872 - 1885) (D3).

Pahala Talawe Sri Sumana Medankara Thero, (1885 - 1908) (D8). Pallegama
Ratanapala Thero (1908 - 1943) (D3) - (Resigned 1943). Sri Sumana Rewatha
Thero (1943 - 20.11.1977)

As stated earlier, except in the case of Kaluebe Dhammarakkitha Thero, who was
not a pupil of his predecessor Pailagama Rewatha Thero, the other monks who
assumed the Atamasthanadhipathiship were the senior pupils of the
predecessors. It is due to this fact that the case of the plaintiff is that
the succession went by the rule of Sishyanu Sishye Paramparawa. The
defendant's case is that all these appointments have been made by a body
headed by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family and an additional qualification
for appointment appears to hay been, a claimant being the senior pupil of the
predecessor in office.

An analysis of several documents produced has to be made to consider and
decide whether there has been what the defendant has called in the plaint "a
custom" and which I call a usage or mode of election, or nomination of the
Atamasthanadhipathi by the head of the Nuwarawewa family, and election by the
Rate Mahattayas and they Koralas as set out in paragraph 8( _a_ ) of the
Answer. I must state that in considering the effect of such documents produced
the Court of Appeal has:-

(1)  Ignored the essential features of the documents and its effects on the
defendant's case of succession,

(2)  Not considered some of the documents and evaluated same,

(3)  Paid attention to the inessential contents of the documents.

A proper analysis of the documents only earl place the case of the defendant
in its proper perspective.

The earliest document produced by the defendant to prove the "custom" or what
I call the mode of succession relied on by the defendant is the document (D5)
of 25.2.1871, a minute made by Dickson, Government Agent, Jaffna with a
postscript dated 18.2.1860. The main matter dealt with by Dickson is what he
calls an illegality in the election of the chief priest of Anuradhapura in
1863. The reference as chief priest is undoubtedly to the

**131**

Atamasthanadhipathi. The Court of Appeal had drawn attention to the
irregularities in the election pointed out by Dickson and has concluded that
document (D5) is not helpful in the proof of the defendant's case. Leaving
aside the irregularities of the election in 1863, the most vital part of the
document is a statement by Dickson which certainly corroborates the
defendant's case as regards the mode of election of the Atamasthanadhipathi.
The second paragraph of the minute (D5) opens as follows:- "according to the
instructions given by Mr. Dyke after communicating with Government the
nomination of the chief priest was vested in the Nuwarawewa family, and the
election in the headmen as representatives of the people". Having made this
categorical statement the minute goes on to point out that the election made
in 1863 was irregular and illegal. As stated earlier, the Court of Appeal has
ignored the evidentiary value of the portion cited above. The next document is
a document dated 12.9.1881 (D6). (D6) is a minute made by the Government
Agent, Anuradhapura on 12.9.1881, and is very revealing. It really deals with
the complaint made against Ipalogama Unnanse, who was referred to earlier by
me as having been disrobed by the Malwatte Chapter. In dealing with this
document the Court of Appeal does not show a proper appreciation of the value
of this document, but directs its attention to some irrelevant contents and
sums up as follows-(I suppose both in reference to documents (D5) & (D6))-"the
change to the Atamasthanaya Committee took place only on 1.2.1907 upon the
creation of the Committee by the 1905 Ordinance which became operative only on
the aforesaid date. In the result the contents of the documents are not
helpful in proving custom or that what was done was in accordance with ancient
custom". I cannot understand why at this stage these two documents (D5) and
(D6) or (D6) only was/were connected to the said Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance of 1905. Further, as I have pointed out, the plaintiff-appellant
himself in the Petition of Appeal to the Court of Appeal has stated that "the
nomination by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family and the appointment by Rate
Mahattayas and Koralas prior to that and recently the appointment by
Atamasthana Committee was of general acceptance". Further the Court of Appeal
has lost sight of the tact that the predecessor from whom the plaintiff
purports to derive title, that is Rewatha Thero was himself appointed by the
Atamasthana Committee under the 1931 Ordinance on the resignation of Pallegama
Ratanapala Thero and also that Rewatha Thero's predecessor Pallegama
Ratanapala Thero was appointed by the Atamasthana Committee of the 1905
Ordinance. The minute (D6)

**132**

which deals with a complaint made against the Chief Priest of the Bo-tree
(otherwise called Annunayake Unnanse of the Atamasthana in Anuradhapura), is
one made by Dickson, the then Government Agent, Anuradhapura whom the Court of
Appeal in its judgment has described as a learned man, a scholar graduate of
the Oxford University, who held with distinction the highest administrative
posts of Ceylon. What is relevant and important is that at page (2) of his
minute (D6) Dickson states that "the ruling authorities on the question of the
removal and the appointment of the Chief Priest of the Bo-tree are to be found
in the correspondence between the Government Agent, Jaffna and the Colonial
Secretary from 1843-1864 during the administration of Mr. Dyke, in Sir John
Packington's Despatch N0. 123 of 4.12.1852 and in the judgment of the Supreme
Court in the Adam's Peak Case which will be printed in the Report of the
Service Tenures Commissioners for 1871-(Administration Reports 1891, Pages
372-375). From these authorities it would appear that the Chief Priest must be
a member of the a Malwate Establishment and the election to the office of the
Chief Priest is vested in-

(1) The head of the Nuwarawewa family.

(2)  The three Rate Mahattayas of Nuwara Kalawiya.

(3)  The seventeen Koralas of Nuwara Kalawiya."

( _Note_. -  " The rights of the family in regard to this appointment were
recognized and secured to Nuwara Banda of Bulankulama by the decision of the
District court, Anuradhapura in case No. 156").

The Court of Appeal judgment makes this remark regarding this note-"Further
there is a reference to a D. C. Anuradhapura Case No. 156\. The record of that
case too has not been produced for the inspection of the Court". The Court has
lost sight of the fact that a responsible officer who may be presumed to have
seen the record or copy himself is making this observation in 1881, nearly 100
years before this dispute arose. (The record in Case D.C. 156 Anuradhapura is
available in the National Archives - proceedings - S.L.N.A. (Sri Lanka
National Archives) Vol: No. 41/269 -and the judgment in S.L.N.A. Vol: No.
41/734. I have read and perused same).

There is a document produced in this case dated 19.12.1886 (D7) with the
address at Udamaluwa Temple at Anuradhapura that is the Bo-tree Temple. This
document contains a set of rules framed for they improvement of the
Anuradhapura Atamasthanaya by three Rate

**133**

Mahattayas of Nuwara Kalawiya and the Koralas of the said Palatha - (i.e.
these who formed the electoral body headed by the Chief of the Nuwarawewa
family). The set of rules has been signed by these officials and its clause 1
is as follows:-

(1)  "That this convention can appoint a Anunayaka Unnanse for the present
vacant post of Anunayaka of Atamasthanaya, Anuradhapura".

Thus it will be seen that those who have signed this document a hundred years
ago have asserted the right of that body to appoint an Anunayaka of the
Atamasthanaya. There is no evidence to show that these rules were adopted and
implemented. But what is valuable in this document is that it deals with the
appointment of the Anunayaka of Atamasthanaya and draft rules for the better
management of the temporalities of the Atamasthanaya. The comment made by the
Court of Appeal on this document (D7) is as follows:- "(D7) is a document in
Sinhala dated 19.12.86, containing a resolution passed by some people
regarding certain Convention Rules for the advancement, of the Atamasthanaya.
This document has not been prepared by the Committee. It does not make custom
and is not relevant". In my view document (D7) is most relevant as it contains
and refers to the appointment of an Atamasthanadhipathi as stated by the
defendant.

The defendant has produced an application dated 3.11.1885 (D8) for the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi made by Pahala Talawe Sri Sumana Medankara Thero (1885 -
1908) who succeeded Halmillewa Ratanapala Thero. Medankara Thero gives the
order of succession and states he is the senior pupil of Ratanapala Thero, who
had been the Anunayaka of the Atamasthanaya. This application is addressed to
"Bulankulama Bandara, Chief of the Nuwarawewa family, Dissamahatun of Nuwara
Kakawiya, Tunpalata and other lay and clergy who have assembled at Sri Maha
Bodhi Temple to select a priest for the post of Anunayaka, Anuradhapura
Atamasthanaya". The Court of Appeal judgment merely sets out in a few lines
the contents of the document (D8), does not evaluate it, consider its
evidentiary value, and its effect on the case of the defendant. The importance
of this document is that this is called an "application submitted to the
Committee", and makes a request that he "be appointed to the vacant post of
Anuradhapura Atamasthana Anunayake". If the succession was only by virtue of
being the senior pupil of the paramparawa, there was no need to make an
application such as this. The comment was

**134**

made that the application is also addressed to "the lay and clergy assembled
at Sri Maha Bodhi to select a priest for the post". My view is that this
document does not include the lay and the clergy who have assembled as part of
the body that makes the election. They seem to be the persons gathered to see
the selection of the Anunayake of the Atamasthana just as persons usually
gather to hear results of an election. It has not at all been suggested that
besides the Chief of the Nuwarawewa family, Rate Mahattayas and Koralas, other
laymen and clergy also participated in the election. In (D8) Medankara Thero
sets out his claims and states as follows:- "I hereby request that I the
applicant Pahala Talawe Medankara Unnanse be appointed to the vacant post of
Anuradhapura Atamasthana Anunayaka". The value of this document is that over
hundred years ago a predecessor of Sri Sumana Rewata Thero, from whom the
plaintiff claims the "post" acknowledges that a body headed by the Chief of
the Nuwarawewa family appointed the Atamasthanadhipathi and inferentially it
shows that the "post" did not as of right pass over to the senior pupil of the
holder of the "post" of Atamasthahadhipathi.

The defendant has produced an application dated 28.12.1908 (D3) by Pallegama
Ratanapala Thero, senior pupil and successor of Sri Sumana Medankara Thero
whose application dated 3.12.1885 (D8), has been considered above. This
application (D3) of 28.12.1908 is of great significance and value to the
defendant. The Court of Appeal has stated that the application (D3) has been
made to the Atamasthana Committee created by the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance of 1905, which Committee had no power to make such an appointment.
The document (D3) is dealt with in that manner and the comment is finally
summed up as follows:- "(D3) is a record not of the observation of previous
custom, but a break with it". I have earlier pointed out that in the petition
of appeal the plaintiff has admitted that "recently the appointment by
Atamasthana Committee was of general acceptance". The Court of Appeal faults
Pallegama Ratanapala Thero for making the application to the Atamasthana
Committee, but even irrespective of that, does not at all consider and
evaluate the document. The document (D3) is of great importance and
significance to the defendant. The application (D3) is addressed to the
Bulankulame Dissapathi of Nuwaragam Palatha and some others who are described
as "the Buddhist Radala Mathituman, who are the Committee Members of the
Atamasthana Committee". Then (D3) states as follows:- "My tutor priest Sri
Sumana Medankara Abhidana ...........

**135**

Maha Viharadhipathi and Atamasthanadhipathi expired on 27th October,
1908....... from the days of the _Sinhala Kings_ the Radala Warun of the two
Walawwas known as Nuwarawewa and Bulankulamawewa........ have selected a
Nayaka Thero to conduct religious services at the Jaya Siri Maha Bodhiya
Anuradhapura ...... After the demise of these Sinhala Kings, British . . . . .
having assembled the Atamasthana Sabha consisting of the Chief Radala Mahatun
of the said two Walawwas . . . . . . have continued to appoint to the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi". Then this monk traces the line of succession arid states
that they have held the post of Atamasthanadhipathi continuously according to
the Sishyanu Sishya Paramparawa. This monk applies for the "vacancy" created
by the death of his tutor. This monk sets out his scholastic achievements
which shoves that he was a very leaned monk. Ultimately this monk states as
follows:- "I have all the right to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi to which
post my tutor priest has been appointed in terms of Sishyanu Sishya
Paramparawa". What is most important in this letter is that instates that the
Atamasthana Committee has appointed the Atamasthanadhipathi from the days of
the Sinhala Kings, and that the practice continued after the British took
over. This document (D3) has been written as long ago as 1908 by the
predecessor-in-title of Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero, whose senior pupil is the
plaintiff in this case. It must be noted that the Buddhist Temporalities
-Ordinance No. 8 of 1905 for the first time recognized the Atamasthanaya at
Anuradhapura as a "temple" and in the proviso to Section 5 provided for a
Atamasthana Committee, and one of the members of this Committee had to be the
head of the Nuwarawewa family. This Ordinance No. 8 of 1905 came into
operation in 1907. Thus, when Pallegama Ratanapala Thero made the application
of 28.12.1908 (D3), it was made to the Atamasthana Committee created by this
Ordinance. From this time both the Atamasthana Committee under the 1905
Ordinance, and under the 1931 Ordinance have dealt with both the appointment
and the acting appointments pertaining to the Atamasthanadhipathi. Thus, from
1908 till 1978 for 70 years the statutory Atamasthana Committee has dealt with
the Atamasthanadhipathiship, and it is now too late in the day to contest this
practice which has grown up "with the general acceptance" of the monks who
claimed the post and the monks who received acting appointments.

**136**

I now refer to another set of documents on which the defendant relies for his
case, as regards the appointment to the Atamasthanadhipathiship. Before I deal
with these documents, it is necessary to set out the historical background to
these documents. From the establishment of Buddhism in the time of
Devanampiyatissa the King, was regarded as the protector of the Sasana and the
secular head of Buddhism. The principal Monks were appointed by the King. When
the Kandyan Provinces were ceded to the British on the 2nd day of March 1815,
the Kandyan Convention was signed between Robert Brownrigg the Governor and
Commander in Chief of Ceylon, and tale Adigars, Dissawes and the other
principal chiefs of the Kandyan Provinces on behalf of the inhabitants. It was
declared under Clause 5 of this Convention that "the religion of Boodho,
professed by the chiefs and inhabitants of these provinces, is declared
inviolable and rights, ministers and places of worship are to be maintained
and protected." (CLE Volume XI Cap. 390). The Constitutional result of this
convention was that the Sovereign of England, a Christian took over the
obligations of the Kandyan King in respect of the Buddha Sasana. The Dalada
Maligawa was placed in the custody of an agent of the Government; and the
appointments and dismissals of monks and the control of domestic matters of
the Buddhist temples was vested in the Governor. "The principal Bhikkus were
appointed by the Governor as were the Basnayake Nilames and some Kapuralas to
principal Devalas". (Ceylon Historical Journal - Volume X - Buddhism under the
British in Ceylon (1840-1855) Dr. K. M. de Silva). There was opposition by the
Christian clergy to a Christian monarch - a Christian Government \- concerning
itself with the internal affairs of the Buddha Sasana which they considered as
an "idolatrous and immoral faith". The leader of this movement was Jingoist
Wesleyan clergyman Rev. Spence Hardy. Dr. K. M. de Silva in the article
referred to above states as follows: "In 1839 Rev. Spence - Hardy a Wesleyan
Missionary issued a pamphlet calling upon the Government to sever its
connection with Buddhism. This connection of the British Government with
Buddhism was described as between a Christian Government and a idolatrous
religious system". As a result of this agitation the British Government in the
United Kingdom considered the effect of the said Clause 5 of the Kandyan
Convention and gave it various interpretations. Due to this agitation the
British Government in Ceylon sought to pass the Ordinance No. 2 of 1846 the
preamble to which was as follows: - "Whereas it is expedient for the British
to relinquish

**137**

the charge of the Dalada or tooth, of Budhu, and to withdraw from the direct
interference in the appointment of the priests and chiefs of Vihares and
Dewalas, and to enable the professors of the Buddhist religion to provide for
the commandment of their Vihares and Dewales and of the revenue appertaining
thereto." This was the first attempt to overcome the effect of Clause 5 of the
Kandyan Convention, but the then Queen of England Queen Victoria refused to
assent to this legislation. Further representations continued from the
Christian community in the Island taking offence that a Christian King was
concerned with the appointments of priests for Buddhist temples. The result of
these memorials and petitions addressed to Her Majesty was a Despatch dated
4.12.1852 by Sir John Pakington Her Majesty's Secretary of State for Colonies.
This Despatch which is a landmark in the history of Buddhism under British
Rule had as its object to put an end to the previously existing practice of
appointments made by the British Government to the officers of the Buddhist
Chief Priesthood and other temples and Dewales. The Despatch directed that the
elective bodies consisting of the monks and any other officers, Chiefs should
elect or nominate persons for office and submit the same to the Governor for
approbation, upon which the Governor will issue his diploma or/recognition of
appointment. After this Despatch the practice of appointments by the Governor
ceased in respect of such appointments and the Governor continued to issue
what was described as the "diploma of appointment" - or the "recognition of
appointment". By this Despatch the Governor was authorised to issue "an
instrument, which while avoiding altogether the form of an appointment,
productive as it is of false notions, should simply profess to be a
recognition by government of the title of the party". (G. W. Wood House - The
Ceylon Antiquary - Volume 111, Part III, 1918).

The defendant produced some such documents Akthapatras which were presented to
the monks who were appointed as Atamasthanadhipathi. The first such document
is a document dated 24.4.1886 issued by His Excellency's Command from the
Colonial Secretary's Office dated 24.4.1886 (D10). This document is partly
damaged and the name of the monk is not decipherable, but the date shows that
this is the appointment of Atamasthanadhipathi Sri Sumana Medankara Thero
(1885-1886). The next Akthapatra produced is the Akthapatra issued to Sri
Sumana Ratnapala Thero dated 21.2.1909 (D11). This document is very revealing
in view of

**138**

the objection taken that the Atamasthana Committee created Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance had no right or power to make appointments.

The document (D11) is as follows:

"Whereas Pallegama Sri Sumana Ratanapala Unnanse has been elected in due form,
by the Atmasthana Committee under Ordinance No. 8 of 1905 to be Anunayake of
the Eight Sacred places (Atamasthana) of Anurahapura. It is hereby declared
that they said election of Pallegama Sri Sumana Ratanapala Unnanse to be
Anunayake of the Eight Sacred places (Atamasthana) of Anuradhappura is
recognized by Government"

His Excellency's Command.

Sgd...............

Colonial Secretary.

Colonial Secretary's Office,

Colombo,

21.2.1909.

    It has to be noted that the Colonial Government has recognized the appointment made by the Atamasthana Committee of 1905 eves though the Ordinance did not give the Committee any power to appoint an Atamasthanadipathi. The defendant has also produced the Akthapatra issued to Halmillewe Sri Sumana Revvatha Thero, the tutor of the plaintiff dated 30.4.1946 (D12). The document (D12) state that Rewatha Thero "has been elected in due form, by the Atamasthana Committee to be the Anunayake of the Eight Sacred Places (Atmasthana) of Anuradhappura". It further states that the election is recognized by the Government. This document (D12) is issued by His Excellency's Command from the Governor's Office. In the course of the judgment the Court of Appeal merely mentions the Akthapatra (D10) of 24.4.1886 and the Akthapatra (D11) and makes the comment that this is the first time such an appointment has been made by the Atmasthana Committee and it is in the 20th Century. In making this comment the Court of Appeal overlooks the fact that for the first time an Atmasthana Committee was created in the 20th Century by the Ordinance of 1905 which came into effect in 1907. The document (D12) is not even mentioned. Thus the Court of Appeal

**139**

has not considered the effect of documents (D10), (D11) and (D12) in respect
of the defendant's case. The defendant does not at all state that these
documents are any appointments made by the Government as such; but has
produced these documents to show that the Government recognized the
appointments so made. The act of appointment by the Governor issued to a
Kaluebbe Dhammarakkita Thero, Atamasthanadhipathi (1863-1872) is available in
the Government Archives. This is a document issued before the Pakington
Despatch of 1852, and it is most helpful to sustain the defendant's case. The
act of appointment is as follows:

"Whereas Kaleebbe Dharma Rakitte Unanse has been elected by the Headmen and
priest of Nuwere Kalawia to be the chief priest for the Eight Sacred Places at
Anuradhapura in the District of Nuwere Kalawia.

It is hereby declared that the said election of Kaleebbe Dharma Rakitta
Unarise to be the chief priest of the Eight Sacred Places at Anuradhapura is
recognized by the government".

By His Excellency's Commmand

 Colonial Secy.

Date-Illegible.

I am annexing to this judgment as apppendix 1 a photo copy of this
"recognition of appointment" obtained from the Government Archives. The
document recognizing the appointment of Kaluebbe Dharnmarakkita Thero has
necessarily followed from the recognition of the mode of appointment of the
Atamasthanadhipathi in the minutes (D5) and (D6) made by the Government Agent,
Dickson. These documents (D10), (D11) and (D12) and appendix 1 clearly show
that there has been an appointment to the post of Aatmasthanadhipathi earlier
by a body headed by the chief of the Nuwarawewa family and after 1907 by the
Atmasthana Committee. It has to be noted that Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero from
whom the plaintiff seeks to claim title has been appointed by the Atamasthana
Committee created by the 1931 Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance.

There is another set of documents which shows that the monks who held the post
of Atamsathanadhipathi acknowledged the rights of the Atamsasthana Committee
created after 1905 to wit-the letters of resignation. Pallegama Ratnapala
Thero the Atamasthanadhipathi

**140**

from 1908-1944 has addressed a letter of resignation from the post, dated 1st
August 1942 (D4) to Punchi Bandara Bulankulama Dissapathi "Chairman of the
Atamasthana Committee and chief of Nuwarawewa family". He has stated that he
has held the Atamasthanadhipathiship for about 33 years and added as follows:-
"However, I am sickly and would like to Inform you that I would like to resign
from the post and also remind you to appoint a suitable person from our
Bomaluwa Paramparawa to the said Nayaka post". This letter has a special
significance apart from the resignation. The Thero requests the Atamsathana
committee - one appointed under the 1931 Ordinance "to appoint a suitable
person to the said post". At a meeting of the Atamsathana committee held on
1.9.43 (D9) presided over by the chief of the Nuwarawewa family P. B.
Bulankulama Dissapathi, the letter of resignation of Ratanapala thero (D4)
dated 1.8.42 has been accepted and on a nomination by P.B. Bulankulama Sri
Sumana Rewatha has been appointed as the Atamasthanadbipathi. Sri Sumana
Rewatha was the Atamasthanadhipathi from 1.9.42 till his death on 20.11.1977.
Before he died he addressed a letter dated 19.11.1977 (D13A) to the Chairman
Atamsathana Committee and informed him that as he was sickly he will be
resigning from the said post of Nayaka with effect from 1.12.1977. At the time
Rewatha thero wrote this letter he was sick and was an inmate of the
Anuradhapura hospital. In this letter he recommended that Pallegama
Gnanaratana Thero the defendant be appointed to succeed him in the post. As
stated earlier these letters of resignation tendered by senior monks clearly
show that they acknowledged the right of the Atamasthana committee, even
though created under the Ordinances of 1905 and 1931, to make the appointment
of Atamasthanadhipathi and to accept resignations addressed to this Committee.
Another document of significance is a letter dated 14.9.1977 (D1) addressed by
Rewatha Thero from the Anuradhapura Hospital in which he was a patient at the
time to the Chairman, Atamasthana Committee as follows:-

"I do hereby inform you that I, Sumana Rewatha Nayaka thero Anuradhapura
Atamasthanadhipathi, am presently is sickly, as such

**141**

to _elect a suitable priest_ from the Bomaluwa Sangha Paramparawa to act in
the post of Atamasthanadhipathi for a period of six months.

Sri Rewatha

Atamasthanadhipathi Nayaka Thero,

Copy sent to the Public Trustee

Jayantha Dissanayake.

Secretary.

(This is the witness Dissanayake, who according to the evidence was the
Secretary of the Atamasthana Committee at this time)."

This is a specific act of acknowledgement by the tutor of the plaintiff monk
that the Anuradhapura Atamasthana committee dealt with the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi. As such in order to get an acting appointment Rewatha
Thero addressed this letter to the Committee. A meeting of the Atamasthana
committee was held on that day, at which meeting Rewatha Thero was present,
and on his proposal Pallegama Gnanaratana Thero. (the present defendant) was
appointed to act from September 1977 to March 1978.

Rewatha Thero was at the relevant time about 93-94 years old. He was ill and
had been admitted to the Anuradhapura General Hospital on 8.11.1977. While an
inmate in the hospital Rewatha Thero made a writing dated 19.11.1977 (D13)
addressed to the Chairman, Atamasthana committee, Anuradhapura. By this
writing (D13) Rewatha Thero, informed the Atamasihana Commitee as follows:-

"(1)  As I am presently sickly I hereby inform you that I will be resigning
the said Nayaka post with effect from 1.12.1977.

(2)  My pupil Pallegama Gnanaratana Thero is the most suitable person at
present in our Bornaluwa sishyanu sishya paramparawa, who has been appointed
by me to act on my behalf on 14.9.1977. As such I hereby inform you that by
virtue of the paramparawa powers I have appointed the said Gnanaratana Thero
to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi created vacant by me. I further inform you
that my appointment be confirmed by the Atamasthana Committee".

This writing (D13) is of utmost importance in this case. I will deal with the
facts pertaining to the writing without any comment of the

**142**

submissions made on (D13) by both parties. There are three important aspects
to this writing (D13) -

(1)  In (D13) Rewatha Thero states that he has been the Atamasthanadhipathi
for about 29 years. As such he was a monk well acquainted with the matters
pertaining to the Atamasthanadhipathiship, and the relations of the
Atamasthanadhipathi with the Atamasthana Committee.

(2)  The writing (D13) is addressed to the Chairman of the Atamasthana
Committee, which was one formed under the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No.
19 of 1931.

(3)  The Atamasthana Committee prior to 1907 has been described as a Committee
of laymen, and on this the submission has been made that laymen have no right
to make an appointment of a Viharadhipathi of a temple. But at this time under
the 1931 Ordinance in terms of Section 9 (2) there were at least 2 monks in
this Committee.

It has been submitted that (D13) was invalid as a resignation of Rewatha Thero
as a Viharadhipathi cannot resign. This submission was based on the Supreme
Court decision of _Mapalane Dhammadaja Thero vs. Rotumba Wimalajothi Thero_
(8), a judgment of a Divisional Bench of Five Judges. In fact this submission
can also have relevance to the resignation of Rewatha Thero's predecessor
Pallegama Ratanapala Thero by writing dated 1.8.1942 (D4).This writing (D13)
has no relevance in this case as a resignation, because Rewatha Thero passed
away on the following day 20.11.1977. It has a significance and relevance to
another aspect of this case which I will deal with later.

The most important matter in this writing (D13) is the nomination by Rewatha
Nayaka Thero of Pallegama Gnanaratana Thero the defendant to the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi from 1.12.1977 - (that was the date of the expected
resignation).

**143**

It is this appointment that has created this case because Rewatha Thero has
overlooked his senior pupil Galgiriyagama Soratha Thero the plaintiff in this
case and appointed or nominated his junior pupil Pallegama Gnanaratana Thero
to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi.

Pallegama Gnanaratana Thero the defendant claims the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi both by right of appointment by the Atamasthana Committee
and by right of nomination on document (D13). The cremation of Rewatha Thero
took place on 27.1 1.1977. On 28.11.1977 the Atamasthana Committee met to
appoint an Atamasthanadhipathi to succeed late Rewatha Thero, presided over by
Mahinda Bulankulama, at that time considered the head of the Nuwarawewa family
(this fact has been admitted by the plaintiff in his evidence). The other
members present were Gnanaratana Thero, Soratha Thero who was then the
representative of the Nayaka Thero of the Bomaluwa, i.e. the late Rewatha
Thero and the Public Trustee Senarath Dias was also present on invitation. At
the start of the meeting Jayantha Dissanayake the witness announced that
Rewatha Thero had left the writing (D13) and it was read aloud. The plaintiff
monk Soratha Thero then proposed the name of the defendant monk Gnanaratana
Thero to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi, and the proposal was seconded by
Mahinda Bulankulama. Thus, the defendant monk was elected the
Atamasthanadhipathi on 28.11.1977. Thereafter the Public Trustee made a short
speech followed by a short speech by the defendant monk. Thereafter the Public
Trustee got the inventory of the articles made, and also on the suggestion of
the Public Trustee the writing (D13) was put in an envelope and sealed with
the seal of the Public Trustee. This sealed envelope was opened after that
only at this trial. The plaintiff monk has stated in his evidence that he
proposed the name of the defendant as Atamasthanadhipathi as he was under the
belief that the appointment was being made for the balance acting period, that
is up to March 1978. He has also stated that the writing (D13) was not shown
to him. Having considered all the evidence pertaining to the meeting of
28.11.1972, which proceedings as stated by the defendant, are supported by an
independent and unimpeachable witness Senerath Dias, Public Trustee, I do not
want to be unkind to a monk. I will only hold that the evidence of the
plaintiff monk regarding the proceedings of this meeting is most unacceptable
and must be rejected. I hold that on 28.11.1977 the Atamasthana Committee
appointed the defendant monk Gnanaratana Thero as the Atamasthanadhipathi.

**144**

The plaintiff claims a declaration that he is the Anuradhapura
Atamasthanadhipathi, both in prayer ( _a_ ) of the plaint, and in paragraph 6
of the Replication, by right of sishyanu sishya paramparavva, that is the
pupillary succession from tutor to the senior pupil. I will now deal with this
claim of the plaintiff. (The plaintiff has also attacked the document (D13) on
certain grounds, and stated that no rights accrued to the defendant on (D13).
I will discuss the writing (D13) later. The rule of succession to the
Viharadhipathiship of a temple based on sishyanu sisya paramparawa is not one
known to the preachings of the Buddha, that is the Buddhist texts Tripitaka
and particularly the Vinaya Pitaka. This rule of succession to the incumbency
of a temple is considered to be a rule originating in this country. The origin
of this rule of succession does not appear to be known and even how long this
rule of succession has prevailed in this country does not appear to be
definite. In the case of _Gunananda Unanse v. Dewarakkitha Unanse_ (9)
Jayewardane A.J., states as follows:- "The origin of sisyanu sisya paramparawa
cannot be traced .. .. . There is no reference to sisyanu sisya paramparawa in
Buddhist Ecclesiastical works, it has been in existence for about 500 years,
and it is by a purely customary rule that a pupil inherits what his tutor
possessed". In this judgment Jayewardane, A.J. does not give the basis on
which the opinion is expressed that this rule "has been in existence for about
500 years". In this case of _Piyananda Therunanse v. Sumanajothi Terunanse_
(5) Tambiah, J. states as follows:- "according to the pupillary succession
known as sisyanu sisya paramparawa, after the death of the chief incumbent of
a Buddhist temple, his eldest pupil succeeds him unless he had deserted his
tutor or suffered what may be termed "ecclesiastical death", such as being
disrobed etc. This rule, which has had a flourished existence for _over 200
years, has undergone_ known deviations". There is a belief among a certain
school of the learned Buddhist monks that the rule of sisyanu sishya
paramparawa must have originated after the British came to Ceylon, as this
rule is based on the English principle of primogeniture - right of succession
belonging to the first born - which is the rule of succession in the British
Monarchy. According to these monk the rule of succession in ancient Ceylon was
the succession to the King by the King's brother. If this ancient rule was
followed the senior co-pupil of an incumbent should succeed an incumbent. In
the case of sishyanu sishya paramparawa there is another category sivuru
paramparawa or the gnathi paramparawa, the consideration of which is not
necessary in this instance.

**145**

In one of the earliest cases on Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law _Danture Unanse v.
Government of Ceylon_ (10) heard by Board of Commissioners at Kandy (the then
Civil Court) dated 4.6.1828 and 8th August 1829 it is recorded that the
Malwatte Vihara were called upon to define sishyanu sishya paramparawa and
sivuru paramparawa. They did so in writing. The next oldest case, is the case
of _Eriminne Unanse v. Senabowe Unanse_ (11)- (Vanderstraaten's Reports-Page
XII-Appendix "D"). The Board of Commissioners by an Order delivered on 5th May
1832 decided as follows:- the sishya paramparawa being the general rule of
succession to Wihares and the Siwooros, the exception to the general rule, the
burden of proof vested on the plaintiff who pleaded the exception. (In appeal
the S.C. on 21st October, 1833 confirmed this decision of the Court of the
Judicial Commissioner at Kandy). This rule of law has been since followed up
to date, that is that "the general rule of succession to a temple is the
sishyanu sishya paramparawa rule and any party who pleads an exception must
prove so". I will later refer to another form in which this rule has been
expressed. The case of _Eriminne Unanse_ was considered by a Divisional Bench
in the case of _Ratnapala Unanse v. Kewitigala Unanse_ (1) and Phear C.J.
enunciated the principles laid down in the _Eriminne_ case as follows:- "This
case has always been a leading authority upon the law of succession to
Buddhist temple property. We gather from this case the following principles:-

(1)  that the general rule of succession to temple property has two branches
viz., the sisya paramparawa and the sivuru paramparawa, and it is the first
branch of the rule which is to be presumed to apply to a given case, in
absence of evidence that it is the other.

(2)  that there are exceptional cases in which succession to temple property
is in the appointment of the Government or even of private individuals.

(3)  that it is the terms of the original dedication that primarily impose the
rule which is to govern the case.

(4)  that in the absence of direct evidence of those terms, usage may be
looked into, and accepted as evidence thereof".

The case of _Wellegama Dhamma Jothy Unanse v. Wellegama Sarananda Unanse and
Sangaratana Unanse and two others_ (12) considered the principle of succession
sishyanu sishya paramparawa and further extended its application on the facts
of that case. This case decided that by sishyanu sishya paramparawa tenure the

**146**

succession devolved first to the pupil of the incumbent, but when the
descending line has been exhausted resort must be had to the ascending line,
and the tutor of the last incumbent is the proper person to succeed.

I have earlier set out that the rule that there is a presumption in favour of
sishyanu sishya paramparawa has been amended in later decisions. I will now
refer to such decisions. The case of _Ratnapala Unanse v. Kewitiagala Unanse_
(1) (supra), held that _in the absence of evidence of any other definite rule
of succession_ the sishya paramparawa must be presumed to be the rule
applicable in the case. This principle has been extended in the case of
_Sangharatana Unanse v. Weerasekera_ (13) In this case Layard C.J. held "there
is absolutely no evidence to establish _the terms of original dedication of
this vihare that primarily imposes the rule which is to govern the case._ Of
course in the absence of such direct evidence we are at liberty to see if any
usage has been established, and if such usage has been clearly proved it may
be accepted as evidence of the terms of the original dedication". This case
held that that "the terms of original dedication of a Buddhist Vihare must
govern the method of succession as to its incumbency. _In the absence of
definite terms attached to the dedication,_ sishya paramparawa must be
presumed to be the rule of succession". It is because of this line of
decisions that I stated earlier that the rule in favour of the presumption of
sishyanu sishya paramparawa has been amended by later decisions. There is a
long line of cases from the _Eriminne case_ up to today which have followed
the principle, that in absence of any proof of succession in terms of the
dedication, succession according to the rule of sishyanu sishya paramparawa
must be presumed. In the leading case of _Morontuduwe Sri Naneswara
Dhammananda Nayaka Thero v. Baddegama Piyaratana Nayaka Thero_ (3) T. S.
Fernando, J. cites with approval the rules of succession set out by Phear C.J.
(with Stewart, J. and Clarence, J.) in the old case of _Ratnapala Unanse v.
Kewitigala Unanse_ (1) which I have quoted above and has summed up as
follows:- "These principles have been consistently followed by our courts and
I might with advantage here refer to the following observations of Fernando,
A.J. in the case of _Sumanatissa v. Gunaratne_ (2) in regard to them. If I
may venture to formulate the position as governed by these principles as
applying to the present case, the law is that the rule of succession is
_governed by the terms of the original dedication,_ or by one of the two rules
of succession, and if the terms of the original dedication cannot be

**147**

proved either by direct evidence or by evidence of usage, then it must be
presumed that the sishyanu sishya paramparawa rule of succession applies
unless it can be established that the succession is governed by the sivuru
paramparawa'. T. S. Fernando, J. in the same page further refers to the
observations of Pereira, A.J., in _Dharmapala Unanse v. Medagama Sumana
Unanse_ (7) where Pereira, A.J. has held that the rule of succession to
vihares is governed by the terms of dedication and when no such terms of
dedication can be proved "the succession should be presumed to be in
accordance with the rule of descent known as sishyanu sishya paramparawa".
Further T. S. Fernando, J., states that Jayewardene, A.J. in _Gunananda Unanse
v. Dewarakkitta_ (9) in summarising the rules regulating the succession to
temples as laid down in the authorities stated, inter alia, that, succession
to an incumbency is regulated by the terms of original dedication, and that,
if the original dedication is silent as to the mode of succession, then the
succession is presumed to be in accordance with the rule of sishyanu sishya
paramparawa". The same principles I have discussed above have been set out by
Bertram, C.J. (with De. Sampayo, J) concurring in _Sarankara Unnanse v.
Indajoti Unnanse_ (14) as follows:- "strictly speaking, the right of pupillary
succession should be proved and determined by the original instrument of
dedication but it is only in exceptional cases, such as that of the Kelaniya
Vihara that we have in possession this original instrument . . . . . . But our
Courts have, in effect, held that in Ceylon every Vihare is presumed to be
dedicated in pupillary succession unless the contrary is proved _(Ratnapala
Unanse v. Kewitigala Unanse)_. The authorities cited above really indicate
that our Courts through a long stream of decisions up to the present day have
taken two views as regards the rule of succession sishyanu sishya paramparawa.

(1)  That in respect of all temples there is a presumption that the rule of
succession sishyanu sishya paramparawa governs succession and any exception to
this rule must be proved by the party who relies on such an exception.

(2)  That the rules of succession are governed by the original instrument of
dedication, and if such original instrument of dedication or terms of
dedication cannot be proved then the presumption that the succession is
governed by sishyanu sishya paramparawa operates.

**148**

I will not refer to the more recent decisions that set out these two lines of
decisions as it is not necessary to do so.

On the facts of this case, it is necessary to discuss the exceptions to the
rule of succession according to sishyanu sishya paramparawa. The oldest case
pertaining to this exception is the _Adam's Peak case,_ (1871)
Vanderstraaten's Reports at 215-Creasy, C.J., Temple, J. and Lawson, J., D. C.
Ratnapura 9353. In this case the plaintiff set up a claim for the Temple
Establishments of Adam's Peak-

(1)  by descent pupillage,

(2)  by right of election and recognition.

It was held that the plaintiff has no right to the incumbency by descent and
pupillage, and the only right he can claim was by election by the beneficed
Malwatte Priests of the District in 1859, and the said election was recognized
by Sir Henry Ward, the then Governor by a document dated 4th April 1860. On
10.6.1866 the Chapter of the Malwatte Priests in the District took proceedings
against the plaintiff monk for misconduct and removed him from office on that
account and then elected the defendant monk as the High Priest of Adam's Peak.
This District Chapter of the Malwatte Priest having elected the defendant monk
informed the Govt. Agent that the plaintiff was removed for misconduct and
that the defendant monk was elected High Priest of Adam's Peak. On 8.6.1867,
the then Governor Sir Hercules Robinson recognized the election of the
defendant monk by granting a document. On 23.3.1868 the Assistant Government
Agent requested the plaintiff to return the letter of recognition granted to
him by the Government. The plaintiff did not comply with this request and
bought this action on 28.4.1869 against the defendant monk claiming the
incumbency of the Adam's Peak Temple.

It was held that in order to decide this dispute, it was necessary to
ascertain-

(1)  in whom the right of appointment was vested,

(2)  in whom the power of removal was vested.

It was held that in the _Adam's Peak_ _case_ the Chapter of the Malwatte
priests of the District had the power of dismissal of a monk from office for
improper conduct, and that the Chapter of the Malwatte priests in the district
had the power of electing the Adam's Peak high priest. What is relevant to the
present case is that, this case held that the right to the incumbency of the
Adam's Peak Temple was not by right of

**149**

pupillary succession, but was by right of election by the Chapter of the
Malwatte monks of the district. A relevant case on this aspect of the law is
the case known as the Mulgirigala case that of _Okandeyaye Wangeesa Thero v.
Mulgirigala Sunanda Thero_ (16). This was a dispute for the Viharadhipathiship
of the ancient Buddhist temple Mulgirigala Raja Maha Viharaya in Tangalle
District. There was no evidence, in view of the lapse of time and absence of
records, of the terms by which the succession to the incumbency was regulated
by the original dedication. T. S. Fernando, J. with H. N. G. Fernando, J.
concurring held that, in the circumstances, it was necessary to fall back upon
such evidence as was available relating to the mode of succession upon and
after the death of the first incumbent. Their Lordships held that "it was
indisputably established by the evidence that the rule of sisyanu sisya
paramparawa did not apply to the temple, and that the traditional and
customary mode of appointment was for the Maha Sangha Sabha to make the
appointment, from among the Mulgirigala paramparawa, a suitable monk being
elected irrespective of whether he was a pupil of the last incumbent". In this
case also T. S. Fernando, J. touches on that aspect of the law pertaining to
the rules of succession to the incumbency of a Buddhist Temple which I
discussed as there being two schools of thought. Page 389-T. S. Fernando, J.
states as follows:- "it is now settled lave that the succession to an
incumbency is regulated by the terms of original dedication"- _(See Gunananda
Unanse v. Dewarakkitha Unanse_ (9). It is in this context that T. S. Fernando,
J. laid down the principle - "In view of the lapse of time and the absence of
records since the original dedication of this temple there is no evidence of
these terms, and one is compelled to fallback upon such evidence as is
available in regard to the mode of succession........ ". In the case of
_Dharmarakkitha v. Wijitha_ (17) the plaintiff monk claimed the incumbency of
a temple by right of pupillary succession sisyanu sisya paramparawa. The
defendant's case was that the right to incumbency was by election among the
pupils. It was held by Keuneman, J. that the pupils of the deceased monk had a
right to elect one of their own number other than the senior pupil, as
incumbent when the senior pupil consents to or acquiesces in such election.
Keuneman, J. in the course of his judgment states as follows:- "the first
question to be decided is whether the right of pupillary succession applies to
the incumbency in dispute. It has been held that where the right to an
incumbency is in question, in the _absence of evidence to the contrary,_
(emphasis mine)

**150**

it must be presumed that the incumbency is subject to the sishyanu sishya
paramparawa rule of succession-Vide _Ratnapala Unnanse v. Kewitigala Unanse_
(1) and _Unnanse v. Unnanse_ (6)". It must be noted that the case cited above
the _Adam's Peak case_ (15) the _Mulgirigala Case_ (16) and the case of
_Dhamarakkitha v. Wijitha_ (17) deal with sanghgika temples, sanghgika
property, but it had been held that though the temples were sanghgika property
succession to the incumbency of these temples was by a mode other than that of
sishyanu sishya paramparawa. In this connection the dicta of T. S. Fernando,
J. in the _Mulgirigala case_ (16) at page 392 are very relevant. His Lordship
has stated as follows:- "in a carefully reasoned judgment, the learned trial
judge has stated that it has been indisputably established by the evidence
that the rule of sishyanu sisya paramparawa does not apply in the case of this
temple, and _that the traditional and customary mode of appointment_ was for
the Maha Sangha Sabha to make the appointment from a monk among the
Mulgirigala paramparawa, a suitable monk being elected irrespective of whether
he was a pupil of the last incumbent". The Supreme Court in this case upheld
this finding. The above cases have established that the rule of succession
sishyanu sishya paramparawa in respect of sanghgika temples is not an
absolutely inviolable principle, but that there can be deviations from that
principle by "traditional and customary mode of appointment".

It was argued for the plaintiff-respondent, that in the cases referred to
above, though there have been deviations from the sishyanu sishya paramparawa
rule: in case of succession to the incumbency, the dominant feature of this
mode of appointment was that it was ultimately the Sangha that made the
appointments of the Viharadhipathis. The attack was made on the mode of
succession relied on by the defendant in this case on the ground that
originally the laity and later (after 1907) a layman and monks appointed the
Atamasthanadhipathi. It was submitted that the laity cannot have any hand in
the appointment of a Viharadhipathi, and this submission was further extended
to state a principle that the laity cannot touch sanghgika property. In fact
the Court of Appeal judgment deals with this submission at great length. At
page 69 of the judgment of the Court of Appeal the heading is as follows: -"on
the question whether the laity can appoint a Viharadhipathi to Sanghgika
property". Under this heading the Court of Appeal judgment discusses the case
of the defendant-petitioner re the mode of appointment to the post of

**151**

Atamasthanadhipathi. In fact the judgment states that this submission "goes to
the root of the case". The Court of Appeal judgment states (Page 70) "where
property is sanghgika, laity have no authority to appoint a Viharadhipathi to
sanghgika property. Alleged custom violates a fundamental principle of
ecclesiastical law". This aspect has been emphasised and over-emphasised in
the judgment, and in fact the Court of Appeal judgment is based on this line
of thought. The judgment states at page 62-"Mr. Jayawardene submitted that
property should not be understood in the Roman Dutch Law sense of the word. In
Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law property included the right to the office of
Viharadhipathi in respect of sanghika property. So the fundamental principle
is, it was submitted, that the moment one accepts that property is sahghika
the laity cannot touch it. No custom can develop in defiance of Buddhist
ecclesiastical legal concepts". The judgment further states (at page 74)-"The
theory of the defendant has no place in Buddhist religion. It is impossible
for the laity to appoint a Viharadhipathi". In support of this principle
several authorities are cited in the judgment of the Court of Appeal. I will
deal with such cases later. At the outset, I must state that the principles of
these cases have not been properly analysed with reference to the facts of the
present case, that is the mode of appointment to the Atamasthanadhipathiship.

The theory that the laity cannot touch sanghgika property is not in accordance
with the history of the Buddhist establishment in Sri Lanka since the visit of
Arahat Mahinda. From the introduction of Buddhism, Buddhism became the state
religion of Ceylon. This status of Buddhism in Ceylon has been adequately
described by the learned monk _Walpola Rahula_ in his authoritative book-
History of Buddhism in Ceylon-The Anuradhapura Period-3rd century B.C. -10th
Century-in Chapter V-"Buddhism as State Religion". The learned monk states as
follows:- "It is quite natural therefore that the King of Ceylon was regarded
as the secular head of Buddhism who protected the sasana........ as the
secular head and the defender of Buddhism, it was one of his primary duties as
the King to look after the well being of the sasana. Hence we find quite often
Kings engaged in the "purification of the sasana, whenever they found it
disorganised and corrupt, it was the duty of the State to suppress by law or
expulsion undesirable heretical elements that stained the purity of the
sasana. The King also fait it his duty to intervene whenever there arose
within the sangha disputes that could not be easily settled by the monks
themselves".

**152**

(Pages 66-67). Walpola Rahula Thero further states in this book-"In fact the
sasana constituted a fully fledged State Department safeguarding the purity
and well being of the sasana and maintaining the sangha and the monasteries
were duties incumbent mainly on the State, although private individuals and
the public collectively established and maintained Aramas on a smaller scale.
There were full and permanent staffs paid by the State to look after the
business of the large Monasteries such as Mihintale and Abhayagiri. These were
governed by rules and regulations laid down by the King with the approval of
the Sangha ......... even taxes on goods were levied for the maintenance of
Aramas trading on Poya Days was prohibited by law". (Page 72). Rahula Thero
sums up this Chapter with a loud expression of a thought apt and relevant to
the present day, as follows:- "We have to admit that from the day that
Buddhism was adopted as a State religion, it began to lose its original spirit
of renunciation and simplicity, and gradually developed into an ecclesiastical
organisation with its numerous duties, religious, political and social. It is
impossible for any religion, when it becomes an organised body, to continue in
its original form. It has to change with the times if it is to maintain its
power and prestige. "Adapt or perish" is nature's inexorable imperative". The
position of Buddhism in Ceylon is also adequately described by Professor K. M.
De Silva of the University of Peradeniya. In his book -A History of Sri Lanka,
in the Chapter-The Anuradhapura Kingdom, A Buddhist Civilization he says-"The
King ruled as a protector of Buddhism. Buddhism as state religion in some form
or other has prevailed in Ceylon throughout history up to the British times".
At that time the Kings or sometimes the chiefs appointed monks to offices and
also dismissed such monks. It is an expression of this concept of Buddhism as
a State religion that has made the Kandyan chiefs to incorporate fundamental
clause No. 5 in the Kandyan Convention of 2.3.1815. When on 2.3.1815 the
Kandyan Kingdom was ceded to the British by its chiefs and "Bikkus" and the
Kandyan Convention was signed by them and on behalf of the British by Governor
Sir Robert Brownrigg, the British became the protector and custodian of
Buddhism. Due to pressure by the Christian elements this custodianship was
whittled down.

The Enactments referred to below, passed during the British era indicate that
the theory that the laity cannot touch sanghika property did not prevail even
after the British occupation. The Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance from 1889 -
1931 statutorily provided for

**153**

the laymen "to touch sanghika property". The Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance
No. 3 of 1889 was an Ordinance "to provide for the better regulation and
amendments of temporalities in this Island". These temporalities were sanghika
property of the temples. Section 20 of this Ordinance provided that all
movable and immovable property and all offerings do vest in the Trustee. The
next Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance was No. 17 of 1895. This was an
amendment to the Ordinance of 1889 and the main purpose of it also was to vest
the temporalities of temples in Trustees. All the previous Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinances were amended and consolidated by the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance No. 8 of 1905. This Ordinance provided for the better
control of the temporalities of the temples. The main feature of these
Ordinances was that the temporalities of the temples were handed over to the
control, solely of laymen and the monks had no place in these Committees. It
was the 1905 Ordinance that for the first time brought within the ambit of the
word "temple" - The Atamasthana at Anuradhapura and by Section 5 proviso
provided for an Atamasthana Committee of six members, one of whom was the high
priest for the time being of the Bomaluwa. There was agitation against the
Buddhist temporalities being in the control solely of laymen, and certain
eminent learned and leading monks of the day, the Maha Nayaka Theros who
included the Maha Nayaka Thero of Malwatte Vihare, Asgiriya Vihare, and the
eminent and highly respected monk Hikkaduwe Sri Sumangala Thero, petitioned to
his Majesty King Edward VII against the control of the temporalities of
temples by laymen only, leaving out monks who were the incumbents of these
temples. (A copy of this petition was produced in this appeal by the learned
Queen's Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent). The penultimate prayer of the
petition was as follows:-

No. 3:  "That all interference on the part of native headmen who are in
Government employment, with the civil or religious rights of priesthood, or
the management of temples or Buddhist temporalities, may be absolutely
forbidden".

It is due to this agitation that the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance No. 19
of 1931 was passed. Section 4(1) of this Ordinance provided that-

"The management of the property belonging to every temple not exempted from
the operation of this sub-section shall be vested in a person or persons duly
appointed Trustee under the provisions of this Ordinance".

**154**

Section 10(1) provided that-

The Trustee for every temple which is not exempted from the operation of
section 4 (1) may ...........be nominated by the Viharadhipathi of such
temple".

Under this section the Viharadhipathi can nominate himself as the Trustee, and
in that case he will become the controlling Viharadhipathi of the temple.
Under the scheme of this Ordinance it is the Diyawadana Nilame of the Dalada
Maligawa, the Atamasthana Committee of the Atamasthanaya partly consisting of
a layman, and the Public Trustee a layman, who handled the temporalities of
these institutions which are sanghgika property. It has been stated by a
Learned writer, Civil Servant G. W. Woodhouse mentioned earlier as follows:-
"It should be observed that there are lay incumbents of certain temples. These
are persons, who managed and administered the temporal concerns and who may
exercise supervision over the spiritual affairs of such temples: for instance
the Diyawadana Nilame is the Chief lay incumbent of the Dalada Maligawa the
temple of the sacred tooth relics in Kandy". (1918 - The Ceylon Antiquary -
Volume III, Part 111, Page 174 at 176, Note 2).

I have set out the above material to show that an absolute proposition that
laymen cannot touch sanghgika property is not in accordance with the history
of the development of Buddhism in Ceylon, and the history of the management of
sanghgika property up to the 1931 Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance and up to
date. One can agree with the principle that a layman cannot touch sanghgika
property if it is used in the Buddhist dhamma sense that a layman must not
appropriate to himself, misappropriate, or consume sanghgika property. A
Buddhist will not even drink water from a well in a temple land, will not
consume any fruits of the trees in a temple, will not consume the food made
sanghgika before offering to the monks at a dana (except acolytes or beggars).
It has been submitted by counsel for the defendant-petitioner that this case
deals with a Viharadhipathiship, a status or an office and not with any
property of a temple dedicated to the Sangha, that is sanghgika property and
that a Viharadhipathiship is not sanghgika property.

To support the argument that a layman cannot touch sanghgika property several
cases have been cited, where the Courts have held that layman cannot appoint a
Viharadhipathi, to a temple offered as sanghgika. In my view those decisions
relied on, which I will analyse and set out below, do not support the
principle sought to be

**155**

enunciated in this case, than is that, layman cannot appoint a Viharadhipathi.
These cases deal with instances in which succession to the incumbency of a
temple which is sanghgika property have been-

( _a_ ) On the rule of sishyanu sishya paramparawa, and ( _b_ ) on the failure
of the paramparawa the succession had been sought to be diverted to a
different course of appointment by laymen on the grounds -

(i)  That the line of succession had failed, or

(ii)  That the laymen who set up the temple have a right to make such an
appointment.

These cases have held that an appointment cannot be changed into an
appointment as in ( _b_ ) above in that manner in an instance where the temple
is sanghgika and subject to succession by sishyanu sishya paramparawa rule.

In the case cited as the oldest case on this subject that of _(1832) Eriminne
Unnanse_ (11) (supra), after the death of _Eriminne Unnanse_ a dispute arose
among his pupils regarding the incumbency of the temple. At that stage the
villagers interposed and had the plaintiff robed and installed him, they
deeming him the rightful heir to the incumbency. On 20.6.1832 the
Commissioners of the Judicial Court at Kandy unanimously held "that the
succession of the temple in question is and should be regulated agreeably to
the law of sishyanu sishya paramparawa". The Supreme Court affirmed this
decision on 21st October 1833. In the case of _Ratanapala Unnanse v.
Kewitigala Unnanse_ (1) (Supra) -the plaintiff claimed to be the incumbent of
the Buddhist Temple Kongala Vihare as the sole pupil of the former incumbent
Sumangala Unnanse. The defendants while denying that the plaintiff was a pupil
of Sumangala Unnanse pleaded that the Vihare had been endowed by the villagers
of Kongala and was under the patronage of the latter and that they in the
exercise of this right, appointed the second defendant as Sumangala's
successor. In appeal Phear, C. J. laid down the four principles extracted from
the _Eriminne case,_ which have guided the law of succession to temples. The
Supreme Court held that in this case the succession to the temple was on the
rule of sishyanu sishya paramparawa and that the mode of succession pleaded by
the villagers has not been proved and as such the plaintiff was the lawful
incumbent of the temple. Among the

**156**

principles laid down in this case (quoted above) the principles (2) and (4)
set out in this case are vital to the present case before this Court to wit: -

(2)  That there are exceptional cases in which succession to temple property
is in the appointment of the Government or even of private individuals.

(4)  That in absence of .direct evidence of the terms usage may be looked to
and accepted as evidence thereof.

The case of (1881) - _Wellegama Dhamma Jothy Unanse v. Wellegama Sarananda
Unanse_ (12) (supra) was a claim to the incumbency of a Vihare Talarambe
Pansale. The plaintiff's case was that the line of sishya paramparawa
succession to the temple got exhausted and that the plaintiff as the tutor of
the predeceased incumbent was entitled to succeed him. The defendant monks in
the answer alleged that they were put in possession of the pansala, by certain
dayakas who originally dedicated the pansala. It was held that after a temple
is dedicated in sanghgika the dedicators ceased to have any right or control
over it, and that the succession of the incumbency of the temple must be
regulated by the well-known principle of sishyanu sishya paramparawa. The
defendants were mere trespassers and the plaintiff was the lawful incumbent.
In the case of (1910) - _Dharmapala Unanse v. Medagama Sumana Unanse_ (7)
(supra) - the plaintiff claimed that the line of succession got exhausted and
the Maha Nayaka of the Malwatte Vihare to which school the vihare belonged
appointed him as the incumbent. The defendant Sumana Unanse claimed title to
the incumbency as the duly appointed incumbent elected by the dayakas and the
villagers of Malwatte, this being a Vihare fully endowed by their ancestors
and with whom alone lay the right of appointment. It was held that this was a
sanghgika temple and the original terms of dedication did not provide for the
mode of succession alleged by the defendant, as such the succession to this
temple is governed by the sishya paramparawa. On the failure of this line of
succession the Maha Nayake Thero of the Chapter has the right to appoint a
successor. In the case of _Unnanse v. Unnanse_ (6) the plaintiff claimed title
to the incumbency by sishyanu sishya paramparawa. The defendant stated that
the incumbency of the Vihare was to be governed by the rule of succession
sishyanu sishya paramparawa, that the temple was a gift of the

**157**

Dehigama and Giragama families who were entitled to appoint a priest to the
vihare on any vacancy, and that the defendant has been appointed by the
Dehigama and Giragama families. De Sampayo, J. held that the defendant has not
proved the mode of succession relied on and that the plaintiff was the lawful
incumbent on the rule of sishyanu sishya paramparawa. With reference to the
claim that the incumbent was appointed by the said two families De Sampayo,
J., observed as follows:- "There are no instances to be found in the books of
this kind of patronage exercised by private persons, but it is stated in the
judgment of the Board of Commissioners who tried the case of _Eriminne Unanse_
(11) (See Vander Rep. Appendix D at p. xIv) that the exceptions to the two
rules of succession abovementioned are those temples "which are in the gift of
Government or of private individuals. There is no further exposition of the
subject". In the case of 159/61(F) \- D.C. Colombo Case No. 8741/L - S.C.
Minutes of 12.10.1965 names of parties not given in the caption) - the
plaintiffs (laymen) claiming to be the Trustees of Gothami Vihare under a deed
of 10th October 1906 marked P1, sued the defendant monks for a declaration
that the plaintiffs were entitled to the control, management and
administration of the vihare, and for a declaration that the defendants have
no right to reside, manage, control or administer the vihare and for ejectment
of the defendants. It was the case of the plaintiffs that the vihare was not
sanghgika property. The claim of the defendants monks was that the vihare was
sanghgika property and that the deed P1 was of no avail in law. Abeysundera,
J. held that the vihare was a Buddhist temple prior to the execution of Deed
P1 of 1906 as there had been a sanghgika dedication of the vihare in 1905. It
was held that as such the plaintiffs were not competent to maintain their
action for the said declaration.

In the case of _Piyananda Thero v. Indananda Thero_ (18) the plaintiff claimed
that the temple was dedicated in sanghgika on a deed of. 1936. In 1959
Dhammananda Thero disrobed and he had no pupils. The plaintiff who was a co-
pupil of Dhammananda was entitled to succeed to the temple. The case of the
defendant Piyananda thero was that he was appointed Viharadhipathi by the
Dayaka Sabha as there was no incumbent to the temple. The plaintiff further
pleaded that the temple being sanghgika property the dayakas have no right
whatsoever to appoint a priest as Viharadhipathi. Bandaranayake, J. held that
the temple was sanghgika property and as such the dayakas have no right to
appoint a Viharadhipathi and that the plaintiff was the lawful incumbent. Much
emphasis was placed on

**158**

this case by the plaintiff-respondent, who relied on the principles that
laymen cannot touch sanghgika property. The facts of this case show that the
temple was established in 1936 and was made sanghgika, that from 1936
succession to the incumbency has been according to the sishyanu sishya
paramparawa. In 1960 the dayakas invited the defendant monk to reside in the
temple and in 1971 the Dayaka Sabha confirmed the defendant as Viharadhipathi
of the temple. Thus, this was an attempt by the Dayaka Sabha to change the
mode of succession to the incumbency of this temple, which act of the Dayaka
Sabha was held by the Appeal Court to be not in accordance with the rule of
succession to the incumbency of that temple.

I have analysed above the cases which were relied on to prove the plaintiff's
case, that laymen cannot touch sanghgika property, and its subsidiary rule
that laymen cannot appoint a Viharadhipathi to a temple which is sanghgika
property. As stated earlier it will be seen that these cases were instances
where the dayakas, laymen, asserted a right of appointment to the incumbency
when a vacancy arose and made an attempt to change the course of succession
which prevailed already according to the rule of sishyanu sishya paramparawa,
and the Supreme Court struck down such attempts. There is not a single case
where the Supreme Court had dealt with an instance such as in the case before
me, where for well over 100 years, but according to the document (D3 of 1908)
from the time of Sinhala Kings, the mode of appointment has been firstly by a
group of laymen and latterly after 1907 by a group consisting of a layman and
monks. It is my firm view that none of the cases referred to above has any
application to the facts of the case before me.

In this case before me there is overwhelming evidence that at least from prior
to 1843 Minutes of the Government Agent (D5) of 1871 and (D6) of 1881. (See D6
para 2 P.2), that the mode of appointment of Atamasthanadhipathi has been by a
group of persons presided over by the head of the Nuwarawewa family as stated
in the answer. According to the records available the first monk who was so
appointed has been Ipalegama Monk in 1843. Appointments have been consistently
made in this manner until the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance of 1907 and
1931 became law. Thus, after 1907 and 1931 the appointment of
Atamasthanadhipathi has been by the Atamasthana Committee, and as pointed out
earlier, the plaintiff in the petition of appeal to the Court of Appeal has
stated that "appointment by the Atamasthana Committee was of general
acceptance". In

**159**

considering the validity of this mode of appointment relied on by the
defendant, it would be necessary to consider the principles gathered from the
_Eriminne Unanse's_ case by Phear, C.J. - in the case of _Ratnapala Unnanse v.
Kewitigala Unnanse_ Page 28, Column 2, Nos. 2 and 45 (supra) which I will
repeat again due to its importance.-

(2) There are exceptional cases in which the succession to temple  property is
in the appointment of the Government or even of  private individuals.

(4)  That in the absence of direct evidence, of these terms usage may be
looked into and accepted as evidence thereof.

The word "terms" is a reference to "terms of original dedication", Tambiah, J.
in the case of _Piyananda Terunnanse v. Sumanajothi Terunnanse_ (5) (supra)
dealt with a plea by the plaintiff that that temple had a peculiar rule of
succession different from the sishyanu sishya paramparawa. While holding that
the plaintiff has failed to prove such a plea, Tambiah, J. stated as follows:-
"when a person alleges that any other rule of succession other than the
aforesaid two rules of succession applies to a temple, the burden is on him to
prove that such a rule had been adopted by long usage. Such usage must be
certain, continuous and invariable to warrant the conclusion that it was laid
down by the founder". Tambiah, J. further referred to the case of _Okandayaye
Wangeesa Thera v. Mulgirigala Sunanda Thero_ (16) (supra), the leading case of
an exception to the rule sishyanu sishya paramparawa and held as follows:- "In
that case, however, it was held that it was 'indisputably established by
evidence' that the rule of sisyanu sishya paramparawa did not apply and the
traditional mode of appointment of an incumbent of that temple was for the
Sangha Sabha to make such an appointment". Thus in _Piyananda's case,_
Tambiah, J. has held that in considering the succession to the incumbency of a
temple the Court can consider whether "long usage" has been proved and also
whether a "traditional mode of appointment of an incumbent of that temple" has
been proved. As stated earlier in the case of _Moruntuduwe Dhaminananda Nayaka
Thero v. Baddegama Piyaratana Thero_ (4) (supra) T. S. Fernando, J. cited at
page 422, the four principles by Phear, C.J. in the old case of _Ratnapala
Unnanse v. Kewitigala Unnanse_ (2) (supra) and commented as follows:-"these
principles have been consistently followed by our courts".

**160**

Both parties have admitted that the Atamasthanaya is sanghgika property.
Replying on this admission the case of the plaintiff is that there is a
presumption that succession to the Atamasthanadhipathi was and is by the rule
of sishyanu sishya paramparawa. I have earlier pointed out that this principle
has been set out in two ways. One view is that succession to a sanghgika
temple is governed by the terms of dedication and if such terms are not proved
then the presumption is that succession is by the paramparawa rule. Basing my
finding even on the plaintiff's case that the Atamasthanaya being sanghgika
property the succession is by rule of sishyanu sishya paramparawa, I hold that
the defendant has led overwhelming evidence to rebut the presumption, and has
proved, that at least for a period of over 100 years prior to the date of this
action 31.1.1978, i.e., from time immemorial, succession to the
Atamasthanadhipathiship has been by usage or by the mode of appointment; or
even by custom, as set out in paragraph 8, sub-paragraphs ( _a_ ), ( _b_ ), (
_c_ ) and ( _d_ ) of the answer. It is difficult for the plaintiff, or should
I say not possible for the plaintiff to deny this mode of succession as his
own tutor priest from whom he claims title Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero has been
so appointed on 1st September 1943 and the predecessor and tutor of Sri Sumana
Rewatha thero, i.e., the Pallegama Ratanapala thero has been so appointed in
1908. Thus, even at the time of filing action for at least 70 years this has
been the mode of appointment. There is no evidence whatsoever of any other
mode of appointment. All evidence points out to the fact that except in one
instance, i.e. when Kaluebe Dhammarakkita was appointed in 1863, in all other
instances prior to and after 1863, being the senior pupil has been considered
as a qualification for appointment. Paramparawa seniority has never been the
cause of the appointment. If this seniority was the only reason for succession
to the Atmasthanadhipathiship, then there was no reason for the claimant-monks
to the post to make importunate applications (D3, D8) to a body of persons
headed by the chief of the Nuwarawewa family to get the appointment, and for
the Government to approve the appointment. The other qualifications for the
post/appointment were that the claimant had to belong to the Malwatta Chapter
and the Bomaluwa paramparawa.

The plaintiff led the evidence of the Maha Nayaka Thero of the Malwatta
Chapter Siri Malwatte Ananda Thero, to prove his case that succession was
according to the rule of sishyanu sishya

**161**

paramparawa. The evidence of this eminent monk on this subject is
inconclusive. The Maha Nayaka Thero was questioned as

 follows in examination-in-chief-











(In this paragraph I will use the departmental abbreviation S.L.N.A. for Sri
Lanka National Archives as used by the Commissioner of Archives).

There are old documents which show that even at that time the Malwatte Chapter
wanted the right of appointment to the Atamasthanadhipathiship vested in the
Chapter, but did not consider that the succession to the
Atamasthandhipathiship was according to the sishyanu sishya paramparawa, and
also that the then British Government did not admit the opinion regarding the
succession expressed by the Malwatte Chapter. A petition dated 28.6.1871 was
sent to W. J. Twynan G. A., N. P., from Medagama Maha Nayaka Unanse, Chief
Priest and the Anu Nayaka and the other priests of Malwatte Chapter as
follows:

"Kaluebbe Chief Priest of Anuradhapura died about May 1870. ............. The
practice that existed from ancient times and which  was continued up this
time, is, that during the Kandyan Government the Maha Nayaka Unanse of the
Malwatta Vihara, Kandy _names a fit person to be appointed_ as Chief Priest of
Anuradhapura to the Kandyan King and see him appointed, and during this
government also the vacancies which occurred in the Chief Priesthood of
Anuradhapura was filled up with the concession of the Chief Priest  and other
Priests of Malwatte Vihara .......... what we now humbly submit to your
honour's kind and serious consideration is that neither Galagoda Banda
Mahatmaya nor Orwilla Kumarihamy have any claim, title, or right of
interference whatever in these matters. That there are several other places in
the Island equal to Anuradhapura to wit - Mahiyangane, Mutiyangane, Siripada,
Dambulla Ridi Vihara and several other places, and no layman had

**162**

any right whatever to exercise any power in the election of priests, over any
of these places. We have heard that upon representations made to His
Excellency the Governor your honour has been requested to make an inquiry
which inquiry is fixed for 28th of this month .......... Therefore we, your
humble petitioner earnestly pray, that your honour will be kindly pleased
after inquiry to make an order that the former practice be again resumed and
that the body of priests forming the Malwatte Committee be allowed the
_election_ of a person as hitherto done.

Sighed by Maha Nayaka Thero and 26 other monks"

(S.L.N.A. Vol: 11/788).

(The italicising is to emphasise that in this petition it is not at all stated
that succession to the Atamasthanadhipathiship was according to the rule of
sishyanu sishya paramparawa as alleged by the plaintiff). Of the temples
referred to in this petition the mode of succession to Siripada has been
referred to earlier in connection with the _Adams Peak case_ (15); in the
_Siripada case_ the Court decided as follows:- "It is necessary to ascertain
in whom the right of appointment vested and also in whom the power of removal
was vested ............................It is sufficient to begin with the time
of the later Kandyan Kings. It is quite clear that the Kandyan Kings possessed
and exercised the power of appointment .......... shows an instance of a high
priest of this temple being deprived of high priesthood by King Rajadi
Rajasinghe". This case also held that all the prerogative rights over the
Buddhist Priesthood" vested in the British Sovereign, so far as the British
Sovereign might think fit to exercise them". The succession to Siripada
referred to in the above quoted petition was held by the Court to be an
exception to the sishyanu sishya paramparawa rule as succession was by
election by a Committee of monks. The documents (D5 of 1871 and D6 of 1881)
show that the then British Government did not accept the mode of succession as
set out in this petition. Even prior to that the Government Agent Anuradhapura
then stationed in the Jaffana Kachcheri, by letter 7th September, 1848, in
reply to a petition dealing with the election to the Atamasthanadhipathiship
commented as follows:- "You will find in the correspondence relative to the
election of a priest in 1843, a copy of which is herewith sent that the right
of election is in the Nuwarawewa family and the Headman of the district
conjointly, _and with which the priests of Kandy have not any concern in this
matter"._ (S.L.N.A. Vol: 41 /192).

**163**

As regards the mode of appointment to the Atamasthanadhipathiship, I will now
refer to the most authoritative work on this subject an unpublished thesis-

Nuwara Kalawiya and the North Central Province, under British Administration.

1838 - 1900 by Ukku Banda Karunananda- Thesis submitted for the Degree Doctor
of Philsosphy, University of Sri Lanka, Vidyalankara Campus, 1977.

(U. B. Karunananda is a Lecturer in History at the Kelaniya University).

(The following abbreviations have been used by this learned Writer-

C.N.A.-Ceylon National Archives.

N.K.-Nuwara Kalawiya).

In Chapter 8-Social Policy and Social Change-

The Buddhist Problem, the learned Writer states as follows :-

"According to the Convention of 1815 the British Government was responsible
for the appointment of the Maha Nayakas-the Basnayaka Niiames of Devales and
the temple officials ........... in connection with such matters. The only
problem that arose in Nuwara Kalawiya was that concerning the Anunayaka or the
Chief Monk of Atamasthanaya". (Dyke to. Co1. Secy, 22 Dept. 1864-C.N.A.
41/113) ........ a special feature governing the selection of the Anunayaka
Unnanse was that the right of selection and dismissal was vested in the
Nuwarawewa family, and the inhabitants of the district on such occasions were
represented by their Chiefs, the Headmen, and that the Maha Nayaka Thero has
no power to intervene in this matter". (Brodie to G.A., N.P., 15 February
1851-C.N.A. 41/154).

Then the learned author goes into the history of this mode of appointment-

"the first appointment of an Anunayaka after the Kandyan Province came under
British rule was probably in 1816-Ipologama Unanse". (Duke to A.G.A.,
Nikaweratiya 27 August 1851-C.N.A. 41/91 No. 174-Encl: Circular letter of Col.
Secy. 22 August 1851).

It is clear that the selection of the Anunayaka when the office fell vacant
was the prerogative of a Committee which consisted of the Chief of the
Nuwarawewa family and the headmen as representatives

**164**

of the people. The inhabitants of the district were represented by three Rate
Mahattayas and 17 Koralas. It is not, however, possible to trace the origin of
this Committee. According to a statement made by Ratwatta Rate Mahattaya in
this connection, the Committee according to tradition had originated during
the time of King Kirthi Sri Rajasinhe". (Levers to Col. Secy. 18 December
1889-C.N.A. 41/64-Page 580).

To sum up my finding the defendant's case as regards the succession to the
Atamasthanadhipathiship by election has been proved. I must state that
succession to a Viharadhipathiship has no relation to any Buddhist law, that
is the doctrine preached by the Buddha. In Sri Lanka the various modes of
succession to an incumbency have been of native origin. The principle that was
been emphasized in the judgment of the Court of Appeal that layman cannot
touch sanghika property is not a valid proposition as a Viharadhipathiship-
incumbency is not sanghika property. A temple or any other corporeal or
material things offered to monks are offered as sanghika, an abstract concept,
status or any incorporeal thing like a Viharadhipathiship is not made
sanghika. A Viharadhipathi, head of a temple may or may not be a head of a
temple which has been offered as sanghika. The recent White Paper issued-THE
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE TO CONSIDER AND REPORT ON THE EFFICIENT MANAGEMENT OF
TEMPLE PROPERTY, November, 1987 states as follows:-

"There are other temples which are controlled by trustees. Accordingly their
temporalities are not Sanghika-Maligakanda Pirivena, Vajiraramaya of
Bambalapitiya, Sri Visuddharama of Sri Dhamma Mawatha, Colombo 10, are temples
which are not Sanghika and not governed by the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance. There is no difference between, such temples as sanghika temples in
their functions".

In view of my observations above the mode of succession to the
Atamasthanadhipathiship is not contrary to any Buddhist Law or doctrine as
preached by the Buddha. There is no reason whatsoever to upset this mode of
succession which has come down from time immemorial for at least more than
over 100 years.

It was submitted that the monk who succeeds to the Viharadhipathiship of the
Bomaluwa is the one who by virtue of that becomes the Atamasthanadhipathi. In
the light of the documents in this case this submission cannot be accepted.
The right of succession

**165**

to the Adhipathiship of the Bomaluwa has been considered only as a
qualification to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi. Further, one of the chief
duties of the Atamasthanadhipathi is to continue the observances of the
ancient religious rites and customs pertaining to the Bomaluwa, really the Uda
Bomaluwa. For this purpose the Atamasthanadhipathi has to take up residence in
the Bomaluwa. Documents D8 of 3.11.1885 and D3 of 28.12.1908 are two
applications "for the post of Atamasthanadhipathi", the Bomaluwa Adhipathiship
is not mentioned in those two applications. I hold that the correct position
seems to be that the monk who is Atamasthanadhipathi becomes the
Viharadhipathi of the Bomaluwa and other seven appurtenant temples of the
Atamasthanaya.

Counsel for the defendant-petitioner strenuously submitted that the
Atamasthanadhipathi was an office held by a monk and was not a
Viharadhipathiship or as under the Buddhist Temporalities Ordinance
(1931)controlling Viharadhipathiship. This submission was opposed by the
learned Queen's Counsel for the plaintiff-respondent. An analysis of the
relevant documents will help to determine whether the Atamasthanadhipathiship
was a post. The documents D8 and D3 are framed as applications. In the
document D3 of 28.12.1908 Pallegama Ratanapala Thero states as follows in
Sinhala- Pallegama Ratanapala Thero, applicant". He ends up the letter by
stating "Appoint me to the post of Atamasthana Nayaka". In D8 of 3.11.1885
Pahala Talawe Medankara Thero states" "Application submitted to select for the
post of Anunayaka, Anuradhapura". This application ends up as follows". "That
I the applicant -monk be appointed to the vacant post".

It had been submitted that the Viharadhipathi cannot resign from his post.
However, D4 of 1.8.1942 is a letter of resignation from the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi addressed by P. Ratanapala Thero Anunayaka. D13 of
19.11.1977 is a letter of resignation addressed by Sri Sumana Rewatha Thero.
An application for the post and the resignation from the post are two
characteristics of any post. If the succession to the Atamasthanadhipathi
devolved by the rule of succession sishyanu sishya paramparawa, there can be
no applications for the post of letters of resignation, but succession would
come to the senior pupil as of right. Further in every instance of

**166**

these letters of resignation the Atamasthana Committee met and accepted the
resignation. There are official duties attached to the post of
Atamasthanadhipathi in the management of eight Viharas. These erudite monks
who made the applications to the post of Atamasthanadhipathi, and have sent
letters of' resignation undoubtedly considered the Atamasthanadhipathiship as
a post. The Maha Nayakaships of Malwatta, Asgiriya, Maha Nayakaship of the
Amarapura Sangha Sabha, The Ramanya Sangha Sabha are posts and the holders of
these offices are Viharadhipathis of various other temples.

In the Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law as developed in our country, In considering
the limitation of an action for a declaration of Viharadhipathiship, it has
been held that the Viharadhipathiship is a status-

_

Terunanse v. Terunanse_ (19)

_

Premaratne v. Indasara_ (20)

_

Kirikitta Saranankara v. Medagama Dhammananda_ (21)

_

Watugedera Amraseehe v. Tittagalla Sasanatilaka_ (22)

The later (Divisional Bench) Case-

_

MAPALANE DHAMMADAJA THERO V. ROTUMBA NIMALAJOTHI THERO._ (8) .

reconsidered the law pertaining to the limitation of an action for a
declaration to an incumbency in the light of the Buddhist Temporalities
Ordinance (1931). Though this case changed the law pertaining to the
limitation of an action it nevertheless went on the basis that a
Viharadhipathiship was a status.

The Viharadhipathiship is not a concept known to the Buddhist doctrine as
found in the teachings of the Buddha. The Constitution of the Buddhist
Monasteries in the time of the Buddha was on an entirely different basis, from
that which had developed in our country at a later stage. But even in Buddha's
time as the organisation of Monasteries expanded on instruction given by the
Buddha, monks were appointed to various offices in the Monasteries to wit-

Civara- Patiggahaka (robe receiver)

Civara-Nidahaka (robe depositor)

Bhandagarika (store keeper)

**167**

However, there was no Viharadhipathi for a Monastery, or as in the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance (1931) a controlling Viharadhipathi. On the material
available in this case and after consideration of the organization and
structure of the Monasteries in Sri Lanka after the introduction of Buddhism,
I hold that Atamasthanadhipathi is an office. As such the rule of sishyanu
sishya paramparawa does not prevail in this instance - _Maligakande Case_ (3)
(supra).

The final matter I will deal with is the construction of the document D13 of
19.11.1977. In the plaint the plaintiff attacked the document D13 on several
grounds-vide paragraph 8 ( _a_ )-( _e_ ). Paragraph 8 ( _a_ ) specifically
stated that D13 "is not a document with the signature of the said Rev. Rewatha
Nayaka thero". At the trial no issue has been raised on this averment, and the
evidence clearly shows that the document D 13 was not attacked on the basis
that it was a forgery. The document D 13 was attacked mainly on the ground
that at the time Rewatha thero signed it on 19.11.77, he was not in a
conscious state to understand the contents of the document. The learned
District Judge having carefully considered all the evidence pertaining to
document D13 firstly held "that Nayaka thero signed D13 knowingly and having
accepted the contents therein". The learned District Judge also held that
assuming the succession was by the paramparawa rule D13 was a valid
nomination. The Court of Appeal also held that assuming that the paramparawa
rule applied in this instance D13 if a genuine document constitues a valid
nomination of Gnanaratana thero as a successor of Rewatha Nayaka thero. The
Court of Appeal posed to itself the question "is D13 a genuine document?".
Then the Court compared the admitted signature of Rewatha thero in D1 with
that in D13 and held as follows:-"It bears no resemblance to the other i.e.
D13 is not a genuine document". In coming to this conclusion the Court of
Appeal has misdirected itself on several matters. Firstly it has lost sight of
the fact that in the trial court, this document was not attacked as a forgery,
particularly there was no issue on that matter, and there was no evidence
either way. As such, there was no basis for the court in terms of Section 73
of the Evidence Ordinance to compare the signatures and come to a conclusion.
There was no material for the Court of Appeal to take that step. Further, the
Court of Appeal has emphasised these two matters as against the acceptance of
document D13. The Court of Appeal has several times emphasised that document
D13 is not in the list of the defendant's document, whereas this document is
listed as No. 10 in that list. The

**168**

Court of Appeal held that Jayantha Dissanayake the drafter of this document
has drafted D13 in exactly the same manner as D4 of 1.8.1942 has been drafted,
and added as follows:-"Jayantha Dissanayake states he looked at old documents
only after the institution of these proceedings which was on 31.1.1978. No man
could possible divine the contents of D4 .............. This means Jayantha
has probably looked at the documents before he made D13. If so, why does he
not admit this?". This is a grievous misdirection on the facts because
Jayantha states in examination-in-chief as follows:-"I prepared that document
D13. I prepared it according to the manner the old documents have been
prepared". Obviously this is a reference to the old document D4 of 1.8.42, the
resignation of Ratanapala Thero. I set aside the findings of the Court of
Appeal pertaining to D13 and affirm the findings of the learned District Judge
that D13 was a genuine document.

For the reasons given above I set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal. I
hold that the defendant-petitioner Pallegama Gnanaratana Thero "is the lawful
Atamasthanadhipathi Anuradhapura" and allow the appeal and dismiss the
plaintiff's action with costs in all courts. I agree with the conclusion of my
brother Atukorale, J., allowing the appeal.

**

APPENDIX-1

**

Whereas Kale Ebbe Dharme Rakitte Unanse has been elected by the Headmen and
priests of Nuwerekalawiya to be the Chief Priest for the Eight sacred places
at Anuradhapura in the District of Nuwerekalawia.

It is hereby declared that the said election of Kale Ebbe Dharme Rakitte
Unanse to be Chief Priest of the Eight sacred places at Anuradhapoora is
recognized by the Government.

By His Excellency's Command

Col. Secy.

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.

**

I have had the privilege of reading the judgments prepared by my brothers
Atukorale, J., and Seneviratne, J., and I wish to state that I am in complete
agreement with them and as such the appeal of the Defendant-Appellant should
be allowed and the case of the Plaintiff-Respondent dismissed. The Defendant-
Appellant will be entitled to costs of this appeal as well as the costs in the
Courts below. _  
  
Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1988/3.html_  

