##  Sudharman De Silva v. The Attorney General - SLR - 9, Vol 1 of 1986 [1985]
LKSC 3; (1986) 1 Sri LR 9 (9 September 1985)

**

9

SUDHARMAN DE SILVA  
v.  
THE ATTORNEY-GENERAL

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., ATUKORALE, J. AND TAMBIAH, J.  
S. C. APPEAL NO. 45/85.  
S. C. (L A) No. 48/83.  
H. C. COLOMBO No. 583/78.  
AUGUST 5, 1985.

_

Criminal Procedure - Appeal - Right of appeal - Is it available to an accused
who has jumped bail and absconded at the trial ? - Section 14 of the
Judicature Act

_**

Held -

**

Section 14 of the Judicature Act has specifically endowed an accused who is
convicted with a substantive right of appeal and this right of appeal cannot
be taken away from him on the ground that he had been acting contumaciously or
in defiance of the law. Contumacious conduct on the part of an accused is
relevant only where the exercise of a discretion vested in the court is
involved. Here the right of appeal is statutory and can be asserted as of
right by the accused although he had jumped bail and was absconding at the
trial.

**

10

Cases referred to

**

(1) A. G. v. Sillem (1864) 10 H. L. Cases 704.

(2) Colonial Sugar Refining Co. v. lrving [1905] A. C. 369.

(3) Robert Edward Wynyard [1972] Criminal Appeal Reports 413, 421.

**

APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal in _Sudharman de Silva and
Another v. the Attorney-General_ reported in [1985] 2 Sri L. R. 12.

_

Mrs. M. Muttetuwegama, with Miss S. de Silva, _for accused-appellant. _D. P.
Kumarasinghe, S. S. C. for State_.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

September 9, 1985. **  
SHARVANANDA, C. J.

**

This is an appeal against the order of the Court of Appeal, rejecting the
appellant's appeal to that court.

This appellant who was the 2nd accused-appellant, along with two other
accused, appealed to the Court of Appeal from their conviction and sentence,
on charges of conspiracy to commit robbery of the People's Bank at
Gangodawila, and of having with other accused committed robbery of a sum of
Rs. 634,315.66 from the Manager of the People's Bank, at Gangodawila, abetment
and robbery of car No. 3 Sri 5609. The, appellant was found guilty on all
counts and sentenced to a term of 7 years R.I. on each count, the sentences to
run concurrently. When the appeal came up for hearing before the Court of
Appeal, preliminary objection was raised by State Counsel that the appellant
could not be heard in appeal as he had absconded from the trial and the trial
against him had proceeded in absentia with the trial of the other accused who
were present and represented at the trial, and had not made any application to
the High Court under section 241 of the Criminal Procedure Code and shown that
his absence was for bona fide reasons. State Counsel stated that the appellant
had not sought to reopen the trial at the High Court and therefore he could
not be heard in appeal. The appellant had been absconding at all relevant
times, even at the time of the hearing of his appeal in the Court of Appeal.
It was the contention of State Counsel that it would be farcical and
contemptuous of the law to allow the accused-appellant under such
circumstances to be heard in the Court of Appeal while he was still
absconding. Counsel for the appellant

**11**

contended that as the accused-appellant had plainly absconded and had no bona
fide reason to establish to the satisfaction of the High Court, applying to
that court to reopen the case under section 241 of the Criminal Procedure
Code, served no purpose and submitted that irrespective of his conduct, the
appellant was "as of right" entitled to appeal to the Court of Appeal under
section 14(b) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978, from his conviction and
sentence and that the preliminary objection was misconceived.

The Court of Appeal held that the conduct of the appellant in jumping bail and
absconding up to date was clearly designed to circumvent and subvert the law
and the institutions of justice and therefore he could not invoke the right of
appeal "as a matter of right", as contended by his Counsel and accordingly
upheld the preliminary objection of State Counsel and rejected the appeal of
the appellant. The appellant has preferred this appeal from the rejection.

The appellant along with others was arraigned on indictment on several charges
contained in the indictment as mentioned above. Indictment was served on all
the accused including the appellant on 29.5.1978. Thereafter the appellant had
absconded and a warrant was issued against him and though the surety was
noticed to produce him he failed to do so and part of the security was
confiscated. The appellant has since then been absconding. Trial commenced
without a jury against all the accused on 16.10.1980. The appellant along with
fourth accused was absconding and not present and was unrepresented at the
trial. The trial was concluded on 29.10.1980 and judgment delivered on
7.11.80. The appellant was found guilty on three counts and sentenced to a
term of 7 years R.I. on each count, sentences to run concurrently. The fact
that the appellant absconded after service of indictment is admitted. As it is
the fact that the appellant had not thought fit to surrender to the High Court
during the pendency of the trial or after conclusion thereof or sought to
reopen the proceedings under section 241 of the Criminal Procedure Code,
Counsel for the appellant conceded that the appellant had no bona fide reason
for absconding. Notwithstanding the fact that he was absconding, he had
through his Attorney-at-Law filed a petition of appeal to the Court of Appeal
within the stipulated time. Counsel for the appellant also admitted that the
conduct of the accused in jumping bail after indictment was served and in
absconding ever since was in no way defensible.

**12**

Counsel however urged before us that the appellant had "as of right'", a
statutory right of appeal against his conviction and sentence and that the
right of appeal was not dependent on the exercise of any discretion in his
favour by the Court of Appeal and that the Court of Appeal had on irrelevant
considerations denied him the right of appeal, which the law has vested him
with. Counsel submitted that the Court of Appeal had fallen into error in
denying the appellant his right of appeal which he was entitled to by virtue
of the provisions of the Judicature Act No. 2, of 1978. In order to determine
the validity of counsel's contention, it is necessary to examine the language
of the relevant provisions relating to the appellate jurisdiction of the Court
of Appeal.

Article 138 (1) of the Constitution spells the appellate jurisdiction of the
Court of Appeal. It provides -

"The Court of Appeal shall have and exercise, subject to the provisions of the
Constitution or any law, an appellate jurisdiction for the correction of all
errors of fact or law which shall be committed by any court of First instance
...... "

Section 14 (b) of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978 provides -

"Any person who stands convicted of any offence by the High Court may appeal
therefrom to the Court of Appeal -

(b) in a case tried without a jury, as of right, from any conviction or
sentence except in the case where -

(i) the accused has pleaded guilty ; or

(ii) the sentence is for a period of imprisonment ......

Provided that in every such case there shall be an appeal on a question of law
or where the accused has pleaded guilty on the question of sentence only.

This section gives a right of appeal to any person who stands convicted of any
offence by the High Court. It draws no distinction between a person who
appeared at the trial and a person who was absent at the trial, whether he was
absconding or not to be competent to appeal: A right of appeal

"is the right of moving a superior court and invoking its, aid and
interposition, to redress the error of the court below It seems absurd to
denominate this paramount right, part of the practice of the inferior
tribunal"-per Westbury, L. C., in A. G. v. Sillem-(1).

**13**

"A right of appeal is a matter of substance and riot of procedure " - Colonial
Sugar Refining Co. v. Erving (2).

An appeal is not a fresh suit but is only a continuation of the original
proceedings and a stage in that suit itself.

A right is an interest which, is recognised and protected by law. As it is
recognised by law a person who is vested With a right is entitled to exercise
it and enforce it. The legislature provides for what is necessary in the
interests of the public, and the courts must obey and enforce all statutes.
However unjust or absurd the results be, a statute must be given effect to and
if the statute endows a convicted person with a right of appeal, a court is
bound by the statute and will have to recognise that right and give effect to
it, however repugnant the conduct of that person be and however undeserving
such person be of any rights.

Section 14 of the Judicature Act has specifically endowed an accused who is
convicted with a substantive right namely, a right of appeal and this right of
appeal cannot be taken away from him, on the ground that he had been acting
contumaciously or in defiance of the law. When the legislature has vested in
the accused an absolute right of appeal "as a- matter of right" it is not open
to a court to qualify or condition that right on the ground that -

"An appeal as a matter of right can be availabe only to a person who obeys the
law and its sanctions and not to any person who has defied and acted in
contempt of it." The Court of Appeal has taken the view that to recognise such
a "right in the appellant can only have the effect of bringing the law and the
institutions of justice into ridicule and contempt."

A legal right unless the statute has made its exercise dependent on the prior
performance of a legal duty may be asserted or claimed irrespective of such
performance. But the exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is
inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations. Article 28 of the
Constitution may be a desirable aspiration and prescription for good
citizenship but cannot constrict the content or ambit of legal rights. An
absconding accused may be penalised otherwise but his rights cannot be taken
away for that default:

The Court of Appeal has endorsed and applied the following observation of
Roskill, C. J. in the case of Robert Edward Wynyard (3)

**14**

"To grant this application at this stage would, in the view of this court, be
to put a premium on prisoners jumping bail ; it may even have the effect of
encouraging others to do so. It might also have as a side effect, increasing
the reluctance of a court in a very long trial to grant bail lest the
applicant's conduct be repeated by others. To put a premium on jumping bail is
something which this court is not for one moment prepared to countenance . . .
. .the applicant has brought this entirely on his own head, and he must now
take the consequences. The application therefore is refused."

In my view this quotation was appropriate in the context in which it was
uttered, namely where an application to court was made for the exercise of a
discretion i.e. extension of time within which to apply for leave to appeal,
in favour of the applicant. Contumacious conduct on the part of the applicant
is a relevant consideration when the exercise of a discretion in his favour is
involved, but not when he asserts his statutory right to appeal and is not
asking for the favour of any permission. This meaningful distinction has been
lost sight of by the Court of Appeal.

The Court of Appeal has referred to the argument of Counsel for the State that
if the contention of the present appellant is upheld a accused person would be
encouraged to act with gross disregard and contempt of the original courts of
justice, would jump bail with impunity and abscond from the trial against him,
and would have a distinct advantage over persons who respected the law and
observed its commands and presented themselves for trial and it would bring
the entire administration of justice into disrepute. This argument of State
Counsel loses much of its force and validity when the rationale of section 241
(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act No. 15 of 1979 which provides that
the commencement or continuance of a trial under section 241 (1) "shall not be
deemed or considered to affect or prejudice the right of an absconding accused
to be defended by an attorney-at-law in such trial," is appreciated in this
context. If the legislature permits an accused who jumps bail with impunity
and absconds from the trial against him to be defended by an attorney-at-law
at such trial and gives its sanction to such a trial, it can only be on the
basis that even an absconding accused is entitled to the fundamental right of
being heard by an attorney-at-law at a fair trial. An appeal is a continuation
of the trial and hence, it is not illogical for such accused even though
absconding to be given the benefit of an appeal and being represented at the
hearing of his appeal by his

**15**

Attorney-at-Law. In any event, a court cannot question the wisdom of a legal
provision and disregard it. When State Counsel was asked in relation to his
above argument what was the distinct advantage which an absconding accused had
over persons who respected the law and presented themselves for trial, he was
hard put to demonstrate such advantage. He had to concede that, on the other
hand, an accused who presents himself for trial will definitely be at an
advantage in that he will be able to cross-examine prosecution witnesses and
himself give evidence and call witnesses in his support.

In my view the considerations which weighed with the Court of Appeal in
rejecting the appeal of the appellant were not relevant and out of place when
he was appealing "as of right" and not with leave of the Court of Appeal. A
fugitive from justice is also entitled to his rights and however repellant be
the idea that he could invoke the law for which he has scant regard, yet his
legal rights will have to be respected and recognised. Since section 14 of the
Judicature Act contains no limitation that it applies only to accused who
appeared at the trial by himself or by his Attorney-at-Law, it is not open for
a court to read words of limitation where the words are clear and unambiguous.
It is the court's duty to ensure that the statutory right of a person is not
lost to him except in strict accordance with the statute. The first duty of a
judge is to administer justice according to law, the law which is established
for us by an Act of Parliament. The judges in their anxiety to uphold the
dignity of courts should not fail to do. justice according to enacted law.
Dislike of the effect of a statutory provision does not justify departing from
its plain language. In my view the preliminary objection of State Counsel was
misconceived and is untenable.

I allow the appeal and remit the case to the Court of Appeal with the
direction for it to hear the appeal of the appellant to it.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

**

TAMBIAH, J.** \- I agree. _  
  
Appeal allowed._

_Case sent back to Court of Appeal for hearing of Appeal._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1985/3.html_  

