##  Bakmeewewa, Authorised Officer of People'S Bank v. Konarage Raja - SLR -
231, Vol 1 of 1989 [1984] LKSC 3; (1989) 1 Sri LR 231 (30 July 1984)

**

231

BAKMEEWEWA, AUTHORISED OFFICER OF PEOPLE'S BANK  
V.  
KONARAGE RAJA

**

SUPREME COURT .  
ATUKORALE A. C. J.,  
H. A. G. DE SILVA, J. AND  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.  
S. C. NO: .10/87  
S. C, SPL. L. A. NO. 181/86  
CA. 1070/84 (REVISION)  
D. C. COLOMBO NO 3794/ZL  
OCTOBER 17 AND NOVEMBER 21. 1 988.

_

Finance Act S. 72 (2) and (3)-(7) and (8). Redemption .under, Finance Act of
Mortgaged land-Vesting in the People's Bank-Order of delivery of possession-
Execution by way of summary procedure under chapter 24-Right of appeal-
Application for stay of execution under S. 763 (2) of the Civil Procedure
Code_ - _Jurisdiction.

_

A previous owner of certain premises applied to the People's Bank for
redemption of his land under provisions of the-Finance Act No: 11 of 1963 as
amended by the Finance and Ceylon State Mortagage Bank (Amendment) Law No. 16
of 1973. After inquiry the People's Bank determined that the premises should
be acquired and upon a vesting order made by. the .Finance Minister under S
72(2) the premises vested 'absolutely', in the Bank 'free from all
encumbrances' S 72 (3) The appellant being the Authorised Officer of the
People's Bank being unable to obtain possession of the premises applied to the
District Court under S. 72(7) for an order for delivery of possession by way
of summary procedure under Chapter 24 C, P. C. as stipulated by S: 72 (8).

**232**

Accordingly the District Court entered an order nisi and despite the
objections of the respondent entered order absolute on 28 11.83. The
respondent appealed and pending the appeal the Bank's Authorised Officer moved
for execution. The respondent filed papers for a stay of execution under S.
763 (2) C. P. C. The District Judge on 30.7.84 rejected the application for
stay of execution holding (a) that there was no right of appeal and (b) that
the order for delivery of possession was not a final order and leave to appeal
had not been obtained.

In appeal the Court of Appeal set. aside the order of the District Judge and
directed him to hear the application for stay of execution.

**

Held

**

The jurisdiction exercised by the District Court under Section 72(7) and (8)
of the Finance Act as amended is a special jurisdiction and there is no right
of appeal from an order made in the exercise of such jurisdiction, unless a
right of appeal is expressly provided for in the Act. No right of appeal-is
provided in the Act. Hence the District Court had no jurisdiction to entertain
an application for stay of execution pending appeal under S. 763 (2) of the
Civil Procedure Code.

**

Cases referred to:

**_1\. Sathir v. Najeare_ (1 978) 79 (2) NLR 1 26, 1 35

 _

2\. Sangarapillai v. Chairman. Muncipal Council of Colombo_ 32 NLR 62.

_

3\. Soertsz v. Colombo Municipal Council-_32 NLR 64,

4\. _Kanagasunderam v. Podibamine-_ 42 NLR 97

5. 9; _A. G v. Sillam-_ 11 ER 1 200

_6\. King v. Joseph Hanson-_ 106 ER 1027

 _

7\. The Queen v. Stock_ 112 ER 892

_

8\. Vanderpoorten v. The Settlement Officer-_ 43 NLR 230

_9\. Fernando v. Fernando-_ 5 CWR 1 56

10\. _Commissioner of Income Tax v. De Vos-_ 35 NLR 349

_11.De Silva v. Commissioner of Income Tax-_ 53 NLR 280, 282.

 _

12.National Telephone, Co. Ltd. v. The Postmaster-General_ [1913] AC 546, 552.
.

**

Appeal** from judgment of Court of Appeal

**233**

_

Faiz Mustapha P. C._ with _Miss Arulpragasam_ and _Nigel Hatch_ for Appellant:

_

M. Kanag-lsvaran, P.C._ with S. _Mahenthiran_ and _Miss Enoka Perera_ for
respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

January 16. 1989.

**

G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.

**

A previous owner of premises No. 95, 3rd Cross Street, Colombo 11, made an
application for redemption under the provisions of the Finance Act No. 11 of
1963, as amended by the Finance and Ceylon State Mortgage Bank (Amendment) Law
No. 16 of 1973 (hereinafter referred to as the Act). The respondent to this
appeal was carrying on business in these premises. After- inquiry, the Bank
determined that the premises should be acquired and upon a vesting order made
by the. Minister of Finance under section 72(2) of the Act and duly published
in the gazette, the premises vested "absolutely" in the Bank "free from all
encumbrances" (Section 72(3) of the Act). The appellant, who is-the authorized
officer of the Bank, being unable to obtain possession of the premises, made
an application to the District Court in terms of section 72(7) of the Act. It
is to be noted that section 72(7) enacts, inter alia, that the authorized
officer of the bank, upon production of the vesting order, is "entitled ****
to obtain an order for delivery of possession of such premises". Section 72(8)
provides that every such application made to the District Court "shall be
made, and shall be disposed of, by way of summary procedure in accordance with
the provisions of Chapter 24 of the Civil Procedure Code". Accordingly, the
District Court entered an order nisi, and despite the objections taken by the
respondent the District Court made the order absolute on 28.1 1.83.

Being aggrieved by the order of 28.11.83, the respondent filed a notice of
appeal on 12.12.83, and the petition of appeal on 24.1.84. On 20.2.84 the
appellant made an application to execute the order pending appeal. On 29:5.84
the respondent filed petition and affidavit in terms of section 763(2) of the
Civil

**234**

Procedure Code moving for a stay of execution pending appeal. The matter was
taken up for inquiry on 30th July 1984 and the respondent moved to call
evidence in support of his application for stay of execution pending appeal.
The District Judge by his order of.30.7.84 rejected the application for stay
of execution pending appeal on the grounds (a) there was no right of appeal;
(b) that the order for delivery of possession of the premises was not a 'final
Order' and as 'leave to appeal' had not been obtained from the Court of Appeal
there was no valid appeal. Thereupon the respondent moved the Court of Appeal
to revise the order of the District Court. The Court of Appeal set aside the
order of the District Judge dated 30.7.84 and directed him to entertain and
hear the respondent's application for stay of execution pending appeal and to
permit him to lead evidence in support thereof. It is from this judgment of
the Court of Appeal that an appeal has been preferred to this Court.

The principal submission of Mr. Mustapha, Counsel for the appellant, is that
there is no right of appeal against the order of the District Judge made on
28.11.83 granting the relief of an order for delivery of possession of the
premises. In short, Counsel urged that the Jurisdiction exercised by the
District Court under the provisions of section 72(7) and 72(8) of the Act is a
**special** jurisdiction and there is no right of appeal from an order made in
the exercise of such jurisdiction, unless a right of appeal is expressly
provided for in the Act. Admittedly, no such right is given under the Act.

The first point which arises for consideration is whether the jurisdiction
exercised by the District Court in the instant case is a special jurisdiction.
This has to be decided by considering the nature of the proceedings before the
District Court. To my mind, the proceedings envisaged in. sections 72(7) and
72(8) are clearly in the nature of execution proceedings and nothing more.
Once the Minister publishes the "vesting order" in the gazette, the premises
vest in the Bank "absolutely" and "free from all encumbrances" (sections 72(2)
and (3) of the Act,). The effect of the "vesting order "was pithily put by
Pathirana J. in his illuminating judgment in _Sathir v. Najeare,_ C).

**235**

_

", _.... the vesting order in favour of the, Bank snaps the link of owner-ship
with persons who were entitled to the land prior to the acquisition or who
claims rights thereto. It creates a new independant title in the Bank not
referable to any previous ownership or right at the same time wiping out all
other rights, title and interests in the land. The title of the Bank to the
premises in question is clearly a title paramount" (The emphasis is mine)

Thus it is clear that no substantive question in regard to the right to
possess the premises could arise in the proceedings before the District Court
contemplated by sections 72(7) and 72(8) of the Act. What these sections
provide for is a speedy mode of obtaining possession of the premises which
have already vested in the Bank by-virtue of the vesting order. In other
words, an application is made to the District Court and the provisions of
Chapter 24 of the Civil procedure Code are invoked solely for the purpose of
executing an extra judicial order. No disputed question in regard to the
right, title or interest in the premises arise for determination before the
District Court, I accordingly hold that the jurisdiction exercised by the
District Court is a special jurisdiction.

Mr. Mustapha next contended that there is no right of appeal from an order of
a District Court exercising a special jurisdiction unless there is express
statutory provision conferring such a right. In _Sangarapillai vs. Chairman,
Municipal Council of Colombo_ (2) it was held that where the District Court
exercises a special jurisdiction conferred upon it by the Housing and Town
Improvement Ordinance No. 19 of 1915, there is no general right of appeal to
the Supreme Court. **** The remedy available to a party aggrieved by the
decision of the District Court acting as the tribunal of appeal in terms of
section. 84 of the Ordinance is to apply to the District Court to state a case
on a matter of law for the Opinion of the Supreme Court and if it refuses may
apply to the Supreme Court for an order requiring the District Court to state
such a case in terms of section 92(1). In _Soertsz vs. Colombo Municipal
Council_ '3) Fisher C.J. had occasion to consider the question whether there
is a right of appeal to the

**236**

Privy Council from a judgment of the Supreme Court on a case stated under
section 92 of the Housing and Town Improvement Ordinance No. 19 of 1915. In
the course of his judgment, the learned Chief Justice observed:

"The District Courts were established by Section 55 of that Ordinance (Courts
Ordinance, 1889) and their civil jurisdiction was defined in section 65. The
appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court is defined by section 21 (2) and
the powers of the Court on appeal are defined in Section 40, and, so far as
appeals from District Courts to the Supreme Court are concerned those
provisions relate solely to the exercise by District Courts of the
jurisdiction conferred upon them by the Courts Ordinance 1899". (The emphasis
is mine)

Mr. Mustapha relied heavily on the case of _Kanagasunderam vs. Podihamine,_
(4). That was a case referred to a Bench of three Judges to decide the
preliminary objection taken on behalf of the Crown that no appeal lies to the
Supreme Court from an order of taxation of costs made under section 31(1) of
the Land Acquisition Ordinance (Chapter 203 of the 1938 revised Legislative
Enactments). On a consideration of a number of authorities cited by Crown
Counsel Howard C. J. (with Moseley S. P. J. and Soertsz J. agreeing) affirmed
the principle that the Supreme Court would have no right to entertain an
appeal where that power is not **expressly** given by statute; it .is not a
right that can be implied or inferred. Howard C.J. referred to the case of _A.
G. vs. Sillam,_ (5) where the Lord Chancellor (Lord Westbury) expressed
himself in the following terms:

"The creation of a new right of appeal is plainly an act which requires
legislative authority. The court from which the appeal is given, and the Court
to which it is given, must both be bound, and that must be the act of some
higher power. It is not competent to either tribunal, or to both collectively,
to create any such right. .. . . . . An appeal is the right of entering a
superior Court, and invoking its aid and interposition to redress the error of
the Court below. . . . .  ..  ".

**237**

The above dicta indicate the reason for a right of appeal being available only
if it is expressly conferred by Statute. Howard, G. J, also cited the
principle stated by Abbot. C.J. in _King vs. Joseph Hanson,_ (6) that,

although a certiorari lies, unless expressly taken away, yet an appeal does
not lie, unless expressly given by statute".

This dictum was affirmed in the _The Queen vs. Stock_ (7).

The above authorities were considered by Keuneman J. in _Vanderpoorten vs. The
Settlement Officer,_ where it was held that an appeal does not lie from a
decision under section 20 of the Waste Lands Ordinance No. 1 of 1 897, thus
re-affirming the principle that a right of appeal cannot be implied, but must
be given by express words. See also _Fernando v. Fernando (9)

_

Mr. Kanag-lswaran for the respondent strenuously sought to counter the
submissions of Mr. Mustapha by relying heavily on the provisions of section 23
of the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1 978 as amended by Act. No. 37 of 1979. This
provision reads as follows: "Any party who shall be dissatisfied with any
judgment decree or order pronounced by a District Court may (excepting where
such right is expressly disallowed) appeal to the Court of Appeal  " Counsel
contended that unless the right of appeal was expressly disallowed, a right of
appeal was always available against any judgment decree or order of the
District Court. He maintained that the language of section 23 of the
Judicature Act was wide enough to confer a right of appeal from the order of
the District Court in the instant case.

Section 23 of the present Judicature Act is similar to the Provisions
contained in section 73 of the repealed Courts Ordinance. Section 23 occurs in
Chapter IV of the Judicature Act which spells out the civil jurisdiction of
the District Courts. In my opinion section 23 of the Judicature Act provides
for a right of appeal in respect of judgments or orders of the District Court
made in the exercise of its ordinary, general, civil jurisdiction and

**238**

has no application to the special jurisdiction conferred on the District Court
as in the instant case. As already stated, the jurisdiction exercised by the
District Court in terms of sections 72(7) and 72(8) of the Act is the
jurisdiction of a Court of execution in respect of an extra judicial order. It
is basically not different from the jurisdiction exercised by the Magistrate's
Court in proceedings for the recovery of taxes in default under the Income Tax
Ordinance. It ,s settled law that there is no right of appeal from an order
made by a Magistrate's Court in such proceedings-vide _Commissioner' of Income
Tax vs. De Vos_ (10) and _De Silva vs. Commissioner of Income Tax_ (11). The
fact that there is no right of appeal does not mean that an aggrieved party is
left without a remedy, for revision is available.

At the hearing before us, we invited the attention of counsel to the principle
stated by Viscount Haldane in _National Telephone Co. Ltd vs. The Postmaster
General_ (12):

"When a question is stated to be referred to an established Court without
more, it, in my opinion imports that the ordinary incidents of the procedure
of that Court are to attach, and also that any general right of appeal from
its decisions likewise attaches".

Although it appeared at first that this principle ran counter to the
submissions advanced on behalf of the appellant, yet on a consideration of the
context in which the principle was enunciated, I am satisfied that it has no
application to the present case. The facts in the _National Telephone Co. Ltd.
case_ (supra) may be briefly stated as follows. By the Railway and Canal
Traffic Act of 1 888 the Railway and Canal Commission was established as a
Court of Record, and section 17 provided, for a right of appeal from the
Commission to the Court of Appeal except upon questions of fact or locus
standi. An agreement entered into between the National Telephone Co. Ltd. and
the Postmaster General provided that any dispute as to the value of the
equipment should be

**239**

referred, to the Commission. Disputes having arisen as to the value of the
equipment, the matter was referred to the Commission. The question for
decision was whether the reference to the Commission was a reference to the
Commission as a Court of Record or to the Commission acting as arbitrators. It
was held that the reference was to the Commission as a Court of Record and not
as arbitrators. Therefore the right of appeal to the Court of Appeal which was
specifically conferred by the Act establishing the Commission was available.
It was in this context that Viscount Haldane stated the principle set out
above.

I accordingly hold that there is no right of appeal from the order of the
District Court dated 28.11.83 allowing the application for an order of
delivery of possession of the premises. The District Court therefore had no
jurisdiction to entertain the application made by the respondent under the
provisions of section 763(2) of the Civil Procedure Code for stay of execution
pending appeal. The appeal is allowed. The Judgment of the Court of Appeal is
set aside, and the District Court is directed to reject the application for
stay of execution pending appeal made by the respondent.

In fairness to the Court of Appeal. It is right to add that- the question
argued before us by Counsel for the appellant was not raised nor argued before
the court. In these circumstances I make no order for costs of appeal in the
Supreme Court as well as in the Court of Appeal.

**

ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree

**

H. A. G. DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree

_

**Appeal allowed.**

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1984/3.html_  

