##  Pannaloka Thero v. Saranankara Thero - SLR - 523, Vol 2 of 1983 [1983]
LKSC 3; (1983) 2 Sri LR 523 (24 March 1983)

**  523**

  **PANNALOKA THERO**

**v.**

**SARANANKARA THERO**

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J. RATWATTE, J. AND COLIN‑THOME, J.

S.C. NO. 17/81

CA NO. 353/72 (F)

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 1150/ZL

16 SEPTEMBER 1982 AND 14 AND 15 OCTOBER 1982.



    Buddhist Ecclesiastical Law -Succession to Viharadhipathyship -Nomination by writing -Seniority -Res judicata -Civil Procedure Code Ss. 33, 34, 207 -Estopped by statutory bar under S 406(2) on abandonment.



In case D.C. Colombo 9357/L the plaintiff along with seven others had sued the
defendant for a declaration of title to the land on which the temple was
built, the buildings, the furniture and other articles within the buildings on
the land and for ejectment of the defendant and damages on the basis that the
subject ­matters was the "Pudgalika Property" of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero
and that he had gifted it to the plaintiffs. The defendant filed answer
claiming the property as _sangika_ and that he was the senior pupil of Rev.
Saranatissa and had succeeded to the Viharadhipathyship. Though the defendant
had by way of a claim in reconvention sought a declaration that he was the
Viharadhipathy, he did not raise or put in issue his claim that he was the
senior pupil and that he had succeeded to the Viharadhipathyship. The
plaintiff's action was dismissed as the property was _sangika._



The defendant‑respondent contends that owing to the failure of the plaintiff
to claim in case No 9357/L that he was the senior pupil of Saranatissa Thero
and the lawful Viharadhipathy of the temple, the judgment and decree in that
case operated as _res judicata_ against his present claim (Ss. 33, 34 and 207
C.P.C). So also the plaintiff‑appellant contended that by his failure to raise
in issue that he was the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa and the lawful
Viharadhipathy, he had abandoned his claim and he was barred by S. 406(2)
C.P.C.



# Held ‑



(1) The judgment and decree in D.C. 9357/L did not operate as _res judicata_
against the plaintiff, because his claim (along with 7 others) was on the
footing that the property was _pudgalika_ property of Rev, Saranatissa,
whereas the plaintiff's claims are based on the property being _sanghika._ The
rights claimed by the palintiff and the _facta probanda_ in that case and this
were different. The earlier action was based on ownership of property, while
this is based on



#  524



entitlement to an office. A person is not bound to sue on an alternative cause
of action. Further the palintiff could not have joined his claim to the
Viharadhipathyship along with the claims of the other plaintiffs.



(2) On the other hand too _res judicata_ will not operate against the
defendant for there had been no adjudication on his claim in the earlier
action.



But the failure of the defendant to put in issue his claim to the incumbency
amounts to an abandonment and S. 406(2) operates as a statutory bar to his
preferring the same claim now. This bar to a fresh suit in respect of the
subject matter of the former action which had been withdrawn without the
permission of Court is not based on the principle of _res judicata_ but is
attributable to the provisions in S. 406(2) of the C. P. C.



Yet although defendant is barred from making a claim no rule of _res judicata_
estops him from setting up the plea as a defence. Section 406(2) does not
extinguish a party's right. It only bars his remedy. He is not precluded from
resisting the plaintiff's claim on the basis of the right in which he founded
his claim in reconvention. The prohibition enacted by S. 406(2) applies to
actions and not to defences.



(3) Robing precedes ordination and the pupil who is the first to be robed is
the senior pupil who is entitled to succeed his predecessor.



A Viharadhipathy has the right to nominate his successor from amongst his
pupils, even a junior pupil over the head of the senior pupil.



A writing by which an incumbent of a Buddhist temple nominates a person to
succeed him on his death is in the nature of a testamentary disposition. Where
such writing is relied on to support nomination to incumbency the burden lies
on the party who relies on such document to establish to the satisfaction of
court that the document is the act and deed of the deceased and if
circumstances exist which arouse the suspicion of the court, as to the
genuineness of the document or as to the circumstances in which the document
is alleged to have been executed, the Court should be vigilant and jealous in
examining the evidence in support of the writing which it should not accept
and act upon unless the suspicion is removed and it is judicially satisfied,
as in the case of a last will, that the writing represents the true
disposition of the deceased.



The very legitimate suspicions expecting the execution of the document of
nomination and its belated disclosure by the defendant, taken together,
conduce to a high degree of improbability that the writing is authentic.



The defendant is liable in damages until the plaintiff is restored to and
quieted in possession. But the defendant being a pupil of Rev. Saranatissa is
entitled to reside at the vihare and cannot be evicted.



#  525

**  **

Cases referred to :



1. _Senaratne v. Jinaratne_ 42 NLR 361



2. _Chand Koer v. Pratab Singh_ 16 Col. 98 (F.C.)



3. _Samichi v. Peiris_ 16 NLR 257, 2261



4. _Ranhoti v. Singhe_ (1935) 14 C.L. Rec. 91



5. _Krishna v. Thevarajah_ 62 NLR 511



6. _Punnirulapillai v. Western India Oil Distribution Co. Ltd_. AIR 1948 Madras 270



7. _Jayawardena v. Aranolishamy_ 69 NLR 497



8. _Fernando v. Perera_ 25 NLR 197



9. _Radheyshian v. Nazir Khan_ AIR 1937 Ondh 394



10. _Dhammajothi v. Sobitha_ 16 NLR 408



11\. _Piyatissa Terunnanse v. Saranapala Terrunnanse_ 40 NLR 262



**APPEAL** from judgment of Court of Appeal.



_E. Amerasinghe, S.A._ with _L. C. Seneviratne, Lakshman Peiris_ and _Miss D.
Guniyangoda_ for plaintiff ‑appellant.



_H. L. de Silva, S.A._ with _S. Mahenthiran_ for defendant-respondent.



## Cur. adv. vult



March 24, 1983

  
SHARVANANDA, J.



The Plaintiff‑Appellant instituted this action on 23rd August 1963 against the
Defendant‑Respondent praying inter alia for a declaration that the
Plaintiff‑Appellant is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple called
'Wijayawardana Aramaya" situated at Skinner's Road North, Kotahena and that as
the controlling Viharadhipathi of the said temple and its temporalities he is
entitled to control and administer the same.



It is admitted that the founder and the first Viharadhipathi of this temple
was Gangulwitigama Saranatissa Thero and that the



#  526



temple is exempted from the operation of section 4(1) of the Buddhist
Temporalities Ordinance, but is governed by section 4(2). The said
Gangulawitiya Saranatissa Maha Thero died on the 27th August 1960. This
dispute that has arisen in this case is in respect of the succession to the
Viharadhipathyship of the said temple with the death of the said Saranatissa
Thero.



The Plaintiff‑Appellant based his claim to the Viharadhipathyship on two
grounds. He stated that according to deed No. 1125 dated 27.9.1958 (P6) the
said Saranatissa Maha Thero created a line of succession to the
Viharadhipathyship of the said temple, according to the rule known as
'Gnathisisya Paramparawa' and appointed the Plaintiff‑Appellant, who is a
blood relative of the said Saranatissa Maha Thero to succeed him as
Viharadhipathi. The Plaintiff claimed that the said deed P6 constitutes a
valid nomination and appointment of the Plaintiff to the office of
Viharadhipathi of the said temple in succession to the said Saranatissa Maha
Thero and that he was therefore a lawful Viharadhipathi of the said
Wijewardena Aramaya. The Plaintiff further claimed that, in any event, he
being the senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero he had succeeded the latter
priest as Viharadhipathi of the said temple.



The Defendant‑Respondent denied plaintiff's claim to the Viharadhipathyship of
the said temple and in turn claimed a declaration that he is entitled to the
incumbency of the said temple on the following grounds: ‑



(a) That he is a senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero and is thus lawful
Viharadhipathi of this temple.



(b) That the said Saranatissa Maha Thero had by writing dated 14.9.1959 (P6)
nominated and appointed him to succeed to the incumbency of this temple on his
death, the defendant had by virtue of the said document D2, succeeded as the
lawful Viharadhipathi of this temple.



(c) That, on the day following the nomination of Saranatissa Maha Thero, the
Sanga Sabha together with the Plaintiff‑



#  527



Appellant and other pupils of the deceased priest elected and nominated the
Defendant as the Viharadhipathi of this temple.



(d) The Plaintiff‑Appellant has by his conduct and consent to the said
election and/or nomination renounced and/or abandoned any right of the
plaintiff to the incumbency and that the plaintiff was thereby estopped from
making the present claim and cannot have and maintain this action.



The Plaintiff‑Appellant by his application denied that the defendant was a
senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero or that the writing dated 14.9.1959‑D2
was the act and deed of the deceased Saranatissa Maha Thero. He also denied
(a) that the Sanga Sabha nominated or elected the Defendant‑Respondent as the
Viharadhipathi or (b) that the Plaintiff or other pupils of the said
Saranatissa Maha Thero at any time acquiesced in or consented to the
appointment of the Defendant as an incumbent or (c) that he renounced or
abandoned any of his rights to the incumbency of this temple as alleged by the
Defendant.



The trial Judge has held against Plaintiff's claims based on deed No. 1125
dated 27.9.1958 to the Viharadhipathyship of the temple. This finding has been
affirmed by the Court of Appeal. I am in agreement with the conclusion of the
Courts below that the Plaintiff's claim to Viharadhipathyship of the temple
based on deed P6 cannot be sustained.



On the issue of the seniority, the trial Judge has accepted the evidence of
the Plaintiff which was supported by the 'Upasampada' Register (P2) and
documents P6 and P21, that he is the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha
Thero by robing and ordination. The Defendant was a pupil of Saranatissa Maha
Thero only by ordination. Under the Buddhist Ecclesiastical law pupilage is
conferred by robing or by ordination and a robed pupil is entitled to succeed
to the incumbency of the tutor, whether he has been ordained or not. Robing
precedes ordination and the pupil who is the first to be robed is the senior



#  528



pupil, who is entitled to succeed his predecessor. ( _Senaratne v. Jinaratne_
(1). On the basis of the dates and the names of the robing and ordaining
tutors given in the declaration P1, P2 and P3, the District Judge concluded
that the Plaintiff was the senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero. The Court
of Appeal has affirmed this finding. No valid reason to differ from this
conclusion has been advanced and I hold that the Plaintiff is the senior pupil
of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero.



The evidence and contention of the Defendant that he was appointed as
Viharadhipathi of the temple by the Sanga Sabha at a meeting held on the day
after the cremation of Saranatissa Maha Thero and that the Plaintiff had
consented to and acquiesced in his election has been rejected by the trial
Judge. On the evidence on record the findings of the trial Judge on this issue
cannot be faulted.



The main argument in this appeal related to the issue of _res judicata._ Both
Plaintiff and Defendant contended that the other party was precluded by the
earlier Judgment and Decree in case D.C. Colombo 9357/L from maintaining his
claim to the incumbency of the temple. In the earlier action 9357/L instituted
on the 14th day of December 1960, the Plaintiff‑Appellant, along with seven
other Plaintiffs had sued this Defendant for a declaration of title to the
said land on which the temple was built, the buildings, the furniture and
other articles within the buildings on the land and for ejectment of the
Defendant priest and for damages, on the basis that the subject‑matter was
'Pudgalika Property' of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero and that he had gifted the
property to the Plaintiffs by Deed No. 1125 dated 27th September 1958 (P1)
subject to the terms thereof. In that action the Defendant had filed answer
stating that the said land and premises constituted 'sangika' property and
that the deed P6 was invalid and had no effect in law. The Defendant has
further stated that he was the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatisssa Maha Thero
and had as such succeeded to the Viharadhipathiship of the temple on the death
of the Saranatissa Maha Thero and further prayed for a declaration that he was
the lawful Viharadhipathi of the said



#  529



temple and entitled to the premises. The said case No. 9357/L went to trial on
eleven issues all touching on Plaintiff's claim. The Defendant‑Respondent
raised the decisive issue whether the said temple property was Sangika
property and if so whether the plaintiff could maintain his action. The
defendant‑respondent, though in his answer, had by way of a claim in
reconvention prayed for a declaration that he was the lawful Viharadhipathi of
the temple, did not raise or put in issue his claim whether he was the senior
pupil and if so he had succeeded the said Saranatissa Maha Thero as
Viharadhipathi of the temple. By its judgment dated 3rd June 1963 the trial
Court held that the property was sangika property and dismissed the
Plaintiff's action in case No. 9357/L. This judgment was affirmed in appeal on
20th July 1966 by the Supreme Court.



On the basis of the judgment and decree case No 9357/L the failure of the
Defendant‑Respondent contends that due to the Plaintiff to claim in case No.
9357/L that he was the senior pupil of Saranatissa Thero and was the lawful
Viharadhipathi of the temple, the judgment and decree in the said case
operated as _res judicata_ against the plaintiff and that sections 33, 34 and
207 of the Civil Procedure Code taken together barred him from making the
present claim. On the other hand the Plaintiff-­Appellant contends, on the
basis of the pleadings, judgments and decree in case No. 9357/L, that though
the defendant had pleaded in case No. 9357/L that he was the senior pupil of
Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero and had become the lawfull Viharadhipathi of the
temple on the death of Saranatissa Maha Thero and had prayed for a declaration
that he was the lawful Viharadhipathi of this temple, he had failed to put
these matters in issue in case No. 9357/L and had thereby abandoned his claim,
and was barred by the provisions of section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code
from agitating the said issues in this case and make a claim that he was the
senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero and is the lawful Viharadhipathl of the
said temple.



The trial Judge upheld the argument of _res judicata_ set up by both parties
and dismissed the plaintiff's action and the claim in



#  530



reconvention of the defendant. Both parties appealed from the judgment of the
District Judge dismissing their claims to the Court of Appeal. The Court of
Appeal by its judgment dated 22.11.1979 set aside the District Judge's
determination on the pleas of _res judicata_ raised by both parties to the
case and held that the judgment and decree in case No. 9357/L did not operate
as _res judicata_ or as an estoppel against the claims of the Plaintiff and
Defendant in this Case.



Though the Court of Appeal affirmed the findings of the District Judge that
the Plaintiff was a senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero and that he
had not abandoned the claim for incumbency, it however held that Rev.
Saranatissa Maha Thero had by writing dated 14.9.1959‑D2 nominated and
appointed the Defendant‑Respondent to the incumbency of the temple and
temporalities and it set aside the findings of the trial Judge that the said
writing D2 was not the act and deed of Saranatissa Maha Thero. In the result
the Plaintiff's action has been dismissed with costs and the claim in
reconvention of the defendant has been upheld and the defendant‑respondent
declared the Viharadhipathi of the temple and its temporalities by the Court
of Appeal. The Plaintiff has preferred this appeal against the judgment of the
Court of Appeal.



In my view the District Judge misdirected himself in law in holding that the
judgment and decree in case No . 9357/L operated as _res judicata_ against the
Plaintiff and precluded him from maintaining this action. The
Plaintiff‑Appellant had along with seven others claimed in action No. 9357/L
title to the land on which the temple is built and the buildings thereon on
the footing that they constituted pudgalika property' of Saranatissa Maha
Thera, which were actually disposed of by him by Deed No. 1125‑P6 in their
favour and that the entirety to the said property had devolved on them
according to P6. On the other hand the claim of the Plaintiff‑Appellant in
this action is founded on the premise that the temple and its temporalities
constitute 'sangika property' and that as senior pupil of the last incumbent
he has succeeded as the Viharadhipathi. In this action the Plaintiff prays



#  531



for a declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple and
entitled as controlling Viharadhipathi of the said temple and temporalities,
to control and administer the same­. The District Judge has fallen into the
error of assuming that the cause of action in the present case is identical
with the cause of action in case No. 9357/L. The cause of action pleaded in
the earlier case No. 9357/L was defendant's denial of plaintiff's title to the
land and premises described in the schedule to the plaint in that case, namely
the land on which the temple is built with the buildings standing thereon
together with the furniture and other articles on the said building. The cause
of action pleaded by plaintiff in the present act on is defendant's denial of
plaintiff's status and office of Viharadhipathi of the temple. The _facta
probanda_ to establish the ingredients of the cause of action in each case are
different and the rights claimed in the two actions are not the. same. The
earlier action is based on ownership of the property on which the temple is
built, while the present action seeks to establish entitlement to the office
of the Viharadhipathi which carries with it the right to the possession and
control of the temple and its temporalities; The rights claimed are different
in nature and content, the grounds of title to the respective rights are
different and the causes of action are distinct. True that the defendant had
in the earlier action resisted the plaintiff's claim on the ground that the
land and the temple are 'sangika property' and that he was the lawful
Viharadhipathi of the temple and entitled, as such to be in possession of the
said premises and temple. But, as observed by Lord Watson in _Chand Koer v.
Pratab Singh_ (2) 16 Cal.98 (P.C.) " the cause of action has no relation
whatever to the defence which may be set up by the defendant, nor does it
depend upon the character of the relief prayed for the plaintiff. It refers
entirely to the grounds set forth in the plaint as the causes of action or in
other words, to the media upon which the plaintiff asks the Court to arrive at
a conclusion in his favour". This principle has been accepted and adopted by
our Courts (Vide _Samichi v. Peiris_ (3) _Ranhoti v. Singho_ (4) _Krishna v.
Thevarajah_ (5)). The plaintiff, though he could have set up, was not bound to
have set up, in the earlier action No. 9357/L, his



#  532



rights to the incumbency of the temple on the ground that he was the senior
pupil of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero; a person is not bound to sue on an
alternative cause of action; his failure to do so in the former action does
not bar the present action for declaration that as the senior pupil of
Saranatissa Maha Thero, he is the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple in suit:
The bar does not operate when the cause of action in the subsequent suit is
not the same as in the previous action. The defendant is plea of _res
judicata_ based on sections 34 and 207 of the Civil Procedure Code is
misconceived for, what would be _res judicata_ in terms of those sections are
rights and reliefs which could have been claimed or put in issue between the
parties upon the cause of action for which action No. 9357/L was brought.
Further the Plaintiff in the present case could not have joined in action No.
9357/L his personal claim to the Viharadhipathyship of the temple with the
claims of other plaintiffs in that action, to the land on which the temple was
built, which was the subject‑matter of that action ‑there would have been
misjoinder of parties and causes of action.



I shall now deal with the plaintiff's contention that since the defendant had
failed to put in issue in case No. 9357/L his claim to be declared as the
senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa, the resent Viharadhipathi of the temple, the
judgment and decree in the said case No. 9357/L operate as _res judicata_ in
respect of the said claim (issues 7 and 8 raised by plaintiff).



In my view no question of _res judicata_ is involved in respect of the
defendant's claims; for there has been no adjudication on the said claims in
the earlier action; the claims were not put in issue. Counsel for the
plaintiff however contended that what precludes the defendant from maintaining
his claims in this action is not any rule of _res judicata_ but the statutory
bar created by section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. He urged that the
defendant had in his answer in case No. 9357/L not only denied and resisted
the plaintiff's claim but had in fact made a claim in reconvention that he be
declared the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple in suit and entitled to the
premises. He submitted that



#  533



since the defendant had however refrained from framing any issue with respect
to his claim in reconvention and seeking adjudication on such claim in case
No. 9357/L, the defendant is consequently, precluded by the said provisions of
section 406(2) from reagitating that claim in the present action.



Counsel submitted that where a defendant makes a claim in reconvention, he is
presumed to be in the position of plaintiff in so far as the said claim for
reconvention is concerned. He based his submission on section 75(E) of the
Civil Procedure Code. The Defendant having put forward his claim in
reconvention was bound to put in issue and have decided all matters on which
he founded his claim in reconvention. The section provides that a claim in
reconvention duly set up in the answer has the same effect as a plaint in a
cross action. Counsel cited in support of his submission the case of the
_Punnirulapillai v. Western India Oil Distribution Co. Ltd.,_ (6) where it was
held that since a defendant who prefers a counter claim is in the position of
a plaintiff in respect of his claim in reconvention , Order 23 Rule 1(3) of
the Indian Civil Procedure Code which corresponds to section 406(2) of our
Civil Procedure Code would operate to preclude him from bringing a fresh
action for the same matter, the subject of his claim in reconvention., if he
withdraws or abandons his claim in reconvention without the permission of
Court.



The Court of Appeal has said that the defendant had in case No. 9357/L only
pleaded a defence and not set up a claim in reconvention and has reasoned that
sections 34, 207 and 406 of the Civil Procedure Code apply in the case of a
defendant only when a claim in reconvention is made by the defendant and not
where the defendant has only pleaded to the Plaint. In my view the Court of
Appeal is in error in holding that what the defendant had pleaded in his
answer in case No. 9357/L was by way of defence and not by way of counter
claim. In his answer in that case the defendant had in paragraph 8 not only
pleaded by way of defence that he was the senior pupil of Rev. Saranatissa
Maha Thero and the lawful Viharadhipathi of the said temple and entitled to
the premises and place of worship, but had in his



#  534



prayer asked not only that the plaintiff's action be dismissed but that he
(the defendant) be declared the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple and
entitled to the said premises. The defendant had thus sought not only to
justify his possession of the temple and the premises on the ground that he is
the lawful Viharadhipathi of the temple, but had proceeded to pray for a
declaration that he is the lawful Viharadhipathi and entitled to the premises
in suit, on the grounds set out in the body of the answer. The plaintiff, in
fact had filed his replication dated 4th May 1961, denying defendant's claim
in reconvention and prayed for its dismissal.



In my view the failure of the defendant in case No. 9357/L to put in issue his
claim to the incumbency amounts to an abandonment of his claim by the
defendant. The Court had not granted him permission for such abandonment.
Section 406(2) provides that if the plaintiff withdraws from the action or
abandons part of his claim without the permission of Court, he shall be
precluded from bringing a fresh action for the same matter or In respect of
the same part. The 'matter' referred to in section 406(2) does not mean the
property in respect of which an action is brought. It means the cause of
action in respect of which the action is brought. It includes the facts and
circumstances upon which the right to relief claimed by the party who
withdraws or abandons his claim depends. ( _Jayawardena v. Aranolishamy_ )
(7). As stated earlier, this bar to a fresh suit in respect of the
subject‑matter of the former action which had been withdrawn without the
permission of Court is not based on the principle of _res judicata_ but is
attributable to the provision enacted in section 406(2). The stringency of
this section is such, that the fact that an action was withdrawn before the
service of summons does not take the case out of the provisions of section
406; an action is instituted when a plaint is presented. _Fernando v. Pereira_
(8).



On the above view of the matter I agree with the contention of Counsel for the
plaintiff that the defendant in the present action is precluded by the
statutory bar created by section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code from
resurrecting his claim in reconvention



#  535



viz. that he be declared entitled to the incumbency of the temple on the
grounds which could have been put in issue in the earlier action 9357/L by way
of fresh action or fresh claim in reconvention against the plaintiff.



But defendant's claim is not irrelevant or purposeless in plaintiff's present
action. Since there had been no adjudication, no rule of _res judicata_ estops
the defendant from setting up the plea as defence. Section 406(2) does not
extinguish a party's right; it only bars his remedy; it does not operate to
preclude the party from resisting the plaintiff's claim on the basis of the
right in which he founded his claim in reconvention. The prohibition enacted
by section 406(2) of the Civil Procedure Code applies to actions and not to
defences. Where a defendant raises a plea of set off but withdraws it without
the permission of the Court, he will not be precluded from raising the same
plea by way of a defence in a subsequent suit against him. _Radheyshian v.
Nazir Khan_ (9).



On the above analysis of the question of _res judicata_ or estoppel by
statutory bar, raised by the parties, I am of the view that the defendant is
barred from maintaining his present claim in reconvention to have him self
declared Viharadhipathi of the temple, but he is not precluded or estopped
from resisting or defending plaintiff's claim on the grounds which support his
claim to Viharadhipathiship. For the purposes of his defence the defendant can
reagitate the issue of his Viharadhipathiship which he abandoned in action No.
9357/L. Hence if the defendant establishes in this case that either that he is
the senior pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero or that he had been appointed and
nominated by writing dated 14.9.1953‑D2 Saranatissa Maha Thero to succeed him
as incumbent of the temple, though the defendant will not be entitled to any
declaration that he is the lawful incumbent of the temple he can negate the
plaintiff's claim and have the plaintiff's action dismissed.



Finally there is the defence of the defendant that Saranatissa Maha Thero
appointed the defendant by writing dated 14th



#  536



September 1959 marked D2, to succeed him as Viharadhipathi of the temple. The
defendant is admittedly a pupil of Saranatissa Maha Thero, though not the
senior pupil. A Viharadhipathi has the right to nominate his successor from
amongst his pupils, even a junior pupil over the head of the senior pupil.
_Dhammajotihi v. Sobitha,_ (10), _Piyatissa Terunnanse v. Saranapala
Terunnanse_ (11). The Plaintiff has challenged the genuineness of the said
writing and has averred that it is not the act and deed of the deceased
Saranatissa Thero. The burden of establishing that the writing D2 was the act
and deed of the deceased lay on the defendant. The trial Judge has, on the
analysis of the evidence and the probabilities of the case, held that the
writing D2 is not the act and deed of Saranatissa Thero and that it conveyed
no right to the incumbency of the temple to the defendant. The Court of Appeal
has disagreed with the finding of the trial Judge and has held that the
writing D2 is a valid and authentic document and that it constitutes a
nomination of the defendant to succeed the writer to the incumbency of the
temple and its temporalities. Counsel for the plaintiff‑appellant has
relevantly urged that the Court of Appeal was not justified in reversing the
trial Judge's finding of primary fact. The question whether D2 is the act and
deed of the deceased is essentially a question of fact and a Court
sitting‑in­-appeal over the judgment of a trial Judge should to be slow to
interfere with the findings of fact reached by a trial Judge, unless it is
satisfied that such finding is against the weight of evidence or that no
person acting juducially and properly instructed as to the relevant law could
have come to such conclusion.



Apart from the signature appearing in D2 which, according to the evidence and
report of the handwriting expert was that of Rev. Saranatissa, the body of the
document is not in his handwriting; it is typed. The Court of Appeal has
observed that "there is complete absence of any suspicious features on the
face of the document itself. I regret that I cannot share this perception of
the document. I note an unexplained space between the body of the document and
the signature. The circumstances in which the document D2 was alleged to have
been executed and the probabilities of the case further caution against
accepting it at its face value.



#  537



According to the defendant, the deceased priest had, on his return from the
funeral of his brother from Ratnapura on 12.9.1959, that very night came to
his room at about 12.30 a.m. and indicated to him that he was going to devise
the Viharadhipathiship of the temple to the defendant and on the following
night at about 12.30 a.m. had bought the typed document D2 and read it to him
and Rev. Walana Ananda and handed over the document to Rev. Walana Ananda for
safe keeping, a little after midnight on that day. Defendant at one stage said
he identified Rev. Saranatissa's signature on D2, but later, in
cross‑examination tried to make out that the priest signed the document in his
presence. The trial Judge has quite justifiably pointed out that there are
several circumstances relating to the execution of the document, D2, which are
suspicious and which militate against its acceptance. I agree with the
observation of the trial Judge that "it seems most unlikely that the Nayake
priest could have come to the defendant's room at about 12.30 a.m on the very
night that he returned from Ratnapura in order to tell the defendant that he
had decided to change his mind in regard to the deed of gift of the Kotahena
temple to the plaintiff . . . Moreover one would ordinarily have expected the
Nayake priest to have summoned the junior priest to his room if he wished to
speak to him. The defendant's evidence that he came again the following night
at about the same time and read D2 to him and Rev. Walana Ananda, who had been
got down by the defendant on the 'instructions of the Nayake priest sound too
artificial to be believed‑D2 is a typed document, there is no typewriter in
the temple, it would have been typed elsewhere. It must necessarily have been
done on the 13th, since the document was handed over to Rev. Ananda for safe
keeping a little after midnight on that day, but the document strangely bears
the date of 14th September." I agree with the District Judge that the
circumstances surrounding the execution of the document D2 as deposed to by
the defendant are highly suspicious and questionable. It is a telling
circumstance that though the defendant was well aware of the execution and
existence of the document D2, by which the incumbency was devised to him he
had not in the earlier case No. 9357/L based



#  538



his claim to the incumbency on the writing D2 dated 14.9.59, nor was the said
writing referred to in the defendant's pleadings in that case. This document
surfaced only in the defendant's list of documents dated 5th July 1961\. As
the trial Judge has quite rightly observed "there is no reason why the
defendant should have concealed the existence of D2, if it was a genuine and
untainted document until after the trial in the earlier case commenced."
Further the defendant had not produced this document before the Sanga Saba
which he said was convened immediatly after the funeral at Ratnapura in order
to decide the succession to the Viharadhipathiship of the two temples at
Pelmadulla and Kotahena. The defendant did not produce D2 even when the
plaintiff came to Kotahena temple to assert his rights to the
Viharadhipathiship, shortly after the funeral of Rev. Saranatissa Maha Thero.
He has also not mentioned the existence of the writing in his complaint to the
Police dated 18.9.60. -The trial Judge's observation "all these circumstances
confirm the suspicious and questionable character of the writing D2" is, in
the perspective of the case, apt and well‑founded.



A writing such as D2 by which an incumbent of a Buddhist temple nominates a
person to succeed him on his death is in the nature of a testamentary
disposition. Where such writing is relied on to support nomination to
incumbency the burden lies on the party who relies on such document to
establish to the satisfaction of Court that the document is the act and deed
of the deceased and if circumstances exist which arouse the suspicions of the
Court, as to the genuineness of the document or as to the circumstances in
which the document is alleged to have been executed, the Court should be
vigilant and jealous in examining the evidence in support of the writing which
it should not accept and act upon unless the suspicion is removed and it is
judicially satisfied, as in the case of a Last Will, that the writing
represents the true disposition of the deceased.



In my view the very legitimate suspicions respecting the execution of the
document D2, and its belated disclosure by defendant, taken together, conduce
to a high degree of



#  539



improbability that the writing is authentic. The acceptance of the
authenticity of the writing depends on defendant's evidence. It is to be noted
that the defendant's evidence on a number of matters had rightly been rejected
by the District Judge. In the circumstances one cannot, with confidence act on
defendant's evidence and accept the document as the act and deed of the
deceased priest which it purports to be.



The Court of Appeal was not justified in reversing the finding respecting the
validity and genuineness of the document D2 by the trial Judge.



I therefore set aside the judgment of the Court of Appeal dismissing the
plaintiff's action and allowing the defendant's claim in reconvention. I also
set aside the judgment of the District Judge dismissing the plaintiff's action
with costs. I allow the appeal of the plaintiff‑appellant with costs and enter
judgment for the plaintiff‑appellant declaring him the lawful Viharadhipathi
of the Wijewardana Aramaya, Skinner's Road North, Kotahena, entitled as
controlling Viharadhipathi of the said temple and its temporalities, to
control, administer and manage the same; dismiss the defendant's claim in
reconvention. The Plaintiff as Viharadhipathi is entitled to be in possession
of the temple and the temporalities. The defendant­ respondent had wrongfully
denied the plaintiff's rights of the Viharadhipathiship of the temple and its
temporalities and has been wrongfully in possession of the temple and its
temporalities and collecting the rents therefrom. The plaintiff in his
evidence has assessed the damage that he has suffered by defendant's wrongful
possession at Rs. 450/-a month. The defendant has not suggested that this
amount is excessive. I direct the defendant to pay the plaintiff‑appellant a
sum of Rs. 400/-per month, from the date of the plaint i.e. 23rd August 1963
until the plaintiff is restored to and quieted in possession of the said
temple and its temporalities. Since the defendant is admittedly a pupil of
Saranatissa Thero and as such entitled to reside at the Vihare. I do not order
the ejectment of the Defendant and I direct the defendant to put the Plaintiff
in quiet possession of the temple



#  540



and its temporalities. The defendant respondent will pay the
plaintiff‑appellant the latter's costs in this Court, in the Court of Appeal
and in the District Court.



**RATWATTE, J.** -I agree.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J. **-I agree.



Appeal allowed.  


_Defendant's claim in reconvention dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1983/3.html_  

