##  Nirmala De Mel v. Seneviratne and Others - SLR - 569, Vol 2 of 1982 [1982]
LKSC 3; (1982) 2 Sri LR 569 (2 August 1982)

# 569

**  NIRMALA DE MEL**

**v.**

**SENEVIRATNE AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT

SHARVANANDA, J., RATWATTE, J., AND VICTOR PERERA, J.

S.C. 8/81, C.A. 923/73

JUNE 28 AND JULY 1, 1982.



    Appeal ‑ Supreme Court Rules 16 and 35 ‑ Lacuna ‑ Substitution on death of petitioner after grant of leave to appeal but before lodging appeal ‑ Interpretation Ordinance, section 8(1) ‑ Computation of time ‑ Evidence Ordinance, section 109.



One Mrs. Annie Jayasuriya was the landlady and Attorney for the other
Co‑owners of premises No. 382, 384 and 386 Main Street, Panadura. Her tenant
was one Paulus who carried on a pharmacy and grocery business on the aforesaid



# 570



premises. Paulus sold the business to the petitioner‑respondent and
petitioner‑res­pondent went into occupation on 21.10.71. Annie Jayasuriya
refused to accept him as tenant and complained to the Police. But
petitioner‑respondent stayed on and obtained an order from the Rent Board on
9.9.72 that he was the tenant. On appeal by Mrs. Annie Jayasuriya the Board of
Review set aside the order of the Rent Board. The petitioner‑respondent
thereupon applied for a Writ of Certiorari claiming there was an error of law
on face of the record.



Annie Jayasuriya died on 26.4.76 and Mrs. Cynthia de Mel, her executrix was
made respondent. Cynthia de Mel died on 28.1.81. Miss Nirmala de Mel sole heir
to Cynthia de Mel and sole heir to 1/6 share of premises owned by Annie
Jayasuriya applied to be substituted on 16.2.81 and also filed petition of
appeal praying that the order of the Court of Appeal dated 18.12.80 be set
aside.



The petitioner‑respondent made a preliminary objection stating that Nirmala de
Mel had no status to file appeal before the Order of Court to substitute her
and also that the appeal was out of time.



# Held ‑



(1)        That though the petition of Appeal was filed by the substituted
respondent petitioner prior to being ordered to be substituted such filing
should, because there was a lacuna in the Supreme Court Rules, be regarded as
regular.



(2)        That the petition of Appeal filed on Monday the next working day
was within time.



(3)        That the burden to prove that tenancy with Paulus had ceased and
that his tenancy was accepted was on the tenant who was asserting it.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.



_H.L. de Silva, S.A.,_ with _M.Y.M. Faiz_ for the
substituted‑respondent‑appel­lant.



_K Shinva_ with _Kithsiri Gunaratne, Miss. S.M. Seneviratne and Salilva
Mathew_ for the petitioner‑respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._



August 2, 1982.



**SHARVANANDA, J.**



The petitioner‑respondent made an application to the Rent Board Panadura, to
have the authorised rent of premises bearing Nos. 382, 384, 386 & 388, Main
Street, Panadura, determined and for the grant of a certificate of tenancy
under section 35 of the Rent Act. He made one Mrs. Annie Jayasuriya, the
landlady and Attorney for all co‑owners of the aforesaid premises, ‑respondent
to the application. The Rent Board by its order dated 9th September, 1972 held
that the petitioner‑respondent was the tenant of Mrs. Jayasuriya and directed
a certificate in terms of section 35(2) of the Rent Act No. 7 of 1972 to be
issued to him Mrs. Jayasuriya appealed against the



**571**



said order to the Board of Review established under section 40 of the Rent
Act. The latter, by its decision dated 13th September, 1973 set aside the
order of the Rent Board of Panadura. The petitioner-­respondent, thereupon,
made an application for the issue of a Writ of Certiorari quashing the
decision of the Board of Review, on the ground that there was an error of law
on the "face of the record." Whilst the said proceedings No. 923/73 were
pending in the then Supreme Court, Mrs. Annie Jayasuriya, who was the 4th
respondent to the said proceedings died on the 26th of April 1976. Thereafter
on an application for substitution by the petitioner‑respondent, M/s. Neville
E.S. Fernando, Ronald de Mel and Terrance Fernando were substituted as added
respondents in the room of the deceased Mrs. Annie Jayasuriya. In addition
Mrs. Amabel Cynthia de Mel was made a respondent as an executrix of the
premises in suit after Mrs. Jayasuriya's death.



The Court of Appeal by its order dated 18.12.1980 allowed the Writ and made
order quashing the decision of the Rent Board of Review dated 13th September
1973, on the ground that there was an error on the "face of the record" in the
decision of the Board of Review. On 15.1.81 the Court of Appeal granted leave
to appeal to this Court, to the substituted‑ respondent to appeal against its
order dated 18.12.80. On the 28th January 1981 Mrs. Amabel Cynthia de Mel, 4th
substituted respondent‑petitioner died. Thereupon Miss Nirmala de Mel,
claiming to be the sole heir to 1/6 share of the premises in suit owned by the
said Mrs. Jayasuriya and as the sole heir to late Mrs. Cynthia de Mel the 4th
substituted respondent petitioner and as the Attorney representing the
co‑owners of the premises in suit, applied to this Court, on 16.2.81 to be
substituted in the room of the substituted respondent‑petitioner and also
filed on that date, namely 16.2.81, petition of appeal praying that the order
of the Court of Appeal dated 18.12.80 be set aside.



By its order dated 20th November 1981 this Court made order that Miss Nirmala
de Mel be substituted in place of the late Mrs. Jayasuriya and reserved to the
petitioner‑ respondent the right to take in due course his objection that the
appeal was out of time.



At the hearing of the appeal preliminary objection was taken by Counsel for
the petitioner‑respondent that:‑



a.         The appeal was not properly constituted and was irregular as the
petition of appeal was filed by Miss Nirmala de Mel, the substituted
respondent‑appellant, along with her



#  572



application for substitution, prior to order being made by this Court
substituting her. It was contended that the substituted‑respondent‑appellant
had no status to file the petition of appeal dated 16.2.81, prior to any order
being made by this Court substituting her as a legal representative.



b.         In any event that appeal was filed out of time, in breach of rule
35 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978 which provides that "where a Court of
Appeal grants leave to appeal, an appeal to the Supreme Court shall be made
within 30 days of the delivery of the judgment granting such leave."



In this case leave was granted on 15.1.81 and the petition of appeal was filed
on 16.2.81.



Rule 16 of the Supreme Court Rules provides for substitution being made "where
at any time _after the lodging of an application for special leave to appeal,_
the record becomes defective by reason of the death or change of status of a
petitioner to an application." And Rule 34 provides for substitution where at
any time _after lodging of an appeal_ the record becomes defective for similar
reasons. There appears to be a lacuna, in the rules for the case where at any
time after leave being granted by the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court the
applicant dies before an appeal to the Supreme Court could be lodged, within
the period stipulated by Rule 35.



Counsel contended that according to Rule 35, the petition of appeal should
have been filed latest on 14th February 1981, which fell on a Saturday, a day
on which the office was closed. In this connexion section 8(1) of the
Interpretation Ordinance embodies a relevant rule, of interpretation, It
states that ‑



"Where a limited time from any date or from the happening of any event is
appointed or allowed by any written law for the doing of any act or taking
proceedings in a Court or office and the last day of the limited time is a day
on which the Court or office is closed, then the act or proceedings shall be
construed as done or taken in due time if it is done or taken on the next day
thereafter on which the Court or office is open."



On the application of this rule of interpretation it would appear that the
petition of appeal filed on Monday the 16th February 1981 which was the next
working day was within time.

**  **

**573**



In my view the substituted‑respondent‑appellant has taken all steps within her
power to perfect her appeal and to conform to the law. Justice requires that
she shall not suffer because of a lacuna in the Supreme Court Rules. Though
the petition of appeal was filed by the substituted‑respondent‑appellant prior
to her being ordered to be substituted, such filing should, in the
circumstances, be regarded, nunc pro tunc, as regular.



The preliminary objections raised by Counsel for the petitioner respondent are
therefore overruled.



At all material times, prior to the petitioner coming into the picture, one
Paulus was admittedly the tenant of the premises paying a monthly rent of Rs.
200/‑, under the deceased Mrs. Annie Jayasuriya. The said Paulus was carrying
on the business of pharmacy and groceries under the name and style of 'Victory
Pharmacy' in the said premises Nos. 382, 384, 386, 388, Panadura. The
petitioner‑respondent purchased the business from Paulus and went into
occupation of the premises on 21.10.71. It is admitted that he went into
occupation of the premises without any prior agreement with the landlady Mrs.
Jayasuriya. When the landlady became aware that the petitioner‑res­pondent had
gone into occupation of the premises she objected to his doing so and made a
complaint to the Police on the 29th October 1971. According to the
petitioner‑respondent he had subsequently discussed with her the purchase of
the property. When his negotiations failed, he had negotiations with her about
the tenancy. Petitioner respondent stated that the landlady only wanted the
rent of Rs. 200/- ­per month be paid in cash to her, and that he agreed and
paid for the month of October. He subsequently paid the rent for the months of
November, December and January. He produced his counterfoils from his cheque
book to show that he had cashed cheques for Rs. 200/‑ and paid the rent to
Mrs. Jayasuriya. He produced the cash book and ledger of his business where
entries had been made for the payment of rent for the premises to Mrs.
Jayasuriya. According to the petitioner‑respondent, as Mrs. Jayasuriya wrongly
refused to accept rent for February 1972 thereafter those rents were deposited
in the Urban Council, Panadura. Mrs. Jayasuriya has denied these payments to
her. According to her she never received any payment of rent from the
petitioner‑respondent and she has not accepted him as her tenant. Paulus
continued to be her tenant of the premises even after the sale of his business
to the petitioner‑respondent. The petitioner did not produce any receipts from
Mrs. Jayasuriya for payment of any rent, nor any document acknowledging him as
her



# 574



tenant. On his own showing no advance rent was demanded by Mrs. Jayasuriya,
nor was paid to her. According to him when the negotiations for purchase
failed the landlady did not ask for any enhanced rent but was satisfied with
the sum of Rs. 200/‑ as monthly rent as paid by Paulus earlier. Even though
she had originally objected to the petitioner's occupation of the premises
without her consent and had even made a complaint to the Police, it is strange
that he had not chosen to get any writing from her to secure his tenancy.



Mrs. Jayasuriya's case is that Paulus continued to be the tenant and was
paying that rent to her. She produced counterfoils of receipts for payments of
rent for the relevant months by Paulus. It was suggested to her that after the
sale of his business to the, petitioner respondent, Paulus could not have had
any interest in paying rent for the premises where the business has been
carried on. Everything depended on the arrangement between the petitioner and
Paulus and what assurance Paulus gave to petitioner about the tenure of the
premises. Mrs. Jayasuriya had told the Board that she was not calling Paulus
as a witness for her to corroborate what she said, namely that he continued to
be the tenant of the premises. In the state of the evidence before the Board
the materiality of Paulus's evidence cannot be over emphasised. It was
contended by the petitioner‑res­pondent that the Board should draw an adverse
inference from the fact that Paulus was not summoned to give evidence by the
landlady. It was not explained why he himself could not have summoned Paulus
to support him, that he had ceased to be tenant.



The Rent Board speculated, in the absence of any evidence from Paulus, whether
Paulus



"would have paid rent for the premises occupied by 'Victory Pharmacy', now in
the occupation of the applicant when he had already sold it to Mendis and was
getting ready to leave the Island for good."



and held that it was more probable that Mrs. Jayasuriya accepted the
petitioner‑respondent as her tenant. On appeal, the Board of Review commented
adversely on the Rent Board's observation that the landlady had not summoned
Paulus to give evidence on her behalf. It stated that there was no burden cast
on the appellant (the landlady Mrs. Jayasuriya) to prove that there was no
tenancy agreement between her and the applicant and that the applicant should
have summoned Paulus to substantiate his allegation. The Board of Review



**575**



therefore allowed Mrs. Jayasuriya's appeal. The Court of Appeal has held that
the most important fact which arose for consideration was whether the rent had
in fact been paid to Mrs. Jayasuriya by Paulus or by the
petitioner‑respondent. It concluded that



"Having regard to the respective positions taken by the 4th respondent (Mrs.
Jayasuriya) and the petitioner the answer to the question whether it was
Paulus or petitioner who actually paid the rent was, if not decisive, at least
a very important consideration in deciding whether petitioner is a tenant of
the 4th respondent or not. Thus any presumption to be drawn upon the failure
to call Paulus to testify before the Rent Board ‑having regard to the relevant
circumstances, ought to be drawn, if at all against 4th respondent, rather
than against the petitioner. "



The judgment of the Court of Appeal proceeds that the evidence showed that 4th
respondent (Mrs. Jayasuriya) was aware at the time she was carrying on
negotiations with the petitioner‑respondent for the sale of the said premises
to him, that it was he who was carrying on business of the said premises and
it might therefore have been contended that it was for her to negative any
intention on her part to accept the petitioner as the tenant,. "holding that
there was an error in the order of the Board of Review on the 'face of the
record,' " It allowed the application of the petitioner‑respondent.



In my view there is no justification for the quashing of the decision of the
Board of Review by the Court of Appeal. It was the petitioner‑respondent who
was claiming the relief of a certificate of tenancy, hence it was for him to
establish that he was the tenant of the premises on 21st October 1971 without
any prior agreement with the landlady. Apart from his self‑serving documents
there is nothing to support his oral evidence that having entered into
occupation of  the premises unlawfully, he had regularized the occupation by
entering into an agreement with the landlady. It was for him to establish that
though he came to occupy the premises without the consent of Mrs. Jayasuriya,
he had subsequently become the tenant of the premises and not for Mrs.
Jayasuriya to satisfy the Rent Board that she persisted in her intention of
not accepting the petitioner as her tenant. He has to prove that Paulus has
ceased to be tenant and that he had succeeded him as tenant of the premises.
It was the case of Mrs. Jayasuriya that Paulus continued to be her tenant even
though he had sold the business to the petitioner‑respondent. Section 109 of
the Evidence Ordinance provides that when the question is whether the persons
are landlord and tenant and it has



# 576



been shown that they have been acting as such the burden of proving that they
have ceased to stand to each other in the relationship is on the person who
affirms it.



The burden of proof in the circumstances of the case therefore rested on the
petitioner‑respondent to show that Paulus and Mrs. Jayasuriya, has ceased to
stand in the relationship of landlord and tenant and that though he had
originally got into occupation of the premises without prior arrangement with
the landlady of Paulus, he had subsequently regularised his occupation and was
accepted as tenant in the place of Paulus by the landlady. In the
circumstances of the case it was for the petitioner‑respondent to have called
Paulus who let him into the premises to support his evidence that Paulus had
ceased to be the tenant of the premises.



In my view there was no error in the order of the Board of Review to justify
its being quashed.



I allow the appeal, and set aside the order of the Court of Appeal and restore
the order of the Board of Review dated 13th September 1973 reversing the
decision of the Rent Board.



The petitioner‑respondent shall pay the substituted respondent‑ap­pellant a
sum of Rs.2,500/‑ as costs of this appeal and of the application before the
Court of Appeal.



**RATWATTE, J**. ‑ I agree.



**VICTOR PERERA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/3.html_  

