##  Viking Tours Ltd. v. The Finance Co, Ltd. and Another - SLR - 116, Vol 1
of 1981 [1981] LKSC 3; (1981) 1 Sri LR 116 (20 November 1981)

**116**

**Viking Tours Ltd.  
v.  
The Finance Co. Ltd. and Another**

**SUPREME COURT.  
SAMARAKOON, C. J., WEERARATNE, J. AND SHARVANANDA, J.  
S.C. 76/80-C.A. APPLICATION 986/79 -M.C. COLOMBO (FORT) 29688  
OCTOBER 15, 1981.  
**  
_Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973, section 102-Disposal of
property seized by police officer-Scope of inquiry to be held by Magistrate-
Hire-purchase agreement-Seizure of vehicle by Finance Company for default-
Whether validity of such agreement can be adjudicated upon in these
proceedings -Code of Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979, section 431.  
_  
On application being made by the Police for the disposal of an omnibus alleged
to have been stolen from the appellant -company, the vehicle was claimed by
the 1st respondent company as wall, on the basis that they had seized it under
a hire purchase agreement entered into with the appellant. After the said
vehicle had been seized on termination of the hire-purchase agreement, the
Police had taken custody of it on a complaint of robbery made by the appellant
and produced it in the Magistrate's Court. At the inquiry into the application
made by the Police, the appellant -company while admitting the hire-purchase
agreement contended that it was merely a "cover" for a money lending
transaction between the parties and not a valid hire-purchase agreement. The
Magistrate accepted this position and taking the view that the Court was
entitled to look into the true nature of the transaction between the parties
held that the appellant was entitled to the vehicle.  
  
On an application in revision made to the Court of Appeal, this order was set
aside and the vehicle directed to be handed over to the 1st respondent. The
appellant preferred an appeal to the Supreme Court from this order.  
  
**Held  
**  
The Magistrate exceeded his jurisdiction under section 102 of the
Administration of Justice Law (which corresponds to section 431 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act, No. 15 of 1979) in embarking on an inquiry into the
validity or genuineness of the hire-purchase agreement. A Magistrate does not
exercise a civil jurisdiction under section 102 and cannot go behind the hire-
purchase agreement and re-open the transaction and grant relief in law or
equity, once it is admitted that the parties entered into a hire-purchase
agreement. Accordingly the judgment of the Court of Appeal must be affirmed.  
  
**APPEAL** from a judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_E. D. Wickramanayake, with M. Hussain,_ for the 2nd claimant-petitioner-
respondent.  
  
_V. S. A. Pullenayagam, with D. S. de Silva and Miss C. Abeysekera,_ for the
1st claimant-petitioner-respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**117**

November 20, 1981  
  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  
**  
The scope of an inquiry under section 102 of the Administration of Justice Law
(which correspondents to section 431 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act,
No. 15 of 1979) arises in this case. Section 102 (1) provides that:  
  
"The seizure by any Police officer of property alleged or suspected to have
been stolen or found under circumstances which create suspicion of the
commission of any offence shall be forthwith reported to a Magistrate who
shall make such order as he thinks fit in respect of the delivery of such
property to the person entitled to possession thereof, or if such person
cannot be ascertained in respect of the custody and production of such
property."  
  
An application was made by the Police under the above section for the disposal
of an omnibus bearing No. 23 Sri 7698 alleged or suspected to have been stolen
from Viking Tours Ltd. On 5th October, 1978, the vehicle in question was
removed from the possession of Viking Tours Ltd. by The Finance Co. Ltd. The
Finance Co. Ltd. claimed that they seized the vehicle under a hire-purchase
agreement dated 21st December, 1976, entered into between them and the 2nd
Claimant. Paragraph 13 (1) of the agreement provided that:  
  
"If during the continuance of the hiring, the hirer (Viking Tours Ltd.) make
default in punctually paying any monthly hiring rental (whether demanded or
not) as and when it falls due, the owners (The Finance Co. Ltd.) should be
entitled, should they think fit, to terminate the hiring either by giving the
hirer notice in writing of such termination or by recovery of the vehicle
without giving any such notice".  
  
By the said agreement, Viking Tours Ltd. agreed and undertook to pay a monthly
hiring rental of Rs. 6,536.70, payable on or before the 21st day of each
month, commencing in the month of January 1977. The hirer paid only a sum of
Rs. 5,000 against the monthly rental and defaulted in the payment of the other
rentals. The Finance Co. Ltd., as it lawfully might, terminated the said hire-
purchase agreement on 26th July, 1977, and demanded from the hirer the return
of the said vehicle. Viking Tours Ltd. having failed to return the said
vehicle, The Finance Co. Ltd., in terms of the said agreement, seized the said
vehicle No. 23 Sri 7698 on 5th

**118**

October, 1978, from the custody of the appellant. Thereafter, on a complaint
of robbery being made by Viking Tours Ltd., the Police took over the custody
of the said vehicle from the possession of The Finance Co. Ltd. and produced
same in the Magistrate's Court of Colombo and made application to the said
Court for the disposal of the said vehicle in terms of section 102 (1) of the
Administration of Justice Law.  
  
At the inquiry into the application of the Police, The Finance Co. Ltd (the
1st claimant) and Viking Tours Ltd. (the 2nd claimant) made claims to the said
vehicle. At the inquiry, Mr. A. S. Gunatilleka, a Director of the 2nd
claimant- company, gave evidence and stated that Viking Tours Ltd. imported
the said vehicle and that the Company needed Rs. 11/2 lakhs for the payment of
debts incurred in connexion with the importation of the said vehicle, which
was valued at about Rs. 7 lakhs, and in connexion with the obtaining of this
money, the Company entered into the hire-purchase agreement P2. He further
stated that The Finance Co. Ltd. was willing to give them Rs. 11/2 lakhs "if
we sign a certain agreement". He further stated that at a meeting of share-
holders in December 1976, it was decided to enter into a hire-purchase
agreement with The Finance Co. Ltd. He admitted that he signed on behalf of
the 2nd claimant the said hire- purchase agreement P2. The 2nd claimant
however contended that the agreement P2 was not a valid hire-purchase
agreement, but was a 'cover' for a money-lending transaction, whereby the said
vehicle was given as security for the loan of Rs, 150,000.  
  
By his order, the Magistrate accepted the submission of the 2nd claimant and
held that "there was no genuine hire-purchase agreement and that the
transaction was a money-lending transaction where Viking Tours Ltd. borrowed
Rs. 1 1/2 lakhs on the security of the vehicle which was worth about Rs. 6 or
Rs. 7 lakhs". His view was that in an inquiry under section 102, the Court was
entitled to probe into the true nature of the transaction between the
claimants and was not hamstrung by the document which purports to set out the
agreement between the parties. On the view taken by him of the circumstances
of the transaction, he held that the 2nd claimant, Viking Tours Ltd., was
entitled to the vehicle.  
  
By his order, the Magistrate accepted the submission of the 2nd claimant and
held that "there was no genuine hire-purchase

**119**

agreement and that the transaction was a money-lending transaction where
Viking Tours Ltd. borrowed Rs. 1 1/2 lakhs on the security of the vehicle
which was worth about Rs. 6 or Rs. 7 lakhs". His view was that in an inquiry
under section 102, the court was entitled to probe into the true nature of the
transaction between the claimants and was not hamstrung by the document which
purports to set out the agreement between the parties. On the view taken by
him of the circumstances of the transaction, he held that the 2nd claimant,
Viking Tours Ltd., was entitled to the vehicle.  
  
The Finance Co. Ltd. thereupon moved the Court of Appeal to revise the said
order, and the Court of Appeal by its order dated 29th September, 1980, set
aside the order of the Magistrate and directed the vehicle to be handed over
to The Finance Co. Ltd. (the 1st claimant). Viking Tours Ltd. (the 2nd
claimant) has preferred this appeal from the said order.  
  
At the hearing before us, counsel for the 2nd claimant appellant submitted
that the transaction between the appellant and The Finance Co. Ltd. was a
money- lending transaction and that the said hire-purchase agreement P2
entered into by both the claimants was a 'sham' to get over the provisions of
the Money Lending Ordinance. He contended that it was competent for the
Magistrate at an inquiry under section 102 of the Administration of Justice
Law to go into the question whether there was a genuine hire-purchase
agreement and that he could go behind the agreement to ascertain the rights of
parties to the said vehicle.  
  
The above contention of counsel cannot be accepted. In my view, the Magistrate
exceeded his jurisdiction under section 102 of the Administration of Justice
Law in embarking on an inquiry into the validity or genuineness of the hire-
purchase agreement and into questions whether the said agreement reflected the
true nature of the transaction between the parties. The jurisdiction that the
Magistrate exercises under section 102 is not a civil jurisdiction. The
Magistrate is not endowed with the civil jurisdiction of a District Judge. He
is not entitled, in an inquiry under section 102, to go behind the hire-
purchase agreement and re-open the transaction and grant relief in law or
equity. The 2nd defendantÂ­-claimant- appellant admitted being a party to the
hire-purchase transaction. It is not a case of the Company denying being a
party and hence the parties are bound by the agreement until it is set

**120**

aside by a competent Court of civil jurisdiction. The question of avoidance or
annulment of the hire-purchase agreement is outside the ambit of the inquiry
under section 102 of the Administration of Justice Law. Different
considerations, however, will apply if a claimant denies being a party to the
agreement or if the agreement is illegal. In this case the Magistrate has
misdirected himself when he proceeded to hold that the agreement between the
parties was not a hire-purchase agreement but was a cloak for a moneyÂ­ lending
transaction. It was not open to the 2nd claimant to agitate before the
Magistrate issues relating to reliefs which only a civil Court is competent to
grant.  
  
The order of the Court of Appeal is affirmed and the appeal of the 2nd
claimant- appellant is dismissed.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C.J. -I** agree.  
  
**WEERARATNE, J.- I** agree.  
  
_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/3.html_  

