##  Raninkumar v. Union Assurance Limited. - SLR - 92, Vol 2 of 2003 [2003]
LKSC 3; (2003) 2 Sri LR 92 (24 July 2003)

**92**

**RANINKUMAR  
v.  
UNION ASSURANCE LIMITED**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, C.J  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. AND  
EDUSSURIYA, J.  
SC (CHC) APPEAL NO. 46/99  
H.C. COLOMBO (CIVIL)  
CASE NO 55/96(1)  
29TH APRIL AND 6TH AND 27 JUNE 2003  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Validity of notice of appeal filed personally by
appel­lant and not by his registered attorney - Section 754(4) of the Code -
Defect not curable under section 759(2).  
  
_Section 754(4) of the Civil Procedure Code ('The CPC") requires that "the
notice of appeal shall be presented to the court of first instance by the
party-appellant or his registered attorney within a period of 14 days " in the
instant case the appellant himself had signed the notice of appeal and not his
registered attorney.  
  
**Held :  
**  
The lapse by the appellant's failure to present the notice of appeal by his
reg­istered attorney goes to the basic validity of the notice and as such is
not cur­able in terms of the provisions of section 759(2) of the Code which
excludes the application of that section to any provision which prescribes the
period within which the act or thing is to be done.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Fernando v Fernando_ (1997) 3 SRI LR 1  
  
2\. _Hameed v Deen_ (1988) 2 SRI LR 1  
  
3\. _Sameen v Abeywickrama_ 61 NLR 553  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court of Colombo.

**93**

  
Gamini Marapana, PC with Navin Marapana for appellant.  
  
_  S.L. Gunasekera with Kushan De Alwis _for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

July 24, 2003  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J.  
**  
When this appeal was taken up for hearing, the learned Counsel for the
respondent invited this Court to reject the appeal in as much as the appellant
himself has signed the notice of appeal and not his registered attorney-at-
law.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant then proceeded to make
submissions on this question and at the end of the day the Court invited him
to tender written submissions.  
  
Learned President's Counsel, by his oral submissions as well as written
submissions, has stated that he does not wish to attempt to justify the
appellant's conduct in signing the "Notice of Appeal" in  question when there
was a registered attorney-at-law appearing for him, but invited this Court to
exercise the discretion vested in this Court in terms of section 759(2) of the
Civil Procedure Code in the appellant's favour since no material prejudice
will be caused to the respondent.  
  
Learned President's Counsel has submitted that the facts considered in the
judgment in Fernando v Fernando C) were similar to the case now before us.
However he contends that even though the learned Judges in deciding that case
had cited with approval the statement of S. N. Silva. J. as he then was, in
the Court of Appeal judgment, in Hameed v Deen (2), wherein S. N. Silva, J.
had stated that "counsel for the appellant did not invite this Court to act in
terms of section 759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code. In any event, this lapse
referred to above goes to the basic validity of the Notice and Petition and as
such is not curable in terms of the provisions of section 759(2)", the
decision of the Privy Council in Sameen v Abeywickrama (3) had not been
considered by Court either in

**94**

Fernando v Fernando (Supra) or in Hameed v Deen (supra) and that therefore
both these decisions were per incuriam and that had the decision of the Privy
Council in Sameen V AbeywicRrama  (supra) been considered Their Lordships who
decided Fernando v Fernando (supra) and Hameed v. Deen (supra) would have
arrived at a different decision.  
  
Learned President's Counsel has submitted that Their Lordships of the Privy
Council had taken the view that in granting relief under section 756(3) of the
Civil Procedure Code it was wrong to decide whether the non compliance
complained of would amount to a substantial non-compliance and that relief
under section 756(3) should be granted only when there was more or less
trivial non compliance and further that there was no limitation to the power
to  grant relief.  
  
In Sameen v Abeywickrama (supra) the Privy Council dis­cussed the scope of
section 756(3) of the Civil Procedure Code and the question whether relief
could be given in terms of that section to an appellant who had (1) failed to
give notice of the filing of a petition of appeal and (2) failed to sign the
bond relating to securi­ty for costs in appeal.  
  
At the date of the decision in Sameen v Abeywickrama (supra) an appellant who
was aggrieved with a decision of the District Court had to file a petition of
appeal within ten (10) days of the pro- so announcement of the judgment as
prescribed in section 754(2) of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
Section 755 required all petitions to be signed by some advo­cate or proctor.
Section 756(1) required the petitioner to forthwith give notice to the
respondent that he will on a day specified within the period set out in the
section tender security for the respondent's costs of appeal as directed
therein etc. The section also required notice of appeal to issue immediately
on the respondent as set out therein on security for costs being accepted.  
  
Section 756(3) reads as follows;  
  
"In the case of any mistake, omission, or defect on the part of any appellant
in complying with the provisions of this section, the Supreme Court, if it
should be of opinion that the respondent

**95**

has not been materially prejudiced, may grant relief on such terms as it may
deem just"  
  
So that, clearly, relief may be granted in the case of any mis­take, omission
or defect on the part of any appellant in complying ,, with the provisions of
section 756 only, and section 756(3) did not extend to any mistake, omission,
or defect in complying with sec­tion 755 which required the petition of appeal
to be signed by some advocate or proctor or section 754(1) which required the
petition of appeal to be presented to the court of first instance within a
period of ten days or seven days as the case may be as set out in that
sec­tion, and therefore that Their Lordships of the Privy Council were not
called upon to decide on the applicability of section 756(3) with regard to
the failure of an appellant to comply with the requirements relating to the
presenting of a petition of appeal as prescribed in section 754(1) or the
provisions of section 755.  
  
It must be borne in mind that the Privy Council decision in Sameen v
Aheywickrama (supra) dealt with only the failure to sign  the bond in respect
of security for costs of the respondent and the failure to give notice of the
filing of a petition of appeal.  
  
Under the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973 which repealed the
Civil Procedure Code, an appellant was required to present a notice of appeal
within the period prescribed, followed by a petition of appeal.  
  
Thereafter, the Administration of Justice Law, No. 44 of 1973 was repealed by
the Civil procedure Code which required an appel­lant to present a notice of
appeal as prescribed in section 754(3)and section 754(4).  
  
Section 755 sets out that a notice of appeal shall be distinctly written on
good and suitable paper and shall be signed by the appellant or his registered
attorney and shall be duly stamped. Section 755(1) sets out the particulars to
be contained in a notice of appeal. Section 755(2) provided for the furnishing
Of security for the respondent's costs in appeal etc. Section 755(3) required
a petition of appeal to be presented within the period prescribed therein.
Section 755(4) referred to the forwarding of such an appeal to the Court of
Appeal. Section 756 referred to the procedure to be followed in respect of an
appeal

**96**

and an application for leave to appeal. Section 757 refers to security for
costs. Section 758(1) sets out the particulars to be contained in the petition
of appeal followed by section 758(2) which sets out that the appellant shall
not be confined to the grounds set forth at the hearing of the appeal etc.
Then comes section 759(1) followed by section 759(2) the purview of which this
Court has been called upon to examine.  
  
Section 759(2) as amended by Act, No.79 of 1988 reads as follows :  
  
"In the case of any mistake, omission or defect on the part 110 of any
appellant in complying with the provisions of the fore­going sections, (other
than a provision specifying the period within which any act or thing is to be
done) the Court of Appeal may, if it should be of the opinion that the
respon­dent has not been materially prejudiced, grant relief on such terms as
it may deem just".  
  
Therefore, no relief whatsoever can be granted where there is any mistake,
omission or defect in complying with a provision specifying the period within
which any act or thing is to be done, even if the respondent is not materially
prejudiced.  
  
Learned President's Counsel has in the course of his sub­missions referred to
several judgments which set out that techni­calities should be overlooked or
that relief should be granted in the case of non compliance of mere trivial
requirements. Those judgments have no bearing on the question to be decided by
this Court.  
  
Although section 755(1) sets out that the notice of appeal shall be signed by
the appellant or his registered attorney and section 755(1) does not refer to
any act which has to be done within a specified period, section 754(4)
specifies that "the notice of appeal shall be presented to the court of first
instance for this purpose by the party appellant or his registered attorney,
within a period of fourteen days from the date when the decree or order
appealed against was pronounced exclusive of the day of that date itself and
of the day when the notice of appeal

**97**

is presented and of Sundays and public holidays, and the Court to which the
notice is so presented shall receive it and deal with it as hereinafter
provided. If such conditions are not fulfilled, Court shall refuse to receive
it".  
  
The words "The notice of appeal shall be presented by the party appellant or
his registered attorney within a period of four teen days " in section 754(4)
connote the handing over to the Court of first instance a duly signed notice
of appeal within the period prescribed and not merely the physical act of
handing over of a purported notice of appeal which is not duly signed as
required by law by the party appellant or his registered attorney. Hence, a
notice of appeal which has been signed by an appellant and not by his
registered attorney-at-law will not be a notice of appeal contemplated by
section 754(4) of the Civil Procedure 150 Code.  
  
It is for this very same reason I believe that S.N. Silva, J. as he then was,
in the Court of Appeal judgment in Hameed v. Deen (supra) stated "In any event
this lapse (where the appellant had signed both the alleged Notice of Appeal
and alleged Petition of Appeal and not his registered attorney-at-law)
referred to above goes to the basic validity of the Notice and Petition and as
such is not curable in terms of the provisions of section 759(2)".  
  
That decision was pronounced on 25th March 1988 and then section 759(2) was
amended by Amendment Act, No.79 of 160 1988 which was certified on 18th
December 1988 to read that section 759(2) shall not apply to a provision
specifying a time within which an act has to be done and that amendment was
the last nail in the coffin as far as the learned President's Counsel's
contention is concerned.  
  
Therefore section 759(2) clearly does not apply to a situa­tion where a
purported notice of appeal is not duly signed, since section 754(4) requires a
notice of appeal to be presented by the appellant or his registered attorney
to the court of first instance within the period prescribed therein. I repeat
such a purported 170 notice is not one contemplated by section 754(4).

**98**

In any event, what is the relief that can be given? To enter­tain the notice
of appeal despite the defect and hear the appeal? That cannot be done as it
would amount to a situation where this Court would entertain an appeal in
spite of there being no notice of appeal as required by section 754(4). In the
alternative, direct the appellant to tender a duly signed notice of appeal?
Such a notice of appeal would be clearly in breach of section 754(4) as it
would be filed beyond the period prescribed therein.  
  
Therefore it is clear, that the appellant advisedly refrained from  moving
Court to accept a duly signed notice of appeal, unlike in the case of Fernando
v. Fernando (supra).  
  
For the above mentioned reasons, the "Notice of Appeal" is rejected nuncpro
tune and accordingly the appeal is also rejected. No costs.  
  
**S.N. SILVA, C.J. -** I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree. _ **  
  
Appeal rejected.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2003/3.html_  

