##  Celweera, S.A. v. Malship Bulkfert (Pvt) Ltd. - SLR - 29, Vol 1 of 2003
[2002] LKSC 3; (2003) 1 Sri LR 29 (22 November 2002)

**29**

**CELWEERA S.A.**

**v.** ****

**MALSHIP BULKFERT (PVT) LTD**

** **





 SUPREME COURT

S.N. SILVA, CJ.

ISMAIL, J. AND

J.A.N DE SILVA, J.

SC APPEAL No. 16/2001

(HC/ARB/448/2000)

8TH JULY AND 1ST AUGUST 2002

_Arbitration - Enforcement of award - Section 31 of Arbitration Act,_ _No. 11
of 1995 - Requirement to file the arbitration agreement or a certified_ _copy
thereof - Section 31 (2) (b) (ii) of the Act._ __



The appellant claimant ("the claimant") applied to the High Court in terms of
section 31 (1) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 ("the Act") for
enforcement of an award which had been made in London against the respondent.
One of

30

the documents filed with the application was marked "D" being "a certified
copy of the Bagging Contract" _(viz._ the Arbitration Agreement) as required
by sec­tion 31 (2) (b) of the Act. Document "D" was certified "true cop/1 by
the attorney-at-law for the respondent (and presumably filed of record by the
attorney-at-law for the claimant). The respondent in his objections admitted
that the document "D" was the Bagging Contract entered into with the claimant.



The High Court Judge overlooked the above facts and erroneously observed that
the document "D" had been certified "true copy" by the claimant and hence
dismissed the application under section 31 on the ground that the said
docu­ment was not duly certified to the satisfaction of the court in terms of
section 31 (2)(b)(ii)of the Act.

**Held :**

Per J.A.N. de Silva.



(1) "...... High Court Judge misdirected himself in holding that the notation

"true copy" (on the document "D") is the seal of the attorney- at-law for the
claimant when in fact the seal is of the attorney-at-law for the respon­dent.
This is in fact a serious misdirection of fact and of law."



(2) In view of the admission of the document "D" by the respondent as the
Arbitration Agreement, the respondent could not have invited the court to
dismiss the application on the ground that there was no copy of the agreement
as required by section 31 (2) (b) of the Act. The High Court failed to give
full effect to section 31 (2) (b) (ii) of the Act.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court

**Case referred to :**

1\. _Kristly (Pvt) Ltd v. The State Timber Corporation_ (2002) 1 SRI LR 225 at
Pg 239

R.de _Silva,_ PC with _P. Kumarasinghe_ for petitioner.

_Ikram Mohamed,_ PC with _Kushan de Alwis for_ respondent.

_ _

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 22,2002

**J.A.N. DE SILVA, J.** ****



This is an appeal against the judgement and order dated 03.10.2000 of the High
Court, setting aside an arbitration award on



31



the ground that the claimant-appellant (the appellant) has failed to comply
with section 31 (2) (b) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995.



The appellant and the respondent entered into a Bagging Contract dated 7th
February 1994. A dispute arose and the said dispute was referred to
arbitration in London. The arbitration was duly held and an award was made in
London. The appellant made an application dated 8th March 2000 to the High
Court of Colombo, seeking _inter alia,_ to file the arbitration award dated
10th March 1999, its reasons and the supplementary awards to be duly
regis­tered and enforced for judgement and decree accordingly. The appellant
annexed several documents to the said petition. One of which was the document
filed of record marked "D" which was a certified copy of the Bagging Contract.



The respondent raised a preliminary objection that the appel­lant has failed
to file the original Arbitration Agreement under which the purported awards
were alleged to have been made or a duly certified copy thereof, in terms of
section 31 (2) (b) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 and therefore the
said application should be dismissed _in limine._ The learned High Court Judge
upheld the said objection and refused the application for enforcement and
dis­missed the same with costs.



At the hearing of this appeal the learned President's Counsel for the
respondent submitted that the failure of the appellant to file the original
Arbitration Agreement under which the purported awards are alleged to have
been made or a duly certified copy thereof, in terms of section 31 (2) of the
Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995 is fatal to the said application of the
appellant.



Section 31 (2) (a) requires an application to enforce an award to be
accompanied by:

(a)       The original of the award or a duly certified copy of such award;
and

(b)                 The original arbitration agreement under which the award
purports to have been duly made or a duly certified copy of such agreement and
that, a copy of the arbitration agreement shall be deemed to have been duly
certified if-

(1) It purports to have been certified by the Arbitral Tribunal or by a
mem­ber of that tribunal and it has not been shown to the court it was not in
fact, so certified; or

32

(2) It has been otherwise certified to the satisfaction of court. The learned
High Court Judge held, _inter alia_ that,



'The question of certification warrants the examination of the relevant
position of the law as found in section 31 (2). The copy tendered to court
bears two certifications. One purported to have been made by a partner of a
firm of solicitors in English whose seal is not placed or affixed to such
certification, which bears no date. His certification is to the effect.



"I confirm that this is a true copy of the document submitted in the London
Arbitration between the parties and relied upon by the Arbitrator."

_ _

This conformation does not identify the document as the con­tract document
containing the Arbitration Agreement nor does he state that he possessed the
document. The signatory does not divulge the relationship he has with the
arbitration proceedings or the Arbitral Tribunal. As such this court does not
consider such cer­tification as being sufficient to satisfy this court as to
the document containing the Arbitration Agreement, as envisaged in terms of
sec­tion 31 (2) (ii) of the Act. Sub-section thereof has no application since
the document is not supposed to have been certified by the Arbitral Tribunal
or any member thereof.



Besides the purported certification by the solicitor in London, the same bears
the notation "true copy" under the seal of the attorney-at-law for claimant,
if this is correct this is a true copy of a cer­tified copy only, which is not
in compliance of requirement of sec­tion 31 (2) (ii). If the document tendered
is a certified copy as averred by the claimant there cannot be any need to
identify it is as a true copy. However the existence of the two notations side
by side stands in the way of this court accepting the document as a certified
copy because this court is unable to give preference of any one of the two
notations. The very existence of the two notations purporting to be a
certification impairs the operation of anyone of them or the other".

33



It is observed that the learned High Court Judge misdirected himself in
holding that the notation "true copy" is the seal of the attorney-at-law for
the claimant when in fact the seal is of the attorney-at-law for the
respondent. This is in fact a serious misdirection of fact and of law.

It is also to be noted that the appellant filed annexed to his application (to
enforce the award) document marked "D" which the appellant stated was a
certified copy of the Bagging Contract. The learned President's Counsel for
the appellant drew the attention of court to the objections and affidavit
filed by the director of the respondent company in the High Court. In
paragraph 7 (a) of the affidavit the respondent states as follows,



"the respondent entered into the Bagging Contract marked "D" with the
petitioner above".



In these circumstances President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that
there can be no doubt whatsoever that the docu­ment marked "D" is in truth and
in fact the contract the appellant and the respondent entered into. It is my
view that after having admitted document "D" as a true copy of the agreement
the parties entered into, the respondent cannot invite the court to dismiss
the application on the basis that the original was not tendered to court.



It is appropriate to cite a passage from the judgement of Justice Fernando in
a similar case, namely, Kristly (Pvt) Ltd. v The State Timber Corporation(1)
"Clause (ii) requires the High Court in each case, having regard to the facts
of the case, to decide whether the document is certified to its satisfaction.
The learned judge erred in laying down a general rule - founded on a virtual
assumption of dishonesty - which totally excludes certification by an
attorney-at-law regardless of the circumstances. The position might have been
different if the application for enforcement had been rejected promptly on
presentation, for then there might have well have been insufficient reason to
be satisfied that the copy was indeed a true copy and that would have caused
no injustice, as the claimant could have filed a fresh application. But I
incline to view that even at that stage the application should not have been
sum­marily rejected. The claimant should have been given an opportu­nity to
tender duly certified copies, interpreting "accompany" in sec­tion 31 (2)
purposively and widely (as in Sri Lanka General Workers Union v. Samaranayake
[1996] 2 Sri LR 268, and Nagappa Chettiar v. Commissioner of Income Tax AIR
1995 Madras 162) Undoubtedly section 31 (2) is mandatory, but not to the
extent that one opportunity and one opportunity only, will be allowed for
com­pliance. In the present case, however, the order was not made

34

immediately, but only after the lapse of the period of one year and fourteen
days allowed for an application for enforcement. By that time the learned
judge had consolidated the proceedings: hence he could not have ignored the
certified copies filed in the STC's appli­cation, which admittedly, were
identical in all material respects to the copies tendered with the claimant's
application. He had also to consider (even if was not bound by it) the
admission in the STC's statement of objections that those copies were "duly
certified" as well as the fact that, by then, the claimant had also tendered
copies certified in terms of clause (i). It was on all that material that the
learned judge had to decide whether the copies had been certified to his
satisfaction".



In the above circumstances I hold the learned High Court Judge failed to give
full effect to clause (ii) of section 31 (2) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of
1995 when there was an admission by the respondent that the agreement marked
"D" was a true copy. Therefore I allow the appeal and set aside the order
dated 03.10.2000. The High Court is directed to take steps in compliance with
Section 31 (2) (b) of the Arbitration Act, No. 11 of 1995.



The appellant will be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs.30,000/= (thirty
thousand).

**S. N. SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.  
**ISMAIL, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/3.html_  

