##  Neil Fernando v. Ranjith Cooray and Others - SLR - 281, Vol 1 of 1999
[1999] LKSC 3; (1999) 1 Sri LR 281 (14 January 1999)

**281**

**NEIL FERNANDO  
v.  
RANJITH COORAY AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 46/97  
H.C. NO. 639/96  
MC KALUTARA NO. 51054/95  
JULY 24, SEPTEMBER 7, 21, 23, 1998

_Appeal - Abatement of nuisance \- Sections 98 (1) and 101 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act - Order of the Magistrate under section 101 of the Act
- Right of appeal from such order - Section 320 (1) of the Act - Appeal to the
High Court - Section 4 of Act, No. 19 of 1990._

The appellant was a funeral undertaker who in the course of his business had
to embalm corpses. The respondents made a report to the Magistrate in terms of
section 98 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act to the effect that the
appellant's business had caused pollution and environmental hazards. The
Magistrate after due inquiry made an order under section 101 of the Act
directing the appellant that he may carry on his business subject to certain
conditions issued by the Deputy Director of the National Health Institute for
ensuring that such business would not pollute the environment or cause a
public nuisance. The respondents appealed to the High Court in terms of
section 320 (1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act read with section 4 of
the High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) Act, No. 19 of 1990. The
High Court held that there was no right of appeal but acting in revision, set
aside the order of the Magistrate.

**Held:**

1.There is a right of appeal to the High Court from the order of the
Magistrate made in terms of section 101 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

2\. In an inquiry under section 101 of the Act the Magistrate is not bound to
hear oral evidence. He may base his order on affidavits which is permitted by
section 415 of the Act.

3\. The High court erred in taking into account extraneous matters not
supported by evidence to set aside the order of the Magistrate.

**282**

**Cases referred to:**

1. _Bakmeewewa, Authorized Officer of the People's Bank v. Konarage Raja_ (1989)1 Sri LR 231.  
  
2. _Forrest v. Leefe_ \- 13 NLR 119.  
  
3. _Saram v. Seneviratne_ \- 21 NLR 190.  
  
4. _Sandarasegara v. Sinnatamby_ \- 25 NLR 139.  
  
5. _Nair v. Costa_ \- 28 NLR 385.  
  
6. _Greena Fernando v. TecklaSaparamadu_ \- (1990) 1 Sri LR 270.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the High Court.

_Faiz Musthapha, PC_ with _Gaston Jayakody_ for the appellant.

_Mohan Peiris_ with _Ms. Nuwanthi Dias_ for the respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

January 14, 1999.  
**  
GUNASEKERA, J.**

The complainant petitioners-respondents filed a report marked 'P1' before the
Magistrate, Kalutara, dated 3.4.95 under the provisions of section 98 (1) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure Act intimating that the respondent-respondent-
appellant who has been carrying on business as a funeral undertaker at
premises bearing Nos. 451 & 453, Galle Road, Kalutara, under the name and
style of "Mahinda Florists" was committing a public nuisance by channelling
impure and contaminated water utilised for the purpose of washing cadavers in
the process of embalming and from permitting noxious vapours of formalin to
emanate into the atmosphere thus contaminating the air which was detrimental
to the health of the complainants and the other members of the public and
sought an Order to prevent the commission of the said nuisance. The learned
Magistrate after considering the report on being satisfied prima facie that
the said acts complained of by the complainants by reason of their being
injurious to the health of the community made a conditional Order prohibiting
the respondent petitioner- appellant from embalming and discharging the
contaminated water to the drain on the main road till 25.4.95 (vide 'P2').

283

On 6.4.95 the respondent-appellant filed a statement of objections together
with an affidavit and the documents marked V1 to V11 in terms of section 98
(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act and for the reasons stated therein
moved that the conditional Order made by the Magistrate be set aside. After
hearing counsel for the respondent-appellant the learned Magistrate suspended
the conditional Order 'P2' made on 3.4.95 and since the complainants were
absent, directed that the complainants should appear in Court on 25.4.95. On
that day after hearing submissions made by counsel on behalf of both parties
the learned Magistrate reserved his Order. By Order 'P5' dated 18.5.95 the
learned Magistrate set aside the conditional Order made on 3.4.95 and made
order permitting the respondent appellant to carry on the function of
embalming at the said premises subject to the conditions set out in letter V5
dated 31.1.87 issued by the Deputy Director (Field Services) of the National
Health Institute. The conditions being:

(1) that the respondent-appellant should ensure that contaminated water in
washing dead bodies and cadavers should not be permitted to flow on to the
drain on the main road and

(2) that the parts removed from the cadavers in the process of embalming
should be systematically disposed of.

Aggrieved by this Order of the learned Magistrate the complainants respondent-
respondents preferred an appeal to the High Court of the Western Province
holden at Kalutara in terms of section 320 (1) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act read with section 4 of the High Court of the Provinces (Special
Provisions) Act No. 19 of 1990. This appeal so filed was transferred to
Panadura and from there to Colombo. After a consideration of the submissions
made by Counsel on behalf of the parties the learned High Court Judge of the
Western Province by his judgment 'PT dated 29.10.96 acting in revision set
aside the Orders made on 6.4.95 & 18.5.95 and restored the conditional Order
made on 3.4.95.

It is against the said Order of the learned High Court Judge that the
respondent-appellant made an application for Special Leave to

284

appeal. Upon a consideration of the submissions made, this Court by its Order
dated 1.4.97 granted Special Leave to appeal on the following questions only :

(1) Does the judgment of the High Court represent an unwarranted interference
with the Order of the Magistrate's Court.

(2) Is there a right of appeal to the High Court from the said Order.

I think it would be pertinent to deal with the 2nd question on which Special
Leave to Appeal was allowed before considering the 1st question raised. In
considering the question as to whether there is a right of appeal to the High
Court from an Order made by a Magistrate in terms of section 101 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure Act one has necessarily to consider the provisions
relating to appeals from the Magistrate's Court which are set out in chapter
XXVIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act specially sections 316 to 320.
Section 316 states "that an appeal shall not lie from any judgment or Order of
a criminal court except as provided for by this code or by any other law for
the time being in force". A right of appeal is provided for in section 320 (1)
which states that "subject to the provisions of sections 317, 318 & 319 any
person who shall be dissatisfied with any judgment or final order pronounced
by any Magistrate's Court in a criminal case or matter to which he is a party
may prefer an appeal to the Court of Appeal (now to the High Court, after the
13th Amendment to the Constitution) against such judgment for any error in law
or in fact **...** "

An examination of this provision clearly shows that the right of appeal is
restricted to any judgment or final order pronounced by any Magistrate's Court
in a criminal case or matter. The question for determination then is as to
whether an Order made under section 101 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act
can be said to be a final order made in a criminal case or matter?

285

It was the contention of Mr. Mustapha learned President's Counsel who appeared
for the appellant that chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act which
dealt with public nuisances vested a special jurisdiction in the Magistrate's
Court as distinguished from its ordinary criminal jurisdiction and therefore
an Order made under this chapter would not attract the general right of appeal
set out in section 320 (1) as that section applies only to orders made in the
exercise of the ordinary criminal jurisdiction of the Magistrate's Court.
Learned President's Counsel cited the case of _Bakmeewewa, Authorised Officer
of the People's Bank v. Konarage Raja_ (1) in support of this contention.

In the said case a previous owner of certain premises applied to the People's
Bank for redemption of his land under provisions of the Finance Act, No. 11 of
1963 as amended by the Finance and Ceylon State Mortgage Bank (Amendment) Law
No. 16 of 1973. After inquiry the People's Bank determined that the premises
should be acquired and upon a vesting Order made by the Finance Minister under
section 72 (2) the premises vested absolutely in the Bank free from all
encumbrances. The appellant being the Authorised Officer of the People's Bank
being unable to obtain possession of the premises applied to the District
Court under section 72 (7) for an order for delivery of possession by way of
summary procedure under chapter 24 of the Civil Procedure Code as stipulated
by section 72 (8). Accordingly, the District Court entered an order nisi and
despite the objections of the respondent entered order absolute on 28.11.83.
The respondent appealed and pending the appeal the Bank's Authorised Officer
moved for execution. The respondent filed papers for a stay of execution under
section 763 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code. The District Judge on 30.7.84
rejected the application for stay of execution holding (a) that there was no
right of appeal and (b) that the order for delivery of possession was not a
final order and that leave to appeal had not been obtained.

In appeal the Court of Appeal set aside the order of the District Judge and
directed him to hear the application for stay of execution. An appeal was
taken to the Supreme Court and it was held by the

286

Supreme Court that the jurisdiction exercised by the District Court under
sections 72 (7) and (8) of the Finance Act as amended is a special
jurisdiction and that there is no right of appeal from an order made in the
exercise of such jurisdiction unless a right of appeal is expressly provided
for in the Act. Hence the District Court had no jurisdiction to entertain an
application for stay of execution pending appeal under section 763 (2) of the
Civil Procedure Code.

I am unable to agree with the contentions of learned President's Counsel that
sections 98 to 105 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act confers a special
jurisdiction to a Magistrate's Court which is sui juris. In my view these
sections provide for a summary procedure to be adopted by a Magistrate's Court
for the removal or abatement of nuisances and the provisions relating to
appeals in chapter 28 should be applicable in regard to these sections as
well. An examination of section 261 of the Penal Code shows that a public
nuisance is considered to be an offence entailing penal consequences and in my
view an order made under section 101 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act is
an appealable order attracting the provisions of section 320 of the said Code.

The question as to whether an appeal lies against an order made under section
109 of the Criminal Procedure Code which is identical in terms to the
provisions in 101 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act came up for
consideration in the case of _Forrest v. Leefe_ (2). In the said case the
Magistrate made a conditional order under section 105 of the Criminal
Procedure Code (which is identical in terms to section 98 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Act), requiring the appellant to forthwith remove his
cooperage from the vicinity of the Magistrate's Court at Galle or to appear
and show cause as to why the order should be modified or set aside. The
appellant duly appeared and showed cause, evidence was taken and the
Magistrate after hearing the appellant and the complainant made the order
absolute. An appeal was taken against the order made, making the conditional
order absolute under section 109. The respondent's counsel took a preliminary
objection that no appeal lies. After considering the arguments of counsel
Hutchinson, CJ. with Middleton, J. agreeing

287

overruled the preliminary objection and held that an appeal lies against an
order absolute made under section 109 of the Criminal Procedure Code.

In the course of the judgment His Lordship the Chief Justice stated that :
"the judgment pronounced by the Magistrate in this case dealt with the
evidence, decided that the appellant's cooperage was a public nuisance, and
decided against his plea of right to continue it, and ordered him to remove
it; it did in fact dispose of all the questions in dispute, and all that
remained to be done was to enforce the order and **. . .** also to punish the
appellant if he disobeyed it. I nevertheless think that this is an appeal
against a judgment. The Magistrate heard evidence, dealt with it and decided
all the questions on law and fact which were raised, and thereupon made an
order in accordance with his findings. In ordinary language he gave judgment;
his statement of reasons and his findings and his order constitute his
judgment. I think, therefore, that the preliminary objection should be
overruled".

Middleton, J. in the course of his judgment stated as follows : The first
point in this case was whether an appeal would lie, it being contended for the
respondent that the order was not a final one. The question as to whether it
was a judgment was not referred to in the argument. It is clear I think that
the decision appealed from is a judgment within the meaning of section 306 (1)
of the Criminal Procedure Code. It becomes, therefore, appealable under
section 338 of the Criminal Procedure Code.

For the reasons stated I hold that there is a right of appeal to the High
Court from the order marked 'P5' dated 18.5.95 of the learned Magistrate made
in terms of section 101 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

The following cases, _Saram v. Seneviratne_ (3), _Sandrasegara v. Sinnatamby_
(4), _Nair v. Costa_ (5) are some of the cases in which appeals had been
preferred against orders made under 109 of the Criminal Procedure Code and the
case of _Greena Fernando v. Teckla_

288

_Saparamadu_ (6) is one in which an appeal had been taken in respect of an
order that have been made under section 101 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
Act.

The other question that remains for determination is as to whether the
judgment of the High Court represents an unwarranted interference with the
order of the Magistrate's Court.

It was submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that the learned High
Court Judge having wrongly held that there was a right of appeal from the
Magistrate's Order which was sought to be impugned inexplicably purported to
act in revision to set aside the Order of the learned Magistrate made in terms
of section 101. It is the contention of the learned counsel that the learned
High Court Judge erred in interfering with the Order made by the Magistrate
inasmuch as no circumstances exists for such intervention and it is based on a
misconception of the facts and the law. According to the appellant the
conditional Order 'P2' made on 3.4.95 by the learned Magistrate was consequent
upon a consideration of the report marked 'P1' filed before him unsupported by
any affidavit.

It was contended that the appellant as permitted by section 98 (2) appeared
before the learned Magistrate and moved to have the conditional Order set
aside having filed a statement of objections 'P3' along with his affidavit
together with documents 1 to 11 and since the complainants were absent that
the learned Magistrate temporarily suspended the conditional Order made on
3.4.95 after hearing submissions of counsel made on his behalf and directed
the complainant to be present on 25.4.95. On that day after a consideration of
the objections filed and the contents of the supporting affidavit of the
appellant and the documents furnished in support thereof and the submissions
made by the counsel for the parties reserved his order and by his order 'P5'
dated 18.5.95 the learned Magistrate set aside the conditional Order and made
order permitting the appellant to continue with his business subject to the
conditions set out in 5

289

It was submitted that the learned High Court Judge erred in law when he set
aside the Order of the learned Magistrate dated 18.5.95 on the basis that
there was no evidence before the Magistrate for his consideration for him to
have set aside the conditional Order. It is contended by learned counsel that
the affidavit filed by the respondent-appellant along with his statement of
objections 'P3' constituted evidence which had been acted upon by the learned
Magistrate to have varied the conditional Order made in terms of section 98
(1) and relied on the provisions of section 415 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act which authorised the learned Magistrate to have acted upon the
said affidavit.

The learned High Court Judge in his judgment at page 19 appears to have taken
the view that when section 101 of the Code "requires the Magistrate to take
evidence in the matter" that the evidence should be oral evidence which should
be recorded in the manner set out in section 273 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure Act where the evidence of each witness should be taken down in
writing by the Judge or in his presence or hearing or under his personal
direction or supervision which had not been complied with by the Magistrate
and for that reason holds that the Order made on 18.5.95 was not in compliance
with the law.

An examination of the Order dated 18.5.95 marked 'P5' which was sought to be
impugned before the High Court indicates that the learned Magistrate had in
fact considered the statement of objections and the evidence of the
respondent-appellant produced by way of his supporting affidavit to vary the
conditional Order.

This being so I am of the view that there has been sufficient compliance with
the provisions of section 101 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Act.

It was further submitted by learned counsel for the appellant that the learned
Judge of the High Court has adverted to matters that were never in evidence
before him when he set aside the Order of

290

the learned Magistrate and was in grave error in taking into consideration
extraneous matters. Learned counsel drew our attention to page 15 of the
judgment where the learned High Court Judge observed as follows:

"I am unable to accept that there is a system where arterial embalming can be
done by the use of a syringe only without removing the brain, the lungs, the
heart, the stomach, and the intestines, for ordinarily these organs are
removed and swabs of cotton wool dipped in formalin is placed in the cavity
and is sutured and if the said organs are not removed the body begins to
stink."

I have perused the brief carefully and find that there is no evidence on
record to support the above findings of the learned High Court Judge and
therefore I agree with the contention of the learned counsel that the learned
High Court Judge had erred in taking into account extraneous matters to set
aside the Order of the learned Magistrate and the consideration of these
extraneous matters in my view, constitutes an unwarranted interference with
the Order of the learned Magistrate.

For the reasons stated I am of the view that the judgment of the learned High
Court Judge should be set aside. Accordingly, I allow the appeal and set aside
the judgment of the learned High Court Judge dated 29.10.96 without costs and
affirm the Order of the learned Magistrate 'P5' dated 18.5.95.

I may add this judgment should not be considered to be a bar to the respondent
to pursue with his action L3464 already pending in the District Court of
Kalutara.

**DE SILVA, CJ.** \- I agree.

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/3.html_  

