##  Jayasekera Ys. Lakmini And Others - SLR - 41, Vol 1 of 2010 [2010] LKSC 3;
(2010) 1 Sri LR 41 (10 October 2010)

**41**

**JAYASEKERA YS. LAKMINI AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
J. A. N. DE SILVA C. J.  
MARSOOF, J.  
CHANDRA EKANAYAKE,J.  
SC 15/2009  
SC HC (CALA)29/09  
WPHCCA / KALUTARA101/2003  
DC PANADURA745/P  
APRIL 30,2009  
JUNE 5, 2009  
JUNE 10, 2010  
  
_Civil Procedure Code - Section 755 (1) Section 755 of (2) (a) - 2b -Section
758 (1), Section 759 (2) Section 770 - Complying mandatory?- All necessary
parties to be made parties in the appeal? - Partition Act 21 of 1977 - Section
67 - Failure to complete required steps - Fatal? Prejudice caused? Can
Appellate Court add a   respondent as a party? - Discretion? '  
_  
The 4th defendant-appellant failed to name the 1st and 2nd defendants in the
District Court in the partition action as the respondents in the appeal - only
the plaintiff was made a party. On the objection raised by the plaintiff-
appellant that the appeal is not property constituted the High Court overruled
the objection stating that, all necessary parties had been noticed by the
4thdefendant-appellant in compliance with Section 755 and fixed the case for
argument.  
  
The plaintiff-respondent sought leave to appeal from the said order and leave
was granted.  
  
**Held  
**  
        (1) An appeal lodged against the judgment/ decree made or entered by Court in a partition action all the provisions of the Civil procedure Code shall apply.   
  
        (2) The issue at hand falls within the purview of a mistake, omission or defect on the part of the appellant in complying with the

**42**

provisions of Section 755. In such a situation if the Court of Appeal was of
the opinion that the respondent has not been materially prejudiced, it was
empowered to grant relief to the appellant on such terms as it deemed just.  
  
        (3) The power of the Court to grant relief under section 759 (2) is wide and discretionary and is subject to such terms as the Court may deem just. Relief may be granted even if no excuse for non compliance is forthcoming \- relief cannot be granted if the Court is of the opinion that the respondent has been materially prejudiced in which  event the appeal has to be dismissed.  
  
Per Chandra Ekanayake, J.  
  
        "In the case at hand the notice of appeal had been filed by the registered attorney-at-law and the failure to comply with Section 755 appears to be a negligence on his part - such negligence though relevant does not fetter the discretion of Court to grant relief when it appears that it is just and fair to do so" \- what is required to bar relief under Section 759 (2) is not any prejudice but material prejudice - I am inclined to the view that the plaintiff being the only respondent named in the notice of appeal would not be materially prejudiced by the grant of relief under Section 759 (2)  
  
**Held further  
**  
        (4) Section 770 shows that if it appears to the Court at the hearing of the appeal that any person who was a party to the action in the Court against whose decree the appeal, is made but who has not been made a party to the appeal, it is within the discretion of the court to issue the requisite notice of appeal on those parties for service.   
  
        (5) If a particular party in a partition action who should have been made a respondent is not made a respondent in the appeal, then granting relief to the appellant will not help such a party to safeguard his rights and making him a respondent would not act to the prejudice of the appellant. A discretion necessarily invokes an attitude of individual choice, according to the particular circumstances, and differs from a case where the decision follow exdibito justitiae, once the facts are ascertained. The exercise of the discretion contemplated in Section 770 is a matter for the decision of the Judge who hears the appeal.

**43**

**APPEAL** from an order of the High Court of Kalutara on a preliminary issue.  
  
**Cases referred to :-  
**  
        (1) Kiri Mudiyanse and others vs. Bandara Menike - 1974 76 NLR 371  
  
        (2)Nanayakkara vs. Wamakulasuriya - 1993 - 2 Sri LR 289  
  
        (3)Keerthisiri vs. Weerasena - 1997 - 1 SLR 70  
  
        (4)Vias vs. Amolis - 17 NLR 289  
  
        (5)Ibrahim vs. Beebe - 19 NLR 289  
  
        (6)Evans vs. Bartlam - 1937 - 2 AER 646 at 655  
  
        (7)Gardiner vs. Jay - 1885 Ch.D. 50  
  
        (8)Hope vs. Great Westem Railway Company - 1937 1All ER 625  
  
        (9)Jerkins vs. Bushby - [1891] 1. Ch. 483  
  
Manohara de Silva PC with Arinda Wijesundera and G. W. C. Bandara Thalagune
for plaintiff-respondent-appellant. Uditha Egalahewa with AmaranathFemandofor
4th defendant -appellantrespondent.  
  
October 10th, 2010  
**CHANDRA EKANAYAKE, J**.  
  
        The plaintiff- respondent-petitioner (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the plaintiff) by her petition dated 25.02.2009 has sought inter alia, special leave to appeal to this Court from the order of the learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal of the Western Province (Holder in Kalutara) dated 15.01.2009 marked "E", to uphold the preliminary objections raised on her behalf and to dismiss the appeal filed by the 4th defendant-appellant-respondent (hereinafter sometimes referred to as the 4th defendant). When the above application was supported this Court by its order dated 19.03.2009 had granted special leave to appeal on the questions of law set

**44**

 out in sub paragraphs (a) to (g) of paragraph 9 of the said petition. Those
sub paragraphs are reproduced below:  
  
(a) The said order is contrary to law and against the weight of the evidence,  
  
(b) The learned Judges of the High Court erred in holding that "all necessary
parties have been noticed" by the 4th defendant appellant,  
  
(c) The learned Judges of the High Court failed to take in to consideration
that only the plaintiff has been named as respondent in the notice of appeal,
and only the plaintiff and the 1st defendant are named as respondents in the
Petition of Appeal,  
  
(d) The learned Judges of the High Court failed to take into consideration
that the bond furnished by the appellant only covers the cost of the
plaintiff-respondent and does not cover the cost of the 1st,2nd,and:3rd
respondents and that the appellant has failed to obtain an acknowledgement or
waiver of security from the said 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents as required by
Section 755 (2) (a) of the Civil Procedure Code as amended by Act No. 79/1988.  
  
(e) The learned Judges of the High Court failed to take in to consideration
that the appellant had failed to serve a  copy of the notice of appeal on all
the respondents and to furnish proof of service as required by Section 755(2)
(a) of the Civil Procedure Code.  
  
(f) The learned Judges of the High Court erred by considering that "the 1st
and 2nd defendants both have tendered one proxy and not tendered a statement
of claim" (which fact only establishes that the 1st and ~ defendants did not
dispute the plaintiffs claim in the District Court) and

**45**

  
thereby concluding that the 1st and ~ defendants would not be contesting the
appeal of the 4th defendant appellant.  
  
(g) The learned Judges of the High Court erred by holding that "in the instant
case only the plaintiff and 3rdand 4th defendants remain as disputed parties"
as in the event the District Court judgment is set aside or varied in any
manner, the rights of the 1stand 2nddefendants who have not been given an
opportunity to be heard before the High Court, would be prejudiced.  
  
        According to Section 5C (1) of the said Act No. 54 of 2006 an appeal shall lie directly to the Supreme Court from any judgment, decree or order pronounced or entered by a High Court established by Article 154 P of the constitution, with leave of the Supreme Court first had and obtained. But in the present case the plaintiff-respondent-petitioner (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff) by petition dated 25-02-2009 has sought special leave.  
  
        At the hearing of the appeal before this Court the Counsel for the plaintiff vehemently stressed on the preliminary objection raised in the High Court on 25.08.2008 by the plaintiff which had been to the following effect - (vide pg - 4 of the written submissions of the plaintiff filed in this Court on 30.04.2009):  'that the 4th defendant-appellant-respondent had failed to comply with the mandatory provisions of Sections 755 (1), 755 (2) (a), 755 (2) (b) and 758 (1) by;-                         &nbsp ;   
  
        (a) failing to name the parties to the action,  
  
        (b) failing to name all the respondents to the action,

**46**

        (c) failing to give required notices of this appeal to the 1st, 2nd and 3rd defendants, and to submit proof thereof.  
  
        (d) failure to provide security of the 1SI, 2nd and 3rd defendants costs of appeal?  
  
With regard to (c) and (d) above it has to be noted that 3rd defendant had
died before the delivery of the judgment by the District Judge.  
  
        In addition to the oral submissions made here plaintiff respondent -petitioner and 4thdefendant -appellant -respondent have filed their written submissions also. The appeal preferred by the 4th defendant was one against the judgment pronounced by District Judge of Panadura in case bearing No. 745/ Partition - instituted against the }81to 4th defendants, to partition the land morefully described in the amended plaint filed in the said partition case. The Learned High Court Judges by their judgment dated 15.01.2009 had concluded that all necessary parties had been noticed by the 4th defendant-appellant-respondent in compliance with the provisions of Section 755 of the Civil Procedure Code and proceeded to fix the case for argument after overruling the aforementioned preliminary objection raised by the plaintiff with regard to the maintainability of the appeal in the High Court.  
  
However, perusal of the notice of appeal (CI) filed in the District Court
makes it clear that only following particulars were included under items (3)
and (5) thereof:-

Under item (3) i.e.  |

Names and  
addresses  
of the parties |

Only plaintiffs and 4th defendant's names and addresses given.  
  
---|---|---  
  
  
  
**47**

Under item (5) i. e. | Name of the  
respondent | Only plaintiff's name  
and address given.  
---|---|---  
  
  
  
        What needs to be examined now is whether the finding of the learned High Court Judge viz- 'all necessary parties were noticed in compliance with Section 755 of the Civil Procedure Code' - is correct?  
  
        To examine same one should first consider the procedure that has to be followed when preferring an appeal against an interlocutory decree or judgment entered in a partition action. It is undisputed that the appeal in hand is an appeal preferred from the judgment of the District Court. Now Section 67 of the Partition Act No. 21 of 1977 (as amended) would become relevant. The said section thus reads as follows:  
  
67\. ''An appeal shall lie to the Supreme Court against any judgment, decree
or order made or entered by any court in any partition action; and all the
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code shall apply accordingly to any such
appeal as though a judgment, decree or order made or entered in a partition
action were a judgment, decree or order made or entered in any action as
defined for the purposes of that Code."  
  
        A plain reading of the above section would make it amply clear that in an appeal lodged against the judgment/ decree made or entered by Court in a partition action - all the provisions of the Civil Procedure Code shall apply. This renders the entire chapter in the Civil Procedure Code pertaining to appeals namely - Chapter LVIII applicable to an appeal preferred from a judgment entered in a partition action also.   
  
The relevant Section in the Civil Procedure Code with regard to 'Notice of
Appeal' - appears to be Section 755.

**48**

        As the requisites of notice of appeal are embodied in sub-paragraph (i) of Section 755 same is reproduced below: 755(1) " Every notice of appeal shall be distinctly written on good and suitable paper and shall be signed by the appellant or his registered attorney and shall be duly stamped. Such notice shall also contain the following particulars:  
  
        (a) the name of the court from which the appeal is preferred;  
  
        (b) the number of the action;  
  
        (c) the names and addresses of the parties to the action;  
  
        (d) the names of the appellant and respondent;  
  
        Provided that where the appeal is lodged by the Attorney- General, no such stamps shall be necessary." Further Section 755(2) of the Civil Procedure Code is clear enough as to what should accompany a notice of appeal - namely security for a respondent's costs of appeal in such amount and nature as is prescribed in the rules enacted under Article 136 of the Constitution, or acknowledgement or waiver of security signed by the respondent or his registered attorney. Sub Section 755 (2) (a) and 2 (b) thus read as follows:  
  
755 (2) "The notice of appeal shall be accompanied by -  
  
(a) except as provided herein, security for respondent's costs of appeal in
such amount and nature as is prescribed in the rules made by the Supreme Court
under  Article 136 of the Constitution, or acknowledge-  


**49**

ment or waiver of security signed by the respondent or his registered
attorney; and  
  
(b) Proof of service, on the respondent or on the his registered attorney, of
copy of the notice of appeal, in the form of a written acknowledgement of the
receipt of such notice or the registered postal receipt in proof of such
service. "  
  
        Examination of the security bond in this case (C2) amply demonstrates that it only covers the cost of the plaintiff respondent and it does not cover the costs of 1st and 2nd defendant-respondents and it accompanied the proof of service only on the plaintiff. Therefore it has to be observed that the security bond C2 is not in compliance with the provisions of sections 755 (2) (a) and 755 (2) (b).  
  
        The contention of the Counsel for the plaintiff was that when it comes to statutes of procedure, failure to complete required steps within the specified time frame, is fatal to the case and thus the preliminary objection should have been upheld by the Learned Judges of the High Court due to noncompliance of the provisions of Section 755 (1), 755(2)(a) and 755(2)(b) which had to be complied with when the notice of appeal was tendered and that was within 14 days from the judgment.  
  
        The main submission of the 4th defendant-appellant respondent's Counsel was that - no prejudice was caused to the 2nd defendant-respondent-respondent by not making her a party and further this Court has the power to add the 2nd defendant as a party to the said appeal. This merits careful consideration in the light of the circumstance of this case. It is to be noted that the following matters were not in dispute:-

**50**

1\. plaintiff had instituted this partition action naming 1 to 4 defendants as
the defendants in the case,  
  
2\. the 3rd defendant who had passed title to the 4th defendant reserving life
interest had died on 29.03.2003.  
  
3\. by the judgment of the learned District Judge dated 21.07.2003 pronounced
after trial, only the plaintiff, pt defendant and 2nd defendant (who got only
life interest of the share allocated to the 1st defendant) were given shares,  
  
4\. as per the notice of appeal filed by the 4th defendant (C1) only the
plaintiff had been named as a party (naming him as a respondent) but not the
1st and 2nddefendants,  
  
5\. failure to give required notice of the appeal to the 1st and
2nddefendants,  
  
6\. failure to provide security for the costs of appeal of the 1st and 2nd
defendants.  
  
From the above it is manifestly clear that although shares were given to the
plaintiff, 1st defendant and 2nd defendant (to whom life interest of 1st
defendant's share was given by the judgment) none of them were made
respondents to the appeal or given notice, and failed to provide security for
the costs of appeal of 1st and 2nd defendants. Even in the petition of appeal
dated 02.09.2003 (C3) only the plaintiff and the 1st defendant were named as
respondents and as such the petition of appeal too is not in conformity with
the provisions of Section 758 (1) of the Civil Procedure Code. Thus the
questions of law on which special leave was grated by this Court are answered
in the affirmative and the impugned judgment of the High Court is hereby set
aside.

**51**

  
        The 4th defendant's position is that the failure to make the 2nd defendant a party to the appeal and non-compliance of the provisions of Section 755 of the Civil Procedure Code has not caused any prejudice to the plaintiff-appellant. The Learned Counsel for the 4th defendant-appellant-respondent has submitted that Court has the power even at this stage to add the 2nd defendant as a party to the appeal. For this submission he has relied on the principle of law enunciated in the decision in Kiri Mudiyanse and another us. Bandara MenikEfl) .  
  
        This leads me to the next point viz - 'would it be correct to say that failure on the part of the 4th defendant to comply with the requirements of Section 755 has not caused any prejudice to the other parties to the main partition case?' The gist of the submission of the Counsel for the plaintiff was that as it is mandatory to comply with steps that need to be taken during a permitted period of time and as the 4th defendant has failed to comply with the same, the preliminary objection raised in the High Court should have been upheld and the appeal was liable to be dismissed there. Further he has urged that since the 4th defendant has failed to move Court for relief under Section 759 of the Civil Procedure Code granting relief under said section (S. 759) does not arise. I am unable to agree with the said submission for the reason that it is undoubtedly incumbent upon the Court to utilize the statutory provisions and grant the relief embodied therein if it appears to Court that it is just and fair to do so. In this background Section 759 (2) of the Civil Procedure Code [which is similar to former section - 756 (3) of the old Civil Procedure Code has to be considered. Section 759 (2) thus reads as follows:   
  
"In the case of any mistake, omission or defect on the part of any appellant
in complying with the provisions of the

**52**

foregoing sections, (other than a provision specifying the period within which
any act or thing is to be done) the Court of Appeal may, it if should be of
opinion that the respondent has not been materially prejudiced, grant relief
on such terms as may deem just. &quot ;  
  
        The issue at hand clearly falls within the purview of a mistake, omission or defect on the part of the appellant (i. e. - 4th defendant) in complying with the provisions of Section 755 when filing the notice of appeal. In such a situation if the Court of Appeal was of the opinion that the respondent has not been materially prejudiced, it was empowered to grant relief to the appellant on such terms as it deemed just. A plain reading of the said subsection (2) makes it clear that the power of Court to grant relief under the same is discretionary. In this regard the decision of the Supreme Court in Nanayakkara us. Wamakulasuriya(2) would lend assistance. In the said case  per Kulatunga, J.  
  
        "The power of the Court to grant relied under Section 759(2) of the Code is wide and discretionary and is subject to such terms as the Court may deem just. Relief may be granted even if no excuse for non-compliance is forthcoming. However, relief cannot be granted if the Court is of opinion that the respondent has been materially prejudiced which event the appeal has to be dismissed. "  
  
In the course of the judgment in the said case (at 293) Kulatuga, J. had
further observed that:- "In an application for relief under section 759 (2),
the rule that. the negligence of the Attorney-at-Law is the negligence of the
client does not apply as in the case 'of defaults curable under sections
86(2),87(3) and 77 of the

**53**

Civil Procedure Code. Such negligence maybe relevant, it does not fetter the
discretion of the Court to grant relief where it is just and fair to do so."  
  
        It was a case where the failure to hypothecate the sum deposited as security by bond as required by section 757 (1) was considered by Court. In the case at hand also the notice of appeal (CI) had been filed by registered attorney-at-law and the failure to comply with the provisions of section 755 as already concluded above appears to be a negligence on his part. In view of the above principle of law I hold that such a negligence though relevant does not fetter the discretion of court to grant relief when it appears that it is just and fair to do so.  
  
        Further in this regard it would be pertinent to consider the pronouncement made by the Supreme Court in the case of Keerthisiri us Weerasena(3) This too was an instance where non compliance of section 755(1) of the Civil Procedure Code (failure to duly stamp the notice of appeal) arose and granting relief under section 759 (2) of the Code was considered. In the above case it was held by G P S de Silva, CJ (with Kulatunga, J. and Ramanathan, J. agreeing) that:   
  
        "Section 759(2) of the Civil Procedure Code which required the Notice of Appeal to be 'duly stamped' is imperative. However, the Court of Appeal has jurisdiction to grant relief to the appellant in terms of Section 759(2) of the Code in respect of the 'mistake' or 'omission' in supplying the required stamp fee." Further, G P S de Silva, CJ. In the course of the said judgment has observed that "what is required to bar relief under Section 759 (2) is not any prejudice but "material prejudice".  Per G P S de Silva, CJ at 74:

**54**

        "What is required to bar relief is not any prejudice but material prejudice, i. e. detriment of the kind which the respondent cannot reasonably called upon to suffer. In this instant case there is nothing to suggest that the respondent has been materially prejudiced. I accordingly hold that the Court of Appeal had jurisdiction to grant relief in terms of section 759(2) of the present Code." Having considered all the facts and circumstances of the present case I am inclined to the view that the plaintiff, being the only respondent named in the notice of appeal, would not be materially prejudiced by the grant of relief under Section 759 (2)  
  
It is clearly seen that persons who were parties to the action in the Court
against whose decree the appeal is made (namely \- the District Court) have
not been made parties in the High Court of Civil Appeal. As such although the
impugned judgment of the High Court has been already set aside, I am of the
view that **Section 770 of the Civil Procedure Code is more to the point.**
The aforesaid section thus reads as follows:-  
  
770 "If, at the hearing of the appeal, the respondent is not present and the
court is not satisfied upon the material in the record or upon other evidence
that the notice of appeal was duly served upon him or his registered attorney
as herein before provided, _or if it appears to the court at such hearing that
any person who was a party to the action in the court against whose decree the
appeal is made. but who has not been made a Dart to the appeal. the court may
issue the requisite notice of appeal for service. "  
_  
The above' section shows that if it appears to the Court at the hearing of the
appeal that any person who was a party

**55**

to the action in the Court against whose decree the appeal is made but who has
not been made a party to the appeal, it is within the discretion of the Court
to issue the requisite notice of appeal on those parties for service. In the
case at hand too the 4th defendant-appellant respondent had failed to name the
1st and 2nd defendants to the District Court case as respondents in the
appeal. The 2nd defendant was made entitled only to the life interest of the
1st defendant. The impugned judgment of the  learned District Judge (dated
21.07.2003) also reveals that the 4th defendant was given rights subject to
the life interest of the 3rd defendant. But the 3rd defendant had died on
29.3.2003. So the question of adding the 3rd defendant as a respondent to the
appeal does not arise.  
  
        At this juncture it would become pertinent to consider whether the 1st and 2nd defendants would be prejudicially affected if the 4th defendant appellant succeeds in the appeal. When considering this, the pronouncement of the Supreme Court in Kiri Mudiyanse & another vs Bandara Menike (Supra) would be of importance. Being a partition suit the main issue in the said case was also a preliminary objection raised by the plaintiff that the appeal was not properly constituted because  some parties who were allocated shares in the judgment were not made party respondents to the appeal. In the above case having discussed the pronouncements in the previous two Full Bench decisions, namely, Dias vs Arnolis(4) and Ibrahim vs Beebei.5)it was that:   
      
        "The Supreme Court had the discretionary power under section 770 of the Civil Procedure Code to direct the 1st to the 3rd and the 6th to the 8th defendants to be added as respondents. The exercise of the discretion contemplated in section 770 is a matter for the decision of

**56**

the Judge who hears the appeal in the particular case. Furthermore, it should
be exercised when some good reason or cause is given for the non-joinder. The
discretion which is an unfettered one must, of course, be exercised judicially
and not arbitrarily and capriciously."  
  
        It is evident from the points of content raised at the trial by the parties that the plaintiff had relied on the title by deeds and prescription as averred in the amended plaint and 3rd and 4th defendants too had claimed the share on deeds and prescription. Further according to the judgement buildings marked as A, B and C have been given according to soil rights and improvements D and E given to the 3rd defendant without any soil rights in the corpus. Even the plantation had been given according to soil rights. In view of the above am inclined to conclude that in the present case if the appeal preferred against the judgement pronounced in the  partition case is ultimatelyallowed, the 1st, and 2nd defendants' rights also would be prejudicially affected. Further in the aforementioned Kiri Mudiyanse's case (Supra) at 375  PathiranaJ. goes onto say this:  
  
        "Intrinsically there is nothing in Section 770 either expressly or by necessary implication to inhibit the discretion to the principles that have been set out in the case of Ibrahim v. Beebee as (Supra) to do so will be tantamount to saying that the exercise of the discretion is cribbed, cabined and confined exclusively to these principles, limiting the exercise of the discretion in a particular way, and thereby putting an end to the discretion itself. In this connection I would quote the observations made by Lord Wright in Evans v. Bartlam(6) at 655:   
  
"To quote again from Bowen L. J., in Gardner v. Jay, (7) at 58;

**57**

        "When a tribunal is invested by Act of Parliament or by rules with a discretion without any indication in the Act or rules of the grounds upon which the discretion is to be exercised, it is a mistake to lay down any rules with a view of indicating the particular grooves in which the discretion should run, for if the Act or the rules did not fetter the discretion of the judge why should the Court do SO?  
  
        Similarly, it has been held by the Court of Appeal, in Hope v. Great Western Railway Companyt8), that the discretion to grant or refuse a Jury in King's Bench cases is in truth, as it is in terms, unfettered. It is, however, often convenient in practices to lay down, not rules of law, but some general indications, to help the Court in  exercising the discretion, though in matters of discretion on one case can be an authority for another. As Kay, L. J., said in Jenkins v. Bushbyt9) at 495: the Court cannot be bound by a previous decision, to exercise its discretion in a particular way, because that would be in effect putting an end to the discretion.   
  
        A discretion necessarily involved a latitude of individual choice, according to the particular circumstances, and differs from a case where the decision follows ex debito justitiae, once the facts are ascertained."    
  
        When a discretion necessarily involves a range of individual choice the manner in which it has to be exercised would depend on facts and circumstances of each case. On the other hand it is needless to stress that the discretion given under Section 770 is a very wide one and same has to be exercised cautiously which being a power expressly and plainly conferred on the Judge who hears the appeal.

**58**

        On the other hand if a particular party in a partition case who should have been made a respondent is not made a respondent in the appeal, then granting relief to the appellant (in this case to the 4th defendant) will not help such a party to safeguard his rights and making him a respondent would not act to the prejudice of the appellant. For the above reasons I conclude that 1at and 2nd defendants named in the District Court case should be added as respondents to the appeal pending in the  High Court.  
  
        In view of the above necessity has now arisen to consider which Court should exercise this power given by Section 770 of the Civil Procedure Code. The impugned judgment of the High Court is already set aside. Perusal of the above section shows that 'if at the hearing of the appeal, if it appears to Court at such hearing that any  person who was a party to the action in the Court against whose decree the appeal is made, but who has not been made a party to the appeal. the Court has the discretion to issue the requisite notice of appeal for service. In the case at hand the appeal had been taken up for hearing in the High Court of Civil Appeal (although it was originally pending before the Court of Appeal) under the provisions of High Court of the Provinces (Special Provisions) - Amendment \- Act No. 54/2006. Thus it becomes clear that it is the High Court of Civil Appeal that has to exercise this power now and, I direct the High Court in terms of Section 770 of the Civil Procedure Code that 1at and 2nd defendants in the District Court case (also named as 1at and 2nd defendant - respondent - respondents in the caption to the present petition) be made respondents to the appeal preferred by the 4th defendant' and to issue the requisite notices of appeal on them.

**59**

The Learned Judges of the High Court of Civil Appeal are further directed to
take such other appropriate steps under the Civil Procedure Code and to
conclude the appeal expeditiously. The plaintiff - respondent - appellant will
however, be entitled to Rs. 15,000/- as costs payable by the 4th defendant-
appellant - respondent.  
  
**J. A. N.DESILVA, C. J. - I** agree.  
  
**MARSOOFP C, J. - I** agree.  
  
Appeal allowed.  
  
Directions given to High Court.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2010/3.html_  

