##  Stella Perera and Others v. Margret Silva - SLR - 169, Vol 1 of 2002
[2001] LKSC 30; (2002) 1 Sri LR 169 (9 November 2001)

**169**

**STELLA PERERA AND OTHERS  
 v.  
  
MARGRET SILVA**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.,  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J  
SC APPEAL NO. 166/97  
CA APPEAL NO. 280/91F  
 DC NEGOMBO NO. 339/L  
NOVEMBER 01. 2001  
  
_Vindicatory suit - Right of spouse to occupy the marital home owned by the
other spouse - Revocation of deed of gift for ingratitude \- Prescription
-Death of defendant - Survival of claim - Litis contestatio.  
_  
The 1st defendant (since deceased and substituted by the 2nd defendant) was
the plaintiff's husband. The 1st defendant who was the original owner of the
marital home (the premises in suit) gifted it to the plaintiff by deed No. 216
dated 02. 05\. 1963 (P3). Thereafter, they continued to live there during
which period the 1st defendant also effected substantive extensions and
improvements to the premises, at his own expense.  
  
The 2nd defendant is the legally adopted daughter of the plaintiff and the 1st
defendant; the 3rd defendant is the husband of the 2nd defendant whose
marriage had the blessings of the 1st defendant. The 2nd defendant had refused
to marry the plaintiff's nephew one Milton de Silva. In 1979 there was
unpleasantness between the plaintiff and the 1st defendant on account of that
marriage. ConÂ­sequently, the 2nd and the 3rd defendants moved to a house
opposite the premises in suit. About January, 1982, the plaintiff left the
matrimonial home and resided elsewhere; and by deed No. 930 dated 30. 01. 1982
the plaintiff gifted the premises in suit to her two nephews one of whom was
Milton de Silva. Later, by deed No. 163 dated 01. 08. 1984, the plaintiff
obtained a retransfer of the premises and proceeded to file an action in the
District Court of Negombo for a declaration of title in her favour and for the
eviction of the 1st defendant, her husband and the 2nd and 3rd defendants. By
that time the 2nd and 3rd defendants had moved back to the premises in suit to
look after the 1st defendant who had become paralysed.

**170**

**Held :  
**  
(1) The Deed of Gift No. 216 dated 02. 05. 1963 (P3) made by the 1st defendant
in favour of the plaintiff is liable to revocation on the ground of
ingratitude; the District Court was right to have ordered the revocation
thereof.  
  
(2) The relief sought in respect of deed P3 was not prescribed under section 3
of the Prescription Ordinance on the ground that the action was filed more
than 10 years after the execution of that deed.  
  
_Per_ Amerasinghe, J.  
  
... adverse possession - if that were possible at all between spouses in
relation to their marital home - could not have commenced till the complete
breakdown of the relationship between the plaintiff and the 1st defendant and
that took place only in 1982."  
  
(3) Consequent upon the revocation of deed P3, the gift made by the plaintiff
to her nephews by deed No. 930 is null and void.  
  
(4) The husband who is the owner of the property occupied by the couple has no
right, while the marriage is in existence, to eject the wife from it without
providing, alternative accommodation. Similarly, the wife has no right to
eject her husband from the marital home merely because the property belongs to
her.  
  
(5) The 1st defendant died pending the appeal in the Court of Appeal. The
stage of ritis contestatio had been reached. Hence, the 1st defendant's action
did not die with him.  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _Dona Podi Nona Ranaweera Menike v. Rohini Senanayake -_ (1992) 2 Sri LR
180.  
  
2\. _Krishnaswamy v. Thillaiyampalam -_ (1957) 59 NLR 265.  
  
3\. _Manuelpillai v. Nallamma -_ (1957) 52 NLR 221.  
  
4\. _Barnes v. Trompowsky -_ (1797) 7 TR 265.  
  
5\. _Badenhorst v. Badenhorst -_ (1964) 2 SA 676.  
  
6\. _Buck v. Buck -_ (1974) 1 SA 609.  
  
7\. _N. J. Canekeratne v. R. M. D. Canekeratne -_ (1968) 71 NLR 522.  
  
8\. _Mrs. A. E. Alwis v. D. S. Kulatunga -_ (1970) 73 NLR 337.  
  
9\. _Fernando v. Livera -_ (1972) 29 NLR 246.  
  
10\. _Dheerananda Them v. Ratnasara Them -_ (1958) 60 NLR 7.  
  
11\. Krishnasamy Vengadasalam v. Adika Pundagan Karuppam - (1978) 79 NLR 150.

**171**

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P. A. D. Samarasekera, PC_ with _R. Y. D. Jayasekera_ for appellant.  
  
_W. Dayaratne with R. Jayawardena_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

November 09, 2001  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
**  
Dewadura Margret Silva, hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff, was the wife
of Lewisdura Jeramias Solomon, hereinafter referred to as the first defendant.
The plaintiff and first defendant had no children of their own and they
adopted Lewisdura Maureen Stella Perera, hereinafter referred to as the second
defendant, as their child-under the Adoption of Children Ordinance. Mirihana
Aratchige Nihal Pedrick Perera, the third defendant, is the husband of the
second defendant.  
  
The premises in suit, No. 124, Weliamuna Road, Hekitta, Wattala, was the
matrimonial home of the plaintiff and the first defendant. After the marriage
of the second and third defendants in 1978 they lived in the premises in suit
until 1979 when they moved into a house situated opposite the premises in
suit. The plaintiff and the first defendant continued to live at the premises
in suit until, following a breakdown of the relationship with her husband, the
plaintiff left her matrimonial home some time in January, 1982\. There is
uncertainty with regard to the exact date. The plaintiff became a 'sil matha'
and went to reside in an 'aramaya'. The first defendant became unwell and the
second and third defendants moved back into the premises in suit to look after
the ailing first defendant who became paralysed.  
  
The premises in suit belonged to the first defendant. Nine years after his
marriage, the first defendant, by deed No. 216 dated 2 May, 1963, gifted the
premises to his wife, the plaintiff. The relationship between the plaintiff
and first defendant were cordial and the plaintiff

**172**

in her evidence did say that there was nothing wrong with the first defendant.
Indeed not, for he was so a dutiful husband that he handed over all his
earnings every month to his wife. The deterioration in family relationships
seems to have commenced when the second defendant, with the blessings of the
first defendant, married the third defendant. The plaintiff was displeased
that the second defendant had refused to marry the plaintiff's nephew,
Benedict Milton de Silva. The  second and third defendants moved out of the
premises in suit in 1979 after the unpleasantness reached a less than
tolerable level. When the plaintiff decided to leave home, instead of
transferring the premises in suit to the second defendant, her adopted
daughter, she by deed No. 930 dated 30 January, 1982, gifted it to her two
nephews, one of whom was Benedict Milton de Silva. Later, by deed No. 163
dated 1st August, 1984, the plaintiff obtained a retransfer of the premises
and proceeded to file an action in the District Court of. Negombo for a
declaration of title in her favour and for the eviction of her own husband,
adopted daughter and the adopted daughter's  husband from the premises in
suit.  
  
The first defendant responded by seeking an order of revocation of the gift
made by deed No. 216 dated 2 May, 1963, on the ground of ingratitude and a
declaration that the gift made by the plaintiff to her nephews by deed No. 930
was null and void.  
  
The learned District Judge, after hearing and duly weighing the evidence, in a
principled and carefully reasoned judgment, made order dismissing the
plaintiff's action and revoked deed No. 216 as prayed for by the first
defendant.  
  
The Court of Appeal, however, set aside the orders of the learned  District
Judge.  
  
There is no doubt that a gift could be revoked on the ground of ingratitude.
Voet, Pandects, 39.5.23; Dona Podi Nona Ranaweera Menike v. Rohini Senanayak
(1); Krishnaswamy v. Thillaiyampalarri (2); Manuelpillai v. Nallamma (3).

**173**

The learned Judge of the Court of Appeal, however, had difficulty with regard
to the proof of ingratitude. He said:  
  
"The 1st defendant being bedridden was unable to give evidence. He being the
person who would have offered the best evidence on the acts of ingratitude on
the part of the plaintiff has not applied to Court to have his evidence
recorded on a commission under section 420 of the Civil Procedure Code. His
daughter the 2nd defendant has spoken of certain alleged acts of ingratitude
of the plaintiff which are insufficient for a Court to base an order of
revocation."  
  
The maxim that 'the best evidence must be given of which the nature of the
case permits', was once regarded as expressing the great fundamental principle
upon which the law of evidence depends. Today, however, the rule is of little
practical importance, and indeed J. D. Heydon and M. Ockeleton (Evidence -
Laws and Materials 4th ed. 1996 p. 9) refer to it as an 'evidentiary ghost'.
Phipson on Evidence (15th ed. 2000 p. 127) succinctly states the current
position: "In the present day, then, it is not true that the best evidence
must, or even may, always be given, though its non-production may be a matter
for comment or affect the weight of that which is produced. Ail admissible
evidence is generally equally accepted". In the instant case, the daughter of
the first defendant, who lived for a time under the same roof as the first
defendant and later a short distance across the street, had personal knowledge
of the facts she spoke to and the learned District Judge unhesitatingly
accepted her evidence. Admittedly, the provision of section 420 may have been
availed of. However, there was, in the opinion of the District Judge,
sufficient evidence of misconduct on the part of the plaintiff manifesting
ingratitude. It is a finding of fact that should not be interfered with on the
basis that the first defendant's evidence might have been obtained by issuing
a commission for the examination of the ailing first defendant since there was
other cogent evidence to support the finding. The old 'best evidence' rule in
that regard had been relaxed as far back as 1797 when Lord Kenyon allowed
proof of the

**174**

handwriting of the attesting witness resident abroad, instead of sending out a
commission to examine him. Barnes v. Trompowsky(4) In any event, how should
one characterise the act of a wife who donates her matrimonial home (gifted to
her by her generous and caring husband) to her nephews at the time when her
husband lay grievously unwell in that home, and then herself attempts to have
him ejected after obtaining a retransfer of the home when her nephews refuse
to have the man ejected?  
  
The learned Judge of the Court of Appeal had a second ground for setting aside
the order of the District Court. He said:  
  
"In any event, this relief is sought ten years after the execution of deed P3
and is prescribed under section 3 of the Prescription Ordinance. Therefore,
the judgment of the District Judge granting that relief to the 1st defendant
is set aside, as it is clear the plaintiff has possessed the property as her
own and dealt with it as such without recognizing the title thereto in any
other."  
  
This, with due respect, is untenable, for any adverse possession - if that
were possible at all between spouses in relation to their matrimonial home -
could not have commenced till the complete breakdown of the relationship
between the plaintiff and the first defendant and that took place only in
1982. After making a gift of the matrimonial home to the plaintiff in 1963,
the first defendant not only continued to live in that house but also effected
substantial extensions and improvements to the premises at his own expense.  
  
Finally, the learned Judge of the Court of Appeal said:  
  
"The 1st defendant has died pending appeal. The learned District Judge has
held that the plaintiff will not be entitled to recover possession or damages
from the defendants as the 1st defendant had a right to remain in occupation
of the premises as the lawful husband of the plaintiff. Counsel conceded that
the appeal from that finding of the District Judge is of academic interest
now."

**175**

The learned District Judge, in my view, was quite right in refusing to eject
the first defendant for, as a matter of law the right of occupation of the
conjugal 'nest' did not depend on ownership. Where the husband is the owner of
the property occupied by the couple, he has no right, while the marriage is in
existence, to eject his wife from it without providing her with suitable
alternative accommodation. Her occupation is not by licence of her husband but
is sui generis. Similarly, the wife has no right to eject her husband from the
matrimonial home merely because the property belongs to her. Because he is her
husband he has rights flowing from the marriage which in relation to that
property 130 put him in a category differing toto coeli from that of a
stranger. All this is subject to the forfeiture of the right in certain
circumstances; but, forfeiture was not an issue in this case. H. R. Hahlo, The
South African Law of Husband and Wife, 5th ed. (1985) pp. 143-144; Bromley's
Family Law, 7th ed. p. 547 Badenhorst v. Badenhors (5); Buck v. Buck (6); Cf.
N. J. Canekeratne v. R. M. D. Canekeratne (7); Mrs. A. E. Alwis v. D. S.
Kulatunge (8). Admittedly, the 1st defendant died pending the appeal in the
Court of Appeal. However, by that time he had a judgment in his favour in
respect of his claim to have the donation to his wife revoked and for
possession. The stage of litis contestatio having been reached, the first
defendant's action did not die with him. The maxim actio personalis moritur
cum persona had no application. Cf. Fernando v. Livera(9); Dheerananda Them v.
Ratnasara Thero (10); Krishnaswamy Vengadasalam v. Adika Pundagan Karuppam
(11)  
  
For the reasons set out in my judgment, I set aside the judgment of the Court
of Appeal with costs and affirm the Order of the District Court.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**BANDARANAYAKE, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Appeal allowed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/30.html_  

