##  Wickramasinghe v. Sri Lanka State Trading (Consolidated Exports)
Corporation - SLR - 41, Vol 3 of 1994 [1992] LKSC 30; (1994) 3 Sri LR 41 (29
April 1992)

**41**

**WICKRAMASINGHE  **

**V.  **

**SRI LANKA STATE TRADING**

**(CONSOLIDATED EXPORTS)**

**CORPORATION**



SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.

DR. AMERASINGHE, J.

AND WADUGODAPITIYA, J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 14/19

C.A. NO. 249/81

L.T NO. 1/11838/75

MARCH 11, 1992.



_Industrial dispute - Company converted into Corporation - Pending proceedings
in Labour Tribunal - Liability of Corporation._

_ _

Consolidated Exports (Ceylon) Ltd. was converted into the Sri Lanka State
Trading (Consolidated Exports) Corporation. Before the conversion the
applicant whose services had been terminated filed proceedings in the Labour
Tribunal.



**Held:**



Where the liabilities of an employer, in a pending Labour Tribunal
application, devolve upon another person, the application can be maintained
and continued against such other person after substitution. Where the issue as
to devolution of liabilities involves no question of fact, an order for
substitution based on errors of law can, generally speaking, be set aside in
appeal. If, however, questions of fact are involved, and either no evidence is
led, or the facts are not disputed, a party who invites or consents to the
order for substitution cannot afterwards challenge it in appeal.



The result of the substitution in the caption was that the Company was
effectively discharged from the proceedings on the representation that the
Corporation would be responsible for the Company's liabilities; the applicant
was deprived of his remedies against the Company.



The applicant was entitled to maintain his application against the successor
in title of the Company; that the Company and the Corporation intentionally
represented that the liabilities of the Company in respect of the subject-
matter of the application had, as a matter of fact, devolved on the
Corporation, and that the Corporation should accordingly be substituted in
place of the Company. The substitution of the Corporation was not vitiated by
a patent want of jurisdiction. Accordingly the Corporation was not entitled to
question the substitution at the stage of appeal.  


Arnolda v Gopalan (1961) 64 NLR 153 doubted.

**42**



**Cases referred to:**



1 _. Arnolda v Gopalan_ (1961) 64 NLR153, 157.

_ _

2 _. Re Arnaldo Da Brescia (1922) 23 NLR 391, 395._

_ _

3 _. Savoy Theatres Ltd. v. Parusella_ (1982) 2 Sri LR 753.

_ _

4 _. Deerananda Thero v. Ratnasara Thero_ (1958) 60 NLR 7, 14.

_ _

5 _. Ramaswamy v. B.C.C. S.C._ No. 60/87 SCM 21.3.91.

_ _

6 _. Shaw Wallace and Hedges v. Palmerston Tea Co_ (1982) 2 Sri LR 427, 433.

_ _

7 _. Ceylon Estate Staffs' Union v Land Reform Commission_ (1987) 2 Sri LR
203, 207, 208.

_ _

8 _. Liquidators, Janawasama Commission v Chandradasa_ (1985) 2 Sri LR 17.

_ _

9 _. Hire Purchase Co. Ltd. v. Fernando_ (1978) 79(2) NLR 15.



**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_ _

_E. D. Wickramanayake with A. P. Niles for appellant._

_ _

_Lucian G. Weeramantry with Jacob Joseph and Uditha Egalhewa for respondent._

_Cur adv vult._



April 29,1992.  


**FERNANDO, J.**



The Applicant-Appellant ("the Applicant") was employed in June 1968 by
Consolidated Exports (Ceylon) Ltd., a limited liability company incorporated
under the Companies Ordinance ("the Company"). His services were terminated in
February 1970, whereupon he made an application to the Labour Tribunal against
his employer, the Company. The inquiry commenced in 1972.



The matter now in dispute arose in consequence of the following proceedings in
1974 and 1975:  
  
"Counsel for the respondent submits that there is a change of address and
requests that all further communications be sent to the following address in
future;

  
Sri Lanka State Trading Consolidated Exports Corporation,  
68/70, York Street,

Colombo 1. " (proceedings of 22.11.74)  
  
"Respondent moves to amend the caption to read as Sri Lanka State Trading
(Consolidated Exports) Corporation, York Street, Colombo 1." (proceedings of
23.10.75)

**43**



Although no formal order was made, it is common ground that such amendment was
effected, and the original application contains an endorsement to that effect.
The same Counsel and instructing Attorneys appeared for the substituted
respondent Corporation. After a protracted inquiry, the Labour Tribunal
dismissed the application on the merits, in June 1981. The Applicant appealed
naming the Corporation as the respondent. The appeal was taken up for hearing
in the Court of Appeal on 7.11.89. A preliminary objection was taken on behalf
of the Corporation that the respondent to the appeal was not the employer of
the Applicant. A supporting affidavit was filed averring that:



1\. The Corporation was established under section 2(1) of the Sri Lanka State
Trading Corporations Act, No. 33 of 1970, in February 1972;



2\. One of the objects of the Corporation was the conversion of the Company
into a State Trading Corporation, and the purchase by the Government of the
shares held in that Company by private individuals and corporations;



3\. The shares not purchased as aforesaid were vested in the Corporation by a
vesting order made in May 1973; and



4\. The said Company "was not and has not been functioning as such" since the
Corporation was established.



The Court of Appeal considered that the questions which arose were whether the
Applicant was an employee of the Corporation, and whether an employee whose
services were terminated before the Corporation came into existence could sue
and obtain relief against the Corporation. It was held that the applicant had
no contract of employment with the Corporation. In regard to the second
question, it was held that the Corporation had statutory power to employ
servants, and accordingly when the Corporation came into existence,  


"a fresh employment of officers, servants and agents is provided for. The
previous employees are not deemed to be employees of the respondent."

**44**



The Court of Appeal upheld the preliminary objection relying on Arnolda v.
Gopalan (1). In that case, after the death of the employer, his widow informed
the workman that his services had ceased in view of the death of her husband.
The workman made an application to the Labour Tribunal, naming the widow as
the respondent, for wages, compensation and gratuity for the period of
employment under the husband. A settlement was entered into whereby the widow
agreed to pay the workman a sum of Rs. 2,073/50, on behalf of the estate of
the husband, and the Tribunal made order accordingly. It was held that the
Tribunal had no jurisdiction to make an order against the widow or legal
representative of a deceased employer. Although the widow had consented to pay
the said sum, such consent did not confer jurisdiction on the Tribunal when in
fact no jurisdiction had been conferred on it by statute. Re Arnaldo Da
Brescia (2), was also relied on for the proposition that:



"The Court is bound to withhold its hand whenever it appears that it is
without jurisdiction, and cannot refuse to entertain an objection to the
jurisdiction at any stage of the suit."



Reference was also made to Savoy Theatres Ltd v Parusella (3).



**Arnold's** case dealt only with the question whether a workman had the right
to make an application against the widow or legal representative of a deceased
employer, and not with the question whether an application duly made against
the employer could, after his death, be continued against the person on whom
his liabilities had devolved under the law. In the **Savoy Theatres Ltd**
case, the Managing Director of the company who had been named as the employer
died pendente lite, and the substitution of the company in his place was held
to be improper. Such substitution was not on the basis that the company had
succeeded to the rights and liabilities of the deceased, but rather by way of
an amendment as if the Company had been the real employer throughout.

  
The question that arises in the present appeal is thus not covered by the
ratio decidendi of **Arnolda's** case. However, I must express my doubts as to
the correctness of that decision. If it was based on the principle actio
personalis moritur cumpersona (of Deerananda Thero v. Ratnasara Thero,(4)),
that decision is unexceptionable.

**45**



However, the workman was employed in the husband's business, which was
registered in the name of the widow within a month, and the workman had in
fact been employed for a few days under the widow (64 N.L.R. at p. 157). The
question therefore did arise whether the widow had become the employer of the
workman, and had accepted responsibility for past services; and if so, whether
it was she who had terminated the services of the workman. That was not
considered. Apart from that, the general question whether the rights of a
workman, employed in connection with a business, who had resigned, retired or
been dismissed shortly before the death of his employer, are enforceable
against the person who succeeds to that business (at least to the extent of
the assets of that business) has not been considered in that case. If, for
instance, the employer had actually put aside funds for the retiring gratuity
due, for, say, a thirty year period of service, would the employer's premature
death disentitle the retired workman from recovering that gratuity from the
successor to the business? Would such successor be entitled to retain all the
assets of that business, and refuse to pay that gratuity? If all other
liabilities in respect of that business-taxes owed to the State, loans
repayable to lenders, sums due on contracts with suppliers, and the like -
have to be discharged by the successor, can it be that only liabilities to
workmen are extinguished? Would such successor be entitled under the common
law to recover a loan taken by the workman, but not be liable under the
Industrial Disputes Act to discharge a vested liability in respect of arrears
of salary, bonus or retiring gratuity? These questions need to be considered
in an appropriate case. I note also that **Arnoida's** case did not deal with
devolution of rights and liabilities otherwise than by death, in relation to
both natural and artificial persons \- e.g. upon the vesting of an estate or a
business under the Land Reform Law No. 1 of 1972 as amended by Law No. 39 of
1975, or under the Business Undertakings (Acquisition) Act, No. 35 of 1971.



Even assuming that it is correct that a Labour Tribunal has no jurisdiction to
entertain an application made against the widow, heirs, legal representatives
or other successors in title of a deceased employer, it does not follow that
an application validly made against an employer in his lifetime, cannot be
maintained against the person on whom his liabilities have devolved by
operation of law. It has been

**46**



held that consequent upon such devolution no order can be made against the
former employer, as his liability ceases and devolves on the successor
(whether in Labour Tribunal applications: Ramaswamy v. B.C.C.(5) or upon a
reference to arbitration Shaw Wallace and Hedges v. Palmerston Tea Co.(6) That
the former employer's liability not only devolves on the successor in title,
but that the successor may properly be substituted, was confirmed in Ceylon
Estates Staffs' Union v. Land Reform Commission(7) In Liquidators, Janawasama
Commission v. Chandradasa,(8) an order was made by the Labour Tribunal against
the Commission. While an appeal against that order was pending, the Commission
was dissolved and the Liquidators were substituted as appellants. On behalf of
the Liquidators it was contended (as in this case) that they had no contract
of employment with the workman, and were not liable to comply with the order,
in the absence of express statutory provision. Rejecting this contention, the
Court of Appeal held that the Liquidators had succeeded to the assets and
liabilities of the Commission, and that the order made against the Commission
was binding on the Liquidators. If such a substitution was permissible at the
stage of appeal, ex hypothesi it was. proper in the Tribunal itself.



Learned Counsel for the appellant referred us to the affidavit submitted on
behalf of the Corporation in the Court of Appeal, and to certain provisions of
the Sri Lanka State Trading Corporations Act, defining the powers of a
corporation, in particular section 5(2) (n):

  
"to amalgamate with any other body, corporate or unincorporate whose objects
are or include objects similar or substantially similar to those of the
Corporation, whether by sale, purchase or compulsory acquisition of the
undertaking of such body corporate or unincorporate, subject to the
liabilities of such body corporate or unincorporate, or by sale, purchase, or
compulsory acquisition, of all, or a controlling interest in, the shares or
stock of such body corporate or unincorporate;"



It was his submission that on a proper construction of the affidavit and the
incorporation order, there had been an amalgamation of the

**47**



Company and the Corporation, subject to the condition that the liabilities of
the Company vested in the Corporation. It is, however, unnecessary for us to
consider this submission. The substitution of a Corporation did not result in
a patent want of jurisdiction, but at most in a latent want of jurisdiction:
for the question whether the liabilities of the Company vested in the
Corporation pendente lite was a mixed question of fact and law. It was for the
Tribunal to determine the facts, and the necessary evidence should have been
placed before the Tribunal. Had the matter been disputed, an order made by the
Tribunal which was wrong on the facts could not have conferred jurisdiction on
the Tribunal, and could have been contested in appeal. Here the Corporation
represented to the Applicant and to the Tribunal, and induced both to act on
the **factual** basis that the liabilities of the Company, in respect of the
subject-matter of the lis, had devolved on the Corporation, and invited the
Tribunal to substitute the Corporation. While a wrong order for substitution
can sometimes deprive a court or tribunal of jurisdiction, this consequence
will not follow where a party having consented to such order, thereafter seeks
to take the objection at the stage of appeal, "where the point depended upon a
question of fact, which if disputed, should have been determined on evidence":
Deerananda Thero v. Ratnasara Thero (at p. 14). In that case the objection was
entertained and upheld in appeal, because all the facts necessary for the
decision were in evidence and were not in dispute at all. The Arnaldo Da
Brescia case has no relevance, because there the objection to jurisdiction was
taken at the outset; there was no question of an initial waiver or consent,
followed by a belated objection; further, the objection was taken and decided
in the same proceedings, and not raised for the first time in appeal.



I am of the opinion that where the liabilities of an employer, in a pending
Labour Tribunal application, devolve upon another person, the application can
be maintained and continued against such other person after substitution.
Where the issue as to devolution of liabilities involves no question of fact,
an order for substitution based on errors of law can, generally speaking, be
set aside in appeal. If, however,

**48**



questions of fact are involved and either no evidence is led, or the facts are
not disputed, a party who invites or consents to the order for substitution
cannot afterwards challenge it in appeal.



In the present case, the matter was not even presented as a question of
substitution, but virtually as a change of name and address. What is more, the
result of that substitution was that the Company was effectively discharged
from the proceedings, on the representation that the Corporation would be
responsible for the Company's liabilities; the Applicant was deprived of his
remedies against the Company. If the liabilities of the Company had, in fact
not devolved on the Corporation, the Applicant was entitled to pursue his
application against the Company {or perhaps the liquidators, if it was in
liquidation: of Hire Purchase Co. Ltd. v. Fernando.(9) The Corporation which
by 1973 was the sole owner of the Company, represented that the liabilities of
the latter had devolved on the Corporation; procured the Company's discharge
from the proceedings by seeking and obtaining its own substitution; and then
submitted fifteen years later that the substitution was illegal. To set aside
the order for substitution, without restoring the Company as the respondent to
the application, was hardly just and equitable, especially since the Company
was wholly owned by the Corporation. Hence, even if the question of devolution
had only involved. matters of law, I doubt whether a wrong order for
substitution should have been set aside without restoring the status quo.



I therefore hold that the Applicant was entitled to maintain his application
against the successor in title of the Company; that the Company and the
Corporation intentionally represented that the liabilities of the Company in
respect of the subject-matter of the application had, as a matter of fact,
devolved on the Corporation, and that the Corporation should accordingly be
substituted in place of the Company; that the substitution of the Corporation
was not vitiated by a patent want of jurisdiction; and that accordingly the
Corporation was not entitled to question the substitution at the stage of
appeal. The order of the Court of Appeal is therefore set aside; the Applicant
will be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 10,000% in both

**49**



Courts. Since 22 years have elapsed after the Applicant's dismissal, we
directed that this case be called today to ascertain whether any settlement
was possible, failing which the Court of Appeal is directed to hear and
determine the appeal on the merits.



**AMERASINGHE, J.** \- I agree.



**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.



_Order of Court of Appeal set aside._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/30.html_  

