##  Bandaranaike v. Premadasa - SLR - 240, Vol 1 of 1989 [1989] LKSC 30;
(1989) 1 Sri LR 240 (29 May 1989)

**240**

**

BANDARANAIKE  
v.  
PREMADASA

**

SUPREME COURT.  
RANASINGHE, C. J.  
TAMBIAH, J.  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, J.  
JAMEEL, J.  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION  
PETITION NO. 1 OF 1989  
MARCH 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 20, 22, 23, 27, 28, 29 and  
MAY 2. 3. 4, 5. 8: and 9, 1989

_

Election Petition - Presidential Election - Preliminary objections - Dismissal
in limine - Poll of over 50% of the registered voters as a legal bar to
avoidance of election - Section 91 (a) of the Presidential Elections Act No.
15 of 1981: General intimidation; Other circumstances in consequence of which
the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from electing the
candidate whom they preferred - Non-compliance with provisions of Presidential
Elections Act as a ground for avoidance of election - Does such non-compliance
fall also under 'other circumstances'? - Concise statement of material facts -
Failure to identify or name candidate whom the majority preferred but were or
may have been prevented from electing whom they preferred \- Sufficiency of
pleadings.

_

The petitioner one of the unsuccessful candidates at the Presidential Election
of 1988 sought to have the election of the returned candidate the 1st
respondent declared null and void on the grounds of general intimidation S. 91
(a) of the Presidential Elections Act No. 15 of 1981 (as amended), non-
compliance with the provisions of the Presidential Elections, Act No. 1 5 of
1981 '(as amended) and the principles thereof (S. 91(b)) and other
circumstances, to wit, failure of the Commissioner of Elections (2nd
respondent) and/or his staff to conduct a free and fair election in accordance
with the provisions of the Presidential Elections Act aforesaid.

To the charge of general intimidation the 1st respondent raised three
preliminary objections;

> 1 . There was a poll of 55.32% of the registered voters and therefore in law
> the election cannot be avoided under S. 91 (a) of the Presidential Elections
> Act:
>
> 2\. The petitioner has failed to identify or name the candidate whom the
> majority preferred but were or may have been prevented from electing
>
> 3\. The petition does not contain a concise statement of material facts (S.
> 96(c)).

> The 2nd respondent raised preliminary objections on the same lines as 1 and
> 3 above.

**

241

**

On the question of non-compliance with the provisions of the Presidential
Elections Act both respondents raised the objection that the petitioner had
failed to aver a material fact relating to an ingredient of the charge under
section 91 (b) namely how the acts of non-compliance with the provisions of
the Act affected the result of the election.

On behalf of the petitioner it was submitted that the Supreme Court cannot
dismiss an election petition in limine

**

Held

**

1 . The Court has power to dismiss an election petition in limine if there is
a fundamental defect in the petition arising out of non-compliance with a
mandatory provision. Although not so stated the power to dismiss the petition
for such non: compliance is Inbuilt m the mandatory provisions.

Public interest in the litigation does not postulate an order on a preliminary
objection being made only at the conclusion of the trial of the petition. Just
as much as the public have interests in the election petition there is also
the principle that the election of a candidate should not be lightly
interfered with.

2\. Mere proof of the several instances or acts of general intimidation would
not suffice to avoid an election. In addition the petitioner must prove that
these several acts or instances had the result or consequence that the
majority of electors were or may have been prevented from electing the
candidate whom they preferred.

3\. The case of the petitioner based on the ground of avoidance under section
91-(a) general intimidation and other circumstances-falls to be determined
solely by a consideration of the provisions contained in section 91 (a).

4\. The petitioner's case is one of preventive intimidation and not coercive
intimidation.

5\. In a case of general intimidation the question that arises is-from the
proved acts of intimidation of electors, is it reasonable to suppose that the
result of the election may have been affected? This, it seems to us, to be the
true meaning 'of the words "the majority may have been prevented from-
electing the candidate they prefer". But, it will be open to the returned
candidate to show that the gross intimidation could not possibly have affected
the result.

6\. In a charge of general intimidation particulars need not be given. Only a
concise statement of material facts is necessary. Only the nature and extent
of the intimidation is. The nature of the alleged intimidation has been
furnished, namely actual violence or threats of violence-bomb explosions,
shootings arid killings, posters threatening voters and announcing curfews
etc. The extent of

**242**

the alleged intimidation has also been given, namely, that it was generally
spread over 20 electoral districts. Therefore there has been sufficient
compliance with section 95(c) of the Act.

7\. The charge under section 91 (b) postulates three ingredients:

1 . Non-compliance with provisions of the Act:

2\. Failure to conduct the erection in accordance with the principles laid
down in such provisions:

3\. Such non-compliance affected the result of the election.

The petitioner has set specifically numerous acts of non-compliance with
reference to the specific provisions of the law pertaining to these
contraventions. The principles in accordance with which the election has to be
conducted are those laid down in the provisions of the Act. What these
principles are, is a matter for the Court.

8\. A consideration of the totality of, the averments in the petition makes
it, in our opinion, quite clear that the petitioner's complaint is that the
said acts of non-compliance did operate to adversely affect her. It does not
seem to us to be open to the 1st respondent to urge that the petition does
not, on the face of it, make it clear what the case is that he the 1st
respondent, has to meet. The petitioner has set out facts which are material
and are necessary for the proof of her case. The facts and circumstances
pleaded are sufficient to enable the 1st respondent to make the necessary
inquiries and obtain information to defend himself.

9\. The words "other circumstances" are wide enough to include instances of
non-compliance with the law relating to the conduct of elections. The
petitioner was entitled to plead instances of non-compliance to sustain a
charge under section 91 (a) of the Act. Section 91 (a) and sect on 91 (b) do
not cover the same area nor are they in conflict or repugnant to each other.

**

Cases referred to:

**

1\.  _Rambukwelle v. Silva_ 26 NLR 231, 251. 252.

2\.  _Saravanamuttu v. De Mel_ 49 NLR 529. 532

3\.  _Wijewardena v. Senanayake_ 80 CLW 1, 4, 5 affd in appeal: 74 NLR 97. 101

4\.  _Aron v. Senanayake_ 40 NLR 257

5\.  _Cooray v. Fernando_ 54 NLR 400

6\.  _Nanayakkara v. Kiriella_ 1985 2 Sri LR 391

7\.  _Kobbekaduwa v. Jayewardene_ 1983 1, Sri LR 416

**243**

8\.  _Samar Singh v Kedar Nath_ 1987 SCC 663

9\.  _Arthur Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi_ 1986 SCC 31 3

10\.  _Guildford_ (1869) 1 O'M & H 13, 15

11\.  _Bradford_ (1869) 1 O'M & H 35..40

12\.  _Dudley_ (1874) 2 O'M & H 115, 119, 120, 121

13\.  _Nottingham_ (1869) 1 O'M & H 245. 246

14\.  _North Durham Case_ (1874) 2 O'M & H 1 52. 1 56. 1 57

15\.  _Gloucester_ (1886) 4 O'M & W 65. 68

16\.  _South Meath Case_ (1886) 4 O'M & H 130. 139, 141

17\.  _Illangaratne v. G. E de Silva_ 49 NLR 169

18\.  _Abeywardene v. Ariya Bulegoda_ 1985 1 Sri LR 86

19\.  _Jayasinghe v. Jayakody_ (1985) 2 Sri LR 77, 89

20\.  _Drogheda Case_ (1869) 1 O'M & H 252, 255, 256

21\.  _Rutnam v. M Dingiri Banda_ 45 NLR 145

22\.  _Pelpola v. R. S. S. Gunawardene_ 49 NLR 207

23\.  _Tarnolis Appuhamy v. Wilmot Perera_ 49 NLR 361

24\.  _North Louth Case_ (191 1) 6 O'M & H 1 24

25\.  _Shiv Charan Singh v. Chandra Bhan Singh and others_ 1988 2 SCC 12

26\.  _Hackney Case_ (1872) 2 O'M& H 77

27\.  _Lichfield Case_ (1869) 1 O'M & H 22, 24

28\.  _Morgan and others v. Simpson and another_ 1974 3 All ER 722

29\.  _Munasinghe v. Corea_ 55NLR 265

30\.  _Eastern Division of the County of Clare_ (1886) 4 0'M & H 162

31\.  _Woodward v. Sarsons_ (1875) LR 10 CP 733

Presidential Election Petition - Preliminary Objections.

_

H. L. de Silva PC_ with _R. K. W Goonesekera, A. A. de Silva, Sidath Sri
Nandalochana, Percy Wickremasekera, M. W. Amerasinghe,

_

**244**

S. L. Gunasekera, Nihal Jayamanne, J. Yusuf Champani Padmasekera & Colin
Senerat Nandadeva instructed by Nimal Siripala de Silva for petitioner.

_

K. N. Choksy PC_ with _P. Nagendra PC. Sunil K. Rodrigo, S.C. Crossette-
Tambiah. Kosala, Wijayatileke, Naufel Abdul Rahman, Daya Pelpola, S. J.
Mohideen, Raja Dep, D. H. N. Jayamaha, S. Mahentiran, Lakshman Perera, A. L.
B. Brito   Mutunayagam & M. lliyas _instructed by _S. Sunderalingam_ for 1st
respondent.

_

Sunil de Silva PC Attorney-General_ with _Tilak Marapona PC_ Additional
Solicitor General, _Shibley Aziz PC_ Additional Solicitor-General, _K.C.
Kamalasabayson,_ Deputy Solicitor-General.

29 May 1989

**

Ranasinghe** C. J. read the following unanimous

**

ORDER OF THE COURT ON THE PRELIMINARY

OBJECTIONS RAISED BY THE RESPONDENTS:

**

The election for the office of President of Sri Lanka was held on the 19th of
December, 1988. There were three candidates, Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike of
the Sri Lanka Freedom Party, Ranasinghe Premadasa of the United National Party
and Oswin Abeygunasekera of the Sri Lanka Mahajana Party. The Commissioner of
Elections declared the results as follows:-

Oswin Abeygunasekera  | 235719 | 04.6%  
---|---|---  
Sirimavo Bandaranaike | 2289860 | 44.95%  
R. Premadasa | 2569199 | 50.43%  
Valid Votes | 5094778 |  
Rejected Votes | 91445 |  
Total Polled | 5186223 |  
Majority | 279339 |  
Total Registered Votes | 9375742 |  
Total Polled/Registered Votes |   | 55.32%  
  
On 9.1.1989, Sirimavo R. D. Bandaranaike filed this petition and has sought to
have the election of Ranasinghe Premadasa declared null and void on the
following grounds:-

Paragraph 6(A) That by reason of the occurrence of the incidents hereinafter
mentioned and the

**245**

commission of the acts-hereinafter specified in paragraph 7 hereof, there was
general intimidation of the electors at the aforesaid election in consequence
of which the majority of the said electors were or may have been prevented
from electing the candidate whom they preferred.

Paragraph 6 (B) That by reason of non-compliance with the provisions of the
Presidential Elections Act No. 15 of 1981 (as amended) the aforesaid election
was not conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in the said
provisions and as hereinafter specified and as particularised in paragraph 8
hereof, which acts of non-compliance affected the result of the election and
the said election is in consequence null and void.

Paragraph 6(C) That by mason of other circumstances to wit, the failure of the
Commissioner of Elections (the 2nd Respondent) and/or certain members of his
staff to conduct a fair and free election, in accordance with the provisions,
of the Presidential Elections Act No. 15 of 1981, more particularly set out in
paragraph 9 read with paragraph 8 hereof, the majority of the said electors
were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred.

To this petition, the said Ranasinghe Premadasa, the successful candidate, has
been made the 1st Respondent, and the Commissioner of Elections has been made
the 2nd Respondent.

As regards the charge of general intimidation, the petitioner in her petition
has enumerated 137 instances of acts of violence and intimidation spread over
22 Electoral Districts. In paragraph 7 of her petition, the petitioner states
that these instances "which

**246**

occurred in various parts of the country either shortly before or on the day
of the poll and which were of a widespread nature affected the freedom of
election and prevented the free exercise of the franchise rendering the
election of the First Respondent null and void, under paragraph (a) of section
91 of the said Act." .

Preliminary objections have been filed by both the 1st and 2nd respondents and
they have asked for a dismissal of the petition in limine. The objections of
the 1st Respondent pertaining to the charge of general intimidation are as
follows:-

(a) As 55.32% of the total registered voters have polled, the petitioner
cannot in law, on the basis of the averments pleaded in the petition,, seek to
have the election declared void on the ground of avoidance set out in S. 91
(a) of the Presidential Elections Act No. 15 of 1981..

(b) The petitioner has failed, as required in terms of S. 91(6) and S. 96(c)
of the said Act to identify or name in the petition, the candidate who the
petitioner alleges the majority of the electors preferred but were or may have
been prevented from electing. A mandatory provision of law has not been
complied with and, therefore, the petitioner cannot rely on the ground of
avoidance set out in S. 91 (a) of the said Act.

(c) The petition does not contain a concise statement of material facts upon
which the petitioner relies and, therefore, has failed to conform to the
mandatory provisions of S. 96(c) of the Act.

The objections of the 2nd Respondent pertaining to the charge of general
intimidation are as follows:-

(a) Since over 50% of the electors have exercised their right to elect a
candidate whom they preferred, the allegation contained in paragraph 6 (a)
cannot be maintained in law.

(b) The petition does not contain a concise statement of material facts as
required by S. 96(c) of the Act, in that, the petition does not contain an
averment that the acts of general intimidation affected any particular
candidate. As a matter of law, it cannot be maintained that by reason of these
acts, the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from electing
the candidate whom they preferred.  
S. 91 of the Acts states, inter alia:-

**

247

**

"The election of a candidate to the office of President shall be declared to
be void on an election petition on any of the following grounds which may be
proved to the satisfaction of the Supreme Court, namely:-

(a) that by reason of general bribery, general treating, or general
intimidation, or other misconduct, or other circumstances, whether similar to
those before enumerated or not, the majority of electors were or may have been
prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred;

(b) non-compliance with the provisions of this Act relating to elections, if
it appears that the election was not conducted in accordance with the
principles laid down in such provisions and that such non-compliance affected
the result of the election."

S. 91 (a) and (b) are in terms identical with S. 77 (a) and (b) of the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946.

S. 96 of the Act states:

"An election petition-

(c) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the
petitioner relies;,

(d) shall set forth full particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice that
the petitioner alleges, including as full a statement as possible of the names
of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt or illegal practice, and
shall be accompanied by an affidavit in support of the allegation of such
corrupt or illegal practice and the date and place of the commission of such
practice;

Provided, however, that nothing in the preceding provisions of this section
shall be deemed or construed to require evidence to be stated in the
petition."

This again is a reproduction of S. 80 B (c), (d) and the proviso of the 1946
Elections Order in Council.

**248**

At the argument before us, Mr. K. N. Choksy, P.C., for the 1st Respondent
submitted:-

(1) The petitioner must prove that by reason of general intimidation, a
certain result or consequence followed, namely, that "the majority of electors
were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred." This is an important ingredient of the ground of avoidance in S.
91 (a) of the Act. If so, the petitioner must identify the candidate whom the
majority of electors preferred, but were or may have been prevented from
electing by reason of general intimidation.

This is a material fact which the petitioner must prove and if, it is a
material fact to be proved, then it must be pleaded. In a total of 137
instances of acts of violence and intimidation alleged in the petition, only
in 30 instances has the petitioner averred that the violence was directed
against SLFP supporters, thereby implying that the petitioner was the
candidate whom the majority of electors preferred.

In three instances only has the petitioner alleged that the violence was
directed against the SLMP supporters. The balance 104 incidents are "neutral"
incidents and it is not stated whether the violence was directed against the
supporters of any political party.

The petitioner must prove against whom the general intimidation was directed.
If so, it must be pleaded.

(2) In addition, the petitioner must plead and prove how the majority of
electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred. That is, the petitioner must plead and prove that the majority of
electors who voted for the 1st respondent were or may have been compelled to
vote for him by reason of general intimidation, or that the balance 45% of the
electors abstained from voting because of general intimidation, and if they
had voted, the reasonable probabilities are that they would have voted for
her. This is a material fact which the petitioner must prove, and if so it
must be pleaded.

**

249

**

(3) In three instances, it is alleged that-the violence was directed against
the SLMP candidate. The election was a three-cornered contest. The petitioner
must further plead either that the SLMP candidate was the candidate whom the
majority of electors preferred or that his supporters were induced to vote for
the 1st respondent by reason of general intimidation. The 1st respondent must
know whether it is the petitioner or the SLMP candidate whom the majority of
electors preferred, otherwise the petitioner was free to change her position
as the trial proceeds.

(4) In some of the instances of general intimidation set out in the petition,
material facts such as the dates, times and places of the incidents, the names
of persons intimidated and the, nature of the intimidation have not been
furnished. The petitioner has failed to conform to the mandatory provisions of
S. 96(c) of the said Act.

(5) Rules 4 (which prescribed the form of petition) and 5 (which enabled the
respondent to obtain particulars) in the 3rd Schedule to the Ceylon
(Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946, were deleted and a new S.
80B was introduced. It is in terms identical with S. 96 of the Act. It is a
mandatory provision. The petitioner cannot amend the petition after the period
for the filing of a petition has elapsed. Failure to comply with S. 96 (c) has
the result of dismissal of the petition.

The learned Attorney-General in support of the 2nd respondent's objections
also submitted that the petition does not contain a concise statement of
material facts, in that, the petitioner has not averred that the acts of
general intimidation affected any particular candidate. That is, the
petitioner has not averred the manner in which the majority were or may have
been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred.

Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., for the petitioner, on the other hand, submitted as
follows-

(1) The English Common Law of a "free and fair election" is what is embodied
in S. 91(a). The expression "majority of electors

**250**

were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred "means" a majority of persons entitled to vote free of intimidation
and other pressures, were prevented or may have been prevented from electing a
candidate according to their preferences: The expression does not impose an
additional burden on the petitioner. If general intimidation is established,
the necessary consequence flows - that the majority were prevented from
electing the candidate of their choice. All that the petitioner need establish
is general intimidation; once general intimidation is established, free choice
goes.

(2) In this view of the matter, it is not necessary to identify the candidate
whom the majority of electors would or may have preferred. Moreover, how the
voters would have voted under different circumstances is impossible of proof.
Unlike in the case of the statutory offence of undue influence, where there
must be an indentification of the individual affected by the intimidation, in
the case of general intimidation, the identification of victims is difficult
and is not necessary. Furthermore, it would violate the principle of secrecy
of the ballot which is enshrined in Article 93 of the Constitution which
enacts that "the voting for the election of the President of the Republic
shall be free, equal' and by secret ballot." A voter cannot be asked for whom
he would have voted, if there was no general intimidation.

(3) Election must not only be "free" but also "equal", which means not only
the majority of electors but also the minority of electors too must have the
freedom of election. The minority in the constituency has as good a right
without fear or intimidation to come to the polling booth as the majority of
the constitutency.

(4) Articles 118(b) and 130(a) of the Constitution confer on the Supreme Court
jurisdiction in respect of election petitions. Article 136(1) empowers the
Supreme Court to make rules as to proceedings in the Supreme Court in the
exercise of its several jurisdictions conferred by the Constitution including,
inter alia, the dismissal of such matters for non-compliance

**251**

with such rules. The Supreme Court has up to now made no such rules. Rule
11(4) in the 4th Schedule to Act No. 15 of 1981 expressly provides for the
dismissal of an election petition for non-payment of security. Apart from
this, the Supreme Court, cannot dismiss a petition in limine. Apart from this,
once an election petition is presented, the matter ceases to be one
exclusively between the petitioner and the respondent. It becomes a matter in
which the whole electorate, not to say the whale country, has an interest.

We shall deal first with President's Counsel Mr. H. L. de Silva's submission
that the Supreme Court cannot dismiss an Election Petition in limine.

Article 136 of the Constitution states:

(1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution and of any law, the Chief
Justice with any three Judges of the Supreme Court nominated by him, may, from
time to time, make rules regulating generally the practice and procedure of
the Court including -

(b) rules as to the proceedings in the Supreme Court and Court of Appeal in
the exercise of the several jurisdictions conferred on such Courts by the
Constitution or by any law, including the time within which such matters may
be instituted or brought before such Courts and the dismissal of such matters
for non-compliance with such rules.

It is not disputed that the Supreme Court has not made rules as to proceedings
in the Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction in election petitions
relating to the election of the President, conferred on it by Article 130(a)
of the Constitution, including, inter alia, the dismissal of petitions for
non-compliance with the rules. The only express provision for the dismissal of
an election petition in limine is Rule 11(4) in the 4th Schedule to the
Presidential Elections Act, No. 1 5 of 1981 for non-payment of, security or
inadequacy of security as

**252**

provided for in Rule 11 (1). Therefore, Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., argued that,
except for non-payment of security, the Supreme Court cannot dismiss an
election petition at the preliminary stage.

Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., also submitted that our Courts have repeatedly said
that an election petition inquiry is not merely a contest between two
litigants. It is not an investigation in which the petitioner and the returned
candidate alone are concerned, but the voters also have rights as well as the
candidates. The electorate is entitled to have the results of the election
declared according to law. (See _Rambukwelle v. Silva,_ (1); _Sarvanamuttu v.
de Mel_ (2)).

Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C. further submitted that S. 98 casts a duty on the
Supreme Court, at the conclusion of the trial of an election petition, to make
a determination whether the returned candidate has been duly elected or
whether the election was void, and also to make a report as to corrupt or
illegal practices; that Rule 20 in the 4th Schedule permits a withdrawal of
an- election petition only with the leave of Court and Rule 23 permits for
substitution of any person as petitioner on withdrawal of the petition; and
that even if before the trial of a petition, the President dies, resigns or
does not oppose the petition, the petition does not abate but continues to be
heard. These provisions, Mr. H. L. de Silva, P. C. contended, indicate that
Parliament did not contemplate that the Supreme Court should assume a power to
terminate election petition proceedings at the threshold of the inquiry, and
that if an objection is taken that a concise statement of material facts as
required by S. 96(c) of the Act has not been furnished by the petitioner, a
decision on the objection should be made only after the conclusion of the
trial. He also stated that, assuming that the petition does contain
insufficient material, the Court has inherent power to permit amplification
and correction, and that if particulars of any corrupt or illegal practice
specified in the petition by S. 97 (1) of the Act can be amended or amplified,
an insufficient statement of facts should not be treated differently.

**253**

Mr. Choksy, P.C., on the other hand, submitted that S. 96 (c) of the Act is a
mandatory provision and our Courts have given effect to the mandatory rule,
that failure to comply with a mandatory provision renders the proceedings a
nullity. He quoted **Maxwell** (11 the Edn. p. 364) - "An absolute enactment
must be obeyed or fulfilled exactly but it is sufficient if a directory
enactment be obeyed or fulfilled substantially."

Mr. Choksy, P.C., further argued that if a S. 96 (c) of the Act is imperative,
there is inbuilt in that very provision, the power of the Court to dismiss the
petition: that therefore it is unnecessary for the Supreme Court to make a
rule under Article 136 (1) (b) for the dismissal of the petition, that Article
136 (1) states that "subject to any law, the Supreme Court make rules" and as
the rule of interpretation is already there inbuilt in the provision, the
necessity to make a rule does not arise; that this Court has no inherent power
to permit an amendment of the petition and allow the petitioner a further
opportunity of supplying the deficiency of material facts. The petition, he
said, is one single petition and if material facts have not been given in
respect of one charge in the petition, the whole petition is rendered a
nullity.

We agree with Mr. Choksy that S. 96 (c) is an imperative provision and not
merely directory (per Samerawickrame; J. in _Wijewardene v. Senanayake,_ (3)
Though the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946 contained
Rule 12(3); which is in terms identical with 11(4) of Act No. 15 of 1981, and
it was the only express provision for the dismissal of the petitions, our
Courts have dismissed election petitions for non-compliance with the mandatory
provision in Rule 15 of the Rules which requires service of notice of the
petition and a copy of the petition on the respondent within ten days of the
presentation of the petition though the consequences of non-compliance has not
been stated. (See _Aron .v. Senanayake_ (4) _Cooray v. Fernando_ (5)
_Nanayakkara v. Kiriella_ (6). So also, election petitions have been dismissed
for non-joinder of necessary parties, though in both the 1946 Order in Council
and in Act No. 15 of 1981, the consequence of the failure to comply with the
mandatory provision regarding joinder has not been stated. (See _Wijewardene
v. Senanayake,_ (3) _Kobbekaduwa v. Jayewardene,_ (7).

**254**

We agree with Mr. Choksy that non-compliance with the mandatory provisions of
non-joinder of necessary parties, and non-service of the notice of
presentation of the petition and a copy of the petition, are fundamental and
fatal defects which render the whole petition bad and a nullity, and the power
to dismiss the petition is inbuilt in those mandatory provisions themselves.
The question whether in a petition consisting, say of three charges, as in
this case, the failure to furnish material facts in respect of one charge
only, renders-that charge only bad and would preclude further evidence being
led by the petitioner in respect of that charge only, or, whether it renders
the whole petition a nullity and precludes further proceedings on it will only
arise for decision if this Court decides that the petitioner has failed to
furnish material facts in respect of any one of the charges.

As regards the submission of Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., based on public
interest in the litigation and that an order on a preliminary objection could
be made only at the conclusion of the trial of the petition, it is a
contention we cannot accept. As Mr. Choksy pointed out, there are other
mandatory provisions in Act No. 15 of 1981. Only a candidate at an election or
a person who signed the nomination paper can present an election petition
challenging the election of the President (S. 93). The petition has to be
presented within 21 days of the date of publication of the result of the
election [S: 102 (1)]. The petitioner shall join the returned candidate as
respondent to the election petition (S. 95). The consequence of non-compliance
with these provisions has not been set out. If a petition is presented, say by
a voter, or the returned candidate has not been made a respondent or the
petition is presented two months after the date of publication of the result,
does that mean that this Court has to proceed with the trial on the charges in
the petition, and at the conclusion of the trial dismiss the petition because
the wrong person has presented the petition or because no adverse order can be
made against the returned candidate without him being heard, or because the
petition is out of time? For, this is the consequence of Mr. H. L. de Silva's
argument.

Just as much the public have interests in the election petition, there is also
the principle that the election of a candidate should

**255**

not be lightly interfered with. In _Samar Singh v. Kedar Nath_ (8), it was
contended that the Court has no power to reject an election petition in limine
on a preliminary objection but must proceed. with the trial, record the
evidence, and only after the trial of the petition is concluded, reject a
defective petition. The Supreme Court in rejecting this argument observed that
"it would be in the interests of the parties to the petition and to the
constituency and in the public interest to dispose of preliminary objections
and to reject an election petition if it does not disclose any cause of
action."

In _Arthur Hussain v. Rajiv Gandhi._ (9) when a similar submission was made,
the Supreme Court rejected the argument as untenable and observed that the
powers (to reject an election petition in limine) in this behalf are meant to
be exercised to serve the purpose for which the same have been conferred on
the competent Court so that the litigation comes to an end at the earliest and
the concerned litigants are relieved of the psychological burden of the
litigation so as to be free to follow their ordinary pursuits and discharge
their duties. And so that they can adjust their affairs on the footing that
the litigation will not make demands on their time or resources, will not
impede their future work, and they are free to undertake and fulfil other
commitments. So long as the sword of Damocles of the election petition remains
hanging, an elected representative of the legislature would not feel
sufficiently free to devote his wholehearted attention to matters of public
importance which clamour for his attention in his capacity as an elected
representative of the concerned constituency."

We take the view that the Court has the power to reject an election petition
in limine, if there is a fundamental defect in an election petition arising
out of non-compliance with a mandatory provision.

What is the English Common Law regarding the avoidance of elections? In
_Guildford_ (10) Willes, J. said:

"But do not be mistaken . . . . . that general corruption quite apart from
acts of the members or their agents would not

**256**

have the effect of vitiating an election. It clearly would, , because it would
show that there was no pure or free choice in the matter, that what occurred
was a sham, and not a reality."

In _Bradford_ (11) Baron Martin said:

"But it has been long held, before these Acts of Parliament passed at all,
that by the common law of the land, that is, law not created by the enactments
of Acts of Parliament, bribery, undue influence, and undue pressure vitiate an
election. So that if it had been proved that there existed in this town
generally, bribery to a large extent, and that it came from unknown quarters,
that no one could tell where it had come from, but that people were bribed
generally and indiscriminately: or if it could be proved that there was
treating in all directions on purpose to influence, voters, that houses were
thrown open where people could drink without paying for it, - by the common
law such an election would be void, because it would be carried on contrary to
the principle of the law."

In _Dudley_ (12) Grove, J. observed:

"The sole allegation in the petition although it is conveyed in a vast number
of words is substantially that there was so much riot and intimidation by mobs
that there was not a free election. I have a duty not only to these two
parties, but the voters, to the public generally, to see that the franchise
can be fairly exercised . . . . What I have to look at is whether there was
such a substantial riot and tumult as prevented any large number of the
electors from voting . . . . Assuming the facts to be so, and assuming also
that there was such a state of things as really placed the whole town in a
state in which reasonable men, who were not very zealous partisans, or, men of
extraordinary courage, had not a fair opportunity of voting, it is clearly
laid down in the cases, that quite irrespective of any agency on the part of
the candidates, intimidation that prevents free voting avoids an election . .
. . . I am of opinion that the tumultuous

**257**

assemblages gathered together, and the acts of extreme violence committed at
the polling places were such as were calculated to intimidate and deter, and
did intimidate and deter a large number of voters from exercising the
franchise, and that very many voters were actually prevented from exercising
it, that the election was not a free one, and that the constituency had not a
fair opportunity of freely exercising the franchise, therefore this election
is void.."

In _Nottingham_ (13) Baron Martin observed:

"No doubt if rioting takes place to such an extent that ordinary men, having
the ordinary nerve and courage of men, and thereby prevented from recording
their votes, the election is void by the common law, for the common law
provides that an election should be free in the sense that all persons shall
have an opportunity of coming to the poll and voting without fear or
molestation. But for the purpose it must be a rioting .to an extent certainly
to deter a man of reasonable nerve from going to the poll."

In _North Durham_ (14) Baron Bramwell said:

"First of all, there is the statutory intimidation that is contemplated by the
statute, if one may use such an expression, that is, an intimidation
contemplated by the statute which avoids the seat, where a candidate or his
agent is guilty of it. But besides that there is another intimidation that has
been called a common law intimidation and it applies to a case where the
intimidation is of such a character; so general and extensive in its operation
that it cannot be said that the polling was a fair representation of the
opinion of the constituency in which the intimidation took place."

In _Gloucester_ (15) Field, J. said:

"It seems to me that the question which I have to decide is whether all the
electors of the other divisions of the

**258**

constituency are to be disenfranchised for what was done in the three
divisions, and a fresh election held with all its turmoil and excitement. That
will have to be done if I am satisfied that there has not been that free
exercise of the franchise which everybody is entitled to have, and that the
absence of that has been caused by intimidation and riot."

In the _South Meath Case_ (16) Andrews, J. said:

"Freedom of election is at common law absolutely essential to the validity of
an election, and if this freedom be prevented generally the election is void
at common law, and in my opinion it matters not by what means the freedom of
election may have been destroyed. This is wholly independent of statute law."

From the observations made in the said cases, it seems to us to be clear that
at English Common Law, where it was proved that bribery, treating or
intimidation were so general and so extensive in its operation that it
prevented men of ordinary nerve and courage from going to the poll, whether or
not the successful candidate or his agents were responsible for the corruption
or violence, the election was set aside on the ground that it was not free.

Rogers _On Elections_ (Vol. 2, 20th Edn., p.341),, succinctly states the
common law as follows:

"Freedom of Election is at common law essential to the validity of an
election. If this freedom be by any means prevented generally, the election is
void at common law. Therefore general intimidation, although not brought home
to the candidate or his agents will avoid an election.'

In England, the common law has now been superseded by S. 142 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1949, which enacts:

S. 142 (1) "Where on an election petition it is shown that corrupt or illegal
practices, or illegal payments,

**259**

employments or hirings committed in reference to the election for the purpose
of promoting or procuring the election of any person thereat have so
extensively prevailed that they may be reasonably supposed to have affected
the result, his election, if he has been elected; shall be void and he shall
be incapable of being elected to fill the vacancy or any of the vacancies for
which the election was held.

(2) An election shall not be liable to be avoided otherwise than under this
section by reason of general corruption, bribery, treating or intimidation."

The English Law, therefore, now requires in order to avoid an election that in
addition to corrupt or illegal practices etc. an additional requirement to be
proved, namely, that the corrupt or illegal practices etc. were committed for
the purpose of promoting or procuring the election of a candidate that they
may be so reasonably supposed to have affected the result.

The question arises whether S. 91 (a) of the Act embodies what Mr. H. L. de
Silva, P.C., described as the "pure and unadulterated English Common Law"
prior to 1949, or, as Mr. Choksy submitted, that in addition to general
intimidation etc. something more has to be proved by a petitioner to have an
election avoided under S. 91(a).

In _Illangaratne v. G. E. de Silva_ (17), the petitioner alleged, under S. 77
(a) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946, that owing
to circumstances arising from floods and the housing of the refugees in camps,
"the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from electing the
candidate whom they preferred." It was contended for the petitioner that (1)
by reason of the circumstances attending the flood, the refugees were not in a
mood for voting; (2) that the respondent as Minister of Health and his son as
Mayor of Kandy, in seeing to the housing and comfort of the refugees, had an
unfair electoral advantage over the petitioners, so that the electors voted or
may have voted for the respondent who would otherwise have voted for another
candidate. All these circumstances, it was argued, had the result that the
"majority of

**260**

electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred." After considering the evidence on the first point Windham, J. held
(p. 184)-

"I cannot hold on the evidence that the majority of electorate were or may
have been prevented from electing the candidate they preferred by reason of
the circumstances having prevented them from voting for any candidate at all."

On the second point, after considering the evidence, Windham, J. held (p.
186):

"I do not think that the petitioner has proved his case upon this charge."

In _Abeywardene v. Ariya Bulegoda,_ (18) it was held that "General
intimidation is concerned not with the intention with which the acts are
committed" as in the case of undue influence, but with the result. Did the
acts taken cumulatively have the effect of preventing the electoral process?"

In _Jayasinghe v. Jayakody,_ (19) Sharvananda, J. observed:

"The petitioner has also stated that the election of the 1st respondent is
void on the ground that by reason of general intimidation the majority of
electors may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred .. . In order to succeed in his petition, _the petitioner has got to
prove a further ingredient,_ viz., that the majority of electors may have been
prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred in order to succeed
in his election petition. The corrupt practice referred to in S. 77 (c) has a
consequence different from that of the corrupt practice that may be exhibited
by general intimidation under S. 77 (a). If it is proved that a corrupt
practice has been committed by the returned candidate or an election agent or
by any other person with the knowledge or consent of the returned candidate,
then the election judge has to declare the election void. But if the corrupt
practice has been committed by a person other than

**261**

the persons mentioned in S. 77 (c), then _it must be further established that
the majority of electors thereby were or may have been prevented from electing
the candidate whom they preferred,_ for the Election Judge to declare the
election void." (The emphasis is ours).

We agree with Mr. Choksy that mere proof of the several instances or acts of
general intimidation would not suffice to avoid an election. In addition, the
petitioner has to prove that these several acts or instances had the result or
consequence that "the majority of electors were or may have been prevented
from electing the candidate whom they preferred."

Mr. H. L. de Silva relied on Article 93 of the Constitution which declares,
"the voting for the election of the President of the Republic shall be free,
equal and .by secret ballot," and contended that the Constitution guarantees
not only that election be free but also equal; that freedom of election is
guaranteed not only to the majority but to the minority of electors as well.
He relied on the observations made by Keogh, J. in the _Drogheda Case_ (20)
and submitted that what was said by Keogh, J. is a correct statement of the
law. In this case it was argued that if the respondent has an actual majority
of registered electors, however small, the election could not be declared
void. Keogh, J. dealing with this argument said:

"Counsel for the respondent contended . . . provided the respondent had an
actual majority of registered electors be it ever so small-then no matter what
happens outside, no matter how many electors are assaulted or driven from the
polling booth, no matter how many voters are hunted through the fields and
obliged to go by devious ways in order to get back to their homes, no matter
how much blood is shed, no matter how much spiritual intimidation has been
brought to bear upon the electors; still, if the candidate is returned upon
the polling day can say, 'There are 1000 electors in the borough, and I have
polled, no matter how, 501 of them', his election cannot be declared void on
the ground of general intimidation,

**262**

although the unsuccessful candidate may, upon a scrutiny, by striking off
individual votes on this ground; show that but for the general intimidation he
would have had a majority. I deny that altogether. The humblest individual in
the whole of the constituency has as good a right without fear or intimidation
to come into the Court-house upon the day of the election as the richest man
upon the register, and as good a right as the great majority of the
constituency. Take it that a candidate has by the most legitimate means
obtained the votes of nine-tenths of the constituency in his favour, yet it is
of vital importance to the public weal that the remaining tenth should be able
to record their votes and to express their opinions. If the majority are not
only to send their own representative to Parliament, as of course the majority
must do, but if they are to drive by terror the minority from the poll what
becomes of freedom to this Country?"

It is unnecessary for us to decide whether what was stated by Keogh, J. is a
correct statement of law or not except to quote Baron Bramwell in the _**North
Durham Case**_ (14) - "If one were told that partial intimidation would avoid
an election, the consequence would be that a few mischievous persons might
upset every election." The same Constitution which enacted Article 93 also
enacted Article 31(6) (d) which states that as regards the election of the
President, Parliament shall by law make provision for, inter alia, the grounds
and manner of avoiding such election and of determining any disputed election.
Parliament has enacted the Residential Election Act, No. 35 of 1981, and in S.
91 sets out the grounds of avoidance of an election of the President: The case
of the petitioner based on the ground of avoidance under S. 91 (a) falls to be
determined solely by a consideration and application of the provisions
contained in S. 91(a).

We now proceed to deal with the submission that the petitioner has failed to
plead in her petition two material facts, viz., (1) that the candidate, other
than the 1st respondent, who would or may have been returned, has not been
identified, (2) that the majority of electors were or may have been induced to

**263**

vote for the 1st respondent by general intimidation or that the balance 45% of
electors who did not vote abstained from voting because of general
intimidation and if they voted, they may have voted for the petitioner.

S. 96 (c) of the Act requires that the -petition "shall contain a concise
statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies." In
_Wijewardena v. Senanayake_ (3) H. N. G. Fernando, C.J. observed that this
requirement was "intended to secure that a respondent will know from the
petition itself what facts the petitioner proposes to prove in order to avoid
the election and will thus have a proper opportunity to prepare for the trial
. . . . . The term 'material facts' has a plain meaning in the context of
requirements relating to pleadings, namely, facts material to establish a
party's case." The object of the requirement is clearly to enable the opposite
party to prepare his case for the trial so that he may not be taken by
surprise. When the petitioner pleaded in' paragraph 6 (A) of her petition that
"there was general intimidation in consequence of Which the majority of the
said electors were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom
they preferred," is there sufficient information given in the petition to
enable the first respondent to identify the candidate whom the electors were
or may have been prevented from electing? In paragraph (1), the petitioner has
stated that she was a candidate at the Presidential Election and "claims to
have had a right to be returned or elected at the said election." The
petitioner has set out in paragraph 5 the votes cast for each candidate and
that she obtained the second largest number of votes. Could there be any doubt
in the mind of the 1st respondent as to the identity of the candidate, who,
the petitioner claims, would or may have been returned, but for the general
intimidation?

It is clear from the petition that the case of the petitioner is not what may
be termed "coercive intimidation", that is to say, intimidation having for its
object the use of force or threats to compel voters to vote for a particular
candidate. A perusal of the concise statement of material facts relating to
the charge of general intimidation shows that the incidents set out therein
relate to bomb explosions, road-blocks, shootings and killings, posters
warning people not to vote or announcing a curfew on

**264**

election day, attacks on polling stations, houses of party supporters and SLFP
Branch offices and so on. It is, therefore, clear from the petition that the
case of the petitioner is what may be termed "preventive intimidation", that
is violence or threats of violence directed towards preventing voters from
voting. This being the case for the petitioner, the argument of Mr. Choksy,
P.C., that there is no averment in the petition that the majority of electors
were or may have induced to vote for the 1st respondent by reason of general
intimidation will have no relevance to the case we are called upon to decide.

Mr. H: L. de Silva, P.C., referred us to Article 93 of the Constitution which
embodies the principle of the secrecy of the ballot, namely, that voting
should be secret. Rogers On Elections (12th Edn. at 347) points out that the
difficulties of proving a case of "coercive intimidation" are much greater
than those of one of "preventive intimidation", because "a voter may not be
asked for whom he voted, whereas he may be asked if he was prevented from
voting by fear."

That brings us on to the submission of Mr. Choksy that the petitioner must
plead and prove that the 45% of electors who did not vote, abstained from
voting by reason of general intimidation, and if they had voted, the
reasonable probabilities are that they would have voted for the petitioner.

What is the meaning of the expression "the majority of electors were or may
have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred"?

In _Rutnam v. M. Dingiri Banda_ (21) the respondent won the election by a
majority of 1559 votes. The petitioner, a candidate who polled the second
highest number of votes, challenged the election of the respondent and in his
petition laid the charges of general intimidation and undue influence. The
petitioner led evidence that large sections of electors were prevented by the
supporters of the respondent from recording their votes by threats of actual
violence and force. The election was avoided on both grounds. Hearne, J. said
(p. 155):

**265**

"I have been asked to consider certain statistics and to hold that,
notwithstanding the intimidation that took place, _the result of the election
could not have been affected by it._ In the _North Durham Case_ (1874, 2 0'M &
H at 157), Mr. Baron Bramwell said "where it (intimidation) is of such a
general character that _the result may have been affected,_ in my judgment it
is no part of the duty of a Judge to enter into a kind of scrutiny to see
whether possibly, or probably even, or as a matter of conclusion upon the
evidence, if that intimidation had not existed, _the result would have been
different._ What the Judge has to do in that case is to say that the burden of
proof is cast upon the constituency whose conduct is, incriminated, and unless
it can be shown that the gross amount of intimidation could not possibly have
_affected the result_ it ought to be declared void. I hold that there was
_gross intimidation,_ that it was widespread in the areas where Mr. Rutnam had
good reason to count upon heavy voting in his favour, and that it may well
have prevented the majority of the electors from returning the candidate whom
they preferred." (The emphasis is ours).

In _Pelpola v. R. S. S. Gunawardene_ (22) the respondent won the election by a
margin of 387 votes and the petitioner, the other candidate, sought to avoid
the election on two charges of general intimidation and undue influence. The
particulars of the general charge stated "that on polling day, at a number of
places in the electorate, but mainly at a place called Uduwella, certain,
groups of persons intimidated other groups from going to the polling station,
by use and threats of force, with the result that the majority of electors
were or, may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred." The petitioner led evidence that of the 1,427 registered voters
for the Uduwella polling station, only 511 voted. He also led the evidence of
the President of the Ceylon Indian Congress Labour Union Committee of
Mossville Estate, that on polling day, he went with a number of Indian
Labourers to vote at the Uduwella polling station and on the, way they were
threatened

**266**

with assault by a group of 30 villagers; they were obliged to return to the
estate; at about 4.30 p.m. with police protection, about 300 labourers from
Mossville Estate and some labourers of the neighbouring Craighead Estate went
to vote and eventually only 150 labourers cast their votes. He further
testified that the Indian Congress Committee of Mossville Estate had decided
to support the petitioner in the election and all the labourers had decided to
vote for him. The evidence of intimidation was not challenged by the
respondent's counsel. Windham, J. said (p. 209):

"Before, however, finding in favour of the petitioner on the charge of general
intimidation, it is necessary, notwithstanding the course taken by the
respondent, to examine _whether the charge has been made out on the evidence
and in law,_ since no election can be declared void by mere consent of parties
to the petition, the whole electorate being the persons concerned. In the
present case, there can- be no doubt to my mind that the petitioner, upon the
uncontradicted evidence led by him, has established his case under S. 77 (a)
of the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council, 1946, namely, that
by reason of general intimidation the majority of electors were or may have
been prevented from electing the candidate whom they preferred. The
respondent, it will be recalled was elected by a majority of only 387 votes.
Counsel for the petitioner has stated in his opening address, and his
statement is not challenged by the respondent, that of the 32,734 voters in
the whole electorate, some 8,375 (over one quarter) were Indian labourers,
against whom, as a body, the acts of intimidation in the electorate were
clearly directed by certain misguided Sinhalese persons . . . . Only 541 out
of 1,427 voters recorded their votes of the Uduwella polling station - an
unusually low proportion, and, clearly attributable to the acts of
intimidation, as is shown by the fact that more persons voted between the
hours of 4 and 5 p.m. (when the police arrived and escorted labourers to the
poll) than during the six hours from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., when the intimidation
had a free hand. _Had 400 more persons voted, and cast their votes for the
petitioner, the_

**267**

_latter would have won the election._ These facts are amply sufficient to
support a finding of general intimidation under S. 77 (a) of the Order in
Council. To establish such a charge, where the general intimidation consists,
as here, of local acts or threats of violence, it is only necessary for the
petitioner to show, that, having regard to the majority obtained, and the
strength of the polling, _the result may reasonably be supposed to have been
affected._ On the figures and in the circumstances disclosed in the present
case, it is at the very least _reasonable to suppose that the result of the
election may have been affected, by the acts of intimidation_ against the
Indian estate labourers." (The emphasis is ours).

In _Tarnolis Appuhamy v. Wilmot Perera_ (23) the petitioners furnished 45
instances of general intimidation. Evidence was given of 13 instances, 7 of
which occurred before polling day and 6 on the day of polling. Nagalingam, J.
said (at p. 362, 368):

"Not only have the acts relied upon by the petitioner as constituting the
basis for the charge; of general intimidation not been proved, but even if
full weight be attached to the testimony given in Court by the petitioners'
witnesses to the extent of holding the charges established, it would be clear
that the entirety of proof, thus assumed to have been given in favour of the
petitioners cannot in law amount to proof of the charge of intimidation . . .
. What evidence was led was led to show that the electorate was subjected to
preventive intimidation, that is to say intimidation which had for its object
the prevention of the electors from going to the polls lest the rival
candidate gets their votes. Having regard to the number polled and to the
circumstance that this electoral area annexed to itself the credit of having
polled the highest percentage of voters in any electoral area in the Island,
it certainly would be difficult to convince anyone that voters in general were
deterred by anything savouring of intimidation from going to the polls or
recording their votes."

Nagalingam, J. cited' the observations of Gibson, J. in the _North South Case_
(24)-

**268**

"To upset an election for general intimidation it is necessary to show that
there was such _general intimidation as might have affected the result of the
election "_; and went on to say:

"Local cases are not wanting which illustrate the principles upon which on the
ground of general intimidation, Courts have interfered in elections. In both
the _Nuwara Eliya Case_ _(21) and the_ _recent Gampola Case (22)_ there was
clear evidence that _large sections of electors were prevented from recording
their votes by threats of actual violence and, force eased on them_. . . The
present case is one far removed from either of these . . . in these
circumstances, there is only one conclusion possible with regard to this
charge, and that is that it has not been made out." (The emphasis is ours).

In the _South Meath Case_ (16) O'Brien, J. said:

"It is a mistake to suppose that where general undue influence exists, it must
be further shown that the _result of the election was, in fact, affected
thereby. It is enough to show such general undue influence as may reasonably
believed to have affected the result. "_ (The emphasis is ours).

S. 91(a) of the Act states that an election will be avoided if it is "proved
to the satisfaction of the Supreme Court that by reason of general
intimidation, the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred." It seems to us that it is for the
petitioner to prove that there was widespread violence directed towards
preventing electors from voting. But relief which the petitioner has asked for
under S. 91(a) of the Act will be granted subject to a finding by the Supreme
Court that the general intimidation had the effect, namely, that the "majority
were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate whom they
preferred." It is a conclusion which is placed in the hands of the Supreme
Court upon a review of all the evidence. The petitioner has, in her petition
pleaded that the general intimidation had this effect. In our opinion, how the
majority were or may have been prevented from electing the candidate of their
choice need not be specially pleaded.

**269**

The expression in S. 91 (a) is "were or may have been prevented". It seems to
us that the term 'may' was designedly used because mathematical proof that the
majority of electors were in fact prevented, in many a case, is impossible of
attainment. The burden to prove that the majority of electors were in fact
prevented is difficult and it is almost impossible to produce the requisite
proof. In _Shiv Charan Singh v. Chandra Bhan Singh and others_ (25), the
appellant was declared elected. The difference between the votes polled by him
and candidate 'R' who polled the third highest number of votes was 4497 votes.
The respondents challenged the election under S. 100 (1) (4) (1) of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, which states that the election is
avoided if the High Court is of opinion that the result of the election in so
far as it concerns a returned candidate, has been materially affected by the
improper acceptance of any nomination. Candidate 'K' whose nomination paper
had been improperly accepted polled the 2nd highest number of votes. The
appellant pleaded, inter alia, that his election was not materially affected
by the acceptance of 'K' 's' nomination paper. The respondents did not produce
any evidence to show that the improper acceptance of the nomination paper of
'K' materially affected the result of the election of the returned candidate.
The appellant, however, produced 21 witnesses who stated that, in the absence
of 'K' in the election contest, the majority of voters who had voted for 'K'
would have voted for the appellant: The High Court rejected this evidence but
held that since the difference between the votes polled by the appellant and
'R' was only 4497 votes, .it could reasonably be concluded that the result of
the election was materially affected. In upholding the appellant's election,
the Supreme Court observed:

"The burden to prove this material effect (on the result of the election) is
difficult and many times it is almost impossible to produce the requisite
proof. Electors exercise their right of vote on various unpredictable
considerations, and the Courts are ill-equipped to speculate, guess or
forecast by proceeding on probabilities or drawing inferences regarding the
conduct of thousands of voters . . . The statement of witnesses could not be
taken at their word and it was surmise and anybody's guess as to how those
people, who did not vote, would have actually voted."

**270**

As Grove J. observed in the _Hackney Case_ (26) at 79-

"I cannot see how the Tribunal can by any possibility say, what would or might
have taken place under different circumstances. It seems to me to be a,
problem which the human mind has not yet been able to solve, namely, if things
had been different at a certain period, what would have been the result of the
concatenation of events upon the supposed change of circumstances. I am unable
at all events to express an opinion upon what would have been the result, that
is to say, who would have been elected provided certain matters have been
complied with which were not complied with." ..

So, it seems to us that on the basis of instances or acts of general
intimidation established by evidence, the Court may draw a reasonable
inference therefrom that the majority of electors may have been prevented from
electing the candidate of their choice. In a case of general intimidation, the
question that arises is - from the proved acts of intimidation of electors, is
it reasonable to suppose that the-result of the election may have been
affected? This, it seems to us, to be the true meaning of the words "the
majority of electors may have been prevented from electing the candidate they
preferred." But, it will be open to the returned candidate to show that the
gross intimidation could not possibly have affected the result of the
election.

We now come to Mr. Choksy's complaint that in certain instances of general
intimidation, material facts have not been pleaded.

(i) Names of persons killed or intimidated, that is, the names of victims of
intimidation have not been stated.

(ii) The time of the incident, the exact location or place of the incidents
and the dates of the incidents have not been furnished.

(iii) The nature of the intimidation has not been given.

**

271

**

S. 96 (d) requires the petitioner to give full particulars of the corrupt
practice or illegal practice, including as full a statement as possible of the
names of persons alleged to have committed such corrupt or illegal practice
and the date and place of the commission of such practice. On the other hand,
in regard to a general charge, S. 96 (c) imposes a less stringent requirement
namely, "a concise statement of material facts" is to be given. As Rogers (p.
192) pointed out, in' a general charge the above particulars cannot, from the
nature of the charge, be given. Prior to the Amendment in 1970, when the Rule
as to obtaining particulars was in operation, with regard to specific charges
of undue influence, the usual practice was for the Election Judge to order the
name of the person alleged to have been unduly influenced, and by whom; with
the address and number on the register, the time when and place where the act
of undue influence is alleged to' have been committed and the nature of the
undue influence. As Willes, J. pointed out in the _Lichfield Case._ (27).-

"The proper definition of undue influence is using any violence or threatening
any damage or resorting to any fraudulent contrivance to restrain the liberty
of a voter so as either to compel or frighten him into voting or abstaining
from voting otherwise than he freely wills."

And so, as Mr. Baron Bramwell pointed out in the _North Durham Case_ (14)
(supra, at p. 156) - individuals must be identified .as the objects upon
which. it was practised or to whom it was addressed by the candidate or by his
agent, to constitute intimidation as defined by Statute. In _Tarnolis Appuhamy
v. Wilmot Perera_ (23) (supra) at p. 369 Nagalingam; J. too. made the same
observation.

"While in order to sustain a charge of general intimidation, it is neither
necessary to prove the agency of the intimidators in relation to the candidate
on whose behalf the intimidation was exercised nor to establish that any
particular voter or voters were in fact intimidated, it is essential, however,
that before an election can be declared void on the ground of the exercise of
undue influence; proof

**272**

must be adduced both of the agency of the person or persons guilty of undue
influence and of the person or persons intimidated."

Halsbury in his Laws of England (4th Edn. at p. 478) states:

"Where a charge of general corruption is made, the particulars which are
ordered are necessarily wider, and the names of particular persons alleged to
have bribed or treated will not be ordered. A petitioner will, however, be
ordered to specify the character and extent of the corruption alleged."

This observation goes for general intimidation as well. A concise statement of
facts cannot be expected to contain any more information than what is stated
above by Halsbury.

Furthermore, it appears to us that when a complaint is made that dates, times
and the exact locations of the acts of intimidation have not been furnished,
what in effect is being asked for, are "particulars" of the charge. The word
"particulars" has not been defined in the Act. It appears to us to mean
details of the case set up by a party.

As we observed earlier, the character and the nature of the general
intimidation have been given in the concise statement of material facts. The
case for the petitioner is one of "preventive intimidation". The nature of the
alleged intimidation has also been furnished, namely actual violence or
threats of violence bomb explosions, shootings and killings, posters
threatening voters and announcing curfews etc. The extent of the alleged
intimidation has also been given, namely, that it was generally spread over 20
electoral districts. It seems to us, therefore, that there has been sufficient
compliance with S. 96 (c) of the Act.

The second ground of avoidance relied on by the petitioner is based on section
91(b) of the Presidential Elections Act, No. 15 of 1981 the operative part of
which reads thus: "non-compliance with the provisions of this Act relating to
elections, if it appears that the election was not conducted in

**273**

accordance with the principles laid down in such provisions and that such non-
compliance affected the result of the election":

The principal submission of Mr. Choksy for the 1st respondent and the learned
Attorney-General for the 2nd respondent was that the petitioner had failed to
aver a material fact relating to an ingredient of the charge under section
91(b), namely, how the acts of non-compliance with the provisions of the Act
set out in paragraph B of the petition affected the result of the election.
Mr. Choksy contended that paragraph 8 of the petition contained only the
factual aspects of the non-compliance with the provisions of the Act, and that
there was no averment that such non-compliance affected the petitioner
adversely or enured to the benefit of the 1st respondent. It was also
counsel's submission that, as the Commissioner of Elections could under
sections 56 and 61 of the Act declare the results of the elections in one of
the two ways set out therein, it was incumbent on the petitioner, in order to
give the respondents adequate notice of the way in which she maintains that
the result was affected, to state clearly in her petition in which one of
these two ways the result could have been declared.

Mr. H. L. de Silva for the petitioner, on the other hand, maintained that
proof that the result of the election was affected is not an essential
ingredient of the ground of avoidance set out in sec. 91 (b). Counsel argued
that the key to the interpretation of section 91(b) is in section 115. While
section 91(b) sets out the ground of avoidance of the election, section 115
guarantees protection to the returned candidate, and both provisions must be
read together and interpreted in a manner consistent with each other. The
protection which section 115 affords to the returned candidate will hold only
if two conditions are satisfied - (1) that the election was conducted
according to the principles laid down in the provisions of the Act; (ii) that
the failure to comply with the provisions of the Act did not affect the result
of the election.

If any one of these two conditions is not satisfied, then the protection given
by section 115 will not hold. Counsel argued

**274**

that section 115 is complementary to section 91 (b) and that both .provisions
must necessarily cover the same ground. Accordingly, Mr. de Silva submitted,
that the word 'and' appearing in section 91(b) was a mistake of the draftsman
and that it should be read as 'or' in order to make the two sections harmonize
with each other.

Mr. de Silva further contended that when section 91 (b) speaks of the 'result
of the election' it can only refer to a valid election. Where the non-
compliance with the provisions of the Act is of such extent and magnitude as
to render the election a sham and a nullity, than the result cannot remain
unaffected. In short, where the election is void for non-compliance with the
provisions of the Act, the result goes with it. In support of his submissions,
Mr. de Silva relied strongly on the judgement of Lord Denning in _Morgan &
others v. Simpson & another _(28).

On a consideration of the submissions of counsel outlined above, it seems to
us that the governing provision is section 91 (b) which is the basis upon
which the petitioner has come into court seeking the avoidance of the
election. On a plain reading of section 91 (b) it is clear that the charge set
out therein postulates three ingredients: (i) non-compliance with the
provisions of the Act; (ii) the failure to conduct the election in accordance
with the principles laid down in such provisions; (iii) such non-compliance
affected the result of the election.

The wording in section 91 (b) of the Presidential Election Act No. 15 of 1981
is identical with the wording in section 77 (b) of the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) Order - in Council 1946. Similarly section 1 15 of the Act is
identical with section 51(1) of the said Order in Council 1946. Nagalingam,
A.C.J. in _Munasinghe v. Corea_ (29) considered both provisions appearing in
the Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946\. That was a' case
where, one of the grounds of avoidance relied on by the petitioner-appellant
was non-compliance with the provisions relating to elections in the Order in
Council 1946 [Section 77(b)]. The petitioner-appellant's case was based on two
categories of ballot papers. Firstly, thirty two ballot papers,

**275**

admittedly genuine but issued without the official mark or perforation, and'
secondly, eight missing ballot papers. As regards the missing ballot papers,
there was no evidence as to how they were lost and therefore there was no
proof of non-compliance in terms of section 77 (b). However, the position as
regards the thirty two ballot papers issued without the official mark was
quite different. It was not disputed that these ballot papers were genuine
ballot papers but the Returning Officer correctly rejected them in terms of
section 49 as, they did not bear the official mark. In these circumstances it
was contended on behalf of the petitioner-appellant that all that he had to
prove in terms of section 77 (b) was non-compliance with the provisions of the
Order in Council. In, rejecting this argument Nagalingam, A.C.J. said: "Every
non-compliance with the provisions of the Order in Council does not afford a
ground for declaring an election void, but it must further be established
(apart from any other requirement) that the non-compliance with the provisions
was of such a kind or character that it could be said that the election had
not been conducted in accordance with the principles underlying those
provisions. Are the principles laid down in the provisions' of the Order in
Council different from the provisions themselves? Unless they were, no
adequate reason can be assigned for the draftsman using the language he has
used. The difference, I think, consists not so much in the nature of the non-
compliance as in the degree of that non-compliance; it consists not in a bare
non-compliance but in the magnitude or extent of the non-compliance . . . . I
would not put down the omission to perforate these ballot papers to
carelessness, and much less to negligence, but rather to human fallibility, to
the imperfection of the human machine, to what is sometimes termed the human
element. The fact that out of 26,054 ballot papers thirty two had no
perforations, in other words that over 26,000 had been duly perforated, is the
most satisfying proof that the election had been conducted at the various
polling booths in accordance with the principles laid down in that behalf in
the provisions of the Order in Council. To hold otherwise would be riot merely
to set at naught elections in general but to render entirely -unworkable the
democratic machinery". (At pages 272 & 273). Furthermore, it was

**276**

'suggested' on behalf of the appellant-petitioner that the true test to
determine whether the election was conducted in accordance with the principles
laid down in the Order in Council 1946 was' "to ascertain the number of ballot
papers not bearing the official mark in relation to the margin of majority
which the successful candidate has secured against the runner-up" which vas
only eight. This suggestion was rejected by Nagalingam, A.C.J. with the
observation that it "bears more properly on the second limb of the provision
of section 77 (b), _which requires that it should also be established that
such non-compliance affected the result of the election "._ (The emphasis is
ours). Mr. H. L. de Silva submitted that this observation in the judgment was
obiter, since the court held that the non-perforation of the thirty two ballot
papers did not establish that the election had not been conducted in
accordance with the principles of election laid down in the Order in Council.
While this submission is correct, so far as it goes, yet the judgment clearly
proceeds on the basis that under the provisions of section 77 (b), it is an
essential requirement that the result of the election should be affected. As
stated earlier, this view is in accord with the plain and ordinary meaning of
the words used by the draftsman.

Mr. de Silva's submission that the use of the word 'and' in section 91 (b) is,
a mistake for the word 'or' made by the draftsman is not acceptable, having
regard to the historical development of our election laws. The section
corresponding to section 115 of the Presidential Election Act No. 15 of 1981
is found in section XL of the Ceylon (Legislative Council) Order in Council
1923 which reads thus :-

"No election shall be invalid by reason of a non-compliance with the rules
contained in Schedule II to this Order if it appears that the election was
conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in such rules or that
such non-compliance did not affect the result of the election."

It is to be noted that the word used in the above section is 'or' as opposed
to the word 'and. There is no provision in the Order in Council of 1923
similar to section 91 (b) of Act No. 15 of 1981.

**

277

**

The next enactment relating to our election laws is the Ceylon (State Council)
Order in Council 1931. Here we find section 74 which for the first time set
out specific grounds for the avoidance of an election. A section similar to
section 74 was not found in the Order in Council 1923. Section 74 (b) reads
thus:

"Non-compliance with the provisions of this Order relating to elections if it
appears that the election was not conducted in accordance with the principles
laid down in such provisions 'and' that such non-compliance affected the
result of the election".

What is noteworthy here is the use of the word 'and'. The section which
corresponds - to section XL of the Ceylon (Legislative Council) Order in
Council 1923 is section 48 of the Ceylon (State Council) Order in Council 1931
which reads as follows:

"No election shall be invalid by reason of any failure to comply with the
provisions contained in this Order relating to elections if it appears that
the election was conducted in accordance with the principles laid down in such
provisions 'and' that such failure did not affect the result of the election".

What is significant for present purposes is the use of the word 'and' in the
above section. The term 'or' which occurred in section XL of the Ceylon
(Legislative Council) Order in Council 1923 was changed to 'and' in the Ceylon
(Legislative Council) Order in Council 1931. It was the submission of Mr.
Choksy that the change of language was deliberate and that it was done with a
view to avoiding any inconsistency between section 48 and section 74 (b) of
the Ceylon (State Council) Order in Council 1931. With this submission we
agree.

The wording contained in sections 48 and 74 of the Ceylon (State Council)
Order in Council 1931 was repeated in the corresponding provisions of the
Ceylon (Parliamentary Elections) Order in Council 1946. The judgment in
_Munasinghe v. Cores_ (29) (supra), delivered in

**278**

December 1953, construed the provisions of the Order in Council of 1946.
Despite the view expressed by Nagalingam, A.C.J., in his judgment, the
legislature did not deem it necessary to include an amendment to the
provisions of section 77 (b) when it enacted the Ceylon (Parliamentary
Elections) (Amendment) Act, No. 9 of 1970. It is also to be noted that the
legislature did not consider it necessary to effect any changes when it
subsequently enacted the Parliamentary Elections Act, No. 1 of 1981. Thus the
submission of Mr. de Silva that the change in the wording was a mistake on the
part of the draftsman is unacceptable.

The foregoing shows clearly what the intention of the legislature has been.

Bindra, Interpretation of Statutes, 7th Edn. p. 537 states:

"The word 'and': in a statute may be read 'or' and vice versa, whenever the
change is necessary to effectuate the obvious intention of the legislature.
The Courts should, however, have recourse to this exceptional rule of
construction, only when the conversion of the words 'and' and 'or' one into
the other, is necessary to carry into effect the meaning and the intention of
the Legislature . . .

The case of _Morgan and others v. Simpson and another_ (28) cited by Mr. de
Silva is of little assistance on this question because it deals with the
English law relating to elections which is different from our law.

We accordingly hold that Mr. Choksy's submission, that one of the essential
ingredients of section 91(b) of the Presidential Election Act, No. 1 5 of 1981
is that the result of the election should be affected, is well-founded.

Mr. Choksy contended that, in regard to the third ingredient postulated by the
provisions of Section 91(b), the petitioner has wholly failed to aver the
material facts required to establish how the acts of non-compliance relied
upon by the petitioner did in

**279**

fact affect the result of the election. He submitted that it was incumbent
upon the petitioner to expressly aver that the acts of non-compliance relied
upon operated either to confer a benefit on the 1st respondent or to adversely
affect the petitioner. He also contended that the petitioner should have in
addition expressly pleaded how such non-compliance would have affected the
declaration of the result, whether the declaration of the result would have
had to be made under the provisions, of S. 56 or whether a declaration under
section 61 would have become necessary.

The "result" contemplated in section 91(b), which, as set above, forms part of
the third ingredient therein, is: "The return of the candidate and not the
amount of the majority" \- vide **Eastern Division of the Country of Clare,**
(30). "The success of the one candidate over the other." (Vide _Woodward v.
Sarsons_ (31) and Rogers On Elections, 13 App. Vol. II, 18th Edn., 1906, p.
61.

The petitioner has, in the petition, set out specifically numerous acts of
non-compliance, such as - failure to appoint, such officers and servants as
were necessary to the taking of the poll; failure to appoint adequate staff in
certain polling stations; failure to maintain certain polling stations at the
places specified in the notices published in the Gazette; failure to permit
the polling agents at certain polling stations to be present at the sealing of
the ballot boxes; failure to keep certain polling stations open at the hours
specified in the Act; failure to specify as required by the Act 49 polling
stations in the Moneragala District, in which the 2nd respondent declared the
polling to be void; failure to comply with section 23 of the Act with regard
to postal votes; failure to ensure that official poll cards were sent to all
registered voters, as required by section 24 of the Act. The specific
provisions of the law pertaining to these contraventions have been expressly
stated in the petition. The principles in accordance with which the election
has to be conducted are :he said provisions of the Act. What these those laid
down in principles are, is a matter for the Court.

There remains for consideration only the question whether the petitioner has
pleaded what, according to the petitioner was the

**280**

effect of such acts of non-compliance. A consideration of the totality of the
averments in the petition makes it, in our opinion, quite clear that the
petitioner's complaint is that the said acts of non-compliance did operate to
adversely affect her. It does not seem to us to be open to the 1st respondent
to urge that the petition does not, on the face of it, make it clear what the
case he, the 1st respondent, has to meet.

In this connection, it is important to note that, while setting out the
factual matrix of the alleged non-compliance, the petitioner has proceeded
expressly to set out the consequences of such non-compliance as being: "that a
large number of persons were unable to vote"; "that some of the voters who
supported the petitioner were unable to vote."

A consideration of the averments in the petition, in our opinion, makes it
quite clear that the petitioner's complaint, in regard to the effect of such
non-compliance in relation to the choice of the particular method of declaring
the ultimate result, is confined to the declaration made in terms of section
56 of the Act. If the petitioner was seeking to make out that the consequences
would even have entailed a declaration under section 61, then the petitioner
would have had to plead more facts. In our opinion it is not open to the
petitioner, upon the averments set out in the petition, to take up the
position that the consequences entailed were such that the 2nd respondent
would have been faced with the possibility of going beyond the stage of a
declaration under section 56 (2) having to consider the making of a
declaration under section 61.

We are of opinion: that the petitioner has set out in the petition facts which
are material and are necessary for the proof of the petitioner's case; that
the facts and circumstances pleaded in the petition are such that the 1st
respondent will know, from the petition itself, not only what the petitioner
proposes to prove as acts of non-compliance, but also the consequences which
have flowed from such failure: that facts and circumstances have been pleaded
which are sufficient to give the 1st respondent notice of the particular
allegations which are being made by the petitioner and which will also enable
the 1st respondent "to make the

**281**

necessary inquiries and obtain information to defend himself." (Vide
_Wijewardene v. Senanayake,_ (3). Having regard to the averments set out in
the petition, the objection based upon the provisions of section 26 (2) of the
Act, is, in our opinion, untenable:

In paragraphs 9 and 10 of the petition the petitioner seeks to rely on the
instances enumerated under the head of non-compliance with the provisions of
Election Law as "other circumstances" and pleads that by reason of their
occurrence, the "majority of electors were or may have been prevented from
electing the candidate whom they preferred:" In other words, the petitioner is
also seeking to avoid the election on the ground of avoidance set out in
section 91 (a) of the Act, relying on non-compliance with the provisions of
Election Law.

Both the learned Attorney-General and Mr. Choksy, P.C., contended that the
legislature contemplated non-compliance as a ground of avoidance under section
91(b) and that facts and instances pleaded by the petitioner are in regard to
non-compliance: hence the petitioner cannot resort to section 91(a) of the
Act:

Mr. Choksy supported his argument by also relying on the rule of construction
_Generalia specialibus non derogant_ \- special provisions will control
general provisions. He contended that section. 91 (b) is the special provision
and section 91(a) is the general provision and the special provision prevails
and is operative.

We are inclined to agree with Mr. H. L. de Silva, P.C., who stated that the
rule of construction does not apply. Bindra on The Interpretation of Statutes,
6th Edn., p. 140 states as follows:

"The following principles must be applied and exhausted before the rule is
applied. First, the two provisions must cover the same area before one can be
treated as an exception to another. Secondly, the two provisions must be so
incompatible with each other that they cannot be reconciled."

**282**

In our view the two provisions do not cover the same area; nor can section
91.(a) be said to be repugnant to or be in conflict with section 91(b). Though
the relief granted on proof of the grounds set out in both sections is the
same, namely, the avoidance of the election, the grounds of avoidance are not
the same. Furthermore, the objectives sought to be achieved by the two
provisions are different. In section 91(a), the objective is to ensure that
the electors must be allowed to vote for the candidate of their choice,
unhampered by intimidation, bribery, treating etc., while section 91 (b)
ensures that the election will be conducted in accordance with the subsisting
Election Law.

It also seems to us that the answer to the submission of the learned Attorney-
General and Mr. Choksy is contained in the words of section 91 (a) - "that by
reason of general bribery, general treating or general intimidation or other
misconduct or other circumstances, whether similar to those before enumerated
or not, the majority of electors were or may have been prevented from electing
the candidate whom they preferred." The "other circumstances" may be any
circumstances whether similar to those enumerated or not. In other words, the
legislature having referred to the occurrences which are common at elections,
viz., intimidation, bribery, treating and misconduct, proceeded to refer to
any circumstances whatsoever by reason of which the majority were prevented
from voting for the candidate of their choice. The words "other circumstances"
are wide enough to include instances of non-compliance with the law relating
to the conduct of elections. The petitioner was, therefore, entitled to plead
instances of non-compliance to sustain a charge under section 91 (a) of the
Act.

For the reasons set out above, we make order overruling all the preliminary
objections raised on behalf of the respondents and direct that this petition
be set down for trial.

The costs of this inquiry will be costs in the cause, but the respondents will
not in any event be entitled to the costs of this inquiry.

**_Objections overruled_.**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1989/30.html_  

