##  Joseph Perera Alias Bruten Perera v. The Attorney General and Others - SLR
- 199, Vol 1 of 1992 [1986] LKSC 30; (1992) 1 Sri LR 199 (7 August 1986)

**199**

**JOSEPH PERERA ALIAS BRUTEN PERERA** **  
v.** **  
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
SHARVANANDA, C.J.  
WANASUNDERA, J.  
ATUKORALE, J.  
L. H. DE ALWIS, J. AND  
SENEVIRATNE, J.  
S.C. 107/86;

S.C. 108/86; AND

S.C. 109186  
16, 17, 18 AND 19 MARCH, 1987

_     Fundamental Rights - Regulation 28 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous)
(Provisions & Powers) Regulation No. 6 of 1986 - Illegal arrest and detention
- Freedom of speech and expression - Constitution, Articles 12(2), 13(i),
14(1) - Power of President to make Emergency Regulations - The vices of
Regulation 28 of the Emergency Regulations - Regulations 18, 19, 26(a), 26(d)
and 33 of the Emergency Regulations - Burden of proof - Constitution, Article
15(2) and (7) - Section 5 and 8 of the Public Security Ordinance and Articles
155(2) and 80(3) of the Constitution - Prior restraints - Pre-censorship._

Three petitions 107 - 409/86 were consolidated and heard together. The
petitioner in application No. 107/86 Joseph Perera alias Bruten Perera was a
member of the Revolutionary Communist League and organiser of the "Young
Socialist" in Chilaw. The petitioner in application No. 108/86, Lorenz Perera
alias Ruman Perera is a brother of Joseph Perera. The petitioner in
application. No. 109/86 Lionel Dias Wijegunasinghe was a one-time lecturer in
History in the Colombo University. The Communist League organised a lecture to
be delivered by the

200

petitioner in application No. 109/86 at the Luxmi Hall, Chilaw on 26 June 1986
at 3.30 p.m. on "Popular Frontism and Free Education". Two days prior to the
meeting, a leaflet XI accusing the U.N.P. Government sup ported by the Roman
Catholic Bishop of Chilaw of getting enmeshed in a capitalist racist war with
the result that there were no funds to spend on free education and calling on
the witch-hunted teachers, progressive students and parents to attend the
meeting, to get together and establish their rights by imposing the fact that
the accused parties are the enemies of the students and were trampling their
rights, was distributed. The leaflet invoked the progressives to attend the
meeting on 26 June and was issued in the name of "Young Socialist of the
Revolutionary Communist League" "Kamkaru Mawatha". A poster "X" advertised the
lecture.

Before the commencement of the meeting at Luxmi Hall on 26 June 1986, a Police
party led by the 2nd respondent arrived at the place of the meeting and
dispensed the crowd and took into custody the three petitioners. On the
morning of the 26 June, 1992 the police had received two complaints from the
Principal, St. Mary's College, Chilaw and the Vice Principal of Ananda
College, Chilaw, to the effect that a meeting was organised and arranged to be
held by some revolutionaries with a view to creating unrest among the students
of the area. The Principal of St. Mary's College also informed that he had
received a warning letter on 23 June, 1986 signed "Eelam Tigers" threatening
to blow up the school. The Principal connected this threat with the proposed
meeting. The threatening letter was not produced, but its contents were taken
down into the Information Book by the Police who recorded the complaints of
the school authorities.

A detention order was served on the three petitioners on 27 June 1986, and
they were held at the Chilaw Police Station until 15 July 1986\. On this day
the Magistrate ordered them to be remanded until 29 July 1986. The remand
order was extended until 25 August 1986 but they were released on bail on 07
August 1986. Sergeant Major Abeysinghe claimed that it was he and not the 2nd
respondent who arrested the petitioner. The respondents sought to justify the
arrest and detention on the basis of powers vested in the police by
Regulations 18 and 19 of the Emergency Regulations. The petitioners were
alleged to have been connected or been concerned in the commission of offences
under Regulations 26(a), 26(d) and 33 of the Emergency Regulations. They were
also said to have contravened Regulation 28 by distributing x and xi without
the permission of the police.

**Held:**

(1) Article 14 of the Constitution deals with those great and basic rights
which are recognised and guaranteed as the natural rights inherent in the
status of a citizen of a free country. Freedom of speech by Article 14(1)(a)
goes to the heart of the natural rights of an organised freedom loving society
to impart and acquire information. Of that freedom one may say that it is the
matrix, the indispensable condition of nearly every other freedom. This
freedom is not absolute. There is no

201

such thing as absolute and unrestricted freedom of speech and expression,
wholly free from restraint; for, that would amount to uncontrolled licence
which would lead to anarchy and disorder. Article 29(2) of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights sets forth the cases in which this freedom of
expression may legitimately be restricted. On similar lines, there are
provisions in our Constitution. Article 15(2) provides that the exercise and
operation of the right of freedom of speech and expression shall be subject to
such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of racial and
religious harmony or in relation to parliamentary privilege, contempt of
court, defamation or incitement to an offence. Article 15(7) further provides
that "the exercise and operation of all the fundamental rights declared and
recognised by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 shall be subject to such
restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national
security, public order and the protection of public health or morality or for
the purpose of the due recognition and respect of the rights and freedoms of
others or of meeting the just requirements of the general welfare of a
democratic society.

Section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance as amended by Law No. 6 of 1978,
enables the President to make Emergency Regulations. Section 8 of the Public
Security Ordinance is a preclusive section providing that no Emergency
Regulation and Order, Rule, or Direction made or given thereunder shall be
called in question in any court. Article 155(2) of the Constitution empowers
the President to make regulations overriding, amending or suspending the
operation of the provisions of any law, except the provisions of the
Constitution.

Thus, the President's legislative power of making Emergency Regulations is not
unlimited. It is not competent for the President to restrict via Emergency
Regulations, the exercise and operation of the fundamental rights of the
citizen beyond what is warranted by Articles 15(1) to (8) of the Constitution.
The grounds of restriction specified in the limitation Article 15 are
exhaustive and any other restriction is invalid.

The regulations which the President is empowered to make owes its validity to
the subjective satisfaction of the President that it is necessary in the
interest of public security and public order. He is the sole judge-of the
necessity of such regulation and it is not competent for this court to inquire
into the necessity for the regulations bona fide made by him. The regulation
to be valid must satisfy the objective test that it is in fact in the interest
of national security, public, order, etc. It is competent to the court to
question the necessity of the Emergency Regulation and whether there is a
proximate or rational nexus between the restriction imposed on a citizen's
fundamental rights by Emergency Regulation and the object sought to be
achieved by the regulation. The integrity of the prohibition referable to
section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance is to that extent detracted.
Further, regulations made under section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance do
not attract the immunity from challenge provided by Article 80(3) of the
Constitution. In a contest regarding the validity of a regulation, the
President's evaluation of the

202

situation that the regulation appeared to him to be necessary or expedient is
not - sufficient to lend validity to the regulation.

Freedom of speech and expression means the right to express one's convictions
and opinions freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, pictures or any other
mode. It includes the expression of one's ideas through banners, posters,
-signs etc. It includes the freedom of discussion and dissemination of
knowledge. It includes freedom of the press and propagation of ideas, this
freedom is ensured by the freedom of circulation. The right of the people to
hear is within the concept of freedom of speech. There must be untramelled
publication of news and views and of the opinions of political parties which
are critical of the actions of the government and expose its weaknesses.
Debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust and widely open and that
may well include vehement, caustic and sometimes sharp attacks on government.

Such debate is not calculated and does not bring the government into hatred
and contempt.

It is only when the words written or spoken which have the tendency or
objection of creating public disorder that the law steps in to prevent such
activities in the interests of public security or public order.

Freedom of speech must yield to public order. In the interest of public order
the State can prohibit and punish the causers of loud noises in the streets
and public places by means of sound amplifying instruments, regulate the hours
and places of public discussion, the use of public streets for the purpose of
exercising freedom of speech, provide for the expulsion of hecklers from
meetings and assemblies, punish utterances tending to incite an immediate
breach of the peace or riot as distinguished from utterances causing mere
public inconvenience, annoyance or unrest.

Regulation 28(1) applied to "any posters, handbills or leaflets* and required
the permission of the police whatever its character for valid distribution.

The general rule is that any form of previous restraint is regarded on the
face of it as an abridgment of the freedom of expression and offends Article
14(1)(a) of the Constitution. Any system of prior restraint of expression
comes to court to bearing a heavy burden of showing justification for the
enforcement of such a restraint.

Pre-censorship is under our law not necessarily unconstitutional and can be
justified if brought within the ambit of Article 15. However, any system of
pre-censorship which confers unguided and unfettered discretion upon an
executive authority without narrow, objective and definite standards to guide
the official is unconstitutional.

Regulation 28 violates Article 12 of the Constitution. It is violative of the
equality provision because it would permit arbitrary and capricious exercise
of. power which is the antithesis of equality before the law.

203

The permission of the police mandated by regulation 28 is a form of prior
restraint. It abridges the freedom of expression guaranteed by the
Constitution. There is no rational or proximate nexus between the restriction
imposed by regulation 28 and national security/public order. Hence the
regulation is invalid and cannot form the basis of an offence in law.

The burden rests on the respondents to justify the arrest and detention of the
petitioners.

**Held further:**

(Sharvananda, C.J., and Autkorale, J. dissenting).

1\. (a) There was no illegal arrest and the detention was illegal only from
15.7.1986 (and not from 26.6,1986).

The powers of a police officer under the Emergency Regulations are in addition
to and not in derogation of his powers under the ordinary law (regulation 54).
In deciding on the validity of the arrest the sole issue for the court is the
knowledge and state of mind of the officer concerned at the time of the making
of the arrest.

A state of emergency was in existence and prevailed in the country and it was
the duty of the Police and armed forces to be as alert and vigilant as
possible to defend the State and the people from armed attack and subversion.
It would not have been consistent with the vigilance expected of the police to
ignore the complaint made by two responsible officers of two responsible
institutions that persons were planning to take steps to blow up a school and
also create unrest and disturbances among the students and have it directed
against the government. The police team had promptly arrived at the scene of
the offence and there saw a crowd of young persons and a meeting about to
begin. Posters were affixed at the place. The petitioners were in possession
of documents which on a cursory glance appeared to be subversive. Document
'XI' appeared to contain if not seditious statements, at least statements that
can be regarded as tendentious. 'XI' was a ten paged tract that was in
Sinhala. All this material required time to consider and legal opinion too
could well have been considered necessary.

In deciding on the validity of the arrest, the sole issue for the court is the
knowledge and state of mind of the officers concerned at the time of making
the arrest.

**_Per_ Wanasundara, J**., "the principles and provisions relating to arrest
are materially different from those applying to the determination of the guilt
or innocence of the arrested person. One is at or near the starting-point of a
criminal proceeding while the other constitutes the termination of those
proceedings and is made by the judge after hearing submissions of all parties.
The power of arrest

204

does not depend on the requirement that there must be clear and sufficient
proof of the commission of the offence alleged. On the other hand for an
arrest, a mere reasonable suspicion or a reasonable complaint of the
commission of an offence suffices. I should however add that the test is an
objective one. I am of the view that the latter requirement was fulfilled in
this case.'

(b) Suspicion arises at or near the starting-point of an investigation of
which the obtaining of prima facie proof is the end.

(c) This is not a case of the police riding roughshod over the rights of
citizens. The police action was bona fide and within the scope of their
functions and the outcome has depended on a legal issue.

(d) No police officer can predict the trial outcome of a case or/how a legal
provision would be interpreted by the court. If they are placed in peril and
heavy damages awarded in respect of their acts where prosecution was to fail,
no police officer would be inclined to perform his functions and may
henceforth decide to leave well alone not only doubtful cases, but practically
all cases, thereby bringing the administration of justice to a standstill.

(2) Though the initial arrest was legal, there is nothing in the documents
which will justify the conclusion that they would have brought the President
or the government into hatred or contempt or incite feelings of any
disaffection.

They cannot be reasonably characterised as subversive literature. On
completion of investigation into this complaint by 15.7.1985 no offence under
the regulations could have been disclosed and detention after this date was
illegal.

(3) Compensation in a sum of Rs. 10,000/- payable by the State would meet the
ends of justice.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Palks v. Connecticut (1937) 302 us 319.  
_  
_2\. Yasapala v. Wickremasinghe FRD 143, 159, 160.  
_  
_3\. Eshugbayi Eleko v. Govt. of Nigeria (1931) AC 662, 670.  
_  
_4\. Satchanandan v. Union of India AIR 1982 SC 902.  
_  
_5\. Griswald v. Connecticut (1965) 28 US 479.  
_  
_6\. Thornhill v. State of Alabama 310 US 88._  
  
_7\. West Virginia State Board v. Barnette (1942) 319 US 624, 641.  
_  
_8\. Abrams v US (1919) 250 US 616._

205

_9\. Austin v. Keele (1971) 402 US 415, 419.  
_  
_10.Terminiells v. Chicago (1949) 337, US 1.  
_  
_11.Superintendent Central Prisons v. Lohia AIR 1960 SC 633.  
_  
_12.Francis v. Chief of Police (1973) 2 ALL ER 251, 259.  
_  
_13.Shelton v. Tucker (1960) 364 US 479, 488.  
_  
_14.Ex parte Jackson (1877) 96 US 277.  
_  
_15.LovelI v. City of Griffin (1938) 303 US 444.  
_  
_16.New York Times v. US (1971) 403 US 713.  
_  
_17.Bantan Books v. Sullivan 372 US 58 - 70.  
_  
_18.Organisation for a Better Austin v. Kiefe (1971) 40 2 US 415.  
_  
_19.Stant v. Banter (1958) 355 US 313.  
_  
_20.Shuttleworth v City of Birmingham (1919) 394 US 147.  
_  
_21.Yick Wo v. Hopkins (1886) 118 US 356.  
_  
_22.Gunasekera v. de Fonseka 75 NLR 246, 247, 250.  
_  
_23.Muttusamy v Kannangara 52 NLR 324, 327.  
_  
_24.Baba Appu v. Adan Hamy 1900 134.  
_  
_25.Dumbell v Roberts (1944) 1 ALL ER 326.  
_  
_26.Hussien v. Chog Fook Kam (1969) 3 ALL Er 1626.  
_  
_27.McArdle v Egan(1933) 150 LT 412.  
_  
_28.Naneyakkara v. Henry Perera and Others (1985) 2 Sri LR 375, 385._  


_D. W. Abeykoon with R. Balendra, C. V. Vivekanandan and N. M. Perera for
petitioners in SC 107/86 and 109/86._  
_  
C. V. Vivekanandan with K. Packiyalingam, Miss Ranjanie Rayanathan and N. M.
Perera for petitioners in SC 108/86._  
_  
Upawansa Yapa, D.S.G. with C. R. de Silva, S.S.C. instructed by Mrs.N.
Nikapitiya, S.S.C., for Attorney-General._

_Cur adv vult._

206

25th May, 1987.  
**SHARVANANDA, C.J.**

These three petitions filed by the three petitioners under Article 126 of the
Constitution were taken up together for hearing, as they covered the same
questions of law and facts.

A Divisional Bench of five Judges of the Supreme Court was constituted in
terms of Article 132(3) of the Constitution as the questions involved in these
three applications are of constitutional importance.

Petitioner in application No. 107/86 says in his petition that he is a member
of the Revolutionary Communist League, a Political Party and is the organiser
of the "Young Socialist" in Chilaw. The Communist League organised a lecture
to be held at Luxmi Hall, Chilaw on 26th June 1986. The said lecture related
to the topic of "Popular frontism and free education" and was to be delivered
at 3.30 that evening by L. D. Wijegunasinghe (a one-time Lecturer in History
in the Colombo University) the petitioner in Application No. 109/86. Copies of
printed poster 'X' were affixed and some copies of leaflet 'X1' were
distributed to the public by the Petitioner two days prior to the date of the
said meeting with a view to give publicity to the meeting. The poster marked
'X' ran as follows:

**" PUBLIC LECTURE"**

POPULAR FRONT AND ATTACK ON FREE EDUCATION

LECTURER: WIJE DIAS

CENTRAL COMMITTEE MEMBER

R.C.L.

June 26 - 3 p.m.

CHILAW LUXMI HALL

YOUNG SOCIALISTS

Piyadasa Press

6/244, High Level Road, Maharagama."

207

The leaflet 'X1' is in Sinhala. The following is the English translation of
it, filed by the State:

**" Preserve the Fundamental Rights of Students and Teachers**

1\. Due to the ever intensifying capitalist economic crisis the U.N.P.
Government has come forward with plans to completely deprive the oppressed
young worker population of their right to education. Already the Government
has deliberately, permitted the establishment of private Universities, the
demolishing of existing Universities, the sacrifice of Maha Vidyalayas and
Central Schools for Army camps and the ruination of other schools by handing
over the administration of such schools to the stooges of the U.N.P.

2\. The Government desperately endeavouring to perpetuate its existence having
enmeshed itself in a capitalist racist war has no funds to spend on education
and it has become necessary to do away with all these rights. These are
pressures that the oppressed worker students cannot in any manner bear.

3\. It is as a first step in the achieving of these wicked ends that over a
100 militant students have been banned from attending classes. It is under
these circumstances that the University Teachers who receive a beggarly salary
from the paltry amount set apart for education by the Government have stepped
in to fight with the Government.

4\. L.S.S.P. and the Stalinist leadership having not supported the students
struggle branded them as strugglers of immature people and stated that nothing
could be done owing to the crisis in the North. They opposed the formation of
a Student Organisation. The Nava Samasamaja and the other capitalist
(leadership) who said that solutions can be found by having discussions with
the capitalist Government are fully responsible for the critical situation
that has arisen today.

5\. In these circumstances this crisis has come into the open in all areas of
the Island in various forms. There are reports of

208

this crisis from two leading schools in Chilaw. The facts reported to us are
briefly as follows:

6\. Five popular and experienced teachers of Chilaw, St. Mary's Boys Maha
Vidyalaya had been suddenly transferred to other schools. It is important to
note that these five teachers have over a long period of time produced good
results and performed their duties with dedication. Vile acts are done against
these teachers by the Principal and some others who call themselves teachers.
These people have a stinking history. These are people who in the previous
student struggles and student issues resorted to have students physically
assaulted and have them suspended from classes and thereby violating the
fundamental rights of students. The parents of the area are well aware of this
and they are held in contempt by the students and the parents. These people
who had played about with the lives of the students in previous student
struggles are today for their opportunist needs witch-hunting the best
teachers left in the school and are destroying the education of the students
with the idea of crowning themselves.

7\. It is no secret that those people receive the complete co-operation of the
political bosses and the head of the Catholic Church of Chilaw - namely the
Bishop, in this venture.

8\. In the meanwhile there are reports of teachers who threaten and harass
students of Ananda College, Chilaw. It is reported that the Vice Principal of
Ananda College, Chilaw who has assumed the leadership of this despicable
service has been slinging mud, abusing students calling them terrorists. This
person who has attracted displeasure in the schools he had served, does
treacherous acts against the students in the company of some others who call
themselves teachers.

9\. We request the witch-hunted teachers, the progressive students and parents
to get together and establish their rights by exposing the fact that these
persons are enemies of the students and are trampling their rights.

209

10\. We who are fighting for the workers to capture State power invite
progressives to attend a lecture on the topic "Free Education and Popular
Frontism" to be delivered at Luxmi Hall, Chilaw at 3.00 p.m. on the 26th of
this month.

Young Socialist of the Revolutionary Communist League,

"Kamkaru Mawatha."

Before the commencement of the meeting at the said Luxmi Hall, a Police Party
led by the 2nd Respondent arrived at the place of the meeting and dispersed
the crowd who had come to hear the lecture and took into custody these three
petitioners. According to the Petitioners they were not at any stage informed
by the Police the reason for dispersing the crowd and the reason for their
arrest. The three petitioners were detained at the Chilaw Police Station from
26.6.86 up to 15.7.86 by the 3rd Respondent without assigning any reason or
cause for such detention. The Petitioner in application No. 108/86, who is a
brother of the Petitioner in application No. 107/86 fell sick on 7.7.86 and
was admitted to the General Hospital, Chilaw. The other Petitioners were
produced before the Magistrate of Chilaw on 15.7.86 and were remanded by the
Magistrate till 29.7.86. Though the Petitioner in S.C. Application No. 108/86
was not produced in court on 15.7.86, the Magistrate made order remanding him
also and he was removed to the prison hospital, Negombo.

The Petitioners filed their applications to this court on 25th July 1986,
while they were still under detention. Subsequently they were enlarged on bail
by the Magistrate on 7.8.86.

The fact of the arrest and detention of the Petitioners are admitted by the
Respondents. The 2nd Respondent however denied that he arrested the Petitioner
and stated that he had nothing to do with their arrest and detention. One
Dhanapala Abeysinghe, Sergeant Major attached to the Police Station, Chilaw,
has filed an affidavit stating that it was he and not the 2nd Respondent who
arrested the petitioners. He states that he informed them that he was taking
them into custody on a charge of distributing newspapers and other documents,
which brought the Government into hatred and contempt in the eyes of the
students and other members of the public. He further deposed that upon
complaints made on 26.6.86 by the

210

Principal St. Mary's College, Chilaw and the Vice Principal, Ananda College,
Chilaw, that a public meeting had been organised by certain revolutionaries
with a view to create unrest among the students of the area, he along with a
Police party proceeded at 2.30 p.m. on that day to Luxmi Hall, to investigate
the said complaints. He questioned the petitioners and they informed him that
they had organised a meeting among the school children, to educate them on
"Free education and the unreasonable attitude of the Government towards free
education." He found in the possession of the petitioners (a) 46 copies of the
newspaper "Kamkaru Mawatha" (b) Pamphlet marked 'Y1' issued by the
Revolutionary Communist Party on "Free Education" and (c) a document entitled
"Kaleena Guru Hahda Prakashana" marked Y2. According to him these documents
contained material which would have brought the Government into hatred and
contempt in the eyes of the people, including the persons who had gathered
there for the meeting. "Having read the said documents, I suspected that the
meeting had been organised with a view of causing hatred and to incite the
feelings of disaffection against the Government, amongst the students of the
area who had gathered there. Consequently I decided to arrest the
petitioners." He further stated that the petitioners were detained at the
Chilaw Police Station in terms of a written order 3114 made by M. C. Mendis,
the Senior Superintendent of Police, Chilaw, dated 27.6.86, by virtue of
powers vested in him under Regulation 19(4) of the Emergency Regulations. The
Superintendent of Police issued the detention order authorising the detention
of the petitioners "as they had committed or were suspected to have committed
an offence under Emergency Regulations 26(a) and 26(d) and 33 of the Emergency
Regulations." Sergeant Major Abeysinghe further stated in his affidavit that
he was aware that permission of the inspector General of Police had not been
obtained for the distribution of the aforesaid documents marked X and X1, and
that their distribution by the petitioners without the permission of the
Inspector General of Police was in violation of Regulation 28(1) of the
Emergency Regulation.

According to the affidavit filed by Peter Fernando, I.P., Chilaw, on 26.6.86
the Principal, St. Mary's College, made a complaint at the Chilaw Police
Station, that he had received a letter on 23.6.86 threatening to blow up the
school; on examining the letter he found that the sender of the letter had
been disclosed as 'Eelam Tigers.'

211

The Principal also informed him that the Revolutionary Communist League had
organised a public meeting at 3.00 p.m. on the same date at Luxmi Hall,
Chilaw, with a view to creating unrest amongst the students of the area. The
Vice Principal of Ananda College, had also made a complaint that a public
meeting had been organised by the Revolutionary Communist League with a view
to create unrest among the students. On this complaint he suspected that the
said meeting had been organised with a view to bring or attempt to bring the
President and the Government into hatred and disrepute and to incite feelings
of disaffection against the government amongst students and other members of
the public, and that in consequence he sent a Police Party in charge of
Sergeant Major Dhanapala Abeysinghe, to make inquiry and take action.

The Respondents have not filed the letter received by the Principal, St.
Mary's College, which is alleged to have been sent to the Principal, St.
Mary's College by 'Eelam Tigers,' threatening to blow up the school. This
letter appears to be a red herring. It is to be noted that though the letter
had been received by the Principal, on 23.6.86, he had not reported the matter
to the Police until 26.6.86, until he became aware of the proposed meeting at
Luxmi Hall on 26.6.86. This threatening letter does not appear to have
influenced the Police or played any role in arresting the petitioners, as
according to the Police, petitioners were arrested on the ground that they
were organising a meeting to bring the President and the Government into
hatred and contempt. It is not alleged that the petitioners had sent that
letter nor were they even suspected of having sent it.

Mendis, the Superintendent of Police who issued the detention order. 3R4 has
filed affidavit stating that "having considered the material placed before me,
by the Officer-in-Charge of the Chilaw Police Station, I was of the opinion
that the petitioners had committed or had been concerned in commission of
offences under Regs. 26(a), 26(d) and 33 of the Emergency Regulations. I was
also of the opinion that the investigations were incomplete and it was
necessary to detain the petitioners. pending the completion of
investigations."

In view of the conclusion that I have reached that the arrest and detention of
the petitioners were illegal and unlawful and that there

212

 was no legal justification for such arrest and detention, it is not necessary
for me to go into the question whether the petitioners were, prior to their
arrest and detention, informed of the reason for their arrest and detention.

The Petitioners in their applications. to this court complained that their
fundamental rights guaranteed to them by Articles 12(2), 13(1), 14(1) viz:
freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention and freedom of speech and
expression have been violated by administrative action.

The Respondents seek to justify the arrest and detention of the Petitioners on
the basis of the powers vested in the Police by Regulations 18 and 19 of the
Emergency Regulations. They state that the Petitioners had committed or had
been concerned in commission of offences under Regulations 26(a), 26(d) and 33
of the Emergency Regulations. At the argument before us it was urged by
Counsel for the Respondents that the petitioners had, by distributing leaflets
X and X1, without the permission of the Police, in any event, violated
Regulation 28 of the Emergency Regulations and that hence their arrest and
detention were warranted in law.

Article 14 of the Constitution deals with those great and basic rights which
are recognised and guaranteed as the natural rights inherent in the status of
a citizen of a free country. Freedom of speech guaranteed by Article 14(1)(a)
goes to the heart of the natural right of an organised freedom-loving society
to impart and acquire information. "Of that freedom one may say that it is the
matrix, the indispensable condition of nearly every other freedom" _Palks v.
Connecdcut_ (1) This freedom is not absolute. There is no such thing as
absolute or unrestricted freedom of speech and expression, wholly free from
restraint; for, that would amount to uncontrolled licence which would tend to
disorder and anarchy. Absolute and unrestricted individual rights do not and
cannot exist in a modern State. The welfare of the individual, as a member of
a collective society, lies in a happy compromise between his rights as an
individual and the interests of the society to which he belongs. Article 29(2)
of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, sets forth the cases in which
this freedom of expression may legitimately be restricted:- "In the exercise
of his rights and freedoms everyone shall be subject only to

213

such limitations as are determined by law, solely for the purpose of securing
due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others and of
meeting the just requirements of morality, public order and the general
welfare in a democratic society." Our Constitution has rightly struck a proper
balance between the varying competing social interests, and has in line with
these principles, set forth the restrictions to which the fundamental right of
speech and expression may be subject to. Though the rights of a citizen are
neither absolute nor limitless, any limitation of the freedoms protected by
Article 14 should however be closely scrutinised.

Article 14(1) of our Constitution provides that every citizen is entitled to
freedom of speech and expression including publication.

Article 15(2) provides that the exercise and operation of this fundamental
right shall be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the
interests of racial and religious harmony or in relation to parliamentary
privilege, contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an offence. Article
15(7) further provides that "the exercise and operation of all the fundamental
rights declared and recognised by Articles 12, 13(1), 13(2) and 14 shall be
subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of
national security, public order and the protection of public health or
morality, or for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the
rights and freedoms of others, or of meeting the just requirements of the
general welfare of a democratic society. For the purpose of this paragraph
"law" includes regulations made under the law for the time being relating to
public security."

Section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance as amended by Law No. 6 of 1978
provides for the President to make Emergency Regulations. It enacted that (1)
The President may make such regulations as appear to him to be necessary or
expedient in the interests of public security and the preservation of public
order and the suppression of mutiny, riot, or civil commotion, or for the
maintenance of the supplies and services essential to the life of the
community.

(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by the
preceding subsection, emergency regulations may, so far as

214

 appear to the President to be necessary or expedient for any of the purposes
mentioned in that subsection -

(a) authorize and provide for the detention of persons;

(b)

(c)

(d) provide for amending any law, for suspending the operation of any law and
for applying any law with or without modification;

(e)

(f) and

(g)

The power of the President to make emergency regulations stems from the
provisions of the aforesaid section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance as
amended. It is the source of his legislative power to do so.

Section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance is a preclusive section providing
that no emergency regulation and order, rule or direction made or given
thereunder shall be called in question in any court.

Article 155(2) of the Constitution stipulates that the power of the President
to make emergency regulations under the Public Security Ordinance ... shall
include the power to make regulations, having the legal effect of overriding,
amending or suspending the operation of the provisions of any law, except the
provisions of the Constitution.

Thus the President's legislative power of making Emergency Regulations is not
unlimited. It is not competent for the President to restrict via Emergency
Regulations the exercise and operation of the fundamental rights of the
citizen beyond that warranted by Article 15(1-8) of the Constitution. The
width of the restriction envisaged by Article 15(7) cannot be added, varied or
superseded by any emergency regulation in excess of that referred to in
Article 15(7). For

215

a restriction, imposed by the Emergency Regulations which directly and
substantially affects the freedom of speech, to be valid, it has to be based
on one of the grounds of restriction specified in Article 15(2) and 15(7) and
only to the extent referrable to it. Any further restriction will not have the
support of law. The grounds of restriction specified in the limitation Article
15 are exhaustive and any other restriction is invalid.

Article 15(7) conditions the curtailment of the fundamental rights in the
interests of national security, public order etc. In order that a law may be
in the interest of national security, public order, there must be a proximate
and reasonable nexus between say, (in the case of freedom of speech and
expression) the nature of the speech prohibited and national security or
public order - the phrase "in the interests of public order" is wider than the
words "for the maintenance of national security or public order - the
connection has to be intimate, real and rational. The phrase cannot be
interpreted to mean that even if the connection between the restriction and
the national security or public order is remote and indirect, the restriction
can be said to be in the interests of national security or public order. A
restriction can be said to be in the interests of security or public order
only if the connection between the restriction and the security or public
order is proximate and direct. Indirect or far-fetched or unreal connection
between the restriction and security/public order would not fall within the
purview of the expression in the interests of security/public order. "For the
impugned restriction to be valid, the relationship between the impugned
regulation and the purpose of the regulation must, of course be rational or
proximate." _Yasapala v. Wickramasinghe_.(2) If the restrictions imposed are
wide enough to cover permissible as well as impermissible restrictions, the
regulation will be struck down as a whole, since the restriction put upon the
freedom of speech will not be justified by Articles 15(2) or 15(7).
Regulations attempting to restrict the freedom of speech must further be
narrowly drawn. Precision of the regulation must be the touchstone in an area
so closely touching a most precious freedom. Such a regulation must be
strictly construed and greater the restriction, the greater the need for
strict security by the court.

216

As stated earlier Article 155 of the Constitution has placed a limitation on
the extensive power of the President to make emergency regulations under the
Public Security Ordinance not to enact law inconsistent with or in derogation
of fundamental rights; if any regulation transgresses the limit, then to the
extent of such contravention it is void. In the enforcing of a fundamental
right the court is, by reason of the provisions of Article 155, necessarily
charged with the duty of enforcing the fundamental right and of declaring void
any regulation which is inconsistent with those rights to the extent of the
inconsistency. When Article 15(7) provided that, for the purpose of that
paragraph "law" included regulations made under the law for the time being
relating to public security, it postulated intra vires regulations and not
regulations prohibited by Article 155(2).

Section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance as amended by Law No. 6 of 1978,
enables the President to make regulations "as appears to him to be necessary
or expedient in the interests of public security and preservation of public
order." The regulation owes its validity to the subjective satisfaction of the
President that it is necessary in the interest of public security and public
order. He is the sole judge of the necessity of such regulation, and it is not
competent for this court to inquire into the necessity for the regulations
bona fide made by him to meet the challenge of the situation. But under
Article 15(7) of the Constitution it is not all regulations, which appear to
the President to be necessary or expedient in the interests of public security
and preservation of public order, made under section 5 of the Public Security
Act which can impose restrictions on the exercise and operation of fundamental
rights. It is only regulations which survive the test of being in the
interests of national security, public order ..." in terms of Article 15(7).
In a contest regarding the validity of a regulation the President's evaluation
of the situation, that the Regulation appeared to him to be necessary or
expedient is not sufficient, to lend validity to the regulation.

Under Article 15(7) the Regulation must in fact be in the interest of national
security, public order ... The Regulation to be valid must satisfy the
objective test. Though the court may give due weight to

217

the opinion of the President that the regulation is necessary or expedient in
the interests of public security and order, it is competent to the court to
question the necessity of the Emergency Regulation and whether there is a
proximate or rational nexus between the restriction imposed on a citizen's
fundamental right by emergency regulation and the object sought to be achieved
by the regulation. If the court does not find any such nexus or finds that
activities which are not pernicious have been included within the sweep of the
restriction, the court is not barred from declaring such regulation void as
infringing Article 155(2) of the Constitution. The integrity of the
prohibition referrable to section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance is to
that extent detracted. The Deputy Solicitor-General, very rightly conceded
that this court can, today inquire into the validity of an Emergency
Regulation. Section 8 of the Public Security Ordinance has to yield to Article
155(2) of the Constitution. Further Regulations made under said section 5 of
the Public Security Act do not attract the immunity from challenge provided by
Article 80(3) of the Constitution.

The basis of the three petitioners' applications is that they were unlawfully
arrested and kept in unlawful detention. The respondents admit the arrest and
detention. The question then arises as to on whom the burden of proof lies to
establish the legality of the arrest and detention. One of the essential
attributes of the Rule of Law is that executive action to the prejudice of or
detrimental to the right of an individual must have the sanction of law. The
State has got no power to deprive a person of his life or liberty without the
authority of law. This is the essential postulate and basic assumption of the
Rule of Law. Lord Atkin said "in accordance with British jurisprudence no
member of the executive can interfere with the liberty or property of a
British subject except on the condition that he can support the legality of
his action before a Court of Justice." _Eshugbayi Eleko v. Govt. of
Nigeria_.(3) Thus the burden rests on the respondents to justify the arrest
and detention of the petitioners. The respondents must show that the
regulation which gives them the power to arrest/ detain is covered by one of
the permissible grounds of restriction e.g. interest of national security or
public order stipulated by Article 15(7). If the impugned regulation imposes a
restriction upon the

218

fundamental right, by interfering with its exercise by the petitioner, the
burden of proving that the restriction is in the public interest lies upon the
Respondents ( _Satchanandan v. Union of India_ ).(4)

Dhanapala Abeysinghe who arrested the petitioners states in his affidavit,
that he found documents in the possession which contained material "which
would have brought the Government into hatred and contempt in the eyes of the
people including the persons who had gathered there at the meeting." The
documents referred to, are copies of the newspaper "Kamkaru Mawatha" and
pamphlets Y1 and Y2. He arrested the petitioners on a charge of "distributing
newspapers and other documents which brought the Government into hatred and
contempt. The documents in question are X and X1 (supra).

M. C. Mendis, Senior Superintendent of Police, states in his affidavit that
"having considered the material placed before me by the Officer-in-Charge of
the Chilaw Police Station, I was of the opinion that the petitioners had
committed or had been concerned in commission of offences under Regulations
26(a), 26(d) and 33 of the Emergency Regulations." The material that appears
to have been placed before him consisted of the complaints of the Principal
and Vice Principal, referred to above, documents X, X1, Y1 and Y2 and the
newspaper "Kamkaru Mawatha". He adds because of that opinion, he .issued the
detention order 3R4, on 27.6.86 to detain the petitioners at the Chilaw Police
Station.

Regulation 18 of the Emergency Regulation authorises the arrest without
warrant and detention for purpose of search any person who is committing or
has committed or whom he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned
in committing an offence under the Emergency Regulations.

Regulation 19(2) authorises the detention of the person detained under
Regulation 18 for a period not exceeding ninety days.

The respondents allege that the petitioners have committed offences under
Regulation 26(a), 26(d) and 33 and hence they were justified in arresting and
detaining them.

219

The relevant regulations provide as follows:

"26\. Any person who by words, whether spoken or written or by sign or visible
representations or by conduct or by any other act \-

(a) brings or attempts to bring the President or the Government into hatred or
contempt, or excites, pr incites or attempts to excite or incite feelings of
disaffection to, or hatred or contempt of the President or the Government; or

(b)

(c)

(d) raises or creates or attempts to raise or create discontent or
disaffection among the inhabitants or Sri Lanka or any section, class or group
of them, shall be guilty of an offence ..."

"33\. Whoever without lawful authority or reasonable excuse, the proof whereof
shall lie on such person, has in his possession, custody or control, any book,
document or paper containing any writing or representation which is likely to
be prejudicial to the interests of national security or to the preservation of
public order or which is likely to arouse, encourage or promote feelings of
hatred or contempt to the Government or which is likely to incite any person
directly or indirectly to take any step towards the overthrowing of the
Government shall be guilty of an offence."

Sergeant Abeysinghe who testifies to having arrested the petitioners states
that, having read the documents X, X1, Y1 and Y2 and the newspaper 'Kamkaru
Mawatha' he suspected that the meeting was organised with a view of causing
hatred and to incite feelings of disaffection against the Government among the
students in the areas who had gathered there and that was why he arrested

220

the petitioners. M. C. Mendis, Senior Superintendent of Police also states
that these documents contained material which would have brought the
Government into hatred and contempt in the eyes of the people and that was why
he issued the detention order 3R4 on these petitioners. These documents have
been placed before this court. I regret to state that a scrutiny of these
documents does not show that they contain any objectionable matter from which
it would be possible for any reasonable man to draw the conclusion that the
petitioners had committed or attempted to commit offences under Regulations
26(a) and/or (d) and Regulation 33 and that it was necessary to arrest or keep
them in detention. In my view it is not sufficient for these Police Officers
to say that they had material and that they felt satisfied on the basis of
that material that it was necessary to take preventive action against the
petitioners. Their word cannot be treated as an ipse dixit, when the material
viz: the impugned documents are before us and we are in a position to see
whether it was possible for a reasonable man to reach the conclusion or the
satisfaction deposed to by the Police Officers. Satisfaction of the mind
presupposes application of the mind and forming a conclusion after an
assessment of the entire matter. It is not a mechanical act. Satisfaction must
be such as can be reached by a rational mind. The satisfaction must be of a
reasonable man. The Police Officer must apply his mind to see whether the
consequences which he apprehends have a reasonable nexus to the nature and
contents of the documents. If the apprehended consequences are far-fetched or
unwarranted, then the satisfaction would not be real. Having perused the
documents in question, I cannot persuade myself to think that a rational and
reasonable person could have been satisfied that the writings would bring the
President or the Government into hatred or contempt or incite feelings of any
disaffection or that they could reasonably be characterised as subversive
literature. The impugned writings do not contain anything objectionable.

The pamphlet Y1 is a printed article in Sinhala, titled "Defend the Right of
Free Education - Build the Mass Movement to Defend the White Paper on
Education." It purports to be a statement of the political committee of the
Revolutionary Communist League. It is

221

 dated 5.2.1982 and priced at Rs. 1/- runs into several pages criticising the
Government's White Paper on Education as conducing to the erosion of free
education.

The pamphlet Y2 dated 8.1.1986 is a Guru Handa Publication - Voice of the
Teachers, titled 'Education is not a privilege but a right' and was issued by
the Lanka Teachers Association. It purports to set out the hardships and
handicaps suffered by the poor parents' children as against the privileges and
advantages enjoyed by rich men's children. It sets out facts and figures
substantiating the allegation that the poor man's child is disadvantaged.

The petitioners admit that the documents Y1 and Y2 contain criticism of the
Government but state that it is a legitimate criticism of its stepmotherly
attitude towards free education and village schools, but refute the allegation
that they bring the President or the Government into hatred or contempt or
ill-affection. I have scrutinised these pamphlets carefully to see whether the
allegation of the respondent that the petitioners had by having in their
possession Y1 and Y2 committed any offence under the Emergency Regulations
26(a) and (d). In my opinion these documents do not bear out the allegations
that the Petitioners had committed the alleged offences. The Deputy Solicitor-
General did not waste his time in trying to support the respondent's fanciful
allegation based on Y1 and Y2.

The respondents did not file as an exhibit any copy of the newspaper 'Kamkaru
Mawatha which they seized from the petitioners. They did not rely on that
newspaper to substantiate their allegation against the petitioners.

Finally the respondents were reduced to relying on the poster 'X' (supra) and
the pamphlet 'X1' (supra) to justify their contention, that the petitioners
had committed the said offences. The poster X can, by no stretch of
imagination, be said to come within the category of documents referred to in
the said Regulations. It is preposterous to state that the poster X,
announcing the holding of a meeting to expatiate on "Popular Front Politics
and Attack on Free Education" was calculated to bring the Government into
hatred and contempt. The Deputy Solicitor-General did not base any arguments
adverse to

222

the petitioners on the poster X and rightly did not seek to rationalise the
view of the Police Officers.

The Deputy Solicitor-General had finally to rest the case of the Police
Officers on the pamphlet X1. He did not accept the correctness of the
translation of X1 (original is in Sinhala) filed by the petitioners and has
chosen to file a separate translation which is reproduced above. It is not
necessary to determine whose translation represents the correct version. Even
on the above translation which is most favourable to the respondents, one
cannot reasonably find anything incriminating in X1 or any foundation for the
opinion that X1 was calculated to bring the Government into hatred and
contempt. Ex facie X1 does not contain anything derogatory of the President or
of the Government. The Deputy Solicitor-General was hard put to detect
anything in X1, which would lend support to the allegation of the respondents
that the document could justifiably be the basis of a charge under the
aforesaid regulations. He has drawn our attention to some stray sentences in
X1 (those sentences are sidelined in X1 above) which, according to him, may
conduce to bring the President and Government into ridicule and contempt and
have the tendency to incite feelings of disaffection. While appreciating his
valiant effort to salvage the opinion of the Police Officers, I cannot
identify in those sentences or in the tenor of the whole document X1, anything
which can reasonably substantiate the accusation of the Police against the
petitioners. He pointed to the passages in X1 where it is stated that "the
Government is desperately endeavouring to perpetuate its existence having
enmeshed itself in a capitalist racist war and that "it is no secret that
these people receive the complete co-operation of the political bosses and the
head of the Catholic church of Chilaw - namely the Bishop, in this venture"
and submitted that these passages go beyond criticism of the Government and
are calculated to create discontent or disaffection among the inhabitants of
Sri Lanka or any section of them. I cannot agree with this far-fetched
construction. The comment may be strongly worded. But it does not have the
pernicious tendency or intention of creating public disorder or disturbance.
The pamphlet is not couched in any language calculated to incite persons to
action. There is no advocacy of action. It certainly contains expressions of
dissent and criticism against Government. But freedom of speech and expression
would be

223

illusory if the Police can with impunity arrest and detain a person if he does
not obsequiously sing the praises of the Government. The danger to a party in
power is not the same as rocking the security or sovereignty of the State. The
Police should not be timorous to scent in every utterance criticising the
Government, an attempt to incite disaffection against or to overthrow the
Government. It is to be noted that what is prohibited is advocacy of action
and not advocacy of ideas. Only when the speech is an integral part of action
does it become penalised.

Freedom of speech and expression means the right to express one's convictions
and opinions freely by word of mouth, writing, printing, pictures or any other
mode. It includes the expression of one's ideas through banners, posters,
signs etc. It includes the freedom of discussion and dissemination of
knowledge. It includes freedom of the Press and propagation of ideas; this
freedom is ensured by the freedom of circulation. "The right of freedom of
speech and press includes not only the right to distribute, the right to
receive, the right to read and freedom of inquiry and the right to teach ...
These are proper peripheral rights" per Douglas, J., in _Griswald v.
Connecticut_.(5)

The freedom of speech and expression is not only a valuable freedom in itself
but is basic to a democratic form of Government which proceeds on the theory
that problems of government can be solved by the free exchange of ideas and by
public discussion - Servai, Indian Constitution, 3rd Ed. Vol. I at 491. Free
discussion of governmental affairs is basic to our constitutional system. Our
form of government is built on the premise that every citizen shall have the
right to engage in political expression and association, the People are the
sovereign, not those who sit in the seats of power. It is the voice of the
People which ultimately prevails. Free political discussion is thus necessary
to the end that government may be responsive to the will of the people and
changes may be obtained by peaceful means. The Constitutional protection for
speech and expression was fashioned to bring about political and social
changes desired by the people.

Freedom of speech and expression consists primarily not only in the liberty of
the citizen to speak and write what- he chooses but in

224

the liberty of the public to hear and read, what it needs. No one can doubt if
a democracy is to work satisfactorily that the ordinary man and woman should
feel that they have some share in Government. The basic assumption in a
democratic polity is that Government shall be based on the consent of the
governed. The consent of the governed implies not only that consent shall be
free but also that it shall be grounded on adequate information and discussion
aided by the widest possible dissemination of information from diverse and
antagonistic sources. The crucial point to note is that freedom of expression
is not only politically useful but that it is indispensable to the operations
of a democratic system.

"Public opinion plays a crucial role in modern democracy. Freedom to form
public opinion is of great importance. Public opinion, in order to meet such
responsibilities, demands the condition of virtually unobstructed access to
and diffusion of ideas. The fundamental principle involved here is the
people's right to know. The freedom of speech guaranteed by the Constitution
embraces at the least the liberty to discuss publicly all matters of public
concern without previous restraint or fear of subsequent punishments."
Thornhill v. State of Alabama, (6) - Without free political discussion, no
public education, so essential for the proper functioning of the process of
popular government, is possible. The welfare of the community requires that
those who decide shall understand them. The right of the people to hear is
within the concept of freedom of speech.

Freedom of discussion must embrace all issues about which information is
needed to enable the members of a society to cope with the exigencies of their
period. It is essential to enlighten public opinion in a democratic state; it
cannot be curtailed without affecting the right of the people to be informed
through sources, independent of the government, concerning matters of public
interest. There must be untrammelled publication of news and views and of the
opinions of political parties which are critical of the actions of government
and expose its weakness. Government must be prevented from assuming the
guardianship of the public mind. Truth can be sifted out from falsehood only
if the Government is vigorously and constantly cross examined.

225

"Authority ... is to be controlled by public opinion, not public opinion by
authority" _West Virginia State Board v. Barnette_.(7) "The ultimate good
desired is better reached by free trade in ideas - the best test of truth is
the power of thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market."
Per Justice Holmes in _Abrams v. U.S_.(8)

One of the basic values of a free society to which we are pledged under our
Constitution is founded on the conviction that there must be freedom not only
for the thought that we cherish, but also for the thought that we hate. All
ideas having even the slightest social importance, unorthodox ideas,
controversial ideas, even ideas hateful to the prevailing climate of opinion
have the protection of the constitutional guarantee of free speech and
expression. Hence criticism of government, however unpalatable it be, cannot
be restricted or penalised unless it is intended or has a tendency to
undermine the security of the State or public order or to incite the
commission of an offence. Debate on public issues should be uninhibited,
robust and wide open and that may well include vehement, caustic and sometimes
unpleasantly sharp attacks on Government. Such debate is not calculated and
does not bring the Government into hatred and contempt.

"Criticism of public measures or comment on Government action however strongly
worded is within reasonable limits and is consistent with the fundamental
right of freedom of speech and expression. This right is not confined to
informed and responsible criticism but includes the freedom to speak foolishly
and without moderation. So long as the means are peaceful, the communication
need not meet "standards of common acceptability." _Austin v. Keele_.(9)

The perspective of free criticism with its limits for free people everywhere
was eloquently brought out by Sir Winston Churchill on the historic censure
motion in the Commons, as Britain was reeling under defeat at the hands of
Hitler -

"This long debate has now reached its final stage. What a. remarkable example
it has been of the unbridled freedom of our Parliamentary institutions in time
of war. Everything that could be thought of or raked up has been used to
weaken confidence

226

in the Government, has been used to prove that Ministers are incompetent and
to weaken their confidence in themselves, to make the army distrust the
backing it is getting from the civil power, to make workmen lose confidence in
the weapons they are striving so hard to make, to present the Government as a
set of non-entities over whom the Prime Minister towers, and then to undermine
him in his own heart, and, if possible, before the eyes of the nation. All
this poured out by cable and radio to all parts of the world, to the distress
of all our friends and to the delight of all our foes. I am in favour of this
freedom, which no other country would use, or dare to use, in times of mortal
peril such as those through which we are passing."

It is only when the words, written or spoken, which have the pernicious
tendency or object of creating public disorder that law steps in to prevent
such activities in the interests of public security or public order. However
precious the freedom of speech may be in a democratic society, the means can
never override the end itself. The object of freedom of speech is to "maintain
the opportunity of free political discussion to the end that government may be
responsive to the will of the people and that changes, if desired may be
obtained by peaceful means." _Terminiells v. Chicago_ (10) This opportunity
can hardly be maintained without the existence of an organised government. No
State can, therefore, tolerate utterances which threaten the overthrow of
organised government by unlawful or unconstitutional means. The reason is that
the security of the State or organised government is the very foundation of
the freedom of speech. None of the freedoms guaranteed by our Constitution can
flourish in a state of disorder. Order is an elemental need in any organised
society. The law restricting freedom of speech is not solely directed against
undermining the security of the State or its overthrow, but is made generally
in the interest of public order. Freedom of speech must yield to public order.
In the interests of public order the State can prohibit and punish the causing
of loud noises in the streets and public places by means of sound amplifying
instruments, regulate the hours and places of public discussion, the use of
public streets for the purpose of exercising freedom of speech; provide for
the expulsion of hecklers from meetings and assemblies, punish utterances
tending to incite an immediate breach

228

of the peace or riot as distinguished from utterances causing mere "public
inconvenience, annoyance or unrest" Superintendent _Central Prison v. Lohia_.
(11) The phrase in the interests of public order "covers action taken for the
avoidance of excessive noise seriously interfering with the comfort or
convenience of a substantial number of persons. The phrase would of course
cover action for the avoidance of any behaviour likely to lead to breach of
the peace and perhaps excessive noise can be brought under that heading." Per
Lord Pearson, delivering the judgment of the _Privy Council in Francis v.
Chief of Police_.(12)

As stated earlier the view of the Police is untenable and hence the arrest and
detention of the petitioners are not authorised in law. Since the culpable
action of the Police Officers constituted executive or administrative action,
within the meaning of Article 126 of the Constitution, the State is liable for
their infringement of petitioners' fundamental rights.

Counsel for the State finally sought to justify the conduct of the Respondents
by submitting that the petitioners had, on the admitted facts, violated
Regulation 28(1) of the Emergency Regulations. For committing that offence
they could lawfully be arrested and detained. Regulation 28(1) reads as
follows:

"The person shall without the permission of the Inspector General of Police or
any Police Officer authorised in that behalf by the Inspector General of
Police, affix in any place visible to the public or distribute among the
public any posters, handbills or leaflets."

It is not denied that the Petitioners had not obtained any such permission as
required by Regulation 28(1) for distributing the poster X and leaflet X1. The
Petitioners contend that they are not bound in law to apply for and obtain any
such permission to distribute such innocuous documents. They submitted that
Regulation 28(1) was ultra vires the regulation-making power of the President
under section 5 of the amended Public Security Ordinance read with Article
155(2) of the Constitution and is void. They pointed to the fact that
Regulation 28(1) applied to "any posters, handbills or leaflets" and

228

that it required the permission of the Police whatever its character for its
valid distribution. They argued that this requirement of permission from the
Police ex facie restricts the exercise and operation of their fundamental
right of freedom of speech and expression and that this restriction is not
referrable to the provisions of Article 15(2) and 15(7) of the Constitution.
It is not disputed that Article 15(2) does not apply to the facts of the case.
But the Deputy Solicitor-General urged that emergency regulations are 'law' in
terms of Article 15(7) and that the sweep of the fundamental right declared by
Article 14(1)(a) can lawfully be restricted by Emergency Regulations such as
Regulation 28\. Counsel for the petitioners countered that a regulation such
as Regulation 28 which provides for obtaining of prior Police permission for
distribution of posters and leaflets, of all categories, be they be innocuous
or harmful, be they be political pamphlets, seditious literature or party
manifestos cannot be justified as having been passed in the interests of
"national security, public order etc., in terms of Article 15(7) - where is
absent any proximate and reasonable nexus between the nature of the
poster/leaflet and national security or public order etc. Counsel further
pointed out that the permission, required by Regulation 28 to render legal the
distribution of a poster/handbill could be granted or refused at the
uncontrolled will or opinion of the Police Official. He submitted that freedom
of expression, one of whose facets is the distribution of posters, handbills
and leaflets, would not truly exist if that right could be exercised only with
the grace or goodwill of the police. It is the basic right of a citizen to
publish what he chooses without obtaining the prior permission from any
authority, subject only to the responsibility before the law.

Laws that trench on the area of speech and expression must be narrowly and
precisely drawn to deal with precise ends. Over-breadth in the area has a
peculiar evil, the evil of creating chilling effects which deter the exercise
of that freedom. The threat of sanctions may deter its exercise almost as
patently as the application of sanctions. The State may regulate in that area
only with narrow specificity. There can be no doubt of the legitimacy of the
Government's interest in protecting the State from subversion. But "even
though the Government's purpose be legitimate and substantial, that purpose
cannot be pursued by means that broadly stifle fundamental personal

229

liberties when the end can be more narrowly achieved." _Shelton v. Tucker_
(13)

Liberty of circulating is as essential to the freedom of speech as liberty of
publishing; indeed without the circulation the publication would be of little
value. _Ex parte Jackson_.(14) This freedom is not to be confined to
newspapers but embraces pamphlets and leaflets. "These indeed have been
historic weapons in the defence of liberty, as the pamphlets of Thomas Paine
and others abundantly attest. The press in its historic connotation
comprehends every sort of publication which affords a vehicle of information
and opinion - _Per Chief Justice Hughes in Lovell v. City of Griffin_.(15)

The general rule is that any form of previous restraint is regarded on the
face of it as an abridgment of the freedom of expression and offends Article
14(1)(a) of the Constitution.

It was said in _New York Times v. U.S._ (16) that "any system of prior
restraints of expression comes to this court, bearing a heavy presumption
against its constitutional validity." _Bantan Books v. Sullivan_ (17) The
Government thus carries a heavy burden of showing justification for the
enforcement of such a restraint "Organisation for a _Better Austin v.
Kiefe_.(18)

Pre-censorship is under our law not necessarily unconstitutional and can be
justified if brought within the ambit of Article 15. However any system of
pre-censorship which confers unguided and unfettered discretion upon an
executive authority without narrow objective and definite standards to guide
the official is unconstitutional. "it is settled that an ordinance which makes
the peaceful enjoyment of freedoms which the constitution guarantees
contingent upon the uncontrolled will of an official - as by requiring a
permit or licence which may be granted or withheld in the discretion of such
an official is an unconstitutional censorship or prior restraint upon the
enjoyment of those freedoms - _Stant v. Banter._ (19) A person faced with such
an unconstitutional licencing may ignore it and engage with impunity in the
exercise of the right of free expression for which the law-purports to require
a licence" _Shuttleworth v. City of Birmingham_. (20)

230

Regulation 28 violates Article 12 of the Constitution. The Article ensures
equality before the law and strikes at discriminatory State action. Where the
State exercises any power, statutory or otherwise it must not discriminate
unfairly between one person and another. If the power conferred by any
regulation on any authority of the State is vague and unconfined and no
standard or principles are laid down by the regulations to guide and control
the exercise of such power, the regulation would be violative of the equality
provision because it would permit arbitrary and capricious exercise of power
which is the antithesis of equality before law. No regulation should clothe an
official with unguided and arbitrary powers enabling him to discriminate -
_Yick Wo v. Hopkins_.(21) Regulation 28 confers a naked and arbitrary power on
the Police to grant or refuse permission to distribute pamphlets or posters as
it pleases, in exercise of its absolute and uncontrolled discretion, without
any guiding principle or policy to control and regulate the exercise of such
discretion. There is no mention in the regulation of the reasons for which an
application for permission may be refused. The conferment of this arbitrary
power is in violation of the constitutional mandate of equality before the law
and is void. The exercise of the basic freedom of expression cannot be made
dependent upon the subjective whim of the Police, without offering any
standard of guidance. Where power is entrusted to a State official to grant or
withhold permit or licence in his uncontrolled discretion, the law ex facie
impinges the fundamental rights under Article 12. The permission of the Police
mandated by Regulation 28 is a form of prior restraint. It abridges the
freedom of expression guaranteed by the Constitution. It gives the Police
absolute discretionary power to control the right of citizens to exercise
their right of expression. There is no rational or proximate nexus between the
restriction imposed by Regulation 28 and national security/public order. It is
unconstitutionally overbroad. It strikes at the foundation of the fundamental
right of speech and expression by subjecting it to prior permission. Hence
that Regulation is invalid and cannot form the basis of an offence in law.

For the foregoing reasons, I hold that the petitioners' fundamental rights of
freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention and freedom of speech and
expression secured to them by Articles 13 and 14 have been violated by
executive/administrative action.

231

The petitioners have been held in unlawful detention from 26.6.86 till 7.8.86.
The detention resulted from the unlawful detention order 3R4.

The petitioners are entitled to relief in terms of Article 126(4) of the
Constitution.

Since the infringements complained of by the petitioners were caused by
executive/administrative action the State is liable to render the petitioners
relief that is just and equitable in the circumstances. The infringements in
question constitute serious violations of a citizen's fundamental rights. They
call for substantial relief being granted to the aggrieved parties. However,
in the special circumstances of this case, I direct the State to pay each of
the petitioners in Application Nos. 107, 108 and 109 a sum of Rs. 25,000/as
damages, on account of the violations complained of.

I allow the applications of the petitioners and order the 1st respondent to
pay each of the petitioners a sum of Rs. 3,000/- as costs of his application
to this court.

**ATUKORALE, J.** \- I agree.

  
**WANASUNDERA, J.**

I am in agreement with the lucid and learned exposition of the provisions of
Article 14(1)(a) of the Constitution relating to the fundamental right of
freedom of speech and expression contained in the judgment of the Chief
Justice. I myself subscribe strongly to the view that the constitutional
provisions of Article 15(2) and (7) cannot be availed of to prohibit
legitimate political expression of opinion and discussion except probably at a
time of gravest emergency and danger to the survival of the State. So
important is this fundamental right, the Chief Justice has rightly cited the
statement that this right is "the matrix, the indispensable condition of
nearly every other freedom". While there can be no disagreement about the
importance and range of this provision of the Constitution, difficulties do
arise in

232

the application of the abstract principle embodying this right to concrete
situations. Since my own evaluation of the facts has led me to a slightly
different conclusion, it is necessary that I set down my reasons in a separate
judgment.

It is unnecessary to traverse the ground covered by his judgment except to
underscore the factual matters which I think lend themselves to a different
interpretation. The arrest of the petitioners took place on the 26th of June
1986\. On the morning of that day, the Police had received two complaints from
two responsible persons, namely, the Principal of St. Mary's College, Chilaw,
and the Vice Principal of Ananda College, Chilaw, to the effect that a meeting
had been organised and was shortly to be held by some revolutionaries with a
view to creating unrest among the students in the area. The Principal of St.
Mary's College also informed the Police that he had received a warning letter
on 23rd June 1986 signed "Eelam Tigers" threatening to blow up the school.
Rightly or wrongly, the Principal coupled this threat with the proposed
meeting and thought that the Police should be apprised of this situation.

In this connection it may be noted that under the Emergency Regulations there
is a duty on every person who becomes aware of an intention or an attempt or a
preparation to commit an offence under any emergency regulation to give
information to the authorities (regulation 49). And regulation 45 makes every
attempt and even the preparation to commit any such offence, an offence by
itself.

The meeting was due to commence at about 3.00 p.m. on that day. Before the
meeting commenced the Police had rushed to the scene, dispersed the students
who had come to the meeting, and arrested the three petitioners. If the
meeting had been held and speeches made, we do not know whether the Police
would have been placed in a better position to defend this petition. What we
now have are the acts and events leading up to the start of the meeting and we
have to decide whether they were sufficient to permit the arrest and whether
they can constitute an offence. The Police took into custody certain documents
belonging to and in the possession of the petitioners. Copies of the printed
poster "X" had been affixed on the walls. The leaflets "X1" had been
distributed prior to the

233

meeting. The petitioners also had in their possession (1) "Y1" \- a pamphlet
on "Free Education", (2) "Y2" \- a document entitled "Guru Handa Prakashana",
and (3) 46 copies of a newspaper called "Kamkaru Mawatha".

The Chief Justice has set out the translation of the contents of leaflet "X1"
in extenso in his judgment. Since the State has submitted that some of the
statements therein are tendentious or seditious, I shall highlight those
passages:

2\. "The Government desperately endeavouring to perpetuate its existence
having enmeshed itself in a capitalist racist war has no funds to spend on
education and it has become necessary to do away with all these rights. These
are pressures that the oppressed worker students cannot in any manner bear."

3\. "it is as a first step in the achieving of these wicked ends that over a
100 militant students have been banned from attending classes. It is under
these circumstances that the University Teachers who receive a beggarly salary
from the paltry amount set apart for education by the Government have stepped
in to fight with the Government."

4\. "L.S.S.P. and the Stalinist leadership having not supported the students'
struggle branded them as strugglers of immature people and stated that nothing
could be done owing to the crisis in the North. They opposed the formation of
a Student Organisation. The Nava Samasamaja and the other capitalist
(leadership) who said that solutions can be found by having discussions with
the capitalist Government are fully responsible for the critical situation
that has arisen today."

10\. "We who are fighting for the workers to capture State power invite
progressives to attend a lecture on the topic "Free Education and Popular
Frontism" to be delivered at Luxmi Hall, Chilaw, at 3.00 p.m. on the 26th of
this month."

"Young Socialist of the Revolutionary Communist League,  
'Kamkaru Mawatha'."

234

Document "Y1" is a tract in Sinhala running into 10 pages. A detailed
consideration of this would require considerable time. It has been issued by
the Political Committee of the Revolutionary Communist League. One of the
petitioners is the organiser of the "Young Socialists" in Chilaw and is a
member of the Revolutionary Communist League. Another petitioner is the
brother of the above petitioner. The organisation is not a proscribed
organisation and the State has also not stated that it has any links or
affiliations with any proscribed organisation.

The legal provisions permitting arrest and detention can be found both in the
emergency regulations and in the Criminal Procedure Code. Regulation 18(1) is
worded as follows:

"Any police officer, any member of the Sri Lanka Army, the Sri Lanka Navy or
the Sri Lanka Air Force, or any other person authorised by the President to
act under this regulation may search, detain for purposes of such search, or
arrest without warrant, any person who is committing or has committed or whom
he has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in or to be committing
or to have committed, an offence under any emergency regulation, and may
search, seize, remove and detain any vehicle, vessel, article, substance or
thing whatsoever used in or in connection with the commission of the offence."

The material words for the purpose of this case are "whom he has reasonable
ground for suspecting to be concerned in or to be committing or to have
committed an offence under any emergency regulation."

The powers of a police officer under the emergency regulations are in addition
to and not in derogation of his powers under the ordinary law (regulation 54).
The relevant provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code relating to this arrest
is found in section 32(1)(b) and is worded as follows:

"any person who has been concerned in any cognizable offence or against whom a
reasonable complaint has been

235

made or credible information has been received or a reasonable suspicion
exists of his having been so concerned."

To judge whether or not the complaint was reasonable or that a reasonable
suspicion or a reasonable ground for suspecting existed for making the arrest,
the state of mind of the person making the arrest at the time of making the
arrest has to be ascertained. In this connection the court has to take
cognizance of the fact that a state of terrorism amounting to almost civil war
is raging in the northern and eastern provinces of the country and that
incidents like bomb explosions of a terrorist nature occur sporadically in
other parts of the country where subversion cannot be ruled out. The safety of
the State and the protection of the general public have now become more than
ever the paramount duty of the State and of the armed forces and the Police. A
state of emergency is in existence and prevails in the country and it is the
duty of the Police and armed forces to be as alert and vigilant as possible to
defend the State and the People from armed attack and subversion. In that
context, would it have been consistent with the vigilance expected of the
Police to ignore the complaint made by two responsible officers of two
responsible institutions that some persons were planning to take steps to blow
up a school and also create unrest and disturbances among the students and
have it directed against the government? Was that not a matter eminently
calling for action?

The Police team had promptly arrived at the scene of the offence. They have to
take an instantaneous decision while in the field and while the action was
proceeding. They had received two complaints of an attempt or preparation to
create unrest among students from responsible persons. At the scene there was
a crowd of young persons and a meeting was about to begin. Posters (which
cannot be regarded in isolation, but constituting part and parcel of the
transaction) were affixed at that place. Regulation 28(1) to which I will
refer later bans the affixing of posters without the permission of the
authorities. The petitioners were in possession of literature, which on a
cursory glance could have appeared to be subversive. Document "X1" appeared to
contain if not seditious statements at least statements that can be regarded
as tendentious. "Y' was a ten-paged tract in Sinhala. All this material
required examination which

236

may have taken at least a few hours, if not days, and a matter in which legal
opinion could well have been considered necessary. But Sergeant-Major
Dhanapala Abeysinghe who actually made the arrest says that on a cursory
reading he found that this material transgressed the law and he took the
petitioners into custody after informing them that they had violated the law
in distributing material that brought the Government into hatred and ridicule.

In deciding on the validity of the arrest, the sole issue for the court is the
knowledge and state of mind of the officer concerned at the time of the making
of the arrest - _Gunasekera v. de Fonseka_ , (22) and _Muttusamy v.
Kannangara_ (23). Our courts had held that

"a suspicion is proved to be reasonable if the facts disclose that it was
founded on matters within the police officer's own knowledge or on statements
by other persons in a way which justify him in giving them credit." _(Baba
Appu v. Adan Hamy_ ) (24)

The principles and provisions relating to arrest are materially different from
those applying to the determination of the guilt or innocence of the arrested
person. One is at or near the starting-point of criminal proceedings while the
other constitutes the termination of those proceedings and is made by the
judge after hearing submissions from all parties. The power of arrest does not
depend on the requirement that there must be clear and sufficient proof of the
commission of the offence alleged. On the other hand, for an arrest a mere
reasonable suspicion or a reasonable complaint of the commission of an offence
suffices. I should however add that the test is an objective one. I am of the
view that the latter requirement was fulfilled in this case.

I find that the corresponding provisions of the U.K. law have been interpreted
by the courts on similar lines. _In Dumbell v. Roberts_ , (25) Scott, L.J.
said:

"127 the constable shall before arresting satisfy himself that there do in
fact exist reasonable grounds for suspicion of guilt. That requirement. is
very limited. The police are not called upon

237

before acting to have anything like a prima facie case for convicting ... The
duty of the police... is, no doubt, to be quick to see the possibility of
crime, but equally they ought to be anxious to avoid mistaking. the innocent
for the guilty,... The police are required to be observant, receptive and
open-minded and to notice any relevant circumstance which points either way,
either to innocence or guilt. They may have to act on the spur of the moment
and have no time to reflect and be bound, therefore, to arrest to prevent
escape; but where there is no danger of the person who has ex hypothesi
aroused their suspicion ... (escaping) ... they should make all presently
practicable enquiries from persons present or immediately accessible who are
likely to be able to answer their enquiries. I am not suggesting a duty on the
police to try to prove innocence: that is not their function; but they should
act on the assumption that their prima facie suspicion may be ill-founded."

In _Hussien v. Chog Fook Kam_ ,(26) Lord Devlin said:

"Suspicion in its ordinary meaning is a state of conjecture or surmise where
proof is lacking: 'I suspect but I cannot prove.' Suspicion arises at or near
the starting-point of an investigation of which the obtaining of prima facie
proof is the end. When such proof has been obtained, the police case is
complete, it is ready for trial and passes on to its next stage. It is indeed
desirable as a general rule that an arrest should not be made until the case
is complete. But if arrest before that were forbidden, it could seriously
hamper the police. To give power to arrest on reasonable suspicion does not
mean that it is always or even ordinarily to be exercised. It means that there
is an executive discretion. In the exercise of it many factors have to be
considered besides the strength of the case. The possibility of escape, the
prevention of further crime and the obstruction of police inquiries are
examples of those factors ...

... There is another distinction between reasonable suspicion and prima facie
proof. Prima facie proof consists of admissible evidence. Suspicion can take
into account matters that could

238

not be put in evidence at all. There is a discussion about the relevance of
previous convictions in the judgment of Lord Wright in _McArdle v. Egan_.(27)
Suspicion can take into account also matters which, though admissible, could
not form part of a prima facie case. Thus the fact that the accused has given
a false alibi does not obviate the need of prima facie proof of his presence
at the scene of the crime; it will become of considerable importance in the
trial when such proof as there is being weighed perhaps against a second
alibi; it would undoubtedly be a very suspicious circumstance..."

This wider discretion vested in the Police is logical and is also necessary
for the proper performance of the functions of the Police and for the
maintenance of the law and order in the country.

Just as the Chief Justice has stated that over-breadth in the restriction of
the freedom of speech and expression has a peculiar evil, the evil of creating
chilling effects which deter the exercise of that freedom, any restriction on
the powers of the Police in this area of action will also have a peculiar
evil, the evil of creating a chilling effect which will inhibit law-
enforcement officers from the due performance of their duties which ensure the
protection and safety of the citizens and their property. No police officer
can predict the final outcome of a case or how a legal provision would be
interpreted by the court. If they are placed in peril and heavy damages
awarded in respect of their acts where prosecution were to fail, no police
officer would be inclined to perform his functions and may henceforth decide
to leave well alone not only doubtful cases but practically all cases, thereby
bringing the administration of justice to a standstill. In my view such a
construction of the powers of arrest was furthest from the minds of the
legislators.

For these reasons I would hold that the arrest was legal and does not
constitute a violation of the petitioners' fundamental right. But this does
not mean that the subsequent detention (except for reasonable period to
scrutinise the material) can be excused. Any detention beyond what can be
justified transgresses the law.

239

Looking at it objectively, I agree with the Chief Justice that the material
before us falls short of establishing the commission of an offence by the
petitioner, although in my view it was adequate to justify the arrest. In this
connection I should also like to add that we are here not dealing with a
matter relating to judicial proceedings, but in regard to a detention by the
executive authorities. The provision for the production of the detainee before
a judge at one stage of the proceedings is in fact more of a formal nature.

The Deputy Solicitor-General ultimately fell back on regulation 28(1) of the
Emergency Regulations to defend the conduct and actions of the respondents.
Regulation 28(1) is worded as follows:

"No person shall, without the permission of the Inspector General of Police or
any police officer authorized in that behalf by the Inspector General of
Police, affix in any place visible to the public or distribute among the
public any posters, handbills or leaflets."

The distribution of the pamphlets was admitted by the petitioners and
Dhanapala Abeysinghe had come to the conclusion that the material was
seditious or tendentious.

While the arrest can be justified, different considerations as I have stated
earlier apply when we have to determine whether or not an offence under this
provision can ultimately be made out.

It may have been possible to advance an argument to preserve the application
of this regulation to the grounds referred to in Article 15(7). But counsel
for the State, in his desire to make it applicable to the present case, took a
mere ambitious course and sought to defend the regulation in the context of a
wider application. The Chief Justice has dealt with the validity of the
regulation on the level of his submission and has come to the conclusion that
the entire regulation has to be declared invalid. I am in agreement with his
conclusion. I may add that counsel's submission that the regulation is
incomplete and has to be supplemented on the most vital and essential
component of classification by the exercise of discretion by a police officer
(who may even be an Inspector or Sub-Inspector and who is

240

not even indicated in the regulation) is a further ground for holding it
invalid. Where a fundamental right has to be restricted or limited, it can
only be done by a law (including an Emergency Regulation), but such law must
express and contain within itself all the vital and necessary components
relating to the restriction. An incomplete regulation omitting the most
essential component and requiring that it be supplemented by the discretion of
an administrative officer cannot be regarded as a "law" restricting the
fundamental right within the meaning of Article 15. This is an additional
ground for nullifying regulation 28(1).

Since I hold that the arrest can be justified, there remains for consideration
only the matter of the detention (beyond a reasonable period necessary for
processing the matter) and the transgression of the right of freedom of speech
and expression. I yield to none in the protection of those fundamental
freedoms and in the appreciation of their importance and relevance to a
democratic system of government. The fact that there was a reasonable basis
for the initial action of the arrest and that the Police have acted bona fide
seems to throw a somewhat different complexion on the matter and makes me view
it from a standpoint different from that of the judgment of the Chief Justice.
This is not a case of the Police riding roughshod over the rights of citizens.
The Police action was bona fide and within the scope of their functions, and
the outcome of the case has depended on a legal issue. While the detention
after the period that would be reasonably required for processing the file and
inquiry notes would be unjustified, it appears that this delay is due to the
authorities not taking prompt steps in the matter. Making every allowance for
delays that may be occasioned by reason of the present situation, yet I think
these petitioners have been deprived of their liberty for a considerable
period of time. What is involved is a very important right and they are
entitled to relief.

In my opinion the transgression of the petitioners' rights would be
sufficiently compensated and the ends of justice met if all the petitioners
are awarded a sum of Rs. 10,000/- each. The petitioner in S.C. Application 109
had been a University lecturer at one time, but this, I think, is no reason to
draw a distinction between him and the others as regards compensation. Each
petitioner would also be

241

entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 3,000/-. This is a liability incurred by the
State and payable by the State.

**L. H. DE ALWIS, J.**

I have had the benefit of perusing the judgments prepared by My Lord the Chief
Justice and Wanasundera, J., and agree with the conclusion reached by
Wanasundera, J. I set out my reasons in a separate judgment.

I shall first deal with the question of the arrest and detention of the three
Petitioners.

Sergeant Major Abeysinghe, of the Chilaw Police Station who made the arrest
stated in his affidavit that upon a complaint made on 26.6.86 by George
Bertram Remius Silva, the Principal of St. Mary's College, Chilaw, and by
Singapulige Vincent, the Vice Principal of Ananda College, Chilaw, that a
public meeting had been organized by certain revolutionary groups with a view
to creating unrest among the students in the area, he set out with a police
party in uniform at about 2.30 p.m. and proceeded to Luxmi Hall, Chilaw, which
was the venue of the meeting, to investigate the complaint.

The complaint had been made at 10.30 a.m. that day at the Chilaw Police
Station by the Principal and Vice Principal of the two respective schools.
They produced a letter, the envelope and a leaflet printed in red ink and
handed them over to the Police for investigation. The letter was not produced
in Court but its contents were taken down in the Information Book by the
Police Officer who recorded their complaints marked 3R1 and 3R2. The letter
had been received by the Principal on the 23rd of June and ran as follows :

"Comrade Brother George,

Are you not 'holding pot' to Jayawardena of Sri Lanka very much ? Your school
will be blown up between the months of June and July. Comrade take care. We
also live in Chilaw. This is Eelam Tigers."

242

The Principal of St. Mary's College in his statement said that on receipt of
the letter he stayed in the school in great fear for the safety of his
students and himself. He did not rush with the letter to the Police but made
secret inquiries into it himself. But when one of the members of his staff
produced before him a leaflet printed in red (x1) handed to him by one of the
students, entitled "Defend the rights of students and teachers", published by
members of a Revolutionary Group, stating in the last paragraph that the
working class who are fighting to take over the government request the
students to attend a lecture on 26 June at 3 p.m. at Luxmi Hall, Chilaw on the
subject "Right to Free Education and Popular Frontism" his fears of the threat
conveyed in the earlier letter were apparently confirmed as day of the lecture
fell between the months of June and July. He also felt that the students were'
being invited to the lecture "with some intention of inciting and inducing
them" (to action). It was then that he went the next morning to the Chilaw
Police Station along with Vice Principal of the other school with whom he had
discussed the matter and made the complaint.

Sgt. Major Abeysinghe says in his affidavit that he proceeded to investigate
the complaint made at 2.30 p.m. on 26.6.86. On his arrival at Luxmi Hall with
a Police Party, a group of persons who had gathered there for the lecture took
to their heels. He questioned the petitioners who were present and found with
them 46 copies of a newspaper entitled "Kamkaru Mawatha", a pamphlet issued by
the Revolutionary Communist Party on Free Education (Y1) and a document
entitled "Kaleena Guru Handa Prakashana" (Y2). Y1 runs into 10 pages, each
containing 3 columns of reading matter in Sinhala. He read the documents Y1
and Y2 and suspected that the meeting was organised with a view to causing
hatred and to incite feelings of disaffection against the Government. He
therefore decided to arrest the petitioners. Before doing so he informed them
that he was taking them into custody for distributing newspapers and other
documents which brought the Government into hatred and contempt, [which are
offences under Emergency Regulations 26(a) and (d)]. Having arrested them he
produced them at the Chilaw Police Station at 3.35 p.m. where he recorded
their statements. The petitioner (in application No. 107/86) admitted in his
statement that he had distributed leaflets among the school children. Sgt.
Major

243

Abeysinghe was aware that permission of the Inspector General of Police had
not been obtained for the distribution, (which is an offence under Regulation
28).

The petitioner in Application No. 107/86 is a member of the Revolutionary
Communist League and had organized the lecture that day. The petitioner in
108/86 is his brother, and the petitioner in Application No. 109/86, had come
there to deliver the lecture and is a Central Committee Member of the
Revolutionary Communist League.

These are the circumstances which led to the arrest of the petitioners. The
arrest was made in pursuance of the powers vested in a Police Officer in terms
of Emergency Regulation 18(1). As pointed out by Wanasundera, J.,' the
material words for the purpose of this case are, "whom he has reasonable
ground for suspecting to be concerned in or to be committing or to have
committed an offence under any Emergency Regulation." I agree with all that
Wanasundera, J., has said in regard to the state of terrorism prevailing in
the country at the time and the quick decision Sgt. Major Abeysinghe had to
make that afternoon in arresting the petitioners. He had no time to make a
close scrutiny of the documents taken into custody by him. The Sgt. Major says
in his affidavit that the complaint was that a public meeting had been
organized by a certain revolutionary group with a view to creating 'unrest'
among the students in the area. But the word used in the complaint by
Principal of St. Mary's College is "inciting" The complaints 3131 and 3132 are
produced in the proceedings and it is on these complaints that the Sgt. Major
set out for inquiry. They form part and parcel of his affidavit. The' Sgt.
Major's affidavit is not a reflection of his own state of mind on the
complaint but simply a record of the contents of the complaint. When he
therefore erroneously used the word "unrest" he must be taken to have meant
"incitement" since that was the word that appeared in the complaint. The
students were young and immature and could easily have been roused to action.
Thus, taking into consideration the contents of the complaints of the
Principal and Vice Principal of the two schools, of which Sgt. Major
Abeysinghe himself would have been aware on reading the Police information
Book before setting out for inquiry, and also taking judicial notice of the
state of civil unrest prevailing in the country caused by acts of

244

terrorism committed by certain groups of persons, I agree with Wanasundera,
J., that applying the objective test a rational man would have had reasonable
grounds for entertaining the suspicion that led Sgt. Major Abeysinghe to make
the arrest under regulation 18(1).

It was submitted by Counsel for the petitioners that that the arrest and
detention were unlawful because the petitioners were not informed of the
reason for their arrest and detention. Sgt. Major Abeysinghe in his affidavit
has stated that he informed the petitioners that he was taking them into
custody for distributing documents which brought the government into hatred
and contempt. Sgt. Major Abeysinghe on a reading of the documents Y1 and Y2
coupled with the background information that he had, entertained a reasonable
suspicion rightly or wrongly in good faith, that offences under Emergency
Regulation 26(a), (d), 28 and 33 were being committed. The petitioners were
therefore caught by him "in flagrante delicto" so to say, and there was no
need for him to have informed them of the reason for their arrest as they
would have known why. Nevertheless the Sgt. Major, out of an abundance of
caution, did inform them of the reason for their arrest.

In Mrs. _Sita Gunasekara v. A. T. de Fonseka & 2 others_,(22) H. N. G.
Fernando, CJ, while agreeing with the decisions in the cases cited by him, to
the effect that when a Police Officer arrests a person without a warrant, he
should, save in exceptional cases, inform the suspect of the true ground of
arrest said at page 250 as follows

"According to the decisions which I have cited there are exceptional cases in
which the requirement will not apply, particularly cases in which it is
obvious in the circumstances that a person must necessarily know why he is
being arrested . . . So also if a person is arrested under Regulation 19 of
the Emergency Regulations (No. 6 of 1971, which is similar to Emergency
Regulation 18 in the present case) **when he is committing an offence** , then
the requirement that he be informed of the ground for his arrest may not
apply." In that case the arrest did not fall within these exceptions. But in
the present case it does. In any event the petitioners have been informed of
the reason for their arrest. The Sgt. Major has made

245

a prompt entry in his notes (3133) that day itself, that he explained the
charge against the petitioners before taking them into custody and I accept
it.

I am therefore of the view that the arrest of the petitioners was lawful and
did not constitute a violation of the petitioners' fundamental rights.

Senior Superintendent of Police, M. C. Mendis, states in his affidavit that on
27.6.86, Sarath Perera, the Officer-in-Charge of the Chilaw Police Station
informed him of the complaint made and produced before him the documents taken
charge of by the Police at the time of the arrest of the petitioners on 26th
along with Sgt. Major Abeysinghe's notes (3133) and the statements of the
Petitioners recorded by the Police in connection with the incident. After
consideration of this material he was of the opinion that offences, under
Emergency Regulations 26(a), (d) and 33 had been committed by the Petitioners
and that the detention of the petitioners was necessary to complete the
investigations. He accordingly acted bona fide and issued the order 3134 for
the detention of the petitioners at the Chilaw Police Station for a period of
one month from that day, by virtue of the powers vested in him under the
Emergency Regulation 19(2). He was informed by Inspector Sarath Perera that
the detention order was handed over to the Petitioners as instructed by him.

The detention of a person arrested without a warrant under Regulation 18 can
be justified if the detention is for search. The expression search is
synonymous with investigation. Hence detention for further investigation is
lawful, _Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera & 3 others_.(28)

The investigation, according to the affidavit of Inspector Sarath Perera was
however completed by 15.7.86. During that period the police had sufficient
time to scrutinize very carefully the documents that they had taken into their
custody. I agree with the Chief Justice, that there is nothing in the
documents X, X1, Y1, Y2 "to think that a rational and reasonable person could
have been satisfied that the writings would bring the President or Government
into hatred or contempt or incite feelings of any disaffection or that they
could

246

reasonably be characterised as subversive literature." It would not have taken
the Police investigators much time to arrive at that conclusion themselves
after due consideration of the documents. Even the Deputy Solicitor-General
who appeared for the Attorney General was hard put to it to support the view
that the documents were subversive or objectionable. He therefore fell back
upon Regulation 28 in an effort to justify the detention.

I also agree with the Chief Justice and Wanasundera J., that Regulation 28 is
invalid so that the detention of the petitioners on the basis of an offence
committed under this regulation is unjustified.

In Nanayakkara v. Henry Perera & 3 others (supra) Colin-Thome, J., said at
page 385 :

"It is manifest, therefore, that the detention of a person arrested without a
warrant under Regulation 18 can be justified in law only if the detention is
for further investigation. It would be unlawful to detain such a person for an
unspecified and unknown purpose as this would be an infringement of Article
13(4). It necessarily follows from this that no sooner the further
investigation is concluded the suspect is entitled to his release from
detention without waiting for the duration of ninety days to be over."

In my view therefore, on the completion of the investigation into this
complaint by 15.7.86, no offence under the Emergency Regulations could have
been disclosed and the petitioners were entitled to be released from
detention.

The Headquarters Inspector of the Chilaw Police Station, Sarath Perera however
produced the Petitioners in Applications Nos. 107/86 and 109/86 before the
Magistrate on a report and moved that they be remanded or released on bail. He
also moved that an order be made in respect of the other petitioner in
Application No. 108/86 who was sick in hospital. The Magistrate had no power
under the Emergency Regulations to grant bail during the period of the
authorised detention of the petitioners under the Regulations, except with the
prior written consent of the Attorney-General. (Regulation 64(1)). The

247

Magistrate therefore made order remanding all three petitioners till 15.8.86:
They were however released on bail on 7.8.86.

The Inspector further stated in the report that he was taking steps to get
instructions from the Attorney-General. But he had ample time to do so from
the date of the detention order on 27.6.87 (3R4). A careful scrutiny of the
documents especially Y1, and Y2 would not have taken a couple of days. Indeed
there appears to have been no necessity to consult the Attorney-General on the
matter because, the Inspector had already formed the opinion that the
petitioners had committed offences under Emergency Regulations 26(a), (d), 27,
28 & 33 when he made his report to the Magistrate and stated so. But as was
pointed out earlier, none of these offences could have been made out so that
it was incumbent on the Inspector to have released the petitioners when
investigations were completed by 15.7.86 without producing them before the
Magistrate. Their detention from 15.7.86 until they were released on bail on
7.8.86 is therefore unjustified and unlawful.

It must be noted that the unlawful detention of the petitioners has been made
by executive or administrative action and not in judicial proceedings. Even
though the last order of remand was made by the Magistrate it was not in the
exercise of his judicial discretion, since he had none under the Emergency
Regulations.

In the result I allow the application in part. I award the petitioners
compensation in a sum of Rs. 10,000/- each on account of the violation of
their fundamental rights during the period of their unlawful detention. They
are also entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 3,000/each. Since these
infringements have been caused by executive or administrative action the State
is liable to make these payments.

**SENEVIRATNE, J.**

As these three applications dealt with the same matter, the arrest and
detention of the petitioners in each of these applications, who described
themselves as members of the Revolutionary Communist

248

League, a political party in Sri Lanka, a section of the International
Committee of the Fourth International, the three applications were
consolidated and heard. Initially these applications were heard by a Bench of
three Judges. In the course of the argument an issue arose as regards the
scope and validity of Regulation 28 of the Emergency (Miscellaneous Provisions
& Powers) Regulations No. 6 of 1986 made under Section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance. Due to this legal issue My Lord the Chief Justice
constituted a Bench of 5 Judges to hear these applications.

His Lordship the Chief Justice has adequately considered this regulation in
relation to Chapter 3 of the Constitution and held that it was invalid. This
Bench has unanimously agreed with that finding.

I have had the advantage of reading the judgment of My Lord the Chief Justice
regarding the other important matters that arose in these applications to wit
:

(a) the validity of the arrest of the petitioners made on 26.&.86,

(b) the detention of these petitioners from 26.6.86 to 15.7.86 at the police
station on a detention order made by the Senior Superintendent of Police Mr.
Mendis,

(c) the detention of the petitioners from 15.7.86 to 7.8.86 on court orders
made in terms of the Emergency Regulations 19 & 20, read with Regulation 64,
which sets out

"No Magistrate shall, except with prior consent of the Attorney-General
release on bail any person suspected or accused of any offence under any
emergency regulation".

Under the said Regulation 19 a person arrested and detained in a police
station under Regulation 18 -

"shall be produced before any Magistrate within a reasonable time, having
regard to the circumstances of

249

each case, and in any event, not later than 30 days after such arrest".

I must state that O.I.C. Police Station Chilaw and the Senior Superintendent
of Police Chilaw have scrupulously observed the relevant regulations. The said
Regulation 20 permits the detention of a person in prison by a Magistrate "for
a continuous period of 3 months and shall not be released at any time prior to
the expiry of such period except in accordance with the provision of
Regulation 64". Regulation 64 has been observed and the petitioners who were
remanded by court have been released on bail on 7.8.86, presumably with the
consent of the Attorney-General. Thus, these three petitioners have been
detained from 26.6.86 to 7.8.86, a period of 42 days on a police detention
order and remand orders made by the Magistrate.

His Lordship the Chief Justice had held that -

(a) the original arrest of the three petitioners by Police Sgt. Dhanapala
Abeysinghe, and the later detention up to 7.8.86 was illegal and unwarranted.

I respectfully disagree with His Lordship the Chief Justice as regards the
finding (a) above. I agree with Wanasundera, J. and L. H. de Alwis, J. that
for the reasons set out by these two brother Judges, the original arrest on
26.6.86 and detention was perfectly legal and warranted and is covered by
Regulation 18(1), which sets out that

"Any police officer ............................................. arrest
without a warrant, any person who is committing or has committed or whom he
has reasonable ground for suspecting to be concerned in or to be committing or
to have committed an offence under any Emergency Regulation".

I emphasise the words "has reasonable ground for suspecting", and agree that
the circumstances which led to the arrest of the petitioners gave Police Sgt.
Dhanapala Abeysinghe "reasonable ground for suspecting". My brother Judges
Wanasundera, J. and De Alwis, J. have held that though initially the arrest
was warranted the

250

detention became illegal later due to the unduly long delay of detention
particularly after 15:7.86 which made the detention illegal unwarranted as
there was sufficient time for the authorities to consider whether the
petitioners had committed any offence under the Emergency Regulations. This
Bench has unanimously agreed that the documents relied on by the respondents
to justify the arrest and detention to wit - Y1 & Y2 recovered from the
petitioners are not writings coming within the Regulations 26(a), 26(d) and
33, in that those writings do not contain any subversive literature which is
likely to "arouse, encourage or promote feelings of hatred or contempt to the
government .................. likely to incite any person ............... to
take any steps towards the overthrowing of the government". I agree with my
brother Judges Wanasundera, J. and De Alwis, J. that the prolonged detention
of these petitioners, that is for a greater length of time than necessary in
the circumstances, to consider the nature and effect of documents Y1 and Y2
made the detention of the petitioners illegal and unwarranted. I agree with
Wanasundera, J. "that this is not a case of the police riding roughshed over
the rights of citizens. The police was bona fide and within the scope of their
functions and the outcome of the case has depended on a legal issue". I agree
that the transgression of the petitioners' right would be sufficiently
compensated and ends of justice met by the award to each petitioner a sum of
Rs. 10,000/- and award as costs a sum of Rs. 3,000/-. The Applications are
accordingly allowed.  
  
_Arrest legal_  
_  
Detention after 15.7.1986 illegal._  
_  
Compensation Rs. 10.000/-._  
_  
Regulation 28 ultra vires._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/30.html_  

