##  Chandrasena and Two Others v. National Paper Corporation and Two Others -
SLR - 19, Vol 1 of 1982 [1982] LKSC 30; (1982) 1 Sri lR 19 (1 January 1982)

# 19  


**CHANDRASENA AND TWO OTHERS**

**v.**

**NATIONAL PAPER CORPORATION AND TWO OTHERS**

** **

SUPREME COURT.

SHARVANANDA , A.C. J., COLIN‑THOME, J. AND SOZA, J.

S.C. APPLICATION No. 88/82

NOVEMBER 11 AND 15, 1982.



_Application to the Supreme Court under Article 126 of the Constitution
‑Refusal to collect and remit trade union membership fees-Executive and
administrative action._



The petitioners were employees of the Embilipitiya  Factory of the National
Paper Corporation (1st respondent) and members of the local branch of the
trade union called the All Ceylon Corporation Employees Union. Union
membership fees were collected and remitted to the Treasurer of the Union by
the 1st respondent until July 1982 but not thereafter. The Petitioners
attributed the refusal to collect these union fees to political motivation.



A preliminary objection that the alleged action of the 1st respondent did not
amount to executive or administrative action was upheld.

_  
Cur. adv. vult._



**APPLICATION** under Article 126 of the Constitution.



**Cases referred to**

_Wijetunga v. Insurance Corporation (1984) 1 S.L.R. 1,_



_Nimal Senanayake S.A._ , with _Miss S.M. Senaratne_ and _Miss A. Telespha_
for 1‑3 Petitioners.



_Sivarasa_ with _A. P. Niles_ and _Miss S. Devathasan_ for 1st respondent.



_Suri Ratnapala_ , Acting Senior State Counsel, for Attorney-General (3rd
respondent).



November 29, 1982.

**  **

**SHARVANANDA, A. C. J.**



The petitioners are members of a trade union called All Ceylon Corporation
Employees Union.



The 1st respondent is a Public Corporation duly incorporated under the
provisions of the State Industrial Corporations Act No. 49 of 1957, to carry
on the industrial undertaking of manufacturing paper and sponsoring the
production of paper and paper products.



The petitioners are employees of the Embilipitiya Factory of the respondent
Corporation. They state they are actively involved in trade union work. The
petitioners further state that the Branch Union of the petitioners' union had
forwarded a list of persons who have joined the said Union and that till July
1982, union membership fees of the said members were remitted to the



**  20**



Treasurer of the petitioners' union, but 1st respondent had for the purpose of
obstructing the lawful activities of the union deliberately omitted to make
deductions from August 1982 and to forward them to the All Ceylon Corporation
Employees Union. The petitioners allege that the Corporation was acting in
concert with the members of the Jatika Sevaka Sangamaya, a rival union
affiliated to the U. N. P. and were attempting to demolish the strength and
influence of the union to which the petitioners belong. Petitioners further
stated that the majority of the members of their union are members of the
political sympathisers of Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna. Petitioners complain that
the failure to deduct the membership fees of the members of the All Ceylon
Corporation Employees Union members in the Embilipitiya Factory constitute
political discrimination against the said union. Petitioners state that the
1st respondent corporation had infringed fundamental rights of the
petitioners, in that the 1st respondent had discriminated against the
petitioners purely on their political opinion. The petitioners have applied to
this court invoking the jurisdiction of this court under Article 126 of the
Constitution in respect of the alleged infringement of their fundamental
rights as set out in Article 12(2) of the Constitution and have applied for
relief.



While denying discrimination and alleged infringement of their fundamental
rights complained of by the petitioners, the 1st respondent Union has taken
the preliminary objection that this court has no jurisdiction to entertain the
petition as the matter referred to in the petition did not amount to executive
or administrative action.



Since the preliminary objection raised in this case was of the same tenor as
that raised in a similar application against the Insurance Corporation of Sri
Lanka in case No. 87/82, both applications were heard together.



For reasons set out in my judgment in 87/82, the preliminary objection raised
by the  1st respondent is upheld and this application is refused without
costs.



**COLIN ‑THOME, J. **‑ I agree.



**SOZA, J.** ‑ I agree.



_**Preliminary objection upheld and application dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/30.html_  

