##  Perera v. Sri Lanka Nsurance Corporation and Others - SLR - 119, Vol 3 of
1999 [1999] LKSC 30; (1999) 3 Sri LR 119 (27 April 1999)

**119**

**PERERA  
v.  
SRI LANKA INSURANCE CORPORATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
PERERA, J.,  
GUNAWARDANA, J.,  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. NO. 553/97 (FR).  
JANUARY 26, 1999.

_Fundamental Rights - Constitution, Article 12 (1) - Time limit - Conformity
with Article 126 (ii) of the Constitution._

On 13.7.1996 the petitioner's office had been sealed. Thereafter, on 15.7.96
he was sent on compulsory leave. The petitioner was informed of this decision
by letter of 25.7.1996 received by him on 1.8.1996. The application under
Article 126 was filed on 11.7.1997. On the preliminary objection to the
maintainability of the application on the ground that it has been filed out of
time, it was contended that keeping of the petitioner on compulsory leave from
July, 1996 and the failure to revoke that order constituted a continuing
violation of Article 12 (1).

**Held:**

It is manifestly clear that the complaint of the alleged violation of Article
12 (1) was based on the act of the respondent placing the petitioner on
compulsory leave, and the present petition has been filed on 11.7.97, after
the lapse of one year from the date of the alleged violation.

_S. L. Gunasekera with M. de Silva for petitioner._

_S. A. Parathalingam, PC with Faiz Musthapha for 1st to 6th & 8th to 10th
respondents._

_R. K. S. Sureshchandra for 7th respondent._

_M. C. Jayaratne with E. L Tirimanne for 11th to 13th respondents.  _

_Cur. adv. vult._

**120**

April 27, 1999.  
**PERERA, J.**

The petitioner in this case has complained to this Court that on the 13th of
July, 1996, whilst the petitioner was in his office at the Sri Lanka Insurance
Corporation, the 11th, 12th and 13th respondents together with the Secretary
of the Sri Lanka Nidahas Sevaka Sangamaya of the Sri Lanka Insurance
Corporation and certain other minor employees had forcibly entered his office
and informed the petitioner that they had to seal his office on the
instructions of the 1st respondent. Thereafter, the Board of Directors of the
1st respondent Corporation on the 15th of July, 1996, had taken the decision
to place the petitioner on compulsory leave. The petitioner was informed of
this decision by letter dated the 25th of July, 1996, which was received by
him on the 1st of August, 1996.

The petitioner states further that the respondents have acted mala fide, inter
alia, for the following reasons:

(1) The petitioner was sent on compulsory leave at the request of a political
organization and/or trade union.

(2) The respondents had failed to reinstate the petitioner even though the
Hon. Attorney-General had advised that there was no material to hold an
inquiry against the petitioner.

(3) The respondents have not reinstated the petitioner nor have they taken any
action against him for the last 1 year.

In the above circumstances, the petitioner has prayed for a declaration that
the petitioner's fundamental rights in terms of Article 12 (1) of the
Constitution have been infringed by the respondents and to direct the 1st
respondent Corporation to cancel the order placing the petitioner on
compulsory leave. The petitioner has filed his petition in the Supreme Court
on the 11th day of July, 1997\. Counsel for the 1 st to the 6th and 8th, 9th
and 1 0th respondents Mr. Parathalingam

**121**

raised a preliminary objection to the maintainability of the present
application on the ground that this petition has been filed out of time and
should, therefore, be dismissed in terms of Article 126 (ii) of the
Constitution. Counsel for the 7th respondent and counsel for the 11th, 12th
and 13th respondents associated themselves with this submission and moved that
the petitioner's application be dismissed. Mr. Parathalingam urged that the
entire case of the petitioner in regard to the alleged violation of his
fundamental rights under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution, was based on
paragraph (c) of the prayer to his petition, which reads thus:

"Direct the 1st to the 10th respondents to cancel the order placing the
petitioner on compulsory leave."

Counsel submitted that according to paragraph (10) of the petition, the
petitioner was sent on compulsory leave, with effect from the 25th of July,
1996 (vide P11). As stated earlier, the petition to this Court was filed on
the 11th of July, 1997. Hence, the petitioner's application has not been filed
in conformity with the provisions of Article 126 (ii) of the Constitution, and
therefore cannot be maintained.

Counsel for the petitioner, however, contended that keeping of the petitioner
on compulsory leave from July, 1996 and the failure to revoke the order
placing him on compulsory leave constituted a continuing violation of his
aforesaid fundamental rights, and that in the said circumstances, his
application for relief was not time-barred.

Counsel also submitted that the petitioner was never informed of the results
of the interview held for the selection of an Additional General Manager
(Investments). He first became aware that he had not been selected for the
above post only when the 1 st respondent Corporation advertised the said post
for the second time in June, 1997. The petitioner at this stage made the
present application for relief on the 11th of July, 1997, within 1 month of
the said date. It was his submission that in the aforesaid circumstances the
petitioner's application for relief in respect of the said matter is not time-
barred and is in conformity with the provisions of Article 126 (ii) of the
Constitution.

**122**

I have examined carefully the petition filed by the petitioner in the present
case and the prayer to the petition. It is manifestly clear that the complaint
of the petitioner of the alleged violation of his fundamental rights
guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution was based on the act of the
respondent placing the petitioner on compulsory leave (vide para. (c) of the
prayer to the petition).  
  
According to the petitioner, the Board of Directors of the 1st respondent had
taken a decision to place him on compulsory leave on the 15th of July, 1996.
The petitioner was informed of this decision by letter dated 25th July, 1996,
which was received by him on the 1st of August, 1996 (vide P11). The present
petition to this Court has been filed on the 11th of July, 1997, after the
lapse of one year from the date of the alleged violation.

Having regard to the facts and circumstances of this case, I am unable to
agree with the submission of counsel for the petitioner that placing the
petitioner on compulsory leave in July, 1996 and the failure to revoke such
order constitutes a continued violation of the petitioner's fundamental rights
guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution.

I have also considered the cases cited by Counsel for the petitioner in
support of the principle that inaction in circumstances where there is a duty
to act would constitute an infringement by executive administrative action
under Article 126 of the Constitution. I am of the view that the cases cited
by petitioner's counsel are not strictly applicable to the facts of this case.

1, therefore, uphold the preliminary objection raised by counsel for the
respondents that this petition is out of time and should, therefore, be
dismissed in terms of Article 126 (2) of the Constitution. The present
petition is accordingly dismissed, but without costs.

**GUNAWARDANA, J.** - **I agree.**

**GUNASEKARA, J.** \- **I agree.**

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/30.html_  

