##  Dissanayake v. Premaratne, Inspector of Police, Nuwara Eliya - SLR - 211,
Vol 2 of 1998 [1998] LKSC 30; (1998) 2 Sri LR 211 (4 May 1998)

**211**

**DISSANAYAKE  
v.  
PREMARATNE, INSPECTOR OF POLICE, NUWARA-ELIYA**

SUPREME COURT  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.,  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J.,  
SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
S.C. (SPECIAL) NO. 117/97  
WITH S.C. APPLICATION NO. 858/97  
16TH AND 30TH MARCH, 1998  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Unlawful arrest and detention - Torture of suspects
whilst in police custody - Articles 11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.  
_  
On a message sent by the Police, the petitioner called over at the Nuwara-
Eliya Police Station at about 3 p.m. on 8.5.1997 with his wife, petitioner in
S.C. Application No. 858/97. They were detained at the Police Station until
5.30 p.m. on 9.5.1997 without being produced before a Magistrate when they
were released on Police bail. The 1st respondent Inspector of Police and the
2nd, 4th and 5th respondents who were subordinate officers subjected the
petitioner to torture on both days. His hands and feet were tied together. A
pole was inserted through his hands and legs after which he was assaulted with
a club whilst he remained in that position. He was also hung up and assaulted
with batons. Water was poured on him; and he was kicked by two officers. In
between the petitioner's house was searched and he was questioned about an
alleged theft of goods which he denied. He was admitted to the Base Hospital,
Nuwara-Eliya, for treatment. According to the medical report, the petitioner
vomitted twice. He was blood stained. He had chest pain and had abrasions and
contusions all over his body.  
  
**Held:  
**  
The petitioner had been subjected to torture at the Police Station by the 1st,
2nd, 4th and 5th respondents in breach of his rights under article II of the
Constitution. The respondents had also violated the petitioner's rights under
Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) by reason of the impugned arrest and detention at
the Police Station for a period exceeding 24 hours.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_Trimi Gorden Rayen_ for petitioners.

**212**

_Dr. Jayampathy Wickramaratne_ for 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th respondents.  
  
_Ms. Priyanthi Gunaratne_ for 3rd respondent.  
  
_Ms. N. M. S. Fernando,_ S.S.C. for 6th, 7th and 8th respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

4th May, 1998  
  
**SHIRANI A. BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
**  
When SC (Special) No. 117/97 was taken for hearing the counsel informed us
that SC (Application) No. 858/97 was filed by the wife of the petitioner with
special permission granted by this Court. As both applications relate to the
same incident, it was agreed that both cases could be heard together.
Accordingly both applications were so heard.  
  
The petitioner in SC (Special) No. 117/97 is a small-time vegetable cultivator
and sells his vegetables at Top Pass. He had gone to Colombo on the 04.05.1997
and he received a call from his wife on 07.05.1997 asking him to come
immediately to Nuwara-Eliya as the Police had wanted him to report to the
Police Station. The petitioner arrived in Nuwara-Eliya around 11. a.m. on
08.05.1997 and went to the Police Station with his wife (the petitioner in SC
(Application) No. 858/97). When they arrived at the Police Station around 3.00
p.m., the 1st respondent scolded him in obscene language and asked whether he
was Gamini Dissanayake. The 1st respondent requested another officer to take
the petitioner and he had dragged the petitioner to the Crime Detection Branch
and using obscene language asked him whether he had stolen anything from the
3rd respondent's home. When the petitioner answered in the negative, he had
asked the petitioner as to why he had closed his but and gone to Colombo. The
petitioner had given him the reason for his visit to Colombo. Thereafter the
1st respondent started assaulting the petitioner all over his body with a
piece of wood of about 2 feet long and 1 1/2 inch in diameter. Then the 1st
and 2nd respondents tied the petitioner's hands and legs and put a piece of
wood between his hands and knees. The 1st respondent assaulted him all over
the body, till about 5.00 p.m. Around 6.00 p.m. the 1st and 2nd respondents
untied the knots and took the petitioner and his wife in the 3rd respondent's
van to the petitioner's house. While travelling in the van they used obscene
language and accused the petitioner and his wife of theft. When they

**213**

went to the petitioner's house at Shanthipura, the 1 st respondent threatened
the petitioner's father, mother and his 5 year old daughter and asked them as
to where the stolen goods were kept. When the petitioner's father denied any
knowledge of stolen goods, they used obscene language and damaged the ceiling
of the house. The 3rd respondent threatened the 5 year old daughter of the
petitioner and asked her for the cap with the hair at the back. The child had
said that there was no such cap the father had given her and had shown an
ordinary cap the petitioner had given her earlier. The petitioner and his wife
were taken back to the Police Station and the 1st and 2nd respondents took the
petitioner back to the Crime Detection Branch inside the Police Station and
the 1st and 2nd respondents removed his clothes and tied his hands and hung
him up and assaulted him with batons. Then they put him down and he could not
even stand up on his own. Thereafter the 1st respondent had threatened by
saying that if the petitioner does not accept that he had committed theft that
they will assault him again and send his wife to the Badulla Remand Prison and
get her raped by the prisoners. In the night they had put the petitioner in
the cell but had kept his wife's cell open. Two policeman had been discussing
whether they should take the petitioner's wife in a three-wheeler to find out
the stolen goods. The petitioner got scared and had begged another policeman
to close his wife's cell. This he had done when the other two officers had
left. On 09.05.1997 the 1st and 2nd respondents took the petitioner towards
the Crime Detection Branch and asked him as to the place where he has hidden
the stolen goods. When the petitioner had denied any knowledge of it, the 1st
and 2nd respondents had tied the petitioner's hands and legs and put a pole
between his knees and hands and assaulted him. After the 1st respondent left
the 2nd respondent again hit the petitioner all over the body and the
petitioner was feeling faintish. Then the 4th and 5th respondents poured
buckets of water on to his body. Then they untied the petitioner and asked him
to stand before a table and the 4th and 5th respondents were holding his hands
which were on the table while the 2nd respondent assaulted him with a piece of
wood. Again the petitioner was feeling faintish. The 4th and 5th respondents
again threw water on him. The petitioner saw the 1st respondent standing
inside the room and the 4th and 5th respondents kicked the petitioner and he
fell down. The 1st respondent kicked the petitioner asking him to accept that
he had stolen the goods threatening him that he would be assaulted again but
the petitioner refused to accept the allegation. Around 12 noon they took the

**214**

Petitioner to the cell. Around 3.30 p.m. the petitioner saw his wife being
brought back to her cell by the 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents. Around 5.30 p.m.
the 2nd respondent wanted the petitioner to put his signature on something he
had written and the petitioner did so. Later they had taken the petitioner's
fingerprints and his photograph. At that time the petitioner's father-in-law
had come and the 1st respondent had told the petitioner and his wife that if
they had done something wrong, to pardon them. The 1st respondent had given
the petitioner, his wife and the father-in-law, pieces of fruit cake and tea
and they were released on Police bail.  
  
This Court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged infringement of
Articles 11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) in SC (Special) No. 117/97 and Articles 13 (1)
and 13 (2) in SC (Application) No. 858/97.  
  
The 1st respondent in his affidavit avers that when he was on his way to
Labukelle along with the 2nd and 5th respondents and other Police Officers,
the 3rd respondent had met him at the Old Bazaar, Nuwara-Eliya and complained
to him that his house at Top Pass had been broken into and that certain items
valued at Rs. 4,900/- were missing. He had arrived at the scene of crime at
3.10 p.m. on 03.05.1997 and the 3rd respondent was present. On 08.05.1997, the
3rd respondent had informed him that he had received information that the
petitioner and his wife had been seen going through a thicket in the vicinity
of his house on the day of the crime and that the petitioner had suddenly left
the area having closed his boutique. He had arrested the petitioner and his
wife who were pointed out by the 3rd respondent at 6.40 p.m. on 08.05.1997
having informed them that they were arrested as suspects for the aforesaid
housebreaking and theft. He had taken them to the Police Station and had them
fingerprinted. The petitioner was taken to his house at Shanthipura, leaving
his wife at the Police Station and the house was searched. No stolen items
were found. The petitioner had wanted to use the toilet and as he was taking
him, the petitioner had started to run away and had fallen down in the
process. He had caught him and brought him under control. Upon making
inquiries in the area he had come to know that the petitioner had been earlier
charged for housebreaking and theft but was acquitted. The petitioner,
according to the 1st respondent, was known in the area as a person who often
stole vegetables. The 1st respondent had also received information that the

**215**

petitioner and his wife were planning to go abroad. At 10.10 p.m. on
08.05.1997, the 1st respondent had arrived at Top Pass and has made further
inquiries. He became aware that the information regarding the petitioner was
given by a person known in the area as 'Malakadaya'. Further information was
received that on the day of the alleged crime, the petitioner had sold the
vegetables in his boutique and had left through a thicket. The 1st respondent
had returned to the Police Station and had questioned the petitioner regarding
several cases of housebreaking and theft in the area. On being questioned
whether he was planning to go abroad, the petitioner stated that applications
for Passports would be at his house. The 1st respondent then took the
petitioner's wife to the house and searched the house and he found 4 Passport
size photographs and an application for a Passport. The statements of the
petitioner and his wife were recorded and they were released on Police bail on
the instructions of the 6th respondent at 4.30 p.m. on 09.05.1997.  
  
On 10.05.1997, the petitioner was admitted to the Nuwara Eliya Base Hospital.
On a direction of this Court the Medico-Legal Report and the Admission Form
relating to the petitioner were received. The Admission Form gives the
following details:  
  
Assaulted by Police on 08.05.1997  
  
Pain in the back  
  
Vomited twice blood stain  
  
Headache +  
  
Small abrasions +  
  
Contusion  
  
Chest pain  
  
General body ache  
  
Small abrasions all over the body  
  
The Medico-Legal Report gives the following details:  
  
**INJURIES**  
  
1\. Abrasion Circular 0.5 x 0.5 cm at L elbow  
  
2\. Linear abrasion 9 cm at R side buttock  
  
3\. Contusion 3 x 3 cm at 1 side back loin region  
  
4\. Contusion 3 x 3 cm at side abdomen  
  
5\. Contusion 1 x 1 cm at L Tibial region (Anterior leg)  
  
6\. Contusion 3 x 4 cm at L buttock region

**216**

**OPINION**  
  
Non-grievous injuries (Nos.) - 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6  
  
**GRIEVOUS INJURIES  
**  
No  
  
**INJURIES CAUSED BY  
  
**Blunt Weapon (Nos.) - 1, 3, 4, 5 and 6  
  
The position of the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th respondents is that if the
respondents assaulted and tortured the petitioner as alleged, the petitioner
would have informed the Medical Officer of such assault and torture. It is
submitted that the petitioner should have complained of the assault to a
superior Police Officer. The respondents' position is that there is no such
material before this Court that the petitioner has done any of these and
therefore it is unsafe to find the respondents liable for assault and torture.
I am not inclined to accept the position set out by the respondents. According
to the Admission Form it is clear that the petitioner had informed the
hospital authorities at the time of his admission to the hospital that he was
assaulted by the Police Officers. Moreover and most importantly, the injuries
set out in the Medico-Legal Report are consistent with the details given by
the petitioner as to the inhuman and degrading treatment meted out by the
respondents. I do not think that it is either necessary or always possible for
a person to complain to superior Police Officers of the treatment meted out to
him/her by fellow police officers. I accept the version given by the
petitioner as it is consistent with the medical evidence. I hold that the
respondents have violated the petitioner's rights enshrined under Article II
of the Constitution.  
  
The position of the petitioner is that on 07.05.1997, when he was in Colombo
his wife telephoned him and informed him that the Police had come in search of
him and left a message asking him to come to the Police Station (P1). The
message, which is undated, was for D. M. Gamini to be present at the Crime
Investigation Branch of the Police Station, Nuwara-Eliya, as soon as possible.
The note is signed by Police Constable 18138. According to the petitioner he
had gone to the Police Station with his wife around 3.00 p.m. on 08.05.1997
and both were kept in the Police Station until about 5.30 p.m. on 09.05.1997.

**217**

The position of the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th respondents is that the 1st
respondent had arrested the petitioner and his wife who were pointed out to
him by the 3rd respondent at 6.40 p.m. on 08.05.1997. In fact this has been
averred by the 1st respondent in his affidavit tendered for the SC (Special)
No. 117/97. The 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th respondents are of the view that the 1st
respondent had a reasonable suspicion that the petitioner and his wife had
committed the crimes in question. The complaint of the 3rd respondent
according to them was clearly a genuine complaint and the 1st respondent
himself had proceeded to the scene of the crime and made inquiries. As the
circumstances gave rise to a reasonable suspicion, the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th
respondents were of the view that the 1st respondent was entitled to arrest
the petitioner and his wife. Their position is that the petitioner and his
wife were kept in detention pending investigations and were released within 24
hours of the arrest. Therefore, the position of the 1 st, 2nd, 4th and 5th
respondents is that the arrest and detention were lawful. I hold that the
petitioner has proved that he and his wife were arrested not at 6.40 p.m. as
stated by the respondents but at 3.00 p.m. as averred by the petitioner. The
respondents have not produced the petitioners before the Magistrate but
released them on Police bail. Therefore, there was no reason for the
respondents to keep the petitioners over 24 hours in the Police Station. I
hold that the 1st, 2nd, 4th and 5th respondents have violated the petitioner's
fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2).  
  
There is no evidence to show that what took place at the Police Station
between the Police Officers and the petitioners were with the connivance of
the 3rd respondent. Also there is nothing to show that the 3rd respondent had
derived any benefit from the actions taken by the respondents. Accordingly I
make no order against the 3rd respondent.  
  
I direct the 1st and 2nd respondents to pay Rs. 7,500% **each** as
compensation and Rs. 2,500% **each** as costs; the 4th and 5th respondents to
pay Rs. 2,500/- **each** as compensation and Rs. 1,000% **each** as costs to
the petitioner in SC (Special) No. 117/97. The State will pay him Rs. 3,500/-
as compensation and Rs. 2,000/ - as costs. In all he will be entitled to Rs.
23,500/- as compensation and Rs. 9,000/- as costs. I also direct the 1st
respondent

**218**

to pay Rs. 5,000/- as compensation and Rs. 1,500/- as costs to the petitioner
in SC (Application) No. 858/97. The State will pay her Rs. 2,000% as
compensation and Rs. 1,000/- as costs. In all she will be entitled to Rs.
7,000/- as compensation and Rs. 2;500/- as costs.  
  
The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Inspector-General of Police.  
  
**G. P. S. DE SILVA, CJ. - I agree.  
  
ANANDACOOMARASWAMY, J. - I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/30.html_  

