##  Anthony and Others v. Chandrasena, Returning Officer and Others - SLR -
311, Vol 2 of 1996 [1996] LKSC 30; (1996) 2 Sri LR 311 (1 January 1996)

**311**

**ANTHONY AND OTHERS  
v.  
CHANDRASENA, RETURNING OFFICER AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT.  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
KULATUNGA, J. AND  
PERERA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL N0.1/94.  
C.A. (PROVINCIAL COUNCILS) ELECTION  
PETITION NO. 4/93.  
23RD JUNE 1994.

_Election Petition ‑ Provincial Councils Elections Act No. 2 of 1988 ‑
Sections 91, 92, 95 and 96 ‑ Non compliance with ‑ the provisions of the Act ‑
allege lapse in counting preference votes ‑ whether the election of an
individual candidate as a member may be challenged ‑Intention of Parliament._

The Appellants were among 39 candidates who were put forward by the Podujana
Eksath Peramuna for the administrative district of Gampaha at the Western
Provincial Councils Elections held in 1993. On the votes polled by the party
it became entitled to return 17 members. But on the basis of the preferences
indicated by the electors, the Appellants were among the unsuccessful
candidates. The Returning Officer declared elected 2nd to 18th Respondents
from that party. The Appellants filed an Election Petition under section 95 of
the Provincial Councils Elections Act, No. 2 of 1988 read with section 96
challenging the return of the said Respondents as members on the ground that
the counting of preferences was not done in accordance with the provisions of
the Act; and that the said non ‑ compliance materially affected the result of
the election of candidates of the Podujana Eksath Peramuna. The Appellants
sought a declaration that the election of 2nd to 18th Respondents was undue,
and a declaration, after a re‑scrutiny of the preference votes for the Party,
that the Appellants or any one or more of them or any of the unsuccessful
Respondents are duly elected as members. The relief thus sought was based on
section 92(1) (b) of the Act.

**Held:**

(1) The grounds for the avoidance of the election of a candidate as a member
of a Provincial Council are expressly provided by sections 91(1) and 92(2).
There are grounds which have relevance to the election and generally based on
personal conduct of the candidate or his agent. On the other hand, the grounds
for the avoidance of the election in respect of any

**312 __**

administrative district are contained in section 92(1) (a) and (b). The scheme
of the Act and the language of section 91(1) show that the "election"
re­ferred to therein is the entire election held in an administrative district
of a Province for electing members to the Provincial Council in that province.

(2) Upon the allegation of such non‑compliances as are competent under section
92(1)(b) Parliament could not have intended to permit an election Petition
where the relief claimed is merely to have the election of a candi­date as a
member of the Provincial Council declared void and to have another candidate
declared duly elected.

**Case referred to :**

_Curtis v. Storm_ (1889) 22 QBD 513.

**AN APPEAL** under section 102 of the Provincial Councils Elections Act No. 2
of 1988 against the order of an Election Judge.

_S. C. B. Walgampaya _with _F. H. Boniface Silva _and _Vijitha Meegahawatha_
for Appellants.

_K.C. Kamalasabayson, D.S.G._ with _Kumar Paul S.C._ for 1st Respondent.

_Cur. Adv. vult._

14th July, 1994.

**KULATUNGA, J.**

The nine Appellants were among 39 candidates whose names were set out in the
nomination paper submitted by the Podujana Eksath Peramuna for the
administrative district of Gampaha at the Western Province Provincial Councils
Elections held on 17.05.93. On the votes polled by that party it became
entitled to return 17 members for that district. According to the result
announced by the 1st Respondent (The Returning Officer) 2nd to 18th
Respondents were declared elected from that party, on the basis of preferences
indicated by the electors. The Appellants and 19th to 31st Respondents were
unsuccessful.

The Appellants do not challenge the election, so far as the count of the votes
for their party in the administrative district of Gampaha is concerned. There
is also no dispute as regards the quota of members their party was declared
entitled to return for that district. However, they allege that the election
of any one or more of 2nd to 18th

**313**

Respondents is void for non‑compliance with the provisions of the Provincial
Councils Election Act, No. 2 of 1988; **** that the counting of preferences
was not done in accordance with the principles laid down in the Act; and that
the said non‑compliance materially affected the result of the election of
candidates of the Podujana Eksath Peramuna and more particularly the election
of the 1st to 9th Appellants or any one of them. On that basis the Appellants
filed an election Petition under section 95 of the Act read with section 96
praying for a declaration that the return of any one or more of the 2nd to
18th Respondents was undue and for a declaration that the Appellants or any
one or more of them and any of the 2nd to 31st Respondents are duly elected as
members of the Western Province, Provincial Council.

The Appellants also prayed for an order on the 1st Respondent directing him to
rescrutinise the tally sheet and summary sheets maintained at the count and to
add up and determine according to law and under the directions of the Election
Judge the number of preferences indicated for each candidate of the Podujana
Eksath Peramuna at the election held in the administrative district Gampaha.

At the hearing of the Election Petition, learned Deputy Solicitor General for
the 1st Respondent raised a preliminary objection that the Appellants are not
entitled to the relief sought by them as the Petition is based on section
92(1)(b) of the Act which sets out a ground of avoidance of the election in
respect of the entire administrative district whereas the grounds on which the
election of a candidate as a member of the Provincial Council may be declared
void on an election Petition are found in section 92(2). The Election Judge
upheld the preliminary objection and dismissed the Petition. The Appellants
appeal to this Court by virtue of section 102 of the Act.

At the hearing before us, learned Counsel for the Appellants submitted that
the grounds for declaring void the election of a candidate as a Member of a
Provincial Council are not limited by section 92(2). He argued that the
expression "election" under section 92 (1) connotes two elections viz.
election of the party and the election of candidates; and this is supported by
the definition of "election" in section 129. Under that section 'election"
means an **election held** in an administrative district of a Province **for
the purpose of electing**

**314**

**members** to the Provincial Council established for that Province. Hence, in
an election Petition based on the ground of non‑compliance with the provisions
of the Act, the Petitioner is not compelled to pray for the avoidance of the
entire election in respect of the administrative district but may pray for the
lesser remedy that the election of a candidate as a Member of the Provincial
Council is void. Counsel added that if this were not possible it would leave
an aggrieved party without relief, even in a case where due to a patent error
in the counting of preference votes a candidate has been wrongly declared
elected. Counsel submitted that it is inconceivable that the legislature
intended such a situation; hence this Court should construe the statute giving
it a sensible meaning. _Curtis v. Storm_.(1)

Learned Deputy Solicitor General drew our attention to the scheme of the Act.
Firstly, section 91(1) provides for avoidance of **the election of a candidate
as a Member** by his conviction for any corrupt or illegal practice. Thus,
under the relevant sections of the Act, if at the date of conviction of a
person for such practice he has been elected as a member of a Provincial
Council, his election shall be vacated from the date of such conviction.
Secondly, section 92 provides for avoidance of election on election Petition.
Under section 92(1) **the election in respect of any administrative district**
shall be declared to be void on the grounds of general bribery etc. or non
compliance with the provisions of the Act relating to elections as provided by
sections 92(1)(a) and (b), respectively. The election can be avoided on any
such ground if it is proved inter alia that it has materially affected the
result of the election.

Under section 92(2) **the election of a candidate as a Member of the
Provincial Council** shall be declared void on the grounds set out in
paragraphs (a), (b), (c) and (d) thereof namely, the commission of a corrupt
or illegal practice by the candidate or his agent, canvassing through an agent
who has been convicted of a corrupt practice or subjected to civic disability
in terms of Article 81 of the Constitution or where the candidate was, at the
time of his election, a person disqualified for election as a Member.

Section 96 sets out the reliefs which may be claimed in an election Petition,
namely:

**315**

(a) a declaration that the election in respect of any administrative district
is void;

(b) a declaration that the return of any person elected was undue;

(c) a declaration that any candidate was duly elected and ought to have been
returned.

Under section 29 "election" means an election held in an administrative
district of a Province **for the purpose of electing members** to the
Provincial Council established for that Province.

The Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the use of the word "purpose" in
the above definition is of significance. In terms of this definition
"election" cannot mean **election of a member** but it is **election held for
the purpose of electing members;** hence in section 92(1) the word "election
necessarily refers to the entirety of the election and not the election of a
member.

There is force in the submissions of the Deputy Solicitor General. The grounds
for the avoidance of the election of a member of the Provincial Council
(whether by conviction or on election Petition) are expressly provided by
sections 91(1) and 92(2), respectively. These are grounds which have relevance
to the purity of the election and generally based on the personal conduct of
the candidate or his agent.

On the other hand, the grounds for the avoidance of the election in respect of
any administrative district are contained in sections 92(1) (a) and (b). The
scheme of the Act and the language of section 92(1) show that the "election"
referred to therein is the entire election held in an administrative district
of a Province for the purpose of electing members to the Provincial Council
for that Province. Thus in terms of section 3(2), every administrative
district in a province shall, for the purpose of elections to the Provincial
Council established for that Province, constitute an electoral area. The
Western Province, Provincial Council has as its electoral areas the
administrative districts of Gampaha, Colombo and Kalutara. The Appellants'
Petition is based on a ground for challenging the election in respect of the
administrative district of Gampaha, which in the context must refer to the
entire election and not the election of a member.

**316**

The nature of the grounds of avoidance under section 92(1) also indicate that
the said election refers to the avoidance of the entire election in the
administrative district; for grounds such as general bribery, general treating
or general intimidation or non‑compliance with the provisions of the Act
which, having regard to their magnitude or implications, affect the result of
the election must logically vitiate the entire election in the administrative
district. If so, the proper relief to be claimed in the instant case on the
ground of such non‑compliance should be a declaration that the election in
respect of the administrative District of Gampaha is void. I find that the
total number of preference votes for the candidates of the Podujana Eksath
Peramuna is 970,280 preferences. The prayer for a rescrutiny involves all such
preferences. If there were irregularities which merit rescrutiny of so many
preferences, it is probable that there were similar irregularities affecting
the candidates of the other political parties as well at the said election. In
fact all of them have been made parties to the Petition with the result that
there are 226 respondents. So it seems that on the basis of the Appellants
allegations also, they ought to have prayed for a declaration that the entire
election in the district is void.

I am of the view that upon the allegation of such non‑compliances as are
competent under section 92(1)(b) Parliament could not have intended to permit
an election Petition where the relief claimed is merely to have the election
of a candidate as a member of the Provincial Council declared void and to have
another candidate declared duly elected. We cannot under the guise of
Interpretation, read such meaning into the said section. As indicated in an
earlier part of this judgment the language of section 92(1) itself is against
the construction urged on behalf of the Appellants, in particular when such
language is contrasted with the language of section 92(2).

For the foregoing reasons, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the judgment of the
Election Judge with costs fixed at Rs. 1000/‑ payable to the 1st Respondent.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.A. ‑** I agree.

**PERERA, J. ‑** I agree.

_**Appeal dismissed.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1996/30.html_  

