##  Wijeratne v. Vijitha Perera, Sub Inspector of Police, Polonnaruwa and
Others - SLR - 319, Vol 3 of 2002 [1994] LKSC 30; (2002) 3 Sri LR 319 (2 March
1994)

**319**

**WIJERATNE  
v.  
VIJITHA PERERA, SUB-INSPECTOR OF POLICE,  
POLONNARUWA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
GOONEWARDENA, J. AND  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 379/93  
JANUARY 10, 1994  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Peaceful picketing for advancement of workers'
conditions - Leaflets in aid of agitation - Seizure of leaflets \- Arrest and
detention of petitioner - Constitution, Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) and Article
14 (1) (a), (b) and (c).  
_  
The petitioner, a casual worker since 1984 working within the Cultural
Triangle was the secretary of a branch of the trade union of workers employed
in the Alahena Pirivena Project. The petitioner took a leading part in
arranging a non-violent picketing campaign for the lunch interval on 06. 08.
1993 to agitate for a better salary and conditions of service. He received
from the parent union posters for display at the picketing.  
  
On the evening of 04. 08. 1993 the 1st respondent Sub-Inspector of Police
acting on the direction of the 2nd respondent officer-in-charge of the police
station searched the petitioner's house without a search warrant or the
petitioner's consent and seized all the posters. According to a belated
affidavit by the president of a rival trade union, the petitioner's union was
getting ready to disrupt the project site by inciting the workers which was an
attempt to topple the government. This information was alleged to have been
given to the 2nd respondent.  
  
After the search and seizure of leaflets, the 1st respondent directed the
petitioner to go to the police station where he was detained until his release
on the noon of the next day with a threat against the proposed display of
posters.

**320**

**Held :  
**  
(1) The 2nd respondent had not received any information from the informant
regarding the alleged disruptive event.  
  
(2) The petitioner was not given any reason for the search of his house and
the house was searched without the petitioner's consent or lawful authority.  
  
(3) The posters were unlawfully seized and detained in police custody and they
contained nothing subversive, criminal or otherwise objectionable. The 1st and
2nd respondents thereby infringed the petitioner's rights under Article 14 (1)
(a), (b) and (c) of the Constitution.  
  
(4) The petitioner was unjustifiably arrested and detained by the 1st
respondent with the approval and acquiescence of the 2nd respondent.
(Goonewardena, J. dissenting on Article 13 (2)).  
  
(5) Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.  
  
_Per_ Fernando, J.  
  
"Dissent, or disagreement manifested by conduct or action, is a cornerstone of
the Constitution . . . Democracy requires that not merely that dissent be
tolerated, but it be encouraged and the obligation of the Executive is
expressly recognized by Article 4 (d), which therefore requires that the
police not merely refrain from suppressing lawful dissent but also that they
"respect, secure and advance", the right to dissent."  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1\. _West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette -_ (1943) 319 US 624,
641.  
  
2\. _Amaratunga v. Sirimal -_ (1993) 1 Sri LR 264.  
  
3\. _Bandara v. Premachandra_ \- (1994) 1 Sri LR 331.  
  
4. _Faiz v. The Attorney-General and Others -_ (1995) 1 Sri LR 372.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_A. A. de Silva_ for petitioner.  
  
_D. P. Kumarasinghe,_ Deputy Solicitor-General for respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**321**

March 02, 1994  
  
**FERNANDO, J.  
**  
The petitioner alleges that the 1st and 2nd respondents (a  Sub-Inspector of
Police, and the Headquarters Inspector, respectively, of the Polonnaruwa
Police) had violated his fundamental rights, by arrest and detention contrary
to Article 13, and by the unlawful restriction of his freedoms of speech and
expression, peaceful assembly, and association, contrary to Article 14 (1)
(a), (b) and (c).  
  
The petitioner says that he is a person of good character, a Justice of the
Peace, and the President of the Gramodaya Mandalaya, and has never been
involved in any illegal or violent act. At the relevant time, he was among
about 2,500 workers employed on a casual basis on six projects, within the
Cultural Triangle, under the Central Cultural Fund established by Act, No. 57
of 1980. About 300 of these workers, including the petitioner, were employed
in the Alahena Pirivena Project. The majority of the workers were members of a
registered trade union, and the petitioner was the secretary of the branch
union at the Alahena Project. The casual workers received a daily wage of Rs.
78 of which half was paid in food stamps.  
  
In 1993 a salary increase of 30% and a special living allowance of Rs. 600 per
month was given to all public sector employees, including employees of the
Central Cultural Fund, but not to the casual workers even though they had been
employed for some years. Quite naturally, the parent trade union made
representations to the management and several discussions were held with the
Director-General of the Fund. These were fruitless. The parent union took a
decision to draw the attention of the public to the plight of the workers by
displaying at all Project sites printed posters containing their demands;
"Increase Salaries", "Grant Permanency of Employment",

**322**

and "Abolish the System of Contract Employment". This was to be a peaceful,
non-violent, picketing campaign at the worksite; no strike was intended and,
indeed, to avoid any disruption of work the  protest was scheduled for the
lunch interval on 06. 08\. 1993; the authorities of all six Projects were
informed. About 300 posters printed in Colombo were sent by the parent union
to the petitioner.  
  
In their affidavits both respondents state that the 2nd respondent had
received information that some employees were planning "to create disturbances
under the guise of a picketing campaign"; they make no mention of violence,
strikes or overthrowing the Government. The 2nd respondent does not reply to
or deny these averments, while the 1st respondent pleads ignorance (apart from
admitting the poster and its contents). Had they made any investigation into
the incident  in question, either contemporaneously or later, I would have
expected some positive assertion as to most of these matters. They have
produced, however, an entry from the Daily Information Book, made at 19:35 of
04. 08. 1993, to the effect that the 1st respondent as directed by the 2nd
respondent, was proceeding with four other officers, with weapons, to search
the houses of two individuals (not identified in anyway), in view of the
"information" (not particularized) received by the 2nd respondent. The name of
the alleged informant and his information was disclosed only in an affidavit
obtained (four weeks after leave to proceed was granted) for the purpose of
this  application. The alleged informant was the president of a rival trade
union, which had also made representations regarding terms and conditions of
employment; he alleges that on or about 01. 08. 1993, the petitioner requested
the support of this union for a picketing campaign planned for 06. 08. 1993,
indicating that this campaign would commence with the display of posters and
might develop into a strike; he thereupon expressed his disapproval. Later he
received information (source unspecified) that the petitioner's union was
getting

**323**

ready to cause disruption at the Project site by inciting the workers and the
public, and had obtained posters for this purpose. Being of  the view that
this was a course of action which might provoke an attempt to topple the
Government, he caused information to be conveyed to the 2nd respondent. No
reason has been suggested for the failure to record a statement from this
informant on 04\. 08. 1993 or thereafter. Had information of this nature
actually been received by the 2nd respondent on 04. 08. 1993, it is most
unlikely that he would have failed to cause a proper record to be made; I hold
that the 2nd respondent had not received such information from this informant.  
  
It is common ground that an armed police led by the 1st  respondent came to
the petitioner's residence at about 9.00 p.m. on 04\. 08. 1993 and wanted to
search his house. When he asked the 1st respondent whether there was a search
warrant, he was asked to shut up; in addition to a general denial; the 1st
respondent merely states that he explained to the petitioner "the reason why
he wanted to search [the] house". What that "reason" was, is not set out
either in the affidavit or in the petitioner's statement recorded later that
night. The respondents do not claim to have had a search warrant or to have
obtained the petitioner's consent. I hold that the petitioner was not given
any reason for the search, that his consent was not obtained,  and that his
legitimate query as to whether there was lawful authority for the search was
rudely brushed aside.  
  
The learned Deputy Solicitor-General was unable to cite any legal provision
which authorised or justified this forcible search of the petitioner's house.  
  
The petitioner says that the Police found the 300 posters; the 1st respondent
says, 175 printed and 20 handwritten posters. Admittedly, however, all the
posters found were seized and taken

**324**

away. There could have been no doubt that the twenty odd words on the posters
related only to the workers' demands, and just one minute would have sufficed
to convince anyone that they contained nothing subversive, criminal or
otherwise objectionable. While not denying that the posters were taken away
despite the petitioner's protests, the 1st respondent claims that he directed
the petitioner to come to the Police Station the following day, and to meet
the 2nd respondent and remove the posters. This assertion is consistent only
with his having known all along that there was no reason to deprive the
petitioner of the posters. The learned Deputy Solicitor-General was forced to
concede that the removal of the posters was quite unjustified, and that even
if the 1st respondent had entertained any doubt, he could have taken just one
to show his superiors. The petitioner further alleges that the 1st respondent
threatened that if any such poster was displayed as planned, the petitioner
and the workers responsible would be remanded for 14 days; that he was
arrested and detained at the Police Station till 12 noon the next day; and
that at the time of release the 2nd respondent made similar threats. The
respondents deny arrest, detention and threats. They claim that the petitioner
came to the Police Station, met the 1st respondent, and "was produced before
the 2nd respondent"; that the 2nd respondent "warned the petitioner not to
create any disturbances and that he could carry on a picketing campaign
peacefully", and asked him to remove the posters, but that the petitioner did
not. Although the 1st respondent says that he recorded the petitioner's
statement at 21:15 on 04. 08. 1993 and although he made an entry at 23:00 when
he handed over the seized posters to another officer, he made no reference to
this "direction" to the petitioner to remove the posters the next day. Nor,
apparently, was any entry made when the petitioner allegedly refused to take
the posters when the 2nd respondent asked him to do so. On 09. 08. 1993, the
parent union complained to the IGP (with copies to the DIG, NCP, and SP,
Polonnaruwa) giving the

**32** **5**

petitioner's version, in particular that threats were made, that the posters
were still in Police custody, and that all this was done in order to disrupt
the picketing campaign; and requested an inquiry. There was no reply, denying
the petitioner's version; and the respondents did not in their affidavits,
give any explanation regarding the serious allegations in that complaint.  
  
I, therefore, hold that the posters were unlawfully seized and retained in
police custody, against the petitioner's wishes. This suggests that the
respondents intended to hinder the petitioner's planned protest. Having regard
to the high-handed manner in which the petitioner's residence was searched,
and his property unlawfully seized, in order to obstruct that protest, it is
probable that the respondents did threaten the petitioner with remand if he
went ahead with his protest.  
  
In consequence of all this, the petitioner says, he and other members of the
union, through fear, decided not to hold the picketing campaign scheduled for
lunch time on 06. 08. 1993 or to prepare or display any posters or placards.  
  
**Article 14  
**  
The facts disclose a grave and pre-meditated violation of the  fundamental
rights of a citizen, and it matters little whether he is a humble casual
worker, raising a not-uncommon plea for a salary increase to meet escalating
living costs, or a person of standing and responsibility in the community, as
a Justice of the Peace, the President of the Gramodaya Mandalaya, or an
office-bearer of a trade union branch. According to his statement, as recorded
by the 1st respondent, he commenced casual employment as far back as 1984 as a
trainee; the issue of the inadequacy of salary was raised ever since 1988 with
the Central Cultural Fund, and also with a Member of Parliament for the area,
the Prime Minister, and the President.

**326**

In that background, what other option did the petitioner have? Did he have any
other means of redress? Was it not appropriate to resort to collective or
trade union action? Or did the Constitution require him to surfer in silence?
The Constitution, and in particular Articles 10, 12, and 14 recognise the
fundamental right of every Sri Lankan to be different; to think differently;
and to have and to express different opinions - not merely a right to disagree
privately in silence, but to communicate disagreement openly, by word, conduct
and action, by peaceful and lawful means. Dissent, or disagreement manifested
by conduct or action, is a cornerstone of the Constitution. It is a right
enjoyed by Members who speak and vote as they wish in Parliament; by "Judges,
who must decide controversies according to their considered opinion; and by
every citizen at election time when he casts his vote for the candidate of his
choice. Democracy requires not merely that dissent be tolerated, but that it
be encouraged; and this obligation of the Executive is expressly recognized by
Article 4 (d), which therefore requires that the police not only refrain from
suppressing lawful dissent, but also that they 'respect, secure and advance"
the right to dissent. As Justice Jackson ominously observed in West Virginia
State Board of Education v. Barnett (1):  
  
"Those who begin coercive elimination of dissent soon find themselves
exterminating dissenters. Compulsory unification of opinion achieves only the
unanimity of the graveyard. It seems trite but necessary to say that the first
amendment was designed to avoid these ends by avoiding these beginnings."  
  
The planned protest was clearly not a hasty, strident, over-reaction to
trifling or transient grievance, but a patient, subdued and dignified plea to
the conscience of the community for a living wage. In Amaratunga v. Sirimal
(2)  I upheld the right to dissent, and expressed the hope :

**327**

"... that the Inspector-General of Police will of his own volition issue
appropriate directions and instructions to all officers-in-charge of Police
Stations, that criticism of the Government, and of political parties and
policies, is, per se, a permissible exercise of the freedom of speech and
expression under Article 14 (1) (a)."  
  
It is regrettable that five months later, the respondents chose to obstruct a
much more restrained exercise by the petitioner of his fundamental rights. His
freedom of speech and expression was violated by the seizure of his posters,
and by threats to have him remanded if he proceeded with the picketing
campaign or displayed posters; this effectively deterred the lunch-time
protest; by preventing the non-violent demonstration, his freedom of peaceful
assembly was infringed; and since that protest and assembly was a legitimate
activity of a lawful association, of which he was a member (Bandara v.
Premachandra (3) ) his freedom of association was also impaired. These were
not errors of judgment occurring during a sudden emergency, or when dealing
with armed violence directed at the foundations of democracy. On the contrary,
the respondents had time for deliberation and were faced with a proper
exercise of democratic dissent. Not only should they have realised that the
seizure and retention of the posters was unlawful, but they should have
returned them, with an unqualified apology, and an unequivocal acknowledgement
of the petitioner's right to go ahead with his demonstration. Instead, they
decided to invade the petitioner's residence at night on the most tenuous
material -consisting, at best, of a vague rumor communicated by a trade union
rival; they caused an armed police party rudely to violate the privacy of his
home, arrogantly dismissing his lawful challenge to search, and arbitrarily to
seize his property without any semblance of right; and then threatened that
any further attempt to exercise his fundamental rights would be suppressed by
procuring what would have been an improper judicial order of remand. A prompt
complaint to the IGP requesting an inquiry, was of no avail.

**328**

I hold that the petitioner's fundamental rights under Articles 14 (1) (a), (0)
and (c) have been infringed by the 1st and 2nd respondents.  
  
**Article 13  
**  
The material available to the 1st respondent did not justify the arrest of the
petitioner. The 1st respondent denies any such arrest. However, not only is
the petitioner's allegation that he was arrested supported by an affidavit
sworn by his father, but in the letter dated 09. 08. 1993 sent by the parent
union to the IGP this allegation of unlawful arrest was specifically made, and
neither denied nor explained. Taking into consideration the absence of a reply
or an explanation, as well as the conduct of the respondents in attempting to
obstruct the planned protest, I hold that it is more probable that the 1st
respondent did arrest and detain the petitioner, with the 2nd respondent's
approval or acquiescence, in furtherance of their intention to prevent that
protest. The petitioner's fundamental rights under Article 13 (1) and (2) were
therefore infringed.  
  
As compensation for infringement of his fundamental rights, I direct the
payment of a sum of Rs. 70,000 to the petitioner as follows :  
  
(a) Rs. 50,000 to be paid by the State,  
(d) Rs. 10,000 to be paid by the 1st respondent, and  
(c) Rs. 10,000 to be paid by the 2nd respondent.  
  
I direct the Inspector-General of Police -  
  
(a) to issue, after consulting the Attorney-General, precise and detailed
instructions to all officers-in-charge of Police Stations as to their duties
in terms of Article 4 (d) of the Constitution, to respect, secure and advance
the exercise

**329**

of the fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 13 (1) and (2) and Articles
14 (1) (a), (b) and (c), and thereafter to  forward to the Registrar of this
court a copy of such instructions; and  
  
(b) to refrain from promoting the 1st and 2nd respondents for a period of one
year from the date of this judgment.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
January 10, 1994  
  
**GOONEWARDENA, J.  
**  
In my judgment in the case of Mohamed Faiz v. The Attorney-General and Six
Others, I had occasion to hold that an illegal arrest violative of Article 13
(1) of the Constitution is not necessarily accompanied by the consequence that
there is a violation of Article 13 (2) as well, and that a violation of that
Article can occur only when there has been a failure to transfer an arrested
person from non-judicial custody to judicial custody within the time period
prescribed by law. It is not necessary to repeat here the reasons I set out in
that judgment and I see no reason now to take a different view.  
  
Upon the petitioner's own showing in this application he had not been kept in
police custody for a period in excess of twenty-four hours. In these
circumstances the petitioner has failed to establish that there has been a
violation of Article 13 (2) of the Constitution.

**330**

In this application I would limit myself and while desisting from giving
directions to the Inspector-General of Police, agree with Fernando, J., only
to the extent of holding that there has been an infringement of the
petitioner's rights guaranteed to him under Articles 13 (1) and 14 (1) (a),
(b) and (c) of the Constitution and would accordingly order compensation as he
has ordered. I see no order in the judgment of Fernando, J. as respects costs
and I myself would make no such order.  
  
_**Relief granted.**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/30.html_  

