##  Ratnayake v. Dassanayake - SLR - 170, Vol 1 of 2003 [2002] LKSC 30; (2003)
1 Sri LR 170 (29 October 2002)

**170**

**RATNAYAKE** ****

**v.** ****

**DASSANAYAKE**

SUPREME COURT

FERNANDO, J.

EDUSSURIYA, J. AND

DE SUVA, J.

SC APPEAL 47/2002

CA240/89(F)

DC KULIYAPITIYA CASE NO. 6741/M

4th AND 29th OCTOBER, 2002

_Defamation \- Circumstances justifying a judgment for defamation when the_
_plaintiff stated that the cause of action was malicious prosecution._

The plaintiff respondent stated that his cause of action was malicious
prose­cution. But in the amended plaint he pleaded facts applicable to
defamation as

171



well as additional facts relevant to malicious prosecution. At the trial the
plain­tiff suggested issues relevant to defamation pure and simple. The trial
judge gave judgment for the plaintiff on the basis defamation had been
established.

**Held :** The trial judge did not err in granting relief for defamation.

**APPEAL** from the judgment of the Court of Appeal.

**Case referred to** **:** ****

1.       _Dodwell v John_ \- (1915) 18 NLR 133.139 

___R. Chula Bandara_ for appellant

Plaintiff-respondent absent and unrepresented.

# Cur. adv. vult



October 29, 2002

**FERNANDO, J.** ****

The plaintiff-respondent was absent and unrepresented. However, an attorney-
at-law has filed a proxy on his behalf and has tendered written submissions on
04.10.2002. We accordingly decided to take up this matter for hearing.



The question of law on which special leave was granted in this case was
whether it was open to the District Court "to grant relief for defamation when
the plaintiff's stated cause of action was malicious prosecution"



A scrutiny of the amended plaint reveals that the plaintiff had pleaded all
the facts which under the law applicable gave rise to a cause of action (i.e.
for defamation) as well as additional facts rel­evant to a cause of action for
malicious prosecution. Thus the plain­tiff pleaded that a complaint made by
the defendant to the police was untrue, malicious, defamatory and injurious to
his reputation, that in consequence he was arrested, remanded and prosecuted
etc. It was not necessary to label the action as belonging to a par­ticular
class. (See _Dodwell v John_ (1)).

172

At the trial when issues were framed, the plaintiff suggested issues relevant
to defamation pure and simple. That he was enti­tled to do. In any event, the
defendant's counsel did not object to those issues or suggest any counter
issues. After trial, the trial Judge gave judgment for the plaintiff on the
basis that defamation had been established. He did not err in granting relief
for defama­tion.



The appeal is dismissed, but without costs as the plaintiff did not appear
either at the stage of leave or at the hearing.

**EDUSSURIYA, J.** - I agree.

**DE SILVA, J.** \- I agree.

_Appeal dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/30.html_  

