##  Surendran v. The University Grants Commission and Another - SLR - 344, Vol
1 of 1993 [1993] LKSC 31; (1993) 1 Sri LR 344 (26 March 1993)

**344**

**SURENDRAN** **  
v.** **  
THE UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION AND ANOTHER**

SUPREME COURT.

FERNANDO, J.  
GOONEWARDENA, J. AND  
WIJETUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPEAL NO. 480/92.  
JANUARY 13th AND 15th, 1993.

_     Fundamental Rights - Right to equality before the law - Article 12(i) of
the Constitution._

The petitioner complained of the infringement of his fundamental right to
equality before the law under Article 12(1) by reason of the failure of the
University Grants Commission (the 1st respondent) to admit him to a University
to follow a course of study in Engineering. He prepared for the G.C.E. (A./L)
examination to be held in August 1990 from the Jaffna District. However that
examination was not held in that month in the District of Jaffna, Kilinochchi,
Mannar, Mullaitivu and Vavuniya, and also in certain parts of the Districts of
Trincomalee, Batticaloa and Ampara because of prevailing unrest. In April 1991
an examination was held in those areas on the same syllabi headed ' General
Certificate of Education

345

(Adv. Level) Examination August 1990 (Special 1991). There was no indication
that this examination would be treated in any way different to the August 1990
examination. The petitioner secured an aggregate of 276 marks.

Rule 29 of the Rules Relating to Admission to Undergraduate Courses in the
Universities read as follows.

.......... admission .......... is........ on the results of the G.C.E. A./L
Examination. Where more than one examination has been held in a particular
year, the results of all the examinations held in that year, will be jointly
considered for this purpose".

The petitioner contended that by virtue of this rule the August 1990 and April
1991 examinations should have been jointly considered. The petitioner was not
selected for Engineering I or Engineering 11 ".

**Held**

There can be no discrimination as between the August and April examinations.
Candidates who sat for the April examination had a legitimate expection that
Rule 29 would not be departed from.

The petitioner's fundamental right to equality was infringed by the sub-
division of the Merit Quota on a geographical basis.

**Cases referred to**

_1\. Seneviratne v. U. G. C. [1978-79-80] 1 Sri L.R. 170, 211._  
_  
2\. Ramupillai v. Minister of Public Administration [1991] 1 Sri L.R. 11, 61._  
_  
3\. Perera v. U. G. C. [1978-79-80] 1 Sri L.R. 128._

**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.

_R. K. W. Goonasekera with Mano Devasagayam and W. S. Senthilnathan for
petitioner._  
_  
D. P. Kumarasinghe D. S. G. for respondents._

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 26, 1993.  
**FERNANDO, J.**

The Petitioner complains of the infringement of his fundamental right to
equality before the law under Article 12 (1) by reason of the failure of the
University Grants Commission, " the 1st Respondent ", to admit him to a
University to follow a course of study in Engineering. The

346

Petitioner had been preparing for the G.C.E. (Advanced Level) examination to
be held in August 1990, from the Jaffna District. However that examination was
not held in that month in the Districts of Jaffna, Kilinochchi, Mannar,
Mullaitivu and Vavuniya and also in certain parts of the Districts of
Trincomalee, Batticaloa and Ampara ("the affected Districts"), because of
prevailing unrest. An examinatior was later held in those areas in April 1991,
on the basis of the same syllabi; the question papers for that examination
were headed " General Certificate of Education (Adv. Level) Examination,
August 1990 (Special -1991) "; there was no indication that this examination
would be treated as being in any way different to the August 1990 examination.
The Petitioner secured an aggregate of 276 marks of that examination, and
having satisfied the minimum requirements for application for admission to a
University, duly applied for admission, indicating Engineering 1, Engineering
11, Quantity Surveying, and Law, in that order of preference, as the courses
of study for which he wished to be considered. The Petitioner's grievance is
that the 1st Respondent's " Rules Relating to Admission to Undergraduate
Courses in the Universities ", for the academic year 1991/92 ("1R1") had not
been observed. Rules 2 and 29 provide

"2\. The following admission policy will apply in respect of the Academic year
1991/1992.

(a) Admission will be done on the basis of raw aggregate marks obtained by
eligible candidates at the G.C.E. (A/L) Examination held in 1990......

(c) (1) Merit Quota

In admitting students to courses of study other than Arts, 40% of the
available places will be filled in the order of marks compiled on an all-
island merit basis.

(2) District and Educationally disadvantaged District quota

(i) In the case of Medicine, Biological Science, Physical Science, Management
Studies and Commerce.......

347

(ii) In the case of all other courses of study, the number of places allocated
to each district shall be the number of places it would have secured under the
criteria applied for the academic year 1989/90 and it will be ensured that no
student from any district is at a disadvantage as a result of the new
admission policy.'

"29\. ....... admission ....... is...... on the results of the G.C.E. (A/L)
Examination. Where more than one examination has been held in a particular
year, the results of all the examinations held in that year, will be jointly
considered for this purpose."

Although Rule 29 refers to examination held "in" that year, it was not
suggested that this referred only to examinations held during a particular
calendar Year; it refers to the examinations held for the purposes of
admission in respect of a particular academic year. Accordingly, says the
Petitioner, the results of the August 1990 and April 1991 examinations should
have been jointly considered, i.e. with no distinction whatever between the
two examinations; the 1st Respondent however treated the April 1991
examination as being a distinct and separate examination, and did not duly
apply Rule 2(c); consequently the Petitioner was not selected for Engineering
I or Engineering II. The effect of Rule 2 is that 40% of the available places
will be filled on the basis of all-island merit, and the remaining 60%
according to quotas allocated (in proportion to population) to the 25
administrative Districts, subject to an adjustment which is not relevant to
the present dispute. In making selections in accordance with the aforesaid
quotas, allowances had to be made for two matters. Firstly, if in respect of
the last vacancy, there were several students who had obtained the same
aggregate, all such students would be selected. Secondly, a certain number of
places had to be reserved for " exceptional " cases provided for by Rules 43
to 56 (21 for Engineering 1 and 3 for Engineering 11). There is some doubt as
to the number of places available for Engineering I (either 611 or 570) and
Engineering 11 (either 106 or 100). The 1st Respondent made selections on the
basis that the number of places available, after making those two allowances,
was 504 for Engineering 1 and 87 for Engineering 11; thus the 40% Merit Quotas
amounted to 202 and 35 respectively.

348

In 1980 the District Quota system ("intended to be a temporary measure, valid
for admission in 1979, and to be reviewed thereafter") was held not to be
unconstitutional ( _Seneviratne v. U.G.C.,_ (1); _in Ramupillai v. Minister of
Public Administration_ ,(2). 1 expressed doubt as to its constitutionality a
decade later. However, the Petitioner does not question the District Quota
system in this application, as his position is that whether admission is
solely on merit, or on the Meritcum-District Quotas system, he was entitled to
admission.

There were 202 candidates who obtained 281 marks or more; 34 candidates who
obtained between 277 and 280 marks; and 11 candidates (including the
Petitioner) who obtained 276 marks. If the two examinations had been
considered together, the 202 candidates who obtained 281 marks or more would
have been selected on the Merit Quota for Engineering I. (Of these, 59 would
have been from Colombo, and 89 from Jaffna.) Thirteen of the 34 candidates who
obtained between 277 and 280 marks, and four of the candidates who obtained
276 marks, were from the Jaffna District; the District Quota for Jaffna
appears to have been 17, so that the Petitioner would probably have been
selected for Engineering I under that District Quota. If not, he would
definitely have been selected for Engineering 11, probably on the Merit Quota
(or at least on the Jaffna District Quota).

However the 1st Respondent treated the two examinations as distinct, and
apportioned the Merit Quota of 202 for Engineering I on the basis of the
number of students applying for admission for Engineering I on the results of
the August 1990 (1853) and the April 1991 (571) examinations. On that ratio,
154 places were filled from among students who sat the August examination, and
48 from among those who sat the April examination. (This resulted in a
complete reversal - 92 being selected from Colombo, and only 60 from Jaffna.)
In consequence of the Merit Quota being sub-divided between the two
examinations, 28 students from the Jaffna District who would otherwise have
gained admission under the (undivided) Merit Quota, failed to do so; instead
17 of them gained admission under the Jaffna District Quota; eleven of them,
and other students who would otherwise have gained admission under the Jaffna
District Quota, failed to do so. The Petitioner was one of the latter; he was
also not selected for Engineering II; in consequence of the apportionment of
the Merit Quota in respect of that course.

349

Learned Counsel for the Petitioner contended that under its own Rule 29,
admittedly made after the decision of this Court in _Perera v U.G.C._ (3) the
1st Respondent was not entitled to treat the April Examination as being
separate or distinct, and was not entitled to sub-divide the Merit Quota
between the two examinations. In that case, consequent upon the abolition of
the Higher National Certificate of Education (H.N.C.E) examination, two G.C.E.
(Advanced Level) examinations were held in 1979; the April examination was the
regular examination, and the August examination was a new examination to meet
the requirements of students who would otherwise have sat for the H.N.C.E.
These two examinations were different, and were based on different syllabi.
The 1st Respondent decided that University admissions in respect of the year
1980 should be based on both these examinations. However, as the 1st
Respondent considered that the two examinations were not of the same standard,
and that there was no rational method by which the performance of candidates
could be jointly considered, it decided that the allocation of available
places as between the two examinations should be in the ratio of the number of
students attaining the minimum requirement for admission at each examination.
On that basis, a ratio of 7.2:2.8 was fixed. It was held

" Once the qualified students from both sources were clubbed together, they
constituted one class and there could not be a class within that class. There
came to exist only one source of selection and not two sources of selection
and there was no basis for any classification and no distinction could any
further be made in selecting the best candidate for admission to the
Universities. The preferential treatment of one source in relation to the
other, based on the differences between the said two sources, can no further
be justified. Also, there was no reasonable nexus between the differences in
the two sources and the ultimate objective of selection, namely, to secure the
best talent. The discriminatory ratio adopted by the Respondent is thus
violative of Article 12 of the Constitution. Allocation of places in the
Universities on the basis of the ratio decided on by the Respondent will
result in candidates of an inferior calibre from the April batch being
selected ........ candidates of a superior calibre from the August batch not
being selected. In view of the fact that there is a larger number of
candidates than places available in the Universities, the object being to
secure the best possible material for admission to the Universities, merit

350

is the only fair and satisfactory basis of selection. The Respondent itself
recognised the excellence of the merit criterion by allocating 30% of the
available places on merit to be determined on an all-island basis. This object
will be defeated by the ratio basis of selection. Selection of those who had
obtained a less number of marks in preference to those who had obtained a
higher number of marks in the examination who had been placed on par by the
Respondent for purposes of qualifying for admission to the Universities is
fundamentally unjust and cannot be sustained. The differences that are alleged
by the Respondent to have existed in the two sources of admission are
irrelevant for the ultimate selection." (p. 142)

The learned Deputy Solicitor General submitted that the 1st Respondent was
entitled to depart from Rule 29 in order to prevent injustice; that if a
common merit list had been prepared for the two examinations only 104
applicants (out of 1,853) from among those who sat the August examination
would have been selected on the basis of merit for Engineering I, as against
106 applicants (out of 571) from among those who sat the April examination;
the latter candidates had the advantage of an additional eight months time for
preparation; further, students who sat the April examination from the Jaffna
District had performed better than in preceding years, whereas the performance
of candidates from other Districts who sat the August examination showed no
significant improvement; he submitted that candidates at the April examination
had the opportunity of scoring more marks. He conceded, however, that the 1st
Respondent had not given any intimation whatsoever, prior to the April
examination, that it would be treated as a separate examination or that the
Merit Quota would be divided. He also conceded that at the August examination
(and indeed at all previous examinations) no distinction had been made between
candidates sitting for the first time and those having an additional year (or
more) for preparation by virtue of repeating the examination.

The decision in Perera v U.G.C. compels me to hold that there can be no
discrimination as between the August and April examinations. Further the 1st
Respondent adopted Rule 29 after that decision, thereby confirming the
principle that there would be no discrimination between two like examinations.
Candidates who sat for the April examination had a legitimate expectation that
this Rule would

351

not be departed from. The fact that, for any reason the 1st Respondent decided
to depart from that Rule did not result in a valid amendment of the Rule (as
suggested by the learned Deputy Solicitor General). Discrimination cannot be
justified on the basis that candidates for the April examination had eight
months more time for preparation, because candidates who repeat these
examinations are treated equally with those who sit for the first time
although they have twelve months more, and that advantage has never been the
basis of discrimination against them; in any event the petitioner has urged
that he had to prepare for the examination under very difficult circumstances
without electricity, while kerosene oil, torch batteries, Candles, etc., were
scarce. If allowances have to be made for the difficulties under which
children. study, it will soon become necessary to make further adjustments to
take account of the circumstances in which disadvantaged students, even in
normal times, have to study and prepare for examinations. That exercise has to
be carried out by reducing disparities in educational facilities and
opportunities, and not by imposing arbitrary quotas.

The learned Deputy Solicitor General also sought to justify the "sub-division"
of the Merit Quota relying on the following factors referred to in the
affidavit of the Chairman of the 1st Respondent.

(a) " Performance levels of students who sat the special examination compared
to the performance levels of the other districts \- specially in the subject
streams of Physical Sciences and Commerce." (in support, the document 1 R2 was
annexed);

(b) " The profile is different. The pattern of the results of the regular
examination held in August matches with the previous years." (In support, the
document 1R3 was annexed);

(c) " The level of admissions to various courses of study should be maintained
at satisfactory levels in the national interest, despite the unsettled
situation in the country. Hence it was decided to maintain the average level
of admissions in the last 5 years. In 1987, 1988 and 1989 the G.C.E. (Advanced
Level) Examinations were held under unsettled conditions in the country. 1985
and 1986 were normal years. Therefore, the 1st Respondent decided to maintain
the average level of

352

admissions for the past 5 years." (In support, the documents 1 R5 and 1R5A
were annexed).

These submissions seek to " standardise " admissions in one year by reference
to performance in previous years; this would be wholly unacceptable where only
one examination had been held; it is equally unacceptable where two
examinations are held, both being required by the relevant Rules, as well as
the principle of equal treatment, to be treated as equivalent. However, I must
point out that the " statistics " contained in the documents annexed do not
support the assumptions on which these submissions are based.

The document 1 R2 annexed in support of the first submission does not give any
particulars in relation to Commerce. However, another document (1R4) entitled
" Minimum Marks for Selection for the Various Courses of Study in respect of
such District " shows that in all the Districts, other than the affected
Districts, the general pattern was that the minimum aggregate for admission to
Engineering I, Engineering II, Physical Science and Commerce were considerably
less than for Medicine; but in Jaffna admission for Engineering I, Engineering
II, and Commerce required considerably more than for Medicine. Had the Merit
Quota not been sub-divided, it is likely that the Jaffna results would have
shown a similar differential. The document 1R2 shows the minimum aggregate
required for admission (under the District Quota) from six Districts including
Colombo and Jaffna, over a five year period; In five Districts the minimum
aggregate for admission for 1991/1992 was less than in the preceding four
years, while in the Jaffna District alone it was higher. The Respondents
suggestion is that so many students from the Jaffna District performed better
at the April examination that a much higher minimum mark than before was
required. But this is equally consistent with an unfair "sub-division" of the
Merit Quota, for that would result in an additional number of students in the
preferred Districts gaining admission on the Merit Quota (i.e. with lower
marks than if the Merit Quota was not sub-divided). Such students would
otherwise have had to gain admission through the District Quota; consequently
an equivalent number of additional students would gain admission through the
District Quota, again with lower aggregates than otherwise. The converse
process would take place in the affected Districts, with the result that the
minimum aggregate required to gain admission through the District Quota would
increase. 1 R2 is therefore equivocal.

353

The document 1 R3 gives the aggregates obtained by the first 100 students in
the Physical Science stream for each of the five years 1986-1990, from the
Colombo, Jaffna and Kandy Districts. Although the submissions referred to 1985
as having been a " normal " year, the figures for 1985 have not been
furnished. This document was relied on as showing an unusually improved
performance by students of the affected Districts; however only the Jaffna
figures have been furnished. I indicated to the learned Deputy Solicitor
General that a proper statistical analysis was essential in order to make any
rational deduction from these figures, but it appeared that no such analysis
had been done. The entries relating to the best candidate in each of these
years seemed to contradict the position that the performances of Colombo
candidates was consistent with past years, while Jaffna candidates had
performed better.

|

1986

|

1987

|

1988

|

1989

|

1990  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Colombo

|

351

|

376

|

381

|

328

|

372  
  
Jaffna

|

372

|

353

|

354

|

351

|

350  
  
Kandy

|

348

|

311

|

302

|

331

|

343  
  
Colombo showed an improvement with reference to an "unsettled" year (1989), as
well as a " normal " year (1986). Jaffna showed a decline in relation to all
previous years. Hence a much closer scrutiny of these figures was necessary.
The learned Deputy Solicitor General was unable even to furnish the average
marks of each of these groups of 100 candidates. Hence his conclusion that
these figures showed an unusual. improvement in respect of the Jaffna District
remained a mere assertion. However I have endeavoured to compare the
performance of the first 25 students in Jaffna and Colombo on the basis of
their average marks



|

1986

|

1987

|

1988

|

1989

|

1990  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
Colombo

|

326.4

|

319.8

|

310.9

|

307.9

|

314.1  
  
Jaffna

|

314.4

|

311.5

|

313.5

|

313.4

|

318.2  
  
These figures appear to suggest a declining trend in Colombo, with a slight
improvement in 1990; and an almost constant level in Jaffna, with a similar
improvement in 1990; they also show that

354

in three successive years Jaffna candidates scored three to five marks more
than Colombo candidates. This cannot be explained away by any assertion that
1985 and 1986 were " normal " years; quite apart from the absence of the 1985
figures, it is a matter of common knowledge that education was disrupted in
1987 to 1989 in Colombo (and in some other Districts), while the unrest in
Jaffna did not seriously affect schools; the performance of candidates from
Colombo in 1990 may well have been adversely affected by the disruption of
their education in 1988 and 1989.

However, a comparison of the performance of the other candidates does suggest
that in the Colombo District performance in 1990 was about the same as in the
previous year, while Jaffna candidates performed better in 1990 (scoring about
twelve marks more than in 1989); the performance of candidates Nos. 25, 50, 75
and 100 were as follows

Candidate No.

|

1986

|

1987

|

1988

|

1989

|

1990  
  
---|---|---|---|---|---  
  
COLOMBO 25

50

75

100

|

311

293

280

269

|

302

281

272

265

|

295

277

268

262

|

297

283

275

268

|

298

284

276

269  
  


JAFFNA 25

50

75

100

|

299

278

265

255

|



287

272

256

242

|



302

284

273

261

|



297

282

273

264

|



307

294

285

278  
  
These figures suggest that in 1990 these Jaffna candidates scored about 9
marks more than their Colombo counterparts (compared with an average of four
marks more in the case of the first 25 candidates). This does not seem a
sufficiently significant difference to warrant a correction.

Even if the performance of Jaffna candidates had been unusually better than in
preceding years, the appropriate arithmetical remedy (assuming this to be
legal) would have been to discount the aggregates of Jaffna candidates by a
corresponding percentage; e.g. if their performance had been found, after a
proper statistical analysis, to be 10% better (or 20 marks more) than
candidates at the August

355

examination, their aggregates should have been reduced by 106 (or 20 marks).
Admissions should then have been determined by reference to the Merit and
District Quotas. The arbitrary "sub-division" of the Merit Quota, by reference
to the ratio of eligible applicants, does not bear any rational relationship
to the extent by which - performance in April was better than in August.
Further, if the April examination was in fact easier, equality before the law
would require other adjustments as well : for example, if a student had scored
40 in each of the four subjects in April, while another had scored 28 in the
same subjects in August, it would be unfair to treat the former as having
passed in all four subjects while treating the latter as having failed. The
remedy applied by the 1st Respondent created a much greater distortion, as the
following figures (of students selected and the minimum aggregate for
admission) demonstrate :



|

1989



|

1990 UNDIVIDED MERIT QUOTA

|

1990 SUB-DIVIDED MERIT QUOTA  
  
---|---|---|---  
  
COLOMBO

JAFFNA

|

68                    (277)

59 (277)



|

59                      (281)

89 (281)



|

92                      (271)

61 (290)

  
  
In seeking to correct an apparent discrepancy of five or six marks in
performance between the two examinations, the 1st Respondent seems to have
created a gross distortion of 19 marks by the "subdivision " of the Merit
Quota.

I therefore find that the documents produced by the Respondents do not support
their submissions. There has been no proper analysis by the 1st Respondent of
the raw statistical information contained in the several documents produced,
in an endeavour to overwhelm the Court by, as it were, feeding it a diet of
undigested (and seemingly indigestible) figures.

It appears to me that the methods used by the 1st Respondent are seriously
flawed for several reasons. The object was to compare the performance of
candidates from the affected Districts at the April examination, vis-a-vis
preceding years, as against the performances of candidates from the other
Districts at the August examination, vis-a-vis preceding years.

356

1\. It seems desirable that the performance of all candidates, and not merely
of those eligible for University admission, should have been considered.

2\. However, assuming that this was too big a task, the performance of all
eligible candidates should have been considered; not merely a small section of
them. Such a comparison should have been according to a statistically
acceptable method, possibly by ascertaining the arithmetical mean or average,
and perhaps also the median, for each category for each of the years in
question.

3\. Even if (and this I cannot accept) it was permissible to compare a section
or sample from each category, such section or sample should have been duly
representative; thus a comparison of the performances of only Jaffna
candidates vis-a-vis only Colombo candidates could not give a correct picture
of the April examination in relation to the August examination; further, even
if the Jaffna and Colombo candidates could have been regarded as truly
representative (which I doubt) of the affected and other Districts
respectively, an appropriate percentage should have been compared. Since there
were 571 and 1,853 eligible candidates in the two categories, 100 candidates
(i.e. 17.5% from the first category could not properly be compared with 100
(i.e. 5.4%) from the second.

4\. Arbitrary assumptions have been made that 1985 and 1986 were " normal "
years and that 1987 to 1989 were " unsettled " years, although the several
Districts would have been differently affected in those years.

5\. Since two of the subjects (Physics and Chemistry) were common to the
Biological Science stream (which included Medicine) and the Physical Science
stream, it is difficult to understand why the 1st respondent did not find a
similar disparity in performance in the former.

I therefore hold that the Petitioner's fundamental right to equality has been
infringed by the " sub-division " of the Merit Quota on a geographical basis.
The 1st Respondent's decision was not only wrong in law, but was based on
factual inferences incorrectly drawn from incomplete statistical data. I have
given anxious consideration

357

to the question of relief. Clearly the Petitioner should have been admitted to
a University for a course in Engineering I. Should others, similarly placed,
who did not apply to this Court be treated as having acquiesced in the
infringement of their fundamental rights ? Should students who have been
selected under the new scheme, and who are not parties to this application
(and of whose names the Petitioner would have been unaware), be prejudiced by
their admissions being invalidated? I am conscious that in Perera v U.G.C. the
1st Respondent's decision to adopt the ratio basis of selection was quashed,
and the Court directed that the two examination be considered jointly; but the
fact that successful candidates had not been heard was not referred to. In
that case there were plausible grounds for differentiating between two
examinations : that both the syllabi and the standards were different. Here
there are none. The Rules required that the two examinations be jointly
considered. The 1st Respondent's inferences from the statistical information
were wrong, and in any event the proposed remedy was quite arbitrary. It is
well known that social and political unrest of the not-so-distant past was
only related to alleged unfairness in University admissions (see Seneviratne v
U.G.C. at p. 211). Justice must not only be done, but must be seen to be done.
And in the field of higher education this requires that the system of
University admissions, both as formulated and as implemented, must not only be
fair but seen to be fair. I therefore consider that granting the Petitioner
relief personally would be insufficient, and that it is just and equitable
that the entire scheme of admission be set aside.

I therefore hold that the Petitioner's fundamental right under Article 12(1)
has been violated by the 1st Respondent by reason of the " sub-division " of
the Merit Quota. I quash the 1st Respondent's decision to sub-divide the Merit
Quota, and direct the 1st Respondent to select candidates for admission to
Universities for courses in Engineering, in accordance with Rule 29. The
Petitioner will be entitled to costs in a sum of Rs. 5,000.

**GOONAWARDENA, J.** \- I agree.

  
**WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1993/31.html_  

