##  Brown & Co. Ltd. and Another v. Ratnayake, Arbitrator and Others - SLR -
91, Vol 3 of 1994 [1992] LKSC 31; (1994) 3 Sri LR 91 (26 November 1992)

91

BROWN & CO. LTD. AND ANOTHER  

**v.  **

**RATNAYAKE, ARBITRATOR AND OTHERS**  





SUPREME COURT

BANDARANAYAKE, J.

KULATUNGA, J.

WADUGODAPITIYA J.

S.C. APPEAL NO. 18/90  
S.C. SPL. L.A. 59/90

C.A./LA./S.C. 15/89

C.A. APPLICATION NO. 566/85

JANUARY 17 AND APRIL 03,1992.



Certiorari - Non-compliance with Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978 -
Failure to file certified copy of proceedings where impugned award of
Arbitrator was made in respect of services - Rule 50 of the Supreme Court
Rules - Interest on amount awarded.



**Held:**

** **

Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules of 1978 requires the petition to be
supported by affidavit and to be accompanied by original or duly certified
copies of documents material to the case in the form of exhibits. The burden
of presenting a proper application is on the party that seeks the intervention
of the Court. The

**92**



procedure is specified for this threshold stage. The Rule regulates the mode
of enforcing a legal right. The petitioner has to tender all relevant material
to the Court in order to invoke its jurisdiction. If he fails to do this there
is a failure to comply with a substantial aspect of the Rule. The fact that
the Court is empowered by Article 140 to inspect and examine the record does
not absolve the petitioner of his duty to invoke jurisdiction properly.



The fact that the record was subsequently made available to court is not an
excuse for failure to comply with basic requirements of the Rule. One cannot
claim a right to proceed to the next step without compliance with a valid
invocation or jurisdiction in the first place. Such would lead to uncertainty,
unreasonableness and oppressive results. In this sense the rule is mandatory.



In this view of the matter dismissal for want of compliance with necessary
basics is an order that may be made within the Rule, a necessary corollary to
it and does not amount to an amendment, alteration or revocation of the Rule
approved by Parliament. The Court here is only articulating the real scope of
the Rule to give effect and expression to it. This interpretation does not
widen the ambit of the Rule.



Although the Rule does not expressly provide for dismissal the question of
obtaining the approval of. Parliament to make an order for dismissal does not
srise. Dismissal is in the scheme of the Rule.



No effort was made by the petitioner's to seek permission of the Court of
Appeal to tender additional documents as they may have done under Rule 50.
Under rule 50 the Court of Appeal has discretionary powers where appropriate,
to admit material not tendered with the petition. In these circumstances the
Court below was entitled to refuse to proceed further with the application.  


In view of the fact that the Arbitrator's award was as far back as 1985, legal
interest on the aggregate sum payable is awarded.



**Cases referred to:**

_ _

1 _. Nicholas v. Macan Markar_ (1981) 1 Sri L.R. 1.

_ _

2 _. Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali_ (1981) 2 Sri L. R. 29.

_ _

3 _. Rasheed Ali v Mohamed Ali_ (1981) 1 Sri L. R. 262.

_ _

4 _. Koralage v. Mohamed_ (1988) 2 Sri L. R. 299

_ _

5 _. Mary Nona v Francina_ (1988) 2 Sri L. R, 250



6\. Paramanathan v. Kodituwakkuaratchi (1988) 1 Sri L. R. 315, 333.

_ _

**Appeal** from order of the Court of Appeal.

93



_H. L. de Silva P.C._ with _Desmond Fernando P.C._ and _Nigel Hatch_ for
plaintiff appellant.

_  
Romesh de Silva P.C._ with _Geethika Gunewardena_ for defendant-respondent.

_Cur adv vult._

  
November 26, 1992.

**  
BANDARANAYAKE. J.**

** **

1\. This is an appeal from an Order of the Court of Appeal dismissing an
application for a Writ of Certiorari for noncompliance with Rule 46 of the
Supreme Court Rules 1978. The Award sought to be quashed was made by an
Arbitrator appointed by the Minister under the Industrial Disputes Act.



2\. The dispute referred for Arbitration related to the termination of the 3rd
Respondent's services by the Petitioners.



3\. By paragraph 15 of the Petition filed before the Court of Appeal the
Appellants averred that the Award was bad in law and/or discloses errors of
law on the face of the record, in that (among other averments):



(a) conclusions drawn from the primary evidence are perverse and/or are such
that no reasonable person duly versed in labour relations law could have
drawn, in particular:



(i) taking into account irrelevent evidence and circumstances such as that the
3rd Respondent was a shareholder in justifying his

misconduct;



(b) the failure to take into account relevant evidence in arriving at
findings, in particular:



(ii) the poor performance of the 3rd Respondent in cross-examination and his
admission .....



4\. It was also averred by the Appellants that the parties had, in accordance
with the practice and direction of the Arbitrator, tendered (to the
Arbitrator) written statements setting out in full

**94**



their respective cases. The Appellants led evidence of an Executive Officer
and marked documents R 1 to R 20 and the 3rd Respondent gave evidence and
called two witnesses on his behalf at the inquiry before the Arbitrator. After
conclusion of the evidence, oral and documentary written submissions were made
by the parties.



5\. Along with the proxy, petition and affidavit tendered by the Appellants in
the application made to the Court of Appeal on 16.5.85 the Petitioners only
annexed and tendered 10 documents marked "A" to "J". The proceedings had
before the Arbitrator or other documents were not tendered to the Court of
Appeal.



6\. The application was first taken up for hearing by the Court of Appeal on
4.7.88. A preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the 3rd Respondent to
the application on the ground that Rule 46 of the Supreme Court Rules 1978 has
not been complied with by the Appellants, in that a certified copy of the
proceedings had not been filed. Counsel for the 3rd Respondent submitted that
a certified copy of the proceedings was necessary for a proper adjudication,
but the Appellants insisted that all documents material to the case has been
filed and that they would stand or fall by those exhibits. The Court took the
view at that initial stage that it would become necessary for the Court to
decide whether a particular document was material to the case or not and to
decide that the Court had to enquire into the application as it can be decided
only in the course of the hearing. The Court thus taking the view that it was
premature to decide this question as a preliminary issue, overruled the
preliminary objection aforesaid and made order on 27.(}9.88 that ... "the
application be listed for hearing in due course".



7\. The journal entries of 10, 10.89 and 11. 10.89 of the Court of Appeal
Record show as follows:  


10.10.89 - Appearances marked (Senior Counsel had appeared for both sides.
Case proceeding further inquiry on 11.10.89 (tomorrow)

**95**



11.10.89 - Same appearances as before. Order reserved for 15.10.89



8\. on 15.10.89 order was delivered by the Court of Appeal. By that Order the
Court dismissed with costs the appellants application for a writ of
certiorari. This appeal is from that order. In doing so the Court made the
following observations and gave the following amongst other reasons for its
order:



**Quote :**



"The Award was made on 13.01.85 and gazetted on 15.03.85. This application was
made on 16.05.85. the pleadings show the Petitioner relied only on the
exhibits annexed to the petition and not on the proceedings (vide paragraphs
15 and 17 of the petition) .



. . No reason is pleaded in the petition as to why the proceedings are not
annexed; nor does the petition state that the proceedings will be tendered
later, . . . The application was supported on 31.5.85 and notice issued.
Objections were filed on 19.8.85 and the 3rd Respondent specifically pleaded
noncompliance with Rule 46 of the SC Rules 1978 ... Despite objections the
Petitioner did not tender the proceedings but filed a motion dated 13.01.86
moving that the record be called for ... On 4.7.88 when objections were taken
that Rule 46 had not been complied with, Counsel for the Petitioners Stated
"documents mentioned to the case have been filed and they would stand or fail
by their own exhibits." In view of this statement, by my judgement dated
27.09.88, I left this issue open ... No other documents or proceedings have
been filed since ... **Learned Counsel for the Petitioners is now seeking not
only to refer to the proceedings but also to other documents as well**. It is
now claimed that certain proceedings and documents have been tendered. There
is no record whatsoever of such proceedings or documents being either tendered
to Court to served on the 3rd Respondent. The Petitioner is unable to state as
to when these (additional) documents were tendered. In any event proceedings
or documents could have been tendered only upon a motion and with permission
of Court after notice to the 3rd respondent in terms of Rule 50 of the SC
Rules. This has not been done. Further, the material said to have been
tendered are uncorrected uncertified copies ... In

**96**



the instant case the Petitioner having stated that he was relying only on the
original exhibits filed and prevented the application from being dismissed (on
27.09.89) cannot now resile from that position. By seeking to rely on
documents and proceedings which have not been duly tendered the Petitioners
impliedly admit that the petition as presently constituted cannot be sustained
... The Appellants has not adduced any reason as to why there has been non-
compliance with Rule 46. The application ... is dismissed with costs."



Whilst vigorously contending that the Court of Appeal should have allowed him
to support his application on the 10 documents tendered, learned president's
Counsel for the Appellant also submitted that:



(i) In the Court of Appeal the Appellants moved the Court to call for the
record front he Industrial Court. Court of Appeal made order calling for such
record on 13.1.86. The record was received by the appellate Court on 16.1.86.
it was submitted the relief invoked involved the appellate tribunal having to
inspect and examine such record - vide Article 140 of the Constitution.
Certiorari proceedings begin with such examination. Therefore, irrespective of
the Petitioner filing certified copies of proceedings, they are to be found in
the record which Court inspects. No prejudice can therefore be caused to the
Respondent in the circumstances.



(ii) The rule-making power of the Supreme Court was governed by Article 136
(1) (b) of the Constitution, which provides for Parliamentary supervision.
Rule 46 does not provide for dismissal of an application for non-compliance.
Parliament has not been made aware that the appellate Courts prescribe
dismissal as a penalty for non-compliance with rule 46 by the process of
interpretation of the Rules. Parliament may well consider such a penalty as
excessively harsh or unfair. It was submitted the supreme Court has no
inherent power to interpret rules as its powers are here circumscribed by the
Constitution which prescribed for parliamentary supervision of the rule-making
power of the Court. There is also no room for the application of precedents.
In a written Constitution when power is prescribed there is no room for
arrogation of inherent powers. If the Supreme Court thought that Rule 46
should be imperative it would

**97**



have prescribed for same. It has not. The Rules may be amended but only with
the approval of Parliament. That has not been done regarding Rules 46.
Therefore the power of dismissal for noncompliance is not available to a
Court. In previous decision of the Courts which held that the rule is
mandatory, to wit:



Nicholas v. Macan Markar (CA) (1)  
  
Rasheed Ali v. Mohamed Ali(2) and(3)  
  
Koralage v. Mohamed (CA)(4)  
  
Mary Nona v. Francina (CA) (5)  
  
the Courts have not counsidered the impact of Article 136 (1) (a) and (b) and
(3) and (4) of the Constitution. Counsel also compared the rule-making powers
of Section 39 of the former Courts ordinance and Section 15 of the former
Administration of Justice law which required the concurrence of the Minister
to the rules framed.



(iii) Appellants Counsel dealing with the factual position regarding the
application submitted that the 10 documents tendered provided sufficient
information to establish a prima facie case. But the Court did not get to the
stage of examining those documents. The Court dismissed the application
prematurely for alleged non-compliance with Rule 46.



Appellants Counsel in the course of oral submissions before us said that the
told the Court of Appeal that the 10 documents tendered were material and
sufficient for his case and that it was not necessary to also have the
proceeding held before the arbitrator. The Record was also available. In the
result Petitioners Counsel contended there had been sufficient compliance with
Rule 46 and that his application should be decided on its merits.



Learned Counsel for the 3rd Respondent on the other hand submitted that all
documents relevant to the case have not been tendered. Material documents such
as the proceedings before the Arbitrator which are essential for a proper
grasp of the dispute have been deliberately left out. There was a lack of
begrime fides on the part of the Petitioner. The arbitration proceedings
itself were deliberately prolonged on frivolous grounds and vexations
applications. The 10 documents tendered to the Court of Appeal

**98**



along with the petition were not enough. Counsel submitted that the Appellants
merely joined issue as to whether Rule 46 was mandatory or not ... (ie) that
they only canvassed matters of law in the Court of Appeal. Their position was
that the Rule was merely directory and that the Court had no power of
dismissal complaining that such would amount to judicial legislation; but the
Petitioners did not contend that all material documents have been tendered to
Court. Respondents Counsel explained the contents of the Petitioners 10
documents tendered to wit:



A - an earlier decision of the Court of Appeal as to who should commence
leading evidence before the Arbitrator - on whom was the burden of proof;  


B - an earlier order of the arbitrator as to whether his inquiry should
proceed ex parte;  


C - an earlier order of the Court of Appeal that the inquiry before the
arbitrator should commence afresh;  


D - the arbitrator's Award;  


E - I - 5 letters which included a memorandum and annual leave entitlement.  


3rd Respondents Counsel also submitted that the material that has not been
filed by the Petitioners comprised.  


(i) Written statements of parties tendered to the arbitrator setting out their
full positions.  


(ii) 475 pages of oral evidence including the evidence of the 3rd Respondent
and 2 witnesses called on his behalf who were all subjected to cross-
examination.



(iii) Written submissions made to that Arbitrator.



It was contended for the 3rd Respondent that of 20 documents produced at the
inquiry, only 5 were tendered to the Appeal Court. This would present a
distorted picture and mislead the Court.

**99**



Consequently the 3rd Respondent strenuously objected to the Petitioner's claim
that the 10 documents tendered to Court by the Petitioner were sufficient. The
Petitioners were content to canvass only matters of law before the Appeal
Court but did not contend that all relevant documents material for a proper
adjudication were tendered to Court.



When the inquiry was taken up the second time in October 1989 before the Court
of Appeal, Petitioner's Counsel kept referring to documents other than those
10 which had been tendered and also to oral evidence given before the
Arbitrator which proceedings also were not tendered. Even after objection was
taken the Petitioners did not seek to tender the other material and essential
documents for a just decision, although such a step is permissible under Rule
50 - vide Paramanathan v. Kodithuwakkuaratchi (CA).(6) Thus Counsel prayed for
a dismissal of this appeal with costs and interest.



I now turn to the submissions of Appellant's Counsel that as Rule 46 does not
specifically provide for dismissal for non-observance the Court below acted
without jurisdiction and that as the record was indeed available there was no
prejudice caused to the Respondents.



Article 136 (1) provides for Rules to be made regulating generally the
practice and procedure of the Courts including rules as to the proceedings in
the Court of Appeal as to the exercise of the several jurisdictions of that
Court. Writ jurisdiction is a special jurisdiction of the Court. This appeal
deals with a procedural matter regarding the exercise of this special
jurisdiction.

  
What is the procedure to be adopted at the threshold stage of a writ
application seeking the invocation of the Court's discretionary powers under
Article 140? Sometimes a Rule makes it plain what the effect of non-observance
of the Rule is to be. More often it does not. It is a question of construction
by looking at the scheme and purpose of the relevant rules and deciding
whether dismissal is in the scheme of things or whether dismissal would amount
to an amendment,

**100**



alteration or revocation of the Rule as envisaged by Article 136 of the
Constitution. Rule 46 requires the petition to be supported by affidavit and
to be accompanied by original or duly certified copies of documents material
to the case in the form of exhibits. Clearly then, the burden of presenting a
proper application is on the party that seeks the intervention of the Court.
The procedure is specified for this threshold stage. The Rule regulates the
mode of enforcing a legal right. The Petitioner has to tender all relevant
material to the Court in order to invoke its jurisdiction. If he fails to do
this there is a failure to comply with a substantial aspect of the Rule. The
fact that the Court is empowered by Article 140 to inspect and examine the
record does not absolve the Petitioner of his duty to invoke jurisdiction
properly.



The Appellant's responsibilities are not over by simply filing a petition and
affidavit in the Court. A Court is not compelled to inspect and examine the
record. As a matter of fact, there is nothing on record to show that the Court
did inspect or examine the record in the instant case although it did call for
the record upon the motion of Appellant's Counsel. So the fact that the record
was subsequently made available to Court is not an excuse for failure to
comply with basic requirements of the Rule. To hold otherwise would lead to
unfairness. The Rule itself is a commonsense response to litigants wanting the
disturbance of an Order or Award. It is no more than a normal procedural step
deemed necessary to inform both Court and Respondents of the matters of
complaint and the matters relied upon to support the complaint. It is
consistent with ordinary practice. One cannot claim a right to proceed to the
next step without compliance with a valid invocation of jurisdiction in the
first place. Such would lead to uncertainty, unreasonableness and oppressive
results. In this sense the rule is mandatory. In this view of the matter
dismissal for want of compliance with necessary basics is an order that may be
made within the Rule, a necessary corollary to it and does not amount to an
amendment, alteration or revocation of the Rule approved by Parliament. The
Court here is only articulating the real scope of the Rule to give effect and
expression to it. This interpretation does not widen the ambit of the Rule.

**101**



Thus the question of obtaining the approval of Parliament to make an order of
dismissal does not arise.



I have enumerated salient facts both from the Petition filed before the Court
of Appeal and the order of the Court of Appeal which are important for the
disposal of this appeal. The contents of paragraph 15 of the aforesaid
Petition clearly state that the Award was bad in law and disclosed errors of
law in that -



(a) conclusions drawn from the primary evidence are perverse, and;



(b) the Arbitrator took into account irrelevant evidence to wit: the poor
performance of the 3rd Respondent in cross-examination and his admissions.



Upon the aforesaid averments clearly the proceedings wherein the 3rd
Respondent gave evidence and called two witnesses on his behalf and other
relevant documents should have been tendered to the Appeal Court as they are
highly relevant for its consideration.



This has not been done.



There is a passage in the Award that the Arbitrator took into account both the
oral and documentary evidence laid before him. This suggests that there was
important relevant material that ought to be considered by a Court exercising
writ jurisdiction but not laid before it. 'The order of the Court of Appeal
shows that that tribunal has pointed to this very circumstance as militating
against the Appellant's application for writ. There is no inconsistency
between the orders made by the Court of Appeal (supra). The preliminary
objection taken by Respondents was overruled on the first occasion as
Petitioner had insisted that his 10 documents were sufficient to enable the
Court to decide on issuance of a writ. On the second occasion according to the
Court, the Petitioner had sought to refer to contents of proceedings and
documents not tendered and strenuously opposed by Respondents. This fact is
confirmed by Counsel for Respondents before us. We see no reason not to accept
the record of events as contained in the Orders of the Court of  


**102**



Appeal (supra). No effort had been made by the Petitioners to seek permission
of the Court of Appeal to tender additional documents as they may have done
under Rule 50 - vide 1988. 1 SLR. 315 at 33(6) and no explanation for such
omission has been offered. Under rule 50 the Court of Appeal has discretionary
powers where appropriate to admit material not tendered with the petition. In
these circumstances the Court below was entitled to refuse to proceed further
with the application. Appellant's present submission that he could Proceed
upon the 10 documents tendered is contradicted by the facts and circumstances
placed before us. The order of dismissal was a proper order that the Court
could fairly have made. The order of the Court of Appeal dated 25.10.89 is
affirmed. The appeal is dismissed. The 3rd Respondent is entitled to his costs
both here and in the Court of Appeal.



This appeal arises from a dispute between employer and employee. The
Arbitrator's award was as far back as 1985. In the circumstances I think it
fair that the employee 3rd Respondent be paid interest on the aggregate sum of
Rs. 470,105/- awarded to him. The Appellants will therefore pay legal interest
on the said total sum awarded from date of Award to date of payment.



**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree

** **

**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree



_Appeal dismissed.  
  
Interest awarded._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1992/31.html_  

