##  Subbash Chandra Fernando v. Kapilaratne, Officer In Charge, Police
Station, Gampaha and Others - SLR - 305, Vol 1 of 1992 [1991] LKSC 31; (1992)
1 Sri LR 305 (2 August 1991)

**305**

**SUBBASH CHANDRA FERNANDO  
v.** **  
KAPILARATNE, OFFICER-IN-CHARGE, POLICE STATION,  
GAMPAHA AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT,  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.,  
M. D. H. FERNANDO, J. AND  
KULATUNGA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. 1/91  
02 AUGUST, 1991, AND 11 AND 26 SEPTEMBER, 1991

_     Fundamental Rights - Violation of fundamental rights under Articles 11,
13(1) and (2) - Excessive detention - Test to be applied to an order of
preventive detention._

**Held:**

(1) Detention for an excessive period and the circumstance that it was no
longer necessary to keep the detainee in detention to prevent him from acting
in any manner prejudicial to the national security or the maintenance of
public order will make the detention illegal.

(2) The Secretary is competent to make an order for preventive detention but
this should be on the basis of his subjective satisfaction as to the existence
of reasonable probability of the likelihood of the detainee acting in a manner
similar to his past acts and preventing him by detention from doing so. It may
or may not relate to an offence. Yet when such an order is challenged, the
mere production of the order may not be adequate. The court is competent to
review the order applying the test of reasonableness in the wide sense.

**Cases referred to:**

_1\. Breen v. Amalgamated Engineering Union (1971) QB175.  
_  
_2\. Hirdaramani v Ratnavale 75 NLR 67.  
_  
_3\. Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herath SC Application No. 27/88 SC Minutes of
06.04.90._

**APPLICATION** for infringement of fundamental rights.

_P. D. Gomes for petitioner._  
_  
A. R. N. Fernando, S.S.C. with Vijitha Malalgoda, S.C. for respondents._

_Cur adv vult._

306

10th December, 1991.  
**KULATUNGA, J.**

The petitioner is a Medical Practitioner with a MBBS degree from the
University of Ceylon. He was arrested on 19.07.89 on a complaint that he had
assaulted Dr. Gunatilaka, Surgeon, Base Hospital, Gampaha and obstructed the
carrying on of the service at the hospital in breach of Regulation 46(2) (a)
(i) of the Emergency Regulations. Thereafter he was detained at the Welikada
Prison on an order dated 20.07.89 under Regulation 19(2) (1R5). He remained in
such detention until 27.09.89 when a preventive detention order (8R1) was made
in terms of which it was directed that he be detained at the New Magazine
Prison, Welikada where he has been kept in continuous detention up to date.

The complaint against the petitioner was that he had assaulted Dr. Gunatilaka
twice on 19.07.89 first at the path lab, a private medical establishment, and
thereafter at the Base Hospital, Gampaha. Although he was arrested for such
conduct under Emergency Regulations, criminal proceedings were instituted on
12.04.90 in M.C. Gampaha case No. 98646 under the normal law. He was charged
on two counts with voluntarily causing hurt to Dr. Gunatilaka punishable under
s.314 of the Penal Code. On 01.10.90 the petitioner admitted the commission of
offences but without a formal plea of guilt and was ordered to pay Rs. 500/-
as State costs (Vide CP5).

The petitioner states that in consequence of representations made by him on
26.07.90 and 02.08.90 to the Advisory Committee established by Regulation 17
of the Emergency Regulations, the Committee recommended his release from
custody but this was not acted upon. He alleges that he has been detained
under Emergency Regulations and kept in continuous detention despite the
termination of the criminal proceedings against him because he happens to be
the brother-in-law of Rohana Wijeweera the late acknowledged leader of the
Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna, a political party that was proscribed; that whilst
he was in detention a Mercedez Benz motor car belonging to him was removed by
the 4th respondent (Senior Superintendent of Police); that the petitioner's
private residence was set on fire and his private nursing home extensively
damaged at the

307

instigation of the police; and that he himself has been subjected to numerous
assaults by prison officials.

This Court granted the petitioner leave to proceed for alleged violations of
the petitioner's rights under Articles 11, 13(l) and (2) of the Constitution.
The petitioner's version of the incident which led to his arrest is that when
he met Dr. Gunatilaka and questioned as to why Dr. Gunatilaka had failed,
though requested, to attend on a patient who was gravely ill and needed urgent
attention and was lying at the petitioner's private nursing home, Dr.
Gunatilaka was rude and assaulted him; whereupon he visited the Police Station
to make a complaint when he was arrested without being informed of the reason
for such arrest in breach of Article 13(1) of the Constitution. However, it is
clear from the notes of investigation (1R1) and the petitioner's statement to
the police (1R2) that the police had informed him of the charge against him;
and as such there has been no violation of Article 13(1).

As regards the detention order under Regulation 17(1), the affidavit of the
1st respondent, Headquarters Inspector, Gampaha during the relevant period,
shows that the fact that the petitioner was the brother-in-law of Rohana
Wijeweera is a circumstance which has weighed with the authorities. The
affidavit in support of the detention has been filed by the 20th respondent,
General Cyril Ranatunga, Secretary, Defence, with a supporting affidavit 20131
from L. M. Jayawardena, Senior Superintendent of Police. The 20th respondent
says that it was his predecessor in office General Attygalle who made the
order 8131 on an application made by. the Inspector General of Police after
considering the material including the material contained in 20R1. He adds
that the said order has been periodically reviewed by his predecessor in
office and himself.

The material urged against the petitioner in 20131 is -

(a) threatening the publisher of "Janadina" newspaper;

(b) organising an anti-government demonstration violating Emergency
Regulations;

(c) conducting lectures in support of the JVP;

308

(d) his vehicle has been used for JVP activities;

(e) inciting people to support JVP organizations;

(f) threatening prison staff whilst in detention with reprisals by the JVP;
and

(g) assaulting doctors at the Gampaha Hospital and the Dental Institute
Colombo.

Mr. Gomes, learned Counsel for the petitioner challenged the correctness or
the relevancy of these grounds.

As regards the material disclosed at (a) above, Mr. Gomes submits that the
truth as is borne out by the document CP4 is that the "Janadina" had in
February 1989 published a derogatory statement about the petitioner; that the
petitioner met the editor and questioned him about it and thereafter
complained to the Press Council successfully and obtained a direction on the
editor to publish a correction; that the demonstration referred to at (b)
above occurred on 29th July 1987 when the petitioner was proceeding to his
private nursing home and met a crowd on the road. It was during curfew hours.
The crowd was demonstrating against the signing of the Indo Sri Lanka Peace
Accord. He was arrested and detained until the emergency was lifted when he
was released; his prosecution under Emergency Regulations on account of that
incident ended with his acquittal on 31.01.91 in case No. 4066/89 by the High
Court of Colombo; in S.C. Application No. 7/89 SCM 03.05.91 he was awarded
compensation in a sum of Rs. 25,000/- for the infringement of his rights under
Article 11 of the Constitution during his said detention; that the petitioner
denies the allegations at (c), (d) and (e) above; that the threat to prison
staff referred to at (f) above is an incident which occurred in the prison
during the petitioner's detention; and that the alleged assault on a doctor at
the Dental Institute in Colombo referred to at (g) above also relates to an
incident during his detention.

Mr. Gomes submits that the petitioner was not indicted under Emergency
Regulations for the assault which occasioned his arrest

309

 presumably because the evidence did not warrant such indictment; that there
is no justification for his detention after the termination of his prosecution
before the Magistrate; that the decision of the Secretary in making the order
of detention is vitiated in that it is affected by irrelevant considerations
and the Secretary never had the opinion he claims to have had in making the
said order. _Mr. Gomes cites Breen v. Amalgamated Engineering Union_ (1) and
_Hirdaramani v. Ratnavale_ (2) in support. Mr. A. R. N. Fernando, learned
Senior State Counsel submits that even if the assault on Dr. Gunatilaka by
itself may not be adequate for making the impugned order, it is justified in
the background of the petitioner's conduct; that the Secretary has also taken
into consideration the petitioner's recent conduct in prison which is
unsatisfactory in continuing his detention; and that unless his conduct in
prison improves he cannot be released.

Whilst there is some substance in the criticism levelled against the material
urged in support of the detention order, it must be kept in mind that it is an
order for preventive detention which the Secretary is competent to make on the
basis of his subjective satisfaction as to the existence of "a reasonable
probability of the likelihood of the detenu acting in a manner similar to his
past acts and preventing him by detention from doing so ... It may or may not
relate to an offence". Shukla - The Constitution of India 7th ed. p.134. Yet
when such an order is challenged the mere production of the order may not be
adequate and this Court is competent to review the order applying "the test of
reasonableness, in the wide sense" as was held in the Divisional Bench
decision in _Wickremabandu v. Cyril Herath_ (3). Applying that test to the
facts of this case, I am unable to hold that the initial detention of the
petitioner is vitiated on the ground of irrelevant considerations. It is also
not possible to conclude that the Secretary never had the opinion he claims to
have had in making the order. I therefore hold that the order 8R1 was validly
made and the petitioner's rights under Article 13(2) have not been thereby
infringed. However, the Court has to consider whether the prolonged detention
of the petitioner under that order can be defended; but before I consider that
question I shall consider the alleged infringement of the petitioner's rights
under Article 11.

The petitioner alleges that on 21.09.90 after he came before this Court in
S.C. Application 7/89 referred to above certain officials

310

 assaulted him; the 7th respondent, jailor and the 8th respondent,
Superintendent of Prisons dealt two blows on his face; that on 23.09.90 the
9th and the 10th respondents, prison guards, assaulted him with wooden poles;
that on 20.11.90 the 18th respondent, jailor, assaulted him; that on 01.12.90
the 7th respondent, jailor and ten others assaulted him in ward No. 41 of the
General Hospital, Colombo in the course of which they broke his spectacles;
and the J.M.O. who examined him on 03.12.90 found injuries on his body; and
that on 10.12.90 the 15th and the 16th respondents, overseers of the Prison
Hospital, assaulted him with hands and wooden poles; and he was again referred
to the J.M.O. who examined him.

Medical reports submitted by the Assistant Judicial Medical Officer and the
Deputy Judicial Medical Officer, Colombo in compliance with directions given
by this Court tend to support the allegations of assault made by the
petitioner whilst the affidavits of the prison officials who are respondents
including medical officers attached to the Prison Hospital show that there had
been a progressive deterioration in the relations between the petitioner and
prison officials; and that certain incidents had occurred between them in the
course of which it is probable that some force was used on the petitioner.
However, the respondents do not admit having used force on him. I shall now
discuss this evidence.

The Asst. J.M.O. had examined the petitioner on 24.10.90. He gave a history of
assault by the 7th and the 8th respondents on 21.09.90 and by the 9th and the
10th respondents with poles and hands on 23.09.90. He complained of pain and
tenderness over the left side of chest. Dr. Vasantha Perera consultant
orthopaedic surgeon diagnosed the pain as being due to soft tissue injury. The
Deputy J.M.O. Colombo had examined the petitioner on 03.12.90. The petitioner
told him that on 01.12.90 the 17th respondent and ten others assaulted him
with clubs and kicked him on the lower abdomen when he was in ward No. 41 of
the General Hospital Colombo. The petitioner complained of chest pain and
difficulty in passing urine. He also complained that the assailants had
damaged his spectacles and dentures.

The Deputy J.M.O. found on him -

311

1\. Contusions of the upper and lower lids of the right eyelid. This could
have been caused when his spectacles were damaged.

2\. An abrasion of the inner aspect of the right wrist area. This could have
been caused by the handcuffs.

The Deputy J.M.O. next examined the petitioner on 12.12.90 when the petitioner
gave a history of assault by the 15th and the 16th respondents on 10.12.90.
The petitioner complained of pain in the chest and lower abdomen and
difficulty in passing urine. There were no external injuries.

The petitioner filed this application on 02.01.91. According to another report
by the Asst. J.M.O. who had examined the petitioner on 19.01.91, the
petitioner complained that on 05.01.91 he had been assaulted by the 15th
respondent and another jailor with hands and feet on his head, arms and
abdomen; further that he had been assaulted on 19.01.91 by male nurse Mahinda
on the head and shoulder with a wooden pole and hands; he was also kicked on
the abdomen. The Asst. J.M.O. observed tenderness of the left shoulder with
limitation of movement of the joint. He also had tenderness of the right lower
abdomen. He was shown to the consultant orthopaedic surgeon who prescribed
treatment. The patient was seen again on 06.02.91 and 23.02.91 when he showed
improvement.

The 7th and 8th respondents deny the alleged assault. They say that on
21.09.90 when the petitioner was taken to the High Court he requested that he
be taken without handcuffs. When this was not acceded to he became abusive and
made allegations against prison staff. The 9th, 10th, 15th and 18th
respondents deny the alleged assaults. The 16th respondent has not entered an
appearance. The 17th respondent says that on 01.12.90 at the General Hospital,
Colombo the petitioner attempted to snatch a gun from a police officer, hit
the 17th respondent and climbed a bed and became abusive to prison staff. This
respondent too denies having assaulted the petitioner.

The 6th respondent, the Commissioner of Prisons says that there were
complaints about the petitioner's unruly behaviour, the

312

 underlying cause of all complaints being the petitioner's objection to being
handcuffed when taken to Court. The 13th respondent Dr. Rani Fernando, the
Medical Officer Prisons says that the petitioner being a doctor demanded
others to prescribe him medicines, food and other facilities of his choice;
when these demands were not met he became abusive and refused treatment; once
he threatened her that by not acceding to his demands she would have to face
consequences at the hands of the J.V.P. The 14th respondent Dr.
Perimpanayagam, Senior Medical Officer Prisons describes the petitioner's
behaviour as unruly, irrational, abusive and violent; he says that the
petitioner once assaulted a male nurse who had to be warded at the General
Hospital in consequence; that Professor Sheriff recommended a psychiatrist's
opinion but the petitioner refused to be examined at the psychiatric clinic.

Upon a consideration of the evidence it is my finding that the petitioner's
complaints of assault are not fabrications but only a one sided version of
incidents with the prison staff in the course of which considerable force
appears to have been used on him. The use of such force is perhaps
unfortunate; but I cannot in all the circumstances hold that the petitioner
has been thereby subjected to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment. As such the alleged violation of Article 11 has not been
established.

As indicated earlier in this judgment I shall now consider the question of the
excessiveness of the detention. Can the petitioner be now regarded as being a
threat to national security or public order ? I am of the view that prolonged
incarceration extending over a period of two years has affected the petitioner
physically and mentally; further Professor Sheriff has recommended a
psychiatrist's opinion on him. The petitioner's private residence has been
burnt and destroyed; his private nursing home has been damaged, even though
there is no evidence that the police were responsible for it. His car has been
seized by the police. No order of requisition has been produced as authority
for such seizure. If the vehicle was seized for being used in connection with
subversive activity as alleged, no charge has been framed against anybody.
During the hearing before us, learned Senior State Counsel undertook to
release the vehicle. A report made to this Court by the agents for the vehicle
shows that it is presently unusable.

313

It is also relevant to note that at the time of the filing of this application
the aforesaid Advisory Committee had recommended the release of the
petitioner. The Secretary, Defence is however not bound by such
recommendation. By 12.06.91 this application was ready for argument when
Senior State Counsel undertook to explore the possibility of the petitioner's
release from custody. No adjustment could be effected; instead a submission
was made that the petitioner cannot be released unless his conduct in prison
improves. This is not a valid ground for extending the petitioner's detention.
He is not a convicted prisoner in respect of whom punishments including
imprisonment can be imposed for offences against prison discipline as may be
competent under Sections 79 and 80 of the Prisons Ordinance (Cap. 54).

The petitioner also informed us that his incarceration has prevented him from
seeking to migrate to the United Kingdom where his family is and where he is
eligible to practice his profession and for which he has facilities. Mr.
Gomes, his Counsel is not prepared to concede that the petitioner is in need
of psychiatric treatment. In all the circumstances, it cannot be said that it
is now necessary to keep him in detention to prevent him from acting in any
manner prejudicial to the national security or the maintenance of public
order. I hold that the detention order 8R1 is vitiated for excessiveness and
the same is invalid after 02.01.91 i.e. the date of this application and
accordingly grant a declaration that the petitioner's detention after that
date is violative of his rights under Article 13(2) of the Constitution. I
direct the 6th and the 20th respondents to release him from custody. I also
direct the State to pay him compensation in a sum of Rs. 9000/(Rupees Nine
Thousand) together with costs in a sum of Rs. 1500/(Rupees One Thousand Five
Hundred).

**BANDARANAYAKE J.** \- I agree.  
  
**M. D. H. FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Relief granted for excessive detention._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1991/31.html_  

