##  Sinnathuray v. Attiken - SLR - 161, Vol 1 of 1987 [1986] LKSC 31; (1987) 1
Sri LR 161 (26 November 1986)

**

161

SINNATHURAY  
v.  
ATTIKEN

**

SUPREME COURT.  
SHARVANANDA, C.J., TAMBIAH, J. AND L. H. DE ALWIS, J.  
S.C. No. 33/85. C.A. No. 923/75 (F).  
D.C. COLOMBO No. 2780/ZL  
MAY 29, 1986, JULY 1, 1986, AUGUST 5, 1986 AND OCTOBER 21, 1986.

_

Last Will - Settled agreement in testamentary proceedings for probate - Is
such agreement a lawful compromise which can be enforced? \- Co-executors -
Trust - Trust Ordinance, s. 54 - Purchase by trustee of trust property -
Purchase by executor of property of estate \- Trust for sale - Residuary
estate - Duties of an executor.

_

In testamentary proceedings instituted by one of two executors named in a Last
Will to prove the Last Will the dispute was settled and an agreement was
entered into to sign a conveyance in favour of the other co-executor in
respect of premises No. 3, Mile Post Avenue, Colombo 3.

When this agreement was sought to be enforced in a separate suit the co-
executor who had agreed to sign the conveyance refused to do so alleging that
by reason of fraud, mistake and misrepresentation, the agreement was invalid
and the executor being in the position of a trustee could not purchase
property belonging to the estate by an agreement with a co-executor. This was
sought to be met by contending that the agreement was one between co-heirs
acting in the capacity of residuary legatees and not between two co-executors.

**

Held :

**

Our law as regards executors and administrators is the English law. The rule
of English law is that a trustee is absolutely disabled from purchasing trust
property and this is embodied in s. 54 of our Trusts Ordinance.

Under our law a trustee and other persons who occupy fiduciary positions are
absolutely prohibited from purchasing the trust property: This is an
inflexible rule and is not founded on fraud on the part of the trustee. It is
a logical consequence of the position which he occupies. This rule is
independent of any questions of adequacy of price or unfairness or undue
advantage. This disability derives from his status and position and not from
his conduct in a particular case.

An executor occupies a fiduciary position. No executor can purchase property
belonging to the estate that he is administering. He cannot be vendor and
purchaser and there cannot be a conflict of duty and interest.

**162**

Purchase of trust property by a trustee from himself must be distinguished
from purchase by a trustee of his beneficiary's interest which is voidable but
liable to be set aside if there is any hint of an abuse of the trustee's
position or of undue influence exercised by him over the cestui que trust.

The duties of an executor consist in (1) the recovery and collection of the
assets of the deceased (2) payment of debts, estate duty and other
testamentary expenses and finally (3) payment and distribution of the legacies
in terms of the will.

"Residuary estate" means the assets which ultimately remain out of the estate
after payment of the testator's debts, funeral and testamentary expenses and
costs of the administration of the estate, the costs of the administration
suit and after payment of the legacies.

In the instant case the plaintiff, while still retaining the character of
executor and trustee, entered into the agreement to purchase the trust
property; he did not purport to purchase the half share of the other residuary
legatee.

The court will not exercise its extraordinary powers to compel specific
performance where to do so would involve a breach of trust. The sale agreement
which is sought to be enforced in this case infringes the rule that an
executor cannot purchase property entrusted to him for sale. The plaintiff is
not capable of contracting with his co-executor for the purchase of the
property in suit and a court of equity cannot lend its aid to enforce such a
contract.

**

Cases referred to:

**

(1) _In Re Boles v. British Land Companies Contract -_ [1902] 1 Ch. 244.  
_  
_ (2) _Thomas v. Allen -_ [1930] 1 Ch. 203.  
_  
_ (3) _Wright v. Morgan -_ [1926] AC 788.  
_  
_ (4) _Ex parte James -_ (1803) 8 Ves 337.  
_  
_ (5) _Mariam Beevi v. Ruqqiah Umma -_ (1955) 53 NLR 15, 17.  
_  
_ (6) _Malliya v. Ariyaratne -_ (1962) 65 NLR 145.  
_  
_ (7) _Bennyfield v. Baxter -_ (1886) 12 AC 167.  
_  
_ (8) _Holder v. Holder -_ [1968] 1 All ER 665, 677.  
_  
_ (9) _Rei Harvey v. Lambert -_ (1888) 58 LT 449.  
_  
_ (10) _Coles v. Trecothick -_ (1804) 9 Ves 234, 244.  
_  
_ (11) _Ex parte Lacey -_ (1802) 6 Ves 625  
_  
_ (12) _William v. Scott -_ [1900) AC 499, 508;  
_  
_ (13) _Parke v. Makenna -_ (1874) LR 10 Ch. 96.

**

APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_

H. L. de Silva, P.C._ with _Mahes Kanagasunderam, Chula de Silva,_ and _S.
Mahenthiran_ for the plaintiff-appellant.  

_

Dr. H. W. Jayewardene, Q.C._ with _J. V C. Nathanielsz_ and _Miss T
Keenawinna_ for respondent.

_

Cur. adv. vult.

_

**163**

November 26, 1986.  
**SHARVANANDA, C.J.

**

By her Last Will dated 24.1.1964 the mother of the plaintiff-appellant and the
defendant-respondent (hereinafter referred to as plaintiff and defendant
respectively) appointed the plaintiff and defendant co-executors of her Last
Will. The testator died on 18.3.1964. The defendant applied for probate. The
plaintiff opposed the application and challenged the Last Will on the ground
that it was not the act and deed of his deceased mother. On 19.5.66, the
plaintiff and defendant settled their differences and entered into Agreement
'D1 '. This document was tendered to court and the terms of settlement were
recorded by court on 19.5.66 and the record was signed by both the plaintiff
and the defendant. The terms of settlement are as follows:

(a) The respondent withdraws the objections to the petitioner's application
for probate of the Last Will No. 1284 dated 24.1.64 of which probate is filed
in court marked 'A',

(b) Probate of Will No. 1284 be granted to the executors mentioned in the Will
namely to Mrs. Agnes Margaret Sinnathuray Attiken and Edward Navaratnarajah
Sinnathuray who are the petitioner and respondent respectively;

(c) The petitioner admits that the business known as the Commercial Tutory
carried on at No. 46, Dematagoda Road, Colombo 9, does not form part of the
estate of the deceased;

(d) It is further agreed that the respondent should purchase premises bearing
assessment No. 3, Mile Post Avenue, Colombo 3, for Rs. 51,000 (Rupees Fifty
One Thousand only) only and which said sum of Rs. 51,000 is to be utilised in
paying off the debts due to the State Mortgage Bank on this property and the
balance, if any, left to be applied in payment of Estate Duty and the legacies
referred to in clause 5 of the Last Will;

(e) The petitioner further undertakes and agrees to sign the necessary
conveyance in favour of the respondent in respect of the said premises No. 3,
Mile Post Avenue, Colombo 3.

**164**

(f) The respondent agrees and undertakes to pay to the petitioner during her
lifetime a sum of Rs. 100 per mensem from date hereof;

(g) All moneys brought into court on account of rents of the premises
mentioned in the Will, subject to any claims by the Commissioner of Inland
Revenue and Estate Duty, will be divided among the devisees of the said Will.

(The defendant and the plaintiff respectively are the petitioner and
respondent referred to above).

The said Last Will, in terms of which the defendant and plaintiff were
appointed joint co-executors, was admitted to probate.

The said Last Will provided inter alia for three specific devises, namely-

(a) Premises No. 3 1/1, Mile Post Avenue, Colpetty-to the plaintiff ;

(b) Premises No. 3A, Mile Post Avenue-to Manoharan Prins Sinnathuray, a son of
the defendant.

(c) Premises 3/1, Mile Post Avenue-to Manoharan Rajkumar Sinnathuray, another
son of the defendant.

Clauses 5, 6 and 7 of the Last Will provided as follows:

Clause 5.-I direct and empower my executors if necessary to sell and convert
into money No. 3, Mile Post Avenue, Colpetty depicted as lot Bx in plan No.
2647 dated 17th June 1963 made by S. Rajendra, Licensed Surveyor and out of
the amount so realised pay the estate duty, the existing mortgage loans and
all the other liabilities of my estate and thereafter pay by the sale money or
alternative arrangement a sum of rupees five thousand (Rs. 5,000) to my
brother Emmanuel Joseph Peiries Pulle a sum of rupees three thousand (Rs.
3,000) to my sister Mrs. V. T. Chellatamby a sum of rupees two thousand (Rs.
2,000) to my brother Anthony Philip Joachim Pulle a sum of rupees three
thousand (Rs. 3,000) to George Attiken and remainder to be equally shared by
Edward Navaratnarajah Sinnathuray and Agnes Margaret Sinnathuray Attiken.

**165**

Clause 6.-I devise and bequeath my entire business known as the Commercial
Tutory carried on at No. 46, Dematagoda Road, Maradana together with the
entire equipment consisting of typewriters, furniture fittings and other
effects to Edward Navaratnarajah Sinnathuray my brother Emmanuel Joseph
Peiries Pulle and George Attiken equally provided that the said Emmanuel
Joseph Peiries Pulle shall not sell or assign his share to any one other than
the co-owners Edward Navaratnarajah Sinnathuray and Georgo Attiken and on his
death his share shall devolve on the said co-owners equally.

Clause 7.-I devise and bequeath my residuary estate both movable and immovable
to Edward Navaratnarajah Sinnathuray and Agnes Margaret Sinnathuray Attiken in
equal shares.

The plaintiff instituted this action on 13.03.1973 complaining that though he
had complied with all the terms and conditions of the settlement dated
19.05.1966 marked "D1" and had requested the defendant to execute a conveyance
of premises No. 3, Mile Post Avenue, Colpetty, for the agreed consideration,
in terms of the said Agreement, the defendant had wrongfully and unlawfully
failed and neglected to do so. He prayed inter alia, that the defendant be
ordered and directed to execute a conveyance of the premises No. 3, Mile Post
Avenue, Colombo 3.

By her answer dated 27.02.1974 the defendant challenged the validity of the
said Agreement that was sought to be enforced and stated that no valid or
enforceable contract was entered into between the parties. She said that the
Agreement was invalid because she was induced to sign the record of the said
date

a) by a fraud practised on her by the plaintiff;

(b) by mistake on her part, as to the nature and contents of the document she
was signing;

(c) by a misrepresentation made to her by the plaintiff and others in regard
to the terms of the said alleged Agreement.

The principal question which arose for determination in the trial was whether
the aforesaid Agreement was a lawful compromise which is capable of being
enforced. The trial judge held in the negative and held that the plaintiff
being an executor of the Last Will of the deceased was in the same position as
a trustee and could not therefore

    **166**

purchase any property belonging to the estate, by an agreement with a co-
executor. He dismissed the plaintiff's action. On appeal to the Court of
Appeal the judgment of the District Judge was affirmed. The plaintiff has now
preferred this appeal to this court.

Counsel for the plaintiff-appellant has submitted that upon a proper
construction of the Last Will it is beyond dispute that the plaintiff and
defendant as joint executors were not obliged to sell the premises No. 3, Mile
Post Avenue, Colpetty and could agree to make other arrangements for the
payment of estate duty, the mortgage loan and the legacies referred to in
clause 5 of the Last Will, instead of selling the property. In that event both
plaintiff and defendant were entitled to half share of the property as the
only persons entitled to the residuary estate, in terms of clause 7 of the
Last Will and were free to dispose their interest in the property in any
manner they chose as the legal owners and as heirs. It was also urged that
under the Agreement the plaintiff undertook to pay Rs. 51,000 which sum was to
be utilised for the payment of the estate duty, mortgage loan and the legacies
and the discharge of the other liabilities of the estate and had also
undertaken to make a payment of Rs. 100 per month to the defendant during her
lifetime.

The basic contention of the senior counsel for the plaintiff is that the said
agreement 'D1' was an agreement between two co-heirs, and not between two co-
executors and that it was in the capacity of residuary legatees that the
parties entered into the said agreement, for the sale of premises No. 3, Mile
Post Avenue, Colpetty. Reliance was placed on the case of In Re Boles v.
British Land Companies Contract (1) where it was held that apart from any
circumstance of doubt or suspicion, there is no rule of court that a person,
who has ceased for 12 years to be a trustee of an instrument which contains a
trust for sale cannot become a purchaser of property that was subject to the
trust. In that case Buckley, J., stated that-

"The principle that lies at the root of this matter is that a trustee for sale
owes a duty to his cestuis que trust to do everything in his power for their
benefit and it is therefore absolutely precluded from buying a trust property,
irrespective of questions of undervalue or otherwise, because he may be thus
induced to neglect his duty. Beyond that if he retires with a view to becoming
a purchaser so as to put himself in a position to do what otherwise would be
breach of trust, that would not do. But if he has retired and there is nothing
to

**167**

show that at the time of the retirement there was any idea of a sale, and in
fact there is no sale for 12 years after his retirement, is there anything to
prevent him from becoming a purchaser? I think not."

The rule of English Law that a trustee is absolutely disabled from purchasing
trust property is embodied in section 54 of our Trust Ordinance (Chap. 87). It
provides that

"No trustee whose duty it is to sell trust property, and no agent employed by
such trustee for the purpose of the sale may, directly or indirectly, buy the
same or any interest therein on his own account or as agent for a third
person."

Thus under our law a trustee and other persons who occupy fiduciary positions
are absolutely prohibited from purchasing the trust property. This is an
inflexible rule and is not founded upon any question of fraud on the part of
the trustee. It is a logical consequence of the position which he occupies.
This rule is independent of any questions of inadequacy of price or unfairness
or undue advantage. This disability derives from his status and position and
not from his conduct in a particular case.

Clauson, J., in Thomas v. Allen (2) at 215 states the principle thus

"The rule of universal application is that an executor and trustee having
duties to discharge of a fiduciary nature towards the beneficiaries under the
will.... shall not be allowed to enter into any engagement in which he has or
can have personal interest conflicting, or which possibly may conflict with
the interest of those whom he is bound to protect."

"Equity will not allow a person who is in a position of trust, to carry out a
transaction where there is a conflict between his duty and his interest."
Wright v. Morgan (3).

An executor occupies a fiduciary position. No executor can therefore purchase
property belonging to the estate that he is administering. He is bound to do
everything in his power, for the benefit of the estate and therefore is
absolutely precluded from buying assets of the estate which he is
administering by himself or with co-executor, irrespective of undervalue or
otherwise.

The rule is a rule of general policy, to prevent the possibility of fraud and
abuse.

**168**

In Ex parte James (4) Lord Eldon observed

"This doctrine as to purchase by trustees, assignees, and persons having a
confidential character, stands much more upon general principle than upon the
circumstances of any individual case. It rests upon this, that the purchaser
is not permitted in any case, however honest the circumstances; the general
interest of justice requiring it to be destroyed in every instance; as no
court is equal to the examination and ascertainment of the truth in much the
greater number of cases."

The strictness with which the rule is applied is well illustrated by the
decision of the Privy Council in Wright v. Morgan (supra) (3). A testator left
the residue of the estate comprising land and stock on it, on trust to sell
and divide the proceeds amongst the widow, his sons and daughters. He
appointed his widow and his sons 'H' & 'D' to be his executors in trust. There
was a clause in the will postponing public sale until the property had been
offered at valuation to 'H' and refused by him. After the testator's death 'D'
purchased "H's share in the estate together with the option to purchase the
trust estate. Thereafter 'D' resigned his trusteeship after agreeing to
purchase the trust estate, but before completion of the sale. The Privy
Council refused to allow this transaction to stand, as it violated the rule
invalidating purchase of the trust property by a trustee.

Counsel for the appellant submitted that purchase of an estate by an executor
is not absolutely void but it is only voidable, according to Roman Dutch Law.
Our Law as regards executors and administrators, however is the English Law.
The English concept of Executorship and Administratorship has been adopted
into our law and it is too late in the day to go back to the Executor under
the Roman Dutch Law. Vide Mariam Beevi v. Ruqqiah Umma (5) and Malliya v.
Ariyaratne (6).

It was further submitted by President's Counsel that the principle that an
executor cannot purchase an asset of the estate from another executor without
the permission of court does not apply where both the executors are heirs of
the deceased, and one executor sells the asset bequeathed to him to the other
executor, there he sells qua owner of the asset. He further urged that clause
5 of the will does not contain a direction or mandate to sell but that it
imposes only a charge

**169**

and that it need not be sold when in the judgment of the executors it was not
necessary to sell as funds could be found otherwise. Counsel for the defendant
on the other hand submitted that clause 5 imposed on the executors a trust for
sale and that legal title had been vested by clause 5 on the executors to
enable them to carry out the trust for sale; the plaintiff and the defendant
were trustees for sale and it was in discharge of that duty that they entered
into the agreement to sell (P 1) : the plaintiff was purchasing trust property
and not any part of the residuary estate that was free of the trust.

The principle underlying the law against purchase of trust property by a
trustee is that a man who undertakes to act for another in any matter, cannot
in the same matter act for himself. This rule applies in a strict form not
only to trustees strictly so called, it applies to all who though differing in
name are invested with the like fiduciary character, such as executors or
administrators Bennyfield v. Baxter (7).

The principle of equity that a trustee may not purchase a part of the trust
estate rests on two reasons-first that a man may not be both vendor and
purchaser, secondly there must not be conflict of duties and interest. A
purchase by a trustee of the trust property is voidable at the instance of any
beneficiary under the trust-Holder v. Holder (8). However honest and fair the
sale may be a "cestui que trustee" has an absolute right to have the
conveyance set aside within a reasonable time after he discovers the
circumstances. It matters not whether the purchase by the trustee was for
himself alone, as sole trustee or as some co-trustee. Rei Harvey v. Lambert
(9), Wright v. Morgan (supra) (3).

Purchase of trust property by a trustee from himself must be distinguished
from purchase by a trustee of his beneficiary's beneficial interest. Unlike
the former, where the trustee is both buyer and seller the latter will not
always be voidable. Certainly it will be watched by the court with the utmost
diligence. Coles v. Trecothick (10) per Lord Eldon, L.C., and is liable to be
set aside if there is any hint of an abuse of trust position or of undue
influence exercised by him over the cestui que trust.

With regard to such purchase by trustees from themselves (as distinguished
from purchase from their beneficiaries) the doctrine stands much more on
principle than upon the circumstances of any individual case. It rests upon
this, that the purchase is not permitted,

**170**

in any case, however honest the circumstances be, the general interest of
justice requiring it to be destroyed in every instance, because no court is
equal to the examination and ascertainment of the truth.

"The rule I take it to be this; not that a trustee cannot buy from his cestui
que trust, but that he shall not buy from himself"-Per Lord Eldon in Ex pane
Lacey (11).

A trustee for safe of trust property cannot sell to himself William v. Scott
(12). A trustee cannot adopt for his own benefit an executory contract to
purchase to which he is a party as vendor-Parke v. Makenna (13).

Under the terms of the Last Will the specific devises referred to in clauses
2, 3 & 4 vested in the legatees on the death of the testator. The testatrix
bequeathed the residuary estate to the plaintiff and defendant. "Residuary"
estate means the assets which ultimately remain out of the estate after the
payment of the testator's debts, funeral and testamentary expenses and the
costs of the administration of the estate, the costs of the administration
suit and after payment of the legacies.

The plaintiff and defendant in terms of clause 7 of the Last Will could become
equally entitled to the residuary estate only after the discharge of the
obligations referred to in clause 5. The payment of the debts and legacies
referred to in the said clause are antecedent to the ascertainment of the
residuary estate.

The duties of an executor consist in (1 ) the recovery and collection of the
assets of the deceased (2) payment of debts, estate duty and other
testamentary expenses and finally (3) payment and distribution of the legacies
in terms of the Will. It is not disputed that there was no money in the estate
available for the payment of the estate duties, mortgage loans and other
monetary legacies referred to in clause 5 of the Will. Hence it was necessary
to sell and convert into money No. 3, Mile Post Avenue, Colpetty, as provided
for by clause 3 of the Will. The sale Was part of the process of realising the
estate and payment of the monies referred to in clause (3). It is significant
that in clause 'D' of the agreement between the parties it is provided that

"It is further agreed that the respondent should purchase premises bearing
Assessment No. 3, Mile Post Avenue, for Rs. 51,000 only and the said sum of
Rs. 51,000 is to be utilised in

**171**

paying off debts due to the State Mortgage Bank on this property and the
balance, if any left to be applied in payment of estate duty and the legacies
referred to in clause 5 of the Last Will."

The motivation for the sale of the said premises is clear; it was to pay the
debts and legacies as directed by the testatrix; until that direction was
complied with the "residuary estate" referred to in clause 7 of the Last Will
could not be identified. The stage was not reached where it could be said that
the premises had vested in the residuary legatees for them to deal with that
property as residuary legatees.

It is relevant to note that according to paragraph 8 of the plaint, in terms
of the agreement of contract, the plaintiff agreed to purchase and the
defendant agreed to sell and convey the entire premises. The prayer of the
plaintiff is that the defendant be ordered and directed to execute a
conveyance of the entire premises and not her half share of the said premises
which she might get as residuary legatees. The plaint makes it clear that by
the agreement P1, the plaintiff was not seeking to purchase the share or
rights of the beneficiary under the Will. The plaintiff, while still retaining
the character of executor and trustee, entered into the agreement to purchase
the trust property; he did not purport to purchase the half share of the other
residuary legatee.

The court will not exercise its extraordinary powers to compel specific
performance where to do so would involve a breach of trust. The sale agreement
which is sought to be enforced in this case infringes the rule that an
executor cannot purchase property entrusted to him for sale. The plaintiff is
incapable of contracting with his co-executor for the purchase of the property
in suit and a court of equity cannot lend its aid to enforce such a contract.
The plaintiff's action has therefore to be dismissed.

I affirm the judgment of the Court of Appeal and dismiss the appeal with
costs, in all the courts.

**

TAMBIAH, J. -** I agree.  

**

L. H. DE ALWIS, J. -** I agree.

_Appeal dismissed.

_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1986/31.html_  

