##  Jeganathan, G. v. Attorney General and Others - SLR - 294, Vol 1 of 1982
[1982] LKSC 31; (1982) 1 Sri LR 294 (23 February 1982)

#  294

#  

#  SUPREME COURT  
  
G. Jeganathan

**v.**

**Attorney ‑General and Others**



_S.C. Appeal No. 12/82 ‑Fundamental Rights_



_Constitution Articles 126 and 127 (3). Supreme Court Rules 65. Admission of
oral evidence. Violation of Fundamental Rights. Torture cruel or inhuman
treatment ‑ Prevention of Terrorism ‑(Temporary Provisions) Act No 48 of
1979._



P. was detained at Panagoda Army cantonment under an order of Minister of
Defence under the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act. The
petitioner alleged torture and cruel and inhuman treatment.



The petitioner in order to prove the allegation sought to lead oral evidence
before Supreme Court in terms of Rule 65 of Supreme Court.



_Held 1)_ Petitioner had failed to make application to the Court to obtain an
affidavit from the witness in the same way as it was done for obtaining the
petitioner's affidavit. No permission to lead oral evidence could be given in
the absence of adequate reason for doing so.



2) On the basis of the affidavit and the subsequent conduct of petitioner, it
was difficult to accept as true the petitioner's story.



#  295



**APPLICATION** complaining of violation of Fundamental Rights.



Before: **          **Hon Weeraratne J

                   Hon Victor Perera J., and 

                   Hon. Soza J.



Counsel: ****_      V. S.A. Pullenayagam_ with _R. Srinivasan_ ,

_                    S.C. Chandrathasan, C.V. Vivekananda _

                   and _Miss Mangalam Kanapathipillai_

                   instructed by _T. Pakianathan_ for 

                   petitioner.

> > _S. H. Silva, D. S. G_. with _Suri Ratnapala_
>>

>> S. C. instructed by _T. G. Gooneratne_ , S.A

>>

>> for the 1st to 3rd respondents.

> > _K. N. Choksy, SAAL_ with _D. H. N. Jayamaha_
>>

>> instructed by _Messrs. Silva_ and _de Mendis_

>>

>> for 4th and 5th respondents.



Argued on: **    **18th March, 1982.

_Cur. adv. vult._



Decided on:  8.4.82



The motion of Counsel for petitioner to call oral evidence is refused. Order
in the main petition is reserved.



**WEERARATNE J.**



This is an application of the 10th March 1982 under Article 126 of the
Constitution made by the, Petitioner, one G. Jeganathan presently detained in
the Army Prison in the Army Cantonment at Panagoda, under an order made by the
second respondent under the Prevention of terrorism Act (Temporary Provisions)
Act No. 48 of 1979. The Petitioner in his application alleges that he was
subjected to torture and cruel inhuman and degrading treatment and
punishments. He further states that for a proper adjudication of the matters
in issue in these proceedings it is expedient inter alia that this Court hears
and takes oral evidence of witnesses on oath in regard to the alleged acts.
Affidavits and counter affidavits were filed on behalf of the petitioner and
the respondents respectively. In this connection



**296**



we heard the submissions of learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner and
the five respondents.



Mr. Pullenayagam, on behalf of the Petitioner, submitted that this Court has
exclusive jurisdiction wide and unfettered to permit an application of this
nature. He referred to Article 126 of the Constitution, which deals with the
subject of "Fundamental rights, jurisdiction and its exercise , wherein it is
stated:‑



(1) "The Supreme Court shall have sole and exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
determine any question relating to the infringement or imminent infringement
........... by executive or administrative action of any fundamental right
..............."



it was submitted by Counsel that this Court consequently has original
jurisdiction to hear evidence and not merely receiving evidence, having regard
to the ordinary meaning of the words "hear and determine". Counsel further
submitted that under Article 127(2) the Supreme Court has power in an appeal
to call for and admit evidence. Mr Sarath Silva, Deputy Solicitor General,
submitted that there was no reference in the relevant papers as to who the
witnesses are. Counsel for the Petitioner stated that the complaint is in
regard to the events of the 6th February, 1982 and that his witnesses are
numbers 1, 3 and 11 referred to in the affidavit of Mr T. Pakianathan
Attorney‑at‑Law at (paragraph 16). The Deputy Solicitor General continuing his
submissions stated that he came ready to meet the Motion of the Petitioner
which does not mention any names, and further that, in the statement filed
there was no reference to witnesses and that even in the Petitioner's
affidavit dated 23rd February 1982, no names of witnesses were given. In this
connection the Deputy Solicitor General submitted that there were no names of
any witnesses given by the petitioner to his Attorney‑at‑Law at the earliest
opportunity Further, the petitioner's affidavit has not been filed, and there
was only a handwritten document (X4). Thus we find that the Petitioner has not
disclosed matters such as the names of witnesses in the first intimation to
Court. It was submitted that in the ordinary course evidence would not be
allowed to be led in the manner sought to be done by Counsel for the
petitioner. The Deputy Solicitor General submitted that there was no reference
to the giving of evidence anywhere in the relevant Articles of the
Constitution and that the was only a reference to affidavits. He conceded,
however, that in



#  297



very exceptional circumstances, as for instance in order to clarify an
affidavit, the Court could permit evidence to be led. However, on the facts of
this case he submitted that the petitioner has not made out any special
reasons for his application.



Mr. Choksy in the course of his submissions stated that in regard to
fundamental rights, evidence should be placed before Court by the petitioner,
but not oral evidence. Even if the Court had the power to receive oral
testimony, the Court would not exercise that power unless the petitioner finds
it impossible to place such material before Court by way of affidavit. The
date of the handwritten petition (X4) is 6th February 1982, i.e., the very day
of the alleged torture. In paragraph 5 it is alleged that the petitioner was
ordered by an Army Officer, whose name he is unaware of, to wash and clean the
bathroom of the detainees. The petitioner did as he was told. A few minutes
later Corporal Gunasekera, the 4th respondent, is said to have escorted the
petitioner and ordered him to wash and clean out the Army Officers' toilets,
which the petitioner refused to do. In consequence, according to him, he was
subjected to the alleged torture referred to in paragraph 8. Learned Counsel's
submission in regard to this episode is that not a single witness is referred
to in the petition as being present at the time of the alleged acts of torture
complained against, nor is there any averment on this point.



In support of his objection to Mr Pullenayagam 's application, Mr Choksy
referred us to Rule 65 of the Supreme Court Rules which sets out the procedure
applicable to Applications under Article 126. He referred in particular to
Rule 65(l)(c) and Rule 65(5) which read as follows,



_Rule 65_ (l): "Where any person applies to the Supreme Court by a petition in
writing for relief or redress in respect of infringement or of an imminent
infringement of any Fundamental Right by Executive or administrative Action in
terms of Article 126(2) of the Constitution he shall: ‑



> (a) ........................................
>
> (b) .........................................
>
> (c) support his petition by an affidavit and other documentary material
> available to him;



#  298





> (d) ...............................
>
> (e) ................................
>
> (f) ....................................

(2) .....................................



(3) ........................................



(4) ...................................



(5) In proceedings held in the exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
126(l) of the Constitution, the Court may so conduct its proceedings and the
duration of oral submission so as to hear and finally dispose of the petition
within the time prescribed by Law."



Counsel submitted that the Court was empowered by Rule 65(5) to regulate the
proceedings in an application under Article 126, and the Court would not
ordinarily permit oral evidence to be led unless the petitioner could satisfy
Court that there was good reason why the evidence in question could not have
been made available by the petitioner to Court in the form of affidavit. He
submitted that the petitioner must show that the evidence in question was
beyond his power to place before the Court by way of affidavit. As an example,
he gave the instance of a petitioner being unable to procure an affidavit
because the witness in question was a public officer who was not prepared to
furnish an affidavit to the petitioner; or, where relevant documents are in
the possession of a third‑party who was not prepared to make the same or
copies thereof available to the petitioner. Such was not the case here. He
also submitted that the words "material available to him (petitioner)"
appearing in Rule 65(l)(c) supports his contention.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that affidavits of eye witnesses
to the alleged torture practised on the petitioner could not be promptly
placed before the Court because they encountered difficulty in obtaining a
Justice of the Peace who has power to perform the duties of his office in the
Panagoda Camp area. Counsel for the respondents submitted that if there was
any evidence to be placed before the Court, then, upon an appropriate motion
filed in Court their statements could have been placed before the Court which
could take cognizance of the matters referred to therein under the Supreme
Court Rules 65(5) so as to dispose of the matter. An Application was made to
this Court to make a J. P available to attest



#  299



the petitioner's affidavit dated 23rd February 1982, but the same was not done
in respect of the witnesses now sought to be called, although they are held in
detention themselves at the Panagoda Cantonment. It seems to me that when a
witness is available to the petitioner, an application should have been made
to this Court to obtain his affidavit in the same way as was done for the
obtaining of the petitioner's affidavit. No such effort was made. It is for
this Court to decide the question of hearing oral evidence, on being satisfied
there is adequate reason for so doing.



On the material placed before us and having regard to the submissions made by
learned Counsel and the reasons stated above, we refused the application made
on behalf of the petitioner to lead the oral evidence of witnesses.



Learned Counsel for the petitioner next addressed us on the substantive
matters in issue as alleged in paragraph 5,6,7 and 8 of the petition dated 6th
February 1981 (marked X4). He alleges that on the above date at 6.30 a. m he
was ordered by an Army Officer, of whose name he is unaware, to wash and clean
the bathroom of the detainees, which he did as ordered. He then returned to
his room. A few minutes later Corporal Gunasekera (the 4th respondent) ordered
him to come out and escorted him to the toilets used by the Army Officers and
directed him to clean and wash them. Corporal Ratnayake (the 5th respondent)
also came and gave him the same order. The petitioner states that he refused
to comply, whereupon he was subjected to the acts of torture, cruel inhuman
and degrading treatment and punishments referred to in paragraph 8(a) to (y)
of X4. In regard to the alleged degrading treatment relating to the toilets,
paragraph 12 of the affidavit of the 4th respondent Gunasekera is relevant. He
states therein that he has no authority to take the detainees out of their
cells except on the directions of his superiors. Further, the petitioner is
permitted to be taken out of his cell only under the guard of the Sergeant
Major in charge, or the Sergeant in charge. The petitioner and other detainees
are kept in one section of the Detention Barracks whilst the other section
housed the Administration Branch and Barracks. _Both sections are separated by
a strong iron door._ The Detention Branch is under a Commandant who serves
under the Commanding Officer, headquarters. One has to go from the cells of
the detainees through the iron door to get to the toilets of the staff. There
are permanent civilian employees

#  

#  300



engaged in keeping the said toilets clean. The 5th respondent Ratnayake in his
affidavit states that the petitioner and other detainees are allowed to go out
of their cells only in exceptional circumstances , ­and only with the
permission of the Commandant according to the directions of his superiors.
Both the 4th and 5th respondents completely deny the allegations made against
them by the petitioner. Lieutenant a Dharmaratne, the Commandant of the
Detention Barracks, states in his affidavit (3R2) that he visits each cell in
the morning and speaks with each of the detainees, including the petitioner.
He received no complaint from him or anyone else regarding acts of torture
degrading treatment, nor were the clothes of the petitioner torn, when he saw
him on the 6th morning. Sergeant Perera, the Duty Sergeant attached to the
staff, providing security to the Detention Barracks, was on duty from 5 a.m on
5th February '82 to 9 a.m 6th February '82, In his affidavit (3R3) he avers
that the petitioner was not taken out of the buildings holding them, or past
the iron door, the keys of which were in his personal custody. He did not see
any acts of torture or degrading treatment alleged to have been committed by
the 4th and 5th respondents. The Commander of the Sri Lanka Army (the 3rd
respondent) states in his affidavit that upon receiving notice of the
petitioner's application to this Court, he caused inquiries to be made from
the Officers in charge of the Detention Barracks and that the facts that they
have disclosed are set out the affidavits (3R1), (3R2), (3R3), (3R4) and
(3R5). The Commander specifically states that if the acts alleged to have been
committed by the 4th and 5th respondents are proved, they would be dealt with
according to military law. Counsel for the petitioners point that no details
have been given by the Army Commander in regard to the matters adverted to by
him in paragraph 6 of his affidavit was countered by Mr Sarath Silva, Counsel
for the respondents who submitted that the affidavits 3R1 to 3R5 give the full
picture of the part played by the said Officers on that day of the alleged
degrading treatment and torture. Learned Counsel for the petitioners stressed
that there is no affidavit from the persons who cleaned all the toilets. This
appears, to say the least, an unpractical suggestion in a complex like the
Army Cantonment at Panagoda. On the question whether there is any truth that
the petitioner was taken out of the heavy iron door in the setting of the
affidavits sworn to by the relevant Officers in charge of the Detention
Barracks, the 4th and 5th respondents affidavits are strongly supported by
Sergeant Weerasinghe's affidavit (3R1), paragraphs 6 and 7, by paragraphs 5 of
the Army

#  

#  301



Commander's affidavit (3R2), Duty Sergeant Perera's affidavit (3R3), paragraph
5. The Court is asked to dismiss these averments in one sweep. Five lawyers
(other than Attorney‑at‑Law Sivasithamparam) had access to the petitioner on
the 6th of February 1982. In the handwritten petition (X4) the petitioner sets
out the various acts of physical assault and torture inflicted on him
described in paragraph 8(a) to (f) It is alleged, inter alia, that the two
Corporals assaulted him with fists and steel handcuffs. They dashed the head
of the petitioner and attempted to strangle him by squeezing his neck. They
raised his arms and handcuffed them at a height which required him to stand on
his toes, for about an hour. They threw his belongings and scolded him in
obscene language.



One of the lawyers named T. Pakianathan who met the petitioner on the 6th
filed an affidavit dated 8th February 1982. If the petitioner was assaulted
and tortured in the manner just described, would he not have shown signs of
torture to the five lawyers, and particularly to lawyer T. Pakianthan? The
injuries should have been apparent if there was an assault with steel
manacles, etc. They would have observed the torn clothes which he was wearing,
which according to him were the only clothes left. Any interested person who
met the petitioner on this day in this condition would surely have made an
application to have him given medical attention, if he actually saw the
petitioner's condition. The petitioner would not have hesitated to show these
lawyers the injuries, if he had any.



It is significant that a motion (X2) was filed by the petitioner in the Court
of Appeal initially on 11.12.81 in order to get the petitioner examined by the
Judicial Medical Officer. Strangely this application has not been supported to
this date, although it is recorded therein,



"I further move that this application be listed for support on the 16th
December 1981."



One would surely expect a lawyer, among the four others who saw the petitioner
on the 6th February 1982 to have supported this motion in the Court of Appeal
with the material he had, even sometime in February 1982, if he had actually
seen the injuries the Petitioner had on his person as a result of the alleged
acts of physical torture. The absence of any such step, together with the lack
of any statement in the affidavit of Mr Pakianathan that he observed or

#  

#  302



was shown any injury by the petitioner when he met him on the 6th February,
and the lack of any affidavits to that effect from the other lawyers who
accompanied Mr Pakianathan, militate strongly against our being able to accept
the petitioner's complaint as being true. The petitioner's allegations against
the 4th and 5th respondents, if proved, will carry with them serious
consequences for these respondents. Furthermore, the allegations are of a very
serious nature. They must therefore be strictly proved. This degree of cogency
is seriously lacking in these proceedings, which thus must fail.



The application of the Petitioner is for the above reasons refused.



**VICTOR PERERA J.** ‑ I agree.



**SOZA J** ‑ I agree.



_**Application refused**_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1982/31.html_  

