##  Land Reform Commission v. Grand Central Limited - SLR - 250, Vol 1 of 1981
[1981] LKSC 31; (1981) 1 Sri LR 250 (16 September 1981)

**250**

**LAND REFORM COMMISSION  
v.  
GRAND CENTRAL LIMITED**

**SUPREME COURT  
SAMARAKOON, C. J.  
ISMAIL, J., WEERARATNE, J., SHARVANANDA, J.,  
AND WANASUNDERA, J.  
S. C. APPEALS NO. 36/81 and 37/81  
C. A. (LA) NO. 20/81  
D. C. COLOMBO 14125/L  
JULY 27, 28, 29, 30 AND  
AUGUST 3, 1981.  
**  
_Constitutional Law-Fundamental right to practise Profession - Right of
Attorney General and State Counsel to appear in private capacity -Article
14(1) (g) of Constitution - Section 41 of Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978­  
_  
The right to be heard in a Court is a right conferred on the party to the
proceeding. It is not a right conferred on the attorney-at-Law, It is open to
an attorney-at-law to appear for the party litigant and to exercise his
client's right to be heard on his behalf. 'entitlement' follows and is
dependent on the 'right' of the party. They are two different concepts.
Although the Attorney-General and the Legal Officers of his Department h been
granted permission to engage in private practice such arrangements between
employer and employee cannot affect the issue if in fact there are legal
constraints on Attorney-General engaging in private practice.  
  
The Attorney-General is the Chief Legal Officer and adviser to the State and
then to the sovereign and is in that sense an officer of the public. The
Attorney-General this country is the Leader of the Bar and the highest Legal
Officer of the State. As Attorney-General he has a duty to the Court, to the
State and to the subject to be wholly detached, wholly independent and to act
impartially with the sole object of establish the truth. That image will
certainly be tarnished if he takes part in private litigation arising out of
private disputes. No Attorney-General can serve both the State and private
litigant.  
  
**Cases referred to:  
**  
_(1) In the matter of a Proctor of the Supreme Court (1927) 30 N L R 65, 70  
  
(2) 0' Toole v. Scott [1965] 2 All ER 240, 243  
  
(3) Collin v. Hicks [1831] 2 B & Ad. 1290  
  
(4) Simus v. Moore [1970] 3 All ER 1,3  
  
(5) Le mesurier v. Layard (1898) 3 N L R 227, 230  
_  
**Appeal** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_C. Thiagalingam Q.C. with K M. M. B. Kulatunga Acting Solicitor General and
S. Ratnapala_ State Counsel for defendant-petitioner-petitioners.  
  
_H. W. Jayewardene Q.C. with H. L. de Silva, Romesh de Silva, and Lakshman_
Per for Plaintiff-respondent.

**251**

_A. C. de Zoysa with George Candappa and Siva Rajaratnam_ (on notice) for Bar
Associa­tion of Sri Lanka.

_Cur. adv. vult._

September 16, 1981.  
  
**SAMARAKOON, C. J.  
**  
Mr. Siva Pasupati the Attorney-General of Sri Lanka, appeared . in this case
at its hearing in the Court of Appeal and marked his appearance as private
Counsel for the Land Reform Commission (hereinafter referred to as the
Defendant) and not in his official capacity as Attorney-General of the
country. Two State Counsel appeared with him and their appearance too was
marked in the same manner by Mr. Pasupati. Mr. Pasupati was denied a right of
audience by the Court of Appeal as that Court was of the opinion that he could
only appear in his official capacity and not in his private capacity. He has
not chosen to complain to this Court, or assert any right claimed by him
either by way of applica­tion or affidavit, although this Court enrolled him
and he now holds the exalted positions of Attorney-General of Sri Lanka and
Leader of the Sri Lanka Bar. Therein lies a tragedy. Instead, his client, the
Defendant, has sought to appeal to this Court, osten­sibly on the plea that it
has been denied the services of Counsel of its choice, and now appearing by
Senior Queen's Counsel has submitted as his only argument that Mr. Pasupati
has been denied his fundamental right of practising his profession, that he
had a right to appear as plain Attorney-at-Law and be granted the right of
audience by the Court of Appeal and that the Court of Appeal in denying him
the right of audience infringed the fundamental right of Mr. Pasupati as a
lawyer conferred on him by Article 14(1)(g) of the 1978 Constitution and it
also committed a breach of Section 41 of the Judicature Act No. 2 -of 1978. It
is the hand of Esau but the voice of Jacob. But perhaps I should begin at the
beginning  
  
On 21. 1. 1981 Grand Central Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as the plaintiff)
instituted proceedings in the District Court of Colombo against the defendant
praying for an order directing the defendant to hand over to the Plaintiff the
lands described in the schedule to the plaint and for an interim injunction
restraining the Defendant and its servants and agents from interfering with
the Plaintiff's right of management of the said lands. The learned Additional
District Judge issued an interlocutory order coupled with an enjoining order
of restraint on the Defendant. On 6-2-81 the Defendant applied inter alia for
a discharge of the enjoining order which application was refused by the
District Court by its

**252**

order of 20-1-81. The Defendant then appealed against that refusal to the
Court of Appeal. It filed two applications - one for leave to appeal to the
Court of Appeal (No. 20/81) and another to revise the order of refusal (No.
21/81). When these applications were taken up for hearing Mr. H. W.
Jayewardene, Q.C. marked his appearance with his Juniors for the Plaintiff and
Mr. Siva Pasupati marked his appearance with his Juniors for the Defendant. To
a pointed question by Mr. Jayewardene, Mr. Siva Pasupati stated that he and
his Juniors (who were all State Attorneys) were appearing in their private
capacities as Attorneys-at-Law and not in their official capacities of
Attorney-General and State Attorney respectively. Thereupon Counsel for
Plaintiff took objection to the Attorney-General appearing in his private
capacity stating that he could only appear in his official capacity as
Attorney-General. It is not clear whether the objection included the State
Attorneys but that does not matter now because the order of the Court of
Appeal refers only to the Attorney-General. It held that the Attor­ney-General
cannot appear for a litigant in his private capacity and can only enter an
appearance, if at all, in his official capacity as Attorney-General. He could
therefore not be heard on behalf of the Defendant in his private capacity as
Attorney-at-Law. The Defendant sought permission from the Court of Appeal to
appeal to this Court which application on was refused. This Court has granted
the Defendant special leave to appeal to this Court in both cases. The appeals
in S.C. No. 36/81 and No. 37/81 were taken together for hearing and this order
of mine covers both appeals.  
  
At the outset I desire to deal with a minor bone of contention. Mention has
been made to the Court of Appeal by Mr. Pasupati suggesting that Mr. Pasupati
and his Juniors were not appearing at their own volition but were doing so on
the direction of the President of the Republic. There is no express record of
it in the Court of Appeal record. However I find the following statement in
the written submissions of the Defendant filed in the Court of Appeal:-  
  
"The Court has been informed from the Bar that the Attor­ney-General is
appearing in his private capacity in accordance with a direction of the Head
of State and Executive, His Excellen­cy the President".  
  
The Plaintiff has referred to this in his written submissions presented to
this Court and states that the Attorney-General referred to this direction in
the course of his submissions before the Court of Appeal. (Para 4 of written
submissions). He adds that this statement of the Attorney-General was objected
to and the Attor-

**253**

ney General "was told by Court not to refer to it but at a later stage
persisted in doing so though objected to" (para 6). The objection is of no
consequence in this appeal. All that matters is that Mr. Pasupati did mention
a direction stated to have been given to him by the Head of State to appear
for the Defendant. Rana singhe, J. has referred to this statement in his
judgment and the impression created in his mind appears to be that it was
mentioned to support the propriety of his appearing in the way he did. Perera,
J. also refers to this statement although he expressed the view that Mr.
Pasupati "did not seem to rely heavily on such direction". Neither of them
appear to have been prejudiced in any way by this statement. The Plaintiff
alleges that that statement of the Attorney­ General was "calculated to cause
prejudice" to the objection raised by the Plaintiff and that the Attorney-
General made the statement I from the Bar which he was not entitled to do.
During the hearing before us Mr. Kulatunga, Junior Counsel for the Defendant
who holds the post of Deputy Solicitor-General in the Attorney-Gene­ral's
Department, stated that the Attorney-General marked his appearance in the
manner he did in consequence of something told to him by Mr. Menikdiwela,
Secretary to the President. In the course of his argument Counsel for the
defendant stated that there was in existence an administrative order by the
Cabinet that the Attorney-General should not appear for State Corporations,
and that when the Attorney-General received a directive (through the Land
Reform Commission) from the President directing him to appear for the
Defendant he was, placed in a dilemma. Counsel submitted that if the Attorney-
General disobeyed such directive he risked instant removal. Placed as he was
in this dilemma he solved it by marking his appearance as private Counsel. If
the Attorney ­General found himself in this impasse it was his duty to bring
it to the notice of the President and to advise him as to the proper course of
action. He is the Chief Legal Adviser to the State. It is extremely unlikely
that the President would have acted contrary to the directive of his own
Cabinet nor is there anything in the record or in the statements made from the
Bar to show that the President directed the Attorney-General to appear as
private Counsel. How the Attorney-General came to mark his appearance as
private Counsel remains a mystery. However it is immaterial to this Court, or
to any Court for that matter, to know the identity of the person high or low,
who has directed a State Officer to appear as private Counsel in private
litigation. In an original Court Counsel is only required to state the name of
the instructing Attorney whose proxy is on record. This is not a requirement
in the Court of Appeal or Supreme Court. Name dropping in Court is therefore
unprecedented and uncalled for. I will leave it at that.

**254**

I will for the purpose of this case proceed on the basis that the Attorney-
General (irrespective of who presently holds the office) has marked his
appearance as plain Attorney-at-Law (and not in his official capacity as
Attorney-General) instructed by an Attorney who is also an employee of the
Defendant. At the outset I asked Counsel for the Defendant what right he had
to espouse the cause of the Attorney-General by way of appeal. He stated that
the Defendant had been deprived of the services of the Counsel of his choice.
I cannot see any substance in this complaint. The Defen­dant's right to be
represented by Counsel has not been denied. He could well have retained other
Counsel. Anyway as the matter for decision is one of importance I shall
proceed to record my deci­sion.  
  
Counsel for the Defendant submitted that there was nothing wrong in appearing
for the Land Reform Commission because it was an organ of State. It might in
corporate language be loosely described as a "wholly owned subsidiary of the
Treasury", but still it is a juristic person entitled in law to retain its own
Counsel even from the private Bar. Besides, if it was an organ or agency of
Government the Attorney-General could have, and would have, marked his
appearance in his official capacity. There would then have been no dilemma as
he claims there was. I do not think any further comment is necessary as that
argument was also intended to demonstrate that there was no conflict of
interests.  
  
It is claimed that a fundamental right of the Attorney-General was infringed
by this refusal of the right of audience. Article 14(1) (g) of the
Constitution of the Republic (1978) is called in aid. It reads thus-­  
  
"14(1) Every citizen is entitled to-­  
  
(g) the freedom to engage himself or in association with others in any lawful
occupation, profession, trade, business or enterprise;"  
  
This Article gives a citizen the freedom to engage by himself or in
association with others "in any lawful profession". The pro­fession we are
concerned with is the legal profession. The Attorney ­General has been
admitted and enrolled in the legal profession. He has acquired that freedom
and nobody can deny his general right to practise that profession as an
Attorney-at-Law. The only res­trictions are those that are prescribed by law
in relation to the professional and other qualifications "necessary for
practising" that profession. (Vide Article 15(5) of the Constitution (1978)).

**255**

For instance rules for that profession are made under Article 136(1) (g) and
(h) for the admission, enrolment, suspension and removal of Attorneys-at-Law
and for their attire when attending Court. These have the force of written
law. The State cannot permit unqualified persons to handle the affairs of a
citizen in Court and in legal matters. Hence these laws and rules. (Vide also
the provisions of section.40 and section 42 of the Judicature Act No. 2 of
1978). The refusal of a right of audience in any particular case does not mean
a denial of the fundamental right to engage himself in the legal profession.
The ruling in this case is that he cannot appear as an Attorney-at-Law in his
private capacity and therefore cannot practise ass a private Attorney. His
right to practise his profession as the Chief Law Officer of the State in all
Courts in the Island has not been denied. Indeed it has been conceded in no
uncertain terms.  
  
Counsel for the Defendant then referred us to the provisions of section 41 of
the Judicature Act No. 2 of 1978. It reads thus­-  
  
"41\. (1) Every Attorney-at-Law shall be entitled to assist and advise clients
and to appear, plead or act in every court or other institution established by
law for the administration of justice and every person who is a party to or
has or claims to have the right to be heard in any proceeding in any such
court or other such institution shall be entitled to be represented by an
Attor­ney-at-Law.  
  
(2) Every person who is a party to any proceeding before any person or
tribunal exercising quasi-judicial powers and every person who has or claims
to have the right to be heard before any such person or tribunal shall unless
otherwise express­ly provided by law be entitled, to be represented by an
attorney ­at- Law".  
  
Counsel claimed that the section conferred a right on the Attor­ney-at-Law
which cannot be denied by a Court and can only be denied if he was removed or
suspended by the Supreme Court. The "right to be heard" is a right conferred
on the party to the proceed­ing in Court. It is not a right conferred on the
Attorney-at-Law. It is open to an Attorney-at-Law to appear for the party
litigant and to exercise his client's right to be heard on his behalf. The
"entitlement" follows and is dependent on the "right" of the party. They are
two different concepts. "The practice of the law is not a business open to all
who wish to engage in it; it is a per­sonal right or privilege limited to
selected persons of good charac­ter with special qualifications duly
ascertained and certified; it is in the nature of a franchise from the
State...................."

**256**

per Jayewardene, A. J. in the matter of a Proctor of the Supreme Court.(1) In
the circumstances I hold that the provisions of section 41 of the Judicature
Act have not been contravened.  
  
Counsel for the Defendant contended that although a Court had the fundamental
right to control its proceedings it had no power to deny the right of audience
to an Attorney-at-Law. He conceded that a Court could deny that right in case
of improper conduct in Court. He relied on the provisions of sections 40, 43
and 44 of the Judicature Act. Section 40 empowers the Supreme Court to enrol
Attorneys-at-Law. Section 43 and section 44 deal with disciplinary enquiries
when misconduct is alleged against any Attorney-at-law. These do not in my
opinion affect the in­herent power of a Court to control its own proceedings.
In exercis­ing that power "subject to usage or statutory power Courts or
Tribunals may exercise a discretion whether they will allow any; and what
persons, to act as advocates before them". per Lord Pearson in O. Toole vs.
Scott.(2)  
  
In the case of Collier vs. Hicks (3) the Plaintiff, who was an Attorney,
attempted to appear for the informer in a case before two justices hearing the
case. He was told by the justices that he could not appear for the informer as
Attorney and Advocate as it was not their practice to allow such appearance.
When the Plaintiff persisted in his attempt to take part in the proceedings he
was, by order of the justices, expelled from the premises into the Street. He
complained of trespass for assaulting and turning him out of the police
office. The Court of King's Bench in appeal held that no one is entitled,
without permission of the magistrates, and as a matter of right, to attend and
take part as an Advocate. Lord Tenterden, C. J. said:  
  
"This was undoubtedly an open Court and the public had a right to be present
as in other Courts; but whether any persons, and who shall be allowed to take
part in proceedings, must depend on the discretion of the Magistrates, who
like other Judges must have the power to regulate their own proceedings."  
  
Littledale J. stated thus:  
  
" The plaintiff, indeed is an attorney of one of the Superior Courts, but he
can derive no right from that character to act as an advocate in a proceeding
before a magistrate. It seems tome, as magistrates have a right to regulate
their own proceedings, they must, consequently, have authority to decide
whether advocates shall not be permitted to plead before them, though in cases
of difficulty it may be desirable and advisable that the liberty should be
granted"

**257**

Parker J. stated the general rule thus:  
  
"No person has a right to act as an advocate without the leave of the Court,
which must of necessity have the power of regula­ting its own proceedings in
all cases where they are not already regulated by ancient usage."  
  
Lord Pearson's statement of the principle was accepted and repea­ted by Lord
Parker C. J. in Simus vs. Moore (4) who stated: "Jus­tices have always had an
inherent power to regulate the procedure in their courts in the interests of
justice and a fair and expeditious trial." Our Courts in Sri Lanka have always
had that power and I know of no law or rule which takes away that power. I
therefore hold that the Court of Appeal had the power to refuse the right of
audience to any Attorney-at-Law for good reason..  
  
I now turn to the main question. Has the Attorney-General the right of
audience when he appears as private Counsel for a client while he holds the
post of Attorney-General? The office of Attorney-General has a long history.
It is the lineal descendant of the "Advocate Fiscal" which existed under Dutch
rule in this country. It continued as such under British rule until 1833 when
it was renamed "King's Advocate". He performed functions simi­lar to the
functions performed by the Attorney-General in England. (18 C. L. Rec. CV). By
Ordinance 1 of 1883 this designation was changed to "Attorney-General" and he
represented the Crown in all civil and criminal matters. In the year 1898
Bonser, C. J. referred to the post in these terms:-  
  
"The present Attorney-General is the lineal successor of the old Advocate
Fiscal, and just as in old days actions against the Government were brought
against the Advocate Fiscal as represen­ting the local 'Fisc' or Treasury, so
they may now be brought against the Attorney-General". Le Mesurier vs. Layard
(5)  
  
Then came the first Constitution - The Ceylon (Constitution) Order-in-Council
1946 (Chapter 376). By virtue of the provisions of section 60 the appointment
and transfer of the Attorney-Gene­ral was made by the Governor-General. This
office was excluded from the purview of the Public Service Commission. In 1972
came the first Republican Constitution which provided that the Attor­ney-
General shall be appointed by the President. It is the same in the 1978
Constitution. (Vide Article 54). The office of the Attor­ney-General is, as
recognised by the Constitution, an exalted one. There is no doubt that there
was a stage, many years ago, when

**258**

the Attorney-General engaged in private practice. This was the practice in
England and was therefore adopted in this Country. The list of cases submitted
by the Defendant ranging from1880 and ending in 1915 bear testimony to this.
Since 1915 the Attorney General has not engaged in private practice. This has
been the tradition built up over 60 years. No doubt it followed the English
rule which was laid down by a Treasury Minute of June 29, 1894, forbidding the
Attorney-General to engage in private practice and made at the instance of the
then Prime Minister. This was a salutary rule in the interests of the
administration of justice and justice itself. We have been informed that by a
government fiat of 23rd July, 1980, the Attorney-General and the Legal
Officers of his Department have been granted permission to engage in private
practice. But such arrangements between employer and employee cannot affect
the issue if in fact there are legal constraints on the Attorney-General
engaging in private practice.  
  
Counsel for the Defendant readily and quite correctly conceded that there is
such constraint in the field of criminal law and prac­tice. His powers in this
field are vast. They extend even to quasi judicial functions. He is empowered
to enter into and take over any criminal prosecution in the Island whether
they be initiated by private plaint or by State Officer. He alone can enter a
nolle prosequi in a criminal case. I need not labour the point. The Attor­ney-
General engaging in private practice in criminal cases is unthin­kable.  
  
What of the civil law? All actions by or against the State must be instituted
by or against the Attorney-General (section 456 Civil Procedure Code Chapter
101). All process issued against the State must be served on the Attorney-
General (section 457 Civil Procedure Code ). He has the power to undertake the
defence in actions against Ministers, Parliamentary Secretaries and Public
Officers (section 463 Civil Procedure Code). Special powers are given to him
to watch the interests of wards of Court such as persons of unsound mind
(section 556(2), section 572(2), section 575(1)) and manors (section 589,
section 591, section 592(2) Civil . Procedure Code). He is the Chief Legal
Officer and Adviser to the State and thereby to the Sovereign and is in that
sense an officer of the public. He is the watch-dog of public rights and can
intervene in private litigation if public rights are in any way to be
affected. He is vested with power in respect of all public charitable Trusts
and actions alleging breach of any charitable Trust can only be brought by the
Attorney-General or by others with his permission (section 101 of Trust
Ordinance Chapter 87). He it is who advises the State and the Speaker on every
Bill that is to be presented to Parliament

**259**

(Article 77 of the 1978 Constitution). Counsel for the Parliament brought to
our notice certain facts connected with this duty which demonstrates the evils
of the Attorney-General appearing in civil cases. This case was instituted in
the District Court of Colombo on the 21st January, 1981, (Document DP1) and an
interlocutor, order coupled with an enjoining order was issued by the Court on
31.1.81 (Document DP2). The Defendant made application on 6. 2. 81 praying for
the dissolution of the enjoining order (Document DP3) which application was
dismissed by the Court on 20. 2. 81 (Document DP5). Application for leave to
appeal and for revision of that order were filed in the Court of Appeal on 23.
2. 81. The Bill to amend -the Land Reform Commission Law was presented to the
Supreme Court on 18. 2. 81 (Document DP1D) and notice in terms of Article 134
of the Constitution was issued on the Attor­ney-General on 19. 2. 81 (Document
DP9). The Bill vas taken up for Consideration by the Supreme Court on 24. 2.
81 and Mr. Siva Pasupati as the Attorney General, himself appeared and
tendered his opinion to the Supreme Court. The Plaintiff was also repre­sented
by Counsel who made submissions which went counter to those of the Attorney-
General. The Supreme Court tendered its advice to the President and Speaker on
the same day. The Court of Appeal heard the applications beginning on3. 3. 81.
At that time the Bills had not been passed by Parliament. No doubt long before
18.2.81 the Attorney-General would have, acting under powers conferred by
Article 77 of the Constitution, tendered his advice to the State on the
provisions of the Bill. It is relevant at this stage to take note of the
position taken up by his client before the Court of Appeal set out in its
written submissions-­  
  
"In view of the fact that the plaintiff-respondent has now resiled from the
agreement to sell the said lands as evidenced by the Plaintiff-Respondent's
present action and conduct, the Government has taken steps to enact amendments
to the Land Reform Law as was contemplated in 1976, which would have the
effect of vesting the Plaintiff-Respondent's estate Lands, in October 1975.
The Bill for enacting the necessary amendments has been certified by the
Cabinet of Ministers under Article '122 of the Constitution as being urgent in
the national interest and the Registrar of the Supreme Court has served notice
on the Attorney-General that the said Bill would be considered by the Supreme
Court, in terms of Article 122 of the Constitution, on the 24th of February,
1981. The Defendant-Petitioner annexes hereto marked 'DP. 9' a true copy of
the said notice and marked 'DP. 10', a true copy of the said Bill which was
forwarded with the said notice."

**260**

"In the premises, the Defendant-Petitioner states that irrepara­ble loss and
damage will be caused if the said Enjoining Order dated 30th January 1981 and
the Order of the learned District Judge made on the 20th February, 1981,
affirming the said Enjoining Order are allowed to stand."  
  
What is the effect of these? They expose the Attorney-General to the charge
that he was partisan and biased when he tendered his advice on the Bill and
when !-,e made submissions on the Bill to the Supreme Court. There is an
appearance of conflict between his duty to Court, his duty to the State and
the legislature, and his duty to the client. The age-old concept that the
Attorney-General is impar­tial and decides equally between State and subject
would have been suspect. The eventual sufferer must necessarily be the
administra­tion of justice and justice itself.  
  
In the course of the argument Counsel for the Defendant was asked what would
the Attorney-General do if, when appearing for one of -the claimants in a
partition case, he discovered in the course of the case or in the course of
receiving instructions that the State had a claim to the lands claimed by his
client. His answer was that the Attorney-General would immediately cease his
appearance for the client, advise the State on the basis of the knowledge so
gained by him and then appear for, the State. This contention cannot be
accepted. It would be improper for him to jettison his client in that way.
Unless he has his client's express consent, he would be acting in breach of
the confidence reposed in him and also contrary to the provisions of section
125 of Evidence Ordinance which expressly forbids any Attorney-at-Law to
disclose any knowledge acquired by him in the course of his professional
employment. In short he will be guilty of professional misconduct and
malpractice the conse­quences of which are serious in the extreme.  
  
Counsel for the Defendant made another submission which I mention only because
it was made. He said that the Attorney General appears in his official
capacity when he is nominative, that is when he is a party, and secondly when
he is served with notice as required by law and in all other instances, eg.
when he takes over the defence of a Minister or Public Servant, he does not
appear in his official capacity but as plain Attorney-at-Law. I cannot agree.
He cannot shed his office as and when the circums­tances suit him. 'The law
does not permit the Attorney-General to play Jekyll and Hyde. He had taken his
oath of office as required by the provisions of the Constitution. Once an
Attorney-General always the Attorney-General until he relinquishes office.

**261**

The Attorney-General of his Country is the leader of the Bar and the highest
Legal Officer of the State. As Attorney-General he has a duty to Court, to the
State and to the subject to be wholly detached, wholly independent and to act
impartially with the sole object of establishing the truth. It is far that
reason that all Courts in this Island request the appearance of the Attorney
General as amicus curiae when the Court requires assistance, which assistance
has in the past been readily given. That image will cer­tainly be tarnished if
he takes part in private litigation arising out of private disputes. I cannot
but agree with the judgment of the Court of Appeal that there are constraints
on the Attorney-General engaging in private practice in the civil law as well
as the criminal law. It is regrettable that the State has sought to act
counter to tradition, (prudence and propriety) in granting the Attorney­
General and his law officers the right of private practice. Justice is the
loser thereby. No man can serve two masters. For either he will hate the one
and love the other- or he will hold to one and dispose the other. No Attorney-
General can serve both State and pri­vate litigant. I would dismiss the appeal
with costs. I desire to re­cord our appreciation of the valuable assistance
given to us by Counsel for all parties and more especially to Counsel for the
Bar Association who gave also of their valuable time.  
  
**ISMAIL, J. - I** agree  
**WEERARATNE, J. - I** agree  
**SHARVANANDA, J.  \- I **agree  
**WANASUNDERA, J.    I** agree  
  
_**Appeal dismissed**_.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1981/31.html_  

