##  Sunila Abeysekera v. Ariya Rubasinghe, Competent Authority and Others -
SLR - 314, Vol 1 of 2000 [2000] LKSC 31; (2000) 1 Sri LR 314 (15 May 2000)

**314**

**SUNILA ABEYSEKERA  
v.  
ARIYA RUBASINGHE, COMPETENT AUTHORITY AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
AMERASINGHE, J.  
WADUGODAPITIYA, J. AND  
WEERASEKERA, J.  
S. C. APPLICATION No. 994/99  
25TH FEBRUARY AND  
23RD MARCH, 2000  
  
_Fundamental Rights - Emergency (Prohibition on Publication and Transmission
of Sensitive Military Information) Regulation No. 1. of 1998 as amended
-Articles I. 12(1),14(1)(a) and 15(7) of the Constitution -Public Security
Ordinance, section 5 (Cap. 40) - Pre censorship. -  
_  
The Emergency (Prohibition on Publication and Transmission of Sensitive
Military Information) Regulation No. 1 of 1998 published in Gazette
Extraordinary No. 1030/28 of 5th June 1998 as amended on 6th June 1999
prohibited the publication, inter alia, of "any publication pertaining to
official conduct, morale, the performance of the Head or any member of the
Armed Forces or the Police Force or of any person authorised by the Commander
- in - Chief of the Armed Forces for the purpose of rendering assistance in
the preservation of national security."  
  
The regulation empowered the Competent Authority to prohibit the use of any
press or equipment and to seize the same where there has been a contravention
of the regulation through such media.  
  
The said regulations were made by the President under section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance. (Cap. 40).  
  
The petitioner who was actively engaged in furthering Interracial Justice and
Equality and free and fair elections and interested in the resolution of the
"ethnic conflict and the war in the North" complained that the restriction
imposed by the aforesaid regulation deprived her of receiving information
regarding the war and the ethnic conflict in breach of her rights under
Article 10 of the Constitution, the said regulation was unwarranted,
discriminatory and arbitrary and violative of Article 12(1); and that it was
overbroad and vague and therefore not necessary in a democratic State; hence
it was violative of her rights under Article 14(1)(a) of the Constitution. The
petitioner alleged that the aim of

**315**

the impugned regulation was to prohibit the publication of information that
was embarrassing to the Government, rather, than to protect national security.  
  
At the hearing of the application counsel for the petitioner did not press the
alleged infringement in respect of Article 10 of the Constitution.  
  
**Held:**  
  
l. The petitioner has failed to show that the genuine purpose or demonstrable
effect of the regulation was to protect the government from embarrassment or
wrongdoing. Nor has she shown that the protection of national security was a
"pretext".  
  
2\. The impugned regulations were framed in reasonably precise terms and
confined in their application to defined circumstances. As such there was no
violation of the petitioner's rights under Article 12(1) of the Constitution.  
  
3\. a Per Amerasinghe, J.  
  
"Freedom of speech necessarily protects the right to receive information,
regardless of the social worth of such information."  
  
b Article 15(7) of the Constitution provides that the exercise of the rights
under Article 14(1)(a) shall be subject to such restrictions as may be
prescribed by "Law" (which expression includes emergency regulations) in the
interest of, inter alia, national security.  
  
c. The burden of establishing restrictions imposed under Article 15(7) is
heavy.  
  
Per Amerasinghe, J.  
  
"Exceptions [to Article 14(1)(a)) must be narrowly and strictly construed for
the reason that the freedom of speech constitutes one of the essential
foundations of a democratic society, which, as we have seen, the Constitution,
in no uncertain terms, declares Sri Lanka to be"  
  
d. While the preservation of morale of the Armed Forces is an important
matter, yet, in a democracy, freedom of speech performs a vital role in
keeping in check persons holding public office. Hence, even if the restriction
is not expressly related to the conduct of such persons in the North and East,
the regulations must be interpreted

**316**

restrictively to limit it to information concerning such persons in the North
and East.  
  
4\. A restriction on the freedom guaranteed by Article 14(1)(a) will be
unconstitutionally overbroad and violative of Article 155(2) of the
Constitution if there is no proximate or rational nexus between the
restrictions imposed and the object sought to be achieved namely, the interest
of national security. Regulations which vest arbitrary powers of censorship in
administrative officials may be struck down as being overbroad.  
  
Per Amerasinghe, J.  
  
"................... if the court is satisfied that the restrictions are
clearly unreasonable, they cannot be regarded as being within the intended
scope of the power under Article 15(7)"  
  
5\. a The impugned restrictions had a basis in law, and that as far as the
quality of the law was concerned. it was formulated with sufficient precision
to enable the petitioner to foresee, to a degree that was reasonable in the
circumstances, consequences which a given action may entail: and even though
the discretion of the Competent Authority was wide, the scope of the
discretion and the manner of its exercise were indicated with sufficient
clarity to enable the discretion to be reviewable and to give the petitioner
adequate protection against arbitrary interference.  
  
b. The restrictions imposed were not disproportionate to the legitimate aim of
the regulations, namely the furtherance of the interest of national security
in terms of Article 15(7).  
  
6\. In the circumstances, the petitioners fundamental rights under Article
14(1)(a) have not been infringed.  
  
**Cases referred to:**  
  
_1\. Joseph Perera alias Bruten Perera v. The Attorney-General and Others,
(1992) 1 Sri L. R. 199.  
  
2\. Re Compulsory membership of journalists association, (1986) 8 E. H. R. R.
165.  
  
3\. Channa Pieris and Others v. The Attorney-General and Others, (1994) 1 Sri
L. R. 1._

**317**

_4\. Palko v. Connecticut, 302 U. S. 319, 327: 658 S. Ct. 149. 152: 82 L. Ed.
288 (1937).  
  
5\. Fernando v. The S. L. B. C. and Others (1996) 1 Sri L. R. 157.  
  
6\. Sumith-Jayantha Dias v. Reggie Ranatunge, Deputy Minister of Transport and
Others, (1999) 2 Sri L. R 8.  
  
7\. Stanley v. State of Georgia, 394 U.S. 557: 89 S. CL 1243: 22 L. Ed. 2d 542
(1969).  
  
8\. Whitney v. California, 274 U. S. 357:47 S. Ct. 641, 71 L. Ed. 1095 (1927).  
  
9\. Handyside v. The United Kingdom, (1976) 1 E. H. R. R 737.  
  
10\. The Sunday Times v. The United Kindgom, (1979) 2 E. H. R. R. 245.  
  
11\. Barthold v. Germany, (1985) 7 E. H. R. R. 383.  
  
12\. Hodgson, Woof Productions and National Union of Journalists and Channel
Four Television v. United Kindgom, (1988) 10 E. H. R. R. 503.  
  
13\. App. No. 11508/85 v. Denmark, (1989) 11 E. H. R. R. 543.  
  
14\. Muller v. Switzerland, (1991) 13 E. H. R. R. 212.  
  
15\. The Observer and the Guardian v. United Kindgom, (1992) 14 E. H. R. R.
153.  
  
16\. The Sunday Times v. United Kingdom (No. 2), (1992) 14 E. H. R. R 229.  
  
17\. Castells v. Spain. (1992) 14 E. H. R. R 445.  
  
18\. Thorgeirson v. Iceland, (1992) 14 E. H. R. R. 843.  
  
19\. Brind and Others v. United Kingdom, (1994) 18 E. H. R R. C. D. 76.  
  
20\. Jerslid v. Denmark, (1995) 19 E. H. R. R. 1.  
  
21\. Otto Preminger Institute v. Austria, (1995) 19 E. H. R. R. 34.  
  
22\. Oberschlick v. Austria, (1995) 19 E. H. R. R. 389.  
  
23\. Piermont v. France, (1995) 20 E. H. R. R. 301.  
  
24\. Goodwin v. United Kingdom, (1996) 22 E. H. R R 123.  
  
25\. Adams and Benn v. United Kingdom, (1997) 23 E. H. R. R C. D. 160.  
  
26\. Wingrove v. United Kingdom, (1997) 24 E. H. R R. 1._

**318**

_27\. Visuvalingam and Others v. Liyanage and Others (1983) 2 Sri L. R. 311.  
  
28\. Visuvalingam and Others v. Liyanage (1984) 2 Sri L. R. 123.  
  
29\. Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola, (1983) 1 Sri L. R 461.  
  
30\. Mohottige and Others v. Gunatillake and Others, (1992) 2 Sri L. R. 246.  
  
31\. Amaratunga v. Sirimal and Others (1993) 1 Sri L. R. 264.  
  
32\. Deshapriya and Another v. Municipal Council, Nuwara Eliya and Others,
(1995) 1 Sri L. R. 362.  
  
33\. Dejonge v. Oregon, 299 U.S. 353,57S. Ct. 255.81 L. Ed. 278 (1937).  
  
34\. Marian and Another v. Upasena, (1998) 3 Sri L. R. 177.  
  
35\. Gunawardena and Another v. Pathirana, O. 1. C., Police Station, Elpitiya
and Others, (1997) 1 Sri L. R. 265.  
  
36\. Karunathilaka and Another v. Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of
Elections and Others, (1994) 1 Sri L. R. 157.  
  
37\. Open Door Counselling and Dublin Well Woman v. Ireland, (1993) 15 E. H.
R. R. 244.  
  
38\. Information sverein Lentia v. Austria, (1994) 17 E. H. R. R. 93.  
  
39\. Martin v. City of Struthers, 319 U. S. 141; 63 S. Ct. 862; 87 L. Ed. 1313
(1943).  
  
40\. Winters v. New York, 333 U. S. 507; 68 S. Ct. 665; 92 L. Ed. 840 (1948).  
  
41\. Griswold v. Connecticut, 381 U.S. 479; 85S. Ct. 1678; 14L. Ed. 2d 510
(1965).  
  
42\. Lamont v. Postmaster General, 381 U. S. 301; 85 S. Ct. 1493; 14 L. Ed.
2d. 398 (1965).  
  
43\. Pierce v. Society of Sisters, 268 U.S. 510; 45 S. Ct. 571; 69 L. Ed. 1070
(1925).  
  
44\. Casado Coca v. Spain, (1994) 18 E. H. R. R. l .  
  
45\. Abeyratne v. Gunatilake and Others, (1994) 2 Sri L. R. 294.  
  
46\. Prager and Obserschlik v. Austria, (1996) 21 E. H. R. R. 1.  
  
47\. Lingens v. Austria, (1986) 8 E. H. R. R. 407.  
  
48\. Worm v. Austria. (1996) 22 E. H. R. R. C. D. 7._

**319**

_49\. McLaughlin v. United Kingdom, (1994) 18 E. H. R. R. 84.  
  
50\. Vereinigung Democratischer Soldaten Osterreichs and Gubi v. Austria,
(1995) 20 E. H. R. R. 56.  
  
51\. Vereniging Radio 100 et al. v. Netherlands, (1996) 22 E. H. R. R. C. D.
198.  
  
52\. Abrams v. United States, 250 U.S. 616; 40 S. CL 17:63 L. Ed. 1173,
(1919).  
  
53\. Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v. F. C. C., 395 U. S. 376. 89 S. Ct. 1794: 23
L. Ed. 2d. 371, (1961).  
  
54\. West Virginia Board of Education v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624; 633 S. Ct.
1178; 87 L. Ed. 1173, (1943).  
  
55\. Shantha Wyeratne v. Vijitha Perera and Others, S. C. Application 379/93,
S. C. Minutes of 03.02.94.  
  
56\. Gitlow v. New York, 268 U. S. 652; 45 S. CL 625: 69 L. Ed. 1138. (1925).  
  
57\. Dissanayaka v. Sri Jayewardenapura University, (1986) 2 Sri L. R.254.  
  
58\. Gaskin v. United Kingdom, (1987) 9 E. H. R. R. 279.  
  
59\. Gaskin v. United Kingdom, (1989) 11 E. H. R. R. 402.  
  
60\. Leander v. Sweden, (1987) 9 E. H. R. R. 433.  
  
61\. Wallen v. Sweden (1986) 8 E. H. R. R. 320.  
  
62\. Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire, 315 U. S. 568. (1942).  
  
63\. Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U. S. 296 (1940).  
  
64\. Schenck v. United States, 249 U. S. 47; S. Ct. 247; 63 L. Ed. 470,  
  
65\. Mallawaarachchi v. Seneviratne, S. C. Application 212/88, S. C. Minutes
of 28.09.1989._

_66\. Bernard Soysa and Two Others v. The A. G. and Two Others, (1991) 2 Sri
L. R. 56.  
  
67\. Saranapala v. Solanga Arachchi, Senior Superintendent of Police, and
Others, (1999) 2 Sri L. R. 166.  
  
68\. Mahinda Rajapakse v. Kudahetti and Others, (1992) 2 Sri L. R. 223.  
  
69\. Walker v. City of Birmingham, 388 U. S. 307: 87 S. Ct. 1824; 18 L. Ed. 2d
1210\. (1967)._

**320**

_70\. Markt Intern Verlag and Been-tan v. Germany, (1990) 12 E. H. R. R. 161.  
  
71\. Dennis v. United States, 341 U.S. 495:71 S. Ct. 857,95 L. Ed. 1157,
(1951).  
  
72\. New York Times Co. v. U. S., and United States v. The Washington Post
Company et al., 403 U. S. 713: 91 S. Ct. 2140, (1971).  
  
73\. Travancore-Cochin v. Bombay Co. Ltd., (152) S. C. R. 1112.  
  
74\. Bombay v. R. M. D. Chamarabagawalla, (157) S. C. R. 874.  
  
75\. Express Newspapers (Private) Ltd. v. Union, (1959) S. C. R. 12.  
  
76\. Kingsley International Pictures Corporation v. Regents of the University
of New York, 360 U. S. 684; 79 S. Ct. 1362: 3 L. Ed. 2d 1512 (1959).  
  
77\. United States v. Carotene Products Co., 304 U.S. 144, 58 S. Ct. 778: 82
L. Ed. 1234. (1938).  
  
78\. Brandenberg v. Ohio, 395 U. S. 444; 89 S. Ct. 1827; 23 L. Ed. 2d. 430,
(1969).  
  
79\. Hess v. Indiana, 414 U. S. 105; 94 S. Ct. 326; L. Ed. 303, (1973).  
  
80\. Frohwerk v. United States, 249 U. S. 204 (1919).  
  
81\. United States v. David Paul O'Brien, 391 U.S. 367; 88 S. Ct. 1673,
(1968).  
  
82\. Hins and Hugenhottz v. Netherlands, (1996) 21 E. H. R. R. C. D. 124.  
  
83\. Gay News v. United Kingdom, (1983) 5 E. H. R. R. 123.  
  
84\. G. V. Germany, (1984) 6 E. H. R. R 467.  
  
85\. Markt Intern and Beerman v. Germany, (1989) 11 E. H. R. R. 212.  
  
86\. Times Newspapers Ltd. and Neil v. United Kingdom, (1993) 15 E. H. R. R.
C. D. 49.  
  
87\. Groppera Radio AG v. Switzerland (1990) 12 E. H. R. R. 321.  
  
88\. Arrowsmith v. United Kingdom, (1982) 3 E. H. R. R. 218.  
  
89\. Tolstoy Miloslavsky v. United Kingdom. (1995) 20 E. H. R. R. 442.  
  
90\. Near v. Minnesota, 283 U. S. 697; 51 S. Ct. 625; 75 L. Ed. 1357, (1931}.  
  
91\. Wickremasinghe v. Edmund Jayasinghe, (1995) 1 Sri L. R. 300._

**321**

_92\. Debs v. United States, 249 U. S. 211, (1919).  
  
93\. Ekanayake v. Herath Banda, S. C. App. 25/91 (F. R.), S. C. Minutes of
11.10.91.  
  
94\. Amaratunga v. Sirimal, S. C. App. 468/92. S. C. Minutes of 08.03.93.  
  
95\. McCray v. United States, 195 U. S. 27, 56; 24 S. Ct. 769, 776; 49 L. Ed.
78. (1904).  
  
96\. State of Arizona v. State of California, 283 U. S. 423; 455; 51 S. CL
522; 75 L. Ed., 1154. (1931).  
  
97\. Malalgoda v. A. G. and Another, (1982) 2 Sri L. R. 777.  
  
98\. Lingens and Leitgens v. Austria, (1982) 4 E. H. R R 373.  
  
99\. App. No. 12230/86 v. Germany, (1989) 11 E. H. R. R. 101.  
  
100\. Barfod v. Denmark, (1991) 13 E. H. R R 493.  
  
101\. Wickremabandu v. Herath and Others, (1990) 2 Sri L. R 348. 102. Rohr v.
Switzerland, (1989) 11 E. H. R. R. 81.  
  
103\. Bowman v. U. K., (1996) 22 E. H. R R. C. D. 13.  
  
104\. Autronic AG v. Switzerland (1990) 12 E. H. R. R 485. 105. Weber v.
Switzerland (1990) 12 E. H. R. R 508.  
  
106\. Shelton v. Tucker 364 U. S. 479, 81 S. Ct. 247, (1960).  
  
107\. Siriwardene and Others v. Liyanage, (1983) 2 Sri L. R 164.  
  
108\. Klass and Others v. Federal Republic of Germany, (1979-80) 2 E. H. R. R
214.  
  
109\. App. No. 10628/83 v. Switzerland, (1987) 9 E. H. R R. 107.  
  
110\. App. No. 11508 v. Denmark, (1989) 111 E. H. R R. 543.  
  
111\. Lovell v. Griffin 303 U. S. 444; 58 S. Ct. 666; 82 L. Ed. 949, (1938).  
  
112\. Cantwell v. Connecticut, 310 U. S. 296; S. Ct. 900; 84 L. Ed. 1213,
(1940).  
  
113\. Saia v. New York, 334 U. S. 558; 68 S. Ct. 1148; 92 L. Ed. 1574. (1948).  
  
114\. Kunz v. New York, 340 U. S. 290; 71 S. Ct. 312; 95 L. Ed. 280, (1951).  
  
115\. Yasapala v. Wickramasinghe, (1980) 1 F. R. D. 143.  
  
116\. Vereninging Weekblad Bluf v. Netherlands, (1995) 20 E. H. R R. 189._

**322**

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.  
  
_R. K. W. Goonesekera with S. H. Hewamanne, J. C. Weliamuna and   Kishali
Pinto Jayawardena _for the petitioner.  
  
_Saleem Marsoof, P. C., A. S. G. with U. Egalahewa, S. C._ for the respondent

_Cur. adv. vult._

May 15, 2000  
**AMERASINGHE, J.  
  
THE IMPUGNED EMERGENCY REGULATIONS AND THEIR PRECURSORS  
**  
On 21 September 1995, the President of Sri Lanka (hereinafter referred to as
the President) made the following regulations under section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance.  
  
"1\. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency (Restriction on
Publication and Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations,
No. 1 of 1995.  
  
2\. The President may for the purpose of these regulations, appoint, by name
or by office, any person or body of persons to be the Competent Authority.  
  
3\. No Editor or Publisher of a Newspaper or any person authorized by or under
law, to establish and operate a Broadcasting Station or Television Station
shall, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, print, publish or distribute or
transmit, whether by means of electronic devices or otherwise, or cause to be
printed, published, distributed or transmitted whether by electronic means or
otherwise, any material containing any matter which pertains to any operations
carried out, or proposed to be carried out, by the Armed Forces or the Police
Force (including the Special Task Force), the procurement or proposed
procurement of arms or supplies by any such Forces, the deployment of troops
or personnel, or the deployment or use of equipment, including aircraft or
naval vessels, by any such Forces.

**323**

4\. Where any person prints, publishes, distributes or transmits, or causes to
be printed, published, distributed or transmitted, whether by electronic means
or otherwise, any matter in contravention of the provisions of regulation 3,
the Competent Authority may, after issuing such directions, as he considers
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of such regulation, make
order that the press or equipment used for such printing, publication,
distribution or transmission shall, for such period as is specified in that
order not be used for the purpose of printing, publication, distribution or
transmission of any matter referred to in regulation 3 and the Competent
Authority may by the same order authorise any person specified therein to take
such steps as appears to the person so authorised to be necessary, for
preventing the printing, publication, distribution or transmission of any such
material.  
  
5\. Any person who prints, publishes, distributes or transmits, any material
in contravention of the provisions of regulation 3, shall be guilty of an
offence."  
  
On October 02, 1995, (Gazette Extraordinary No. 891/3) the President amended
the regulations made on 21 September 1995 by adding, "any statement pertaining
to the official conductor the performance of the Head or any member of any of
the Armed Forces or the Police Force", to the list of restricted subjects.  
  
On December 20, 1995, the President, acting under section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance, rescinded the Emergency (Restriction on Publication and
Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) Regulation No. I of 1995, as
amended by the regulation of October 2, 1995.  
  
On 19 April 1996, the President made the following regulations under section 5
of the Public Security Ordinance.

**324**

" 1\. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency (Prohibition on
Publication and Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations
No. 1 of 1996.  
  
2\. No Editor or Publisher of a Newspaper or any person authorised by or under
law to establish and operate a Broadcasting Station or a Television Station
shall, whether in or outside Sri Lanka, print, publish, distribute or
transmit, whether by means of electronic devices of otherwise, or cause to be
printed, published, distributed or transmitted whether by electronic means or
otherwise, any material containing any matter which pertains to any operations
carried out or proposed to be carried out, by the Armed Forces or the Police
Force (including the Special Task Force), the procurement or proposed
procurement of arms or supplies by any such Forces, the deployment of troops
or personnel, or the deployment or use of equipment, including aircraft or
naval vessels, by any such Forces, or any statement pertaining to the official
conduct or the performance of the Head or any member of any of the Armed
Forces or the Police Force.  
  
3\. Where any person prints, publishes, distributes or transmits, or causes to
be printed, published, distributed or transmitted, whether by electronic means
or otherwise, any matter in contravention of the provisions of regulation 2,
the Competent Authority may, after issuing such directions as he considers
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of such regulation, make
order that the press or equipment used for such printing, publication,
distribution or transmission shall for such period as is specified in that
order not be used for the purpose of printing, publication, distribution or
transmission of any matter referred to in regulation 2 and the Competent
Authority may by the same order authorise any person specified therein to take
such steps as appears to the person so authorised to be necessary, for
preventing the printing, publication, distribution or transmission of any such
material.

**325**

4\. The President may for the purpose of these regulations, appoint, by name
or by office, any person or body of persons to be the Competent Authority.  
  
5\. Any person who prints, publishes, distributes or transmits, any material
in contravention of regulation 2 shall be guilty of an. offence."  
  
On 8 October 1996, the Emergency (Prohibition on Publication and Transmission
of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations No. l of 1996 were rescinded by
a regulation made by the President under section 5 of the Public Security
Ordinance.  
  
On 5 June 1998, the President made the following regulations under section 5
of the Public Security Ordinance:  
  
"1\. These Regulations may be cited as the Emergency (Prohibition on
Publication and Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations
No. 1 of 1998.  
  
2\. No Editor or Publisher of a Newspaper or any person authorised by or under
law, to establish and operate a Broadcasting Station or a Television Station
shall whether in or outside Sri Lanka, print, publish, distribute or transmit
whether by means of electronic devices or otherwise, or cause to be printed,
published, distributed or transmitted whether by electronic means or
otherwise, 'any material containing any matter which pertains to any
operations carried out or proposed to be carried out, by the Armed Forces or
the Police Force (including the Special Task Force), the deployment of troops
or personnel, or the deployment or use of equipment, including aircraft or
naval vessels, by any such forces, or any statement pertaining to the official
conduct or the performance of the Head or any member of the Armed Forces or
the Police Force.  
  
3\. Where any person prints, publishes, distributes or transmits, or causes to
be printed, published, distributed or

**326**

transmitted, whether by electronic means or otherwise, any matter in
contravention of the provisions of Regulation 2, the Competent Authority may,
after issuing such directions as he considers necessary to effect compliance
with the provisions of such regulation, make order that the press or equipment
used for such printing, publication distribution or transmission shall for
such period as is specified in that order not be used for such printing,
publication, distribution or transmission of any matter referred to in
Regulation 2 and the Competent Authority may by the same order authorise any
person specified therein to take such steps as appears to the person so
authorised to be necessary for preventing the printing, publication,
distribution or transmission of any such material.  
  
4\. The President may for the purpose of these regulations, appoint by name or
office, any person or body of persons to be the Competent Authority.  
  
5\. Any person who prints, publishes, distributes or transmits any material in
contravention of the provisions of Regulation 2 shall be guilty of an
offence."  
  
On 6 November 1999, the President made the following regulations, hereinafter
referred to as the 'impugned regulations', under section 5 of the Public
Security Ordinance:  
  
"I. The Emergency (Prohibition on Publication and Transmission of Sensitive
Military Information) Regulation 01 of 1998 published in Gazette Extraordinary
No. 1030/28 of 05th June, 1998 and deemed to be in force by virtue of Section
2A of the Public Security Ordinance, is hereby amended by the substitution for
Regulation 2 thereof, of the following new Regulation:  
  
2\. No Editor or Publisher of a newspaper or any person authorised by or under
law to establish and operate a Broadcasting Station or a Television Station
shall, except

**327**

with the permission of the Competent Authority, print, publish, distribute or
transmit whether by means of electronic devices or otherwise cause to be
printed, published, distributed or transmitted any material (inclusive of
documents, pictorial representations, photographs or cinematograph films)
containing any matter pertaining to military operations in the Northern and
Eastern Province (sic.) including any operation carried out or being carried
out or proposed to be carried out by the Armed Forces or by the Police Force
(including the Special Task Force), the deployment of troops or personnel or
the deployment or use of equipment including aircraft or Naval vessel by any
such forces or any statement pertaining to the official conduct, moral [e],
the performance of the Head or any member of the Armed Forces or the Police
Force or of any person authorised by the Commander-in-Chief of the Armed
Forces for the purpose of rendering assistance in the preservation of national
security."  
  
**THE PETITIONER AND HER COMPLAINT  
**  
The petitioner is the President of the Movement for Interracial Justice and
Equality (MIRJE) and a member of the Executive Committee of the Movement for
Free and Fair Elections (MFFE). The petitioner stated that during the
Presidential election campaign of 1999, any citizen or political party had the
right to "seek, receive and impart information or. the ethnic conflict and the
war and" had "the concomitant right to seek and receive and impart information
on the military strategies and drawbacks in the conduct of the military
operations in the North and East." The petitioner went on to state that she is
"a registered voter in the country and a public spirited citizen concerned
about the integrity of the democratic process and the people's franchise
guaranteed by Article 3 of the Constitution. As a social/human rights activist
concerned about the ethnic conflict and the war in the North and East", she
said she had "actively taken part in debate to resolve the said conflict and
hence she is required to know the correct position with regard to the long
drawn out war between the

**328**

Armed Forces and the LTTE", The petitioner said that her "opinion on all
activities relating to the ethnic conflict in the country in general and in
relation to the (1999 Presidential) election is based on information received
by her on the said war and hence any prior restraints on information as
aforesaid is contrary to the rights guaranteed to the petitioner under Article
10 of the Constitution".  
  
The petitioner states that the amended regulation made by the President on 6
November 1999 had "been imposed by Presidential Order in a manner that is
unwarranted, discriminatory, and arbitrary and violative of Article 12(1) of
the Constitution".  
  
The petitioner further states that "as a result of the said amended
Regulation... she is constrained from forming (sic.) and communicating
information on matters of public debate and which are of vital concern to the
nation and which task she had been hitherto responsibly engaged in as an
Executive Director of INFORM." Consequently, it is alleged, that the
petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) of the
Constitution have been violated.  
  
Article 10 of the Constitution states: "Every person is entitled to freedom of
thought, conscience and religion, including the freedom to adopt a religion or
belief of his choice."  
  
Article 12(l) states: "All persons are equal before the law and are entitled
to the equal protection of the law."  
  
Article 14(1)(a) states: "Every citizen is entitled to the freedom of speech
and expression including publication."  
  
On the face of it, the impugned regulations apply to all persons and they have
not been shown to have been applied in a discriminating manner. In Joseph
Perera alias Bruten Perera v. The Attorney-General and Others, (1) especially
at p. 230, the Court held that the impugned regulation in that case violated
Article 12 of the Constitution since it had vested

**229**

the Police with "naked" "unguided" and "arbitrary" power "enabling them to
discriminate". In the instant case, however, as we shall see, the impugned
regulations were framed in reasonably precise terms and confined in their
application to defined circumstances. Therefore, I fail to see how the
impugned regulations violate the petitioner's rights under Article 12(1) of
the Constitution and I declare that there has been no violation of that
Article. With regard to Article 10, the gravamen of the petitioner's complaint
was that she was deprived of the opportunity of forming her own judgment as
well as influencing others by being able, freely and openly without restraint,
to have access to and receive and disseminate information on what the
petitioner describes in her petition as the "ethnic conflict and the war in
the North and East." The petitioner's substantial complaint is that the
impugned regulations interfered with her freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed by Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution.  
  
Freedom of speech and expression represents the means that enable the
community, when exercising its options to be sufficiently informed. Cf. Re
Compulsory membership of journalists' association, (2) at p. 184 para. 70.
Links between free speech and some of the other rights and freedoms recognized
by our Constitution, including freedom of thought and conscience, do exist.
This hardly comes as a surprise when we consider the words of the First
Amendment of the American Constitution, described in Channa Pieris and Others
v. The Attorney-General and Others, (3) at p. 137, as "the progenitor of
Article 14(1) (a) (freedom of speech), 14(1)(b) (freedom of peaceful
assembly), and 14(1)(e) (freedom of association) of the Constitution." The
First Amendment states as follows: "Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or of the right of the
people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of
grievances." Justice Cardozo observed that free speech is "the matrix, the
indispensable condition of nearly every other form of freedom." Palko

**230**

v. Connecticut, (4) cited in Channa Pieris and Others v. Attorney-General and
Others, (3) at p. 143.  
  
The submissions of learned counsel for the petitioner concentrated on the
question of interference with the petitioner's freedom of speech and
expression, including her right to receive and impart information. The
complaint, it seems, related to the deprivation of food for thought by reason
of interference with her right to receive information which she could process
and transmit by speech and expression. rather than to an interference with her
freedom of thought and beliefs: Access to information made her right of
freedom of speech fully meaningful. Cf. the observations of Fernando, J. in
Fernando v. The S. L. B. C. and Others (5) at p. 179. Cf. also Sumith Jayantha
Dias v. Reggie Ranatunge, Deputy Minister of transport and Others, (6) at pp.
21 - 22. In the instant case the complaint was not that the Government was
exercising control over the mind of the petitioner by dictating to her, while
she sat down in her own house, what she may read or what audio-visual
information she may gather. Cf. Stanley v. State of Georgia, (7).
Understandably, learned Counsel for the petitioner did not press the matter of
the alleged violation of the petitioner's right to freedom of thought,
although leave to proceed in respect of the alleged violation of Article 10
had been granted. In the circumstances, it is unnecessary to deal separately
with the question whether there has been a violation of Article 10  
  
**FREEDOM OF SPEECH IN A REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY  
  
**Freedom of speech is vitally important in the discovery of truth in the
market place of ideas so that the wishes of the people safely can be carried
out; in serving the need of every man and woman to achieve personal
fulfilment; and in meeting the demands of a democratic regime. I had, at some
length, endeavoured to discuss these three intrinsic bases of the right to
freedom of expression in Channa Pieris, (3), at pp. 131-137 and feel reluctant
to repeat what I said. However, Thomas Emerson (Toward a General Theory of the
First

**331**

Amendment, 1963, 72 Yale L. J. 877, 894) observed: "The theory of freedom of
expression is a sophisticated and even complex one. It does not come naturally
to the ordinary citizen but needs to be learned. It must be restated and
reiterated not only for each generation, but for each new situation." In
relation to the issues before this Court, where the Constitutional validity of
the impugned regulations is being challenged, principally on the ground that
it is overbroad and therefore not necessary in a democratic state, I should
like to reiterate the following:  
  
The preamble to the Constitution states that the people of Sri Lanka empowered
their representatives by a mandate to "draft, adopt and operate" a new
Constitution "in order to achieve the goals of the DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST
REPUBLIC, and having solemnly resolved by the grant of such mandate . . . to
constitute Sri Lanka into a DEMOCRATIC SOCIALIST REPUBLIC, whilst ratifying
the immutable republican principles of REPRESENTATIVE DEMOCRACY, and assuring
to all peoples FREEDOM, EQUALITY, JUSTICE, FUNDAMENTAL HUMAN RIGHTS and the
INDEPENDENCE OF THE JUDICIARY as the intangible heritage that guarantees the
dignity and well-being of the succeeding generations of the People of SRI
LANKA and of all the people of the World, who come to share with those
generations the effort of working for the creation and preservation of a JUST
AND FREE SOCIETY:  
  
WE, THE FREELY ELECTED REPRESENTATIVES OF THE PEOPLE OF SRI LANKA, in
pursuance of such mandate ... do hereby adopt and enact this Constitution as
the Supreme Law of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka."  
  
The words in capital letters so appear in the Constitution.  
  
Article 1 of the Constitution states, "Sri Lanka (Ceylon) is a Free,
Sovereign, Independent and Democratic Socialist Republic and shall be known as
the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka." Article 27(2) states that
"The State

**332**

is pledged to establish in Sri Lanka a democratic socialist society . . .  
  
Article 27(2) states that "The State is pledged to establish in Sri Lanka a
democratic socialist republic. . ."  
  
"Democratic" is derived from the Greek words demos (the people) and Kratos
(rule). Democracy is the rule of the people. Although at a time when the Greek
States had small populations and limited franchise it was possible for the
people - at. any rate those who were empowered at the time - to directly
decide every important issue, today, with large populations, universal
suffrage, infinitely more complex organizations of societies and the costs
involved in holding elections or referrenda, the people of most countries,
including Sri Lanka, cannot directly participate in deciding every important
issue, although Article 3 of the Constitution does state that "In the Republic
of Sri Lanka sovereignty is in the people and is inalienable", and that
"sovereignty includes the powers of government. . ."  
  
For practical reasons, people must act in a modern democracy through their
elected representatives. And so, Article 4 states:  
  
"The sovereignty of the People shall be exercised and enjoyed in the following
manner:  
  
(a) the legislative power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament,
consisting of elected representatives of the People and by the People at a
referendum,  
  
(b) the executive power of the People, including the defence of Sri Lanka,
shall be exercised by the President of the Republic elected by the People;  
  
(c) the judicial power of the People shall be exercised by Parliament through
courts, tribunals and institutions created and established, or recognized by
the Constitution, or created and established by law, except in regard to
matters relating to

**333**

the privileges, immunities and powers of Parliament and of its members,
wherein the judicial power of the People may be exercised directly by
Parliament according to law. . ."  
  
The value of free speech in a democracy has been recognized by the Courts of
many democratic countries around the world. In Whitney v. California, (8)
quoted in Channa Pieris, (3), at p. 137, explaining why the framers of the
American Constitution, who in 1787 had felt no need to include in the original
document a general theory of freedom of speech, in 1791, by the First
Amendment, did introduce the concept, justice Brandeis, said:  
  
"Those who won our independence believed that the final end of the State was
to make men free to develop their faculties; and that in its government the
deliberative forces should prevail over the arbitrary. They valued liberty
both as an end and as a means. They believed liberty to be the secret of
happiness and courage to be the secret of liberty. They believed that freedom
to think as you wish and to speak as you think are means indispensable to the
discovery and spread of political truth; that without free speech and assembly
discussion would be futile; that with them, discussion affords ordinarily
adequate protection against the dissemination of noxious doctrine; that the
greatest menace to freedom is an inert people; that public discussion is a
political duty; and that this should be a fundamental principle of the
American Government. They recognized the risks to which all human institutions
are subject. But they knew that order cannot be secured merely through fear of
punishment for its infraction; that it is hazardous to discourage thought,
hope and imagination; that fear breeds repression; that repression breeds
hate; that hate menaces stable government; that the path of safety lies in the
opportunity to discuss freely supposed grievances and proposed remedies; and
that the fitting remedy for evil counsels is good ones. Believing in the power
of reason as applied through public discussion, they eschewed silence coerced
by law - the argument of force in its worst form. Recognizing the occasional
tyrannies of governing

**334**

majorities, they amended the Constitution so that free speech and assembly
should be guaranteed."  
  
The European Commission of Human Rights and the European Court of Human Rights
have repeatedly stressed that freedom of expression, in particular freedom of
political and public debate, constitutes one of the essential foundations of a
democratic society, in addition to being one of the basic conditions for its
progress, and for individual self-fulfilment and development of every man and
woman. Handyside v. The United Kingdom, (9) at p. 754; The Sunday Times v. The
United Kingdom, (10) at p. 280: Barthold v. Germany, (11) at p. 403; Hodgson,
Woolf Productions and National Union of Journalists and Channel Four
Television v. United Kingdom, (12) at p. 507; App. No. 11508/85 v. Denmark,
(13); Muller v. Switzerland, (14) at p. 228; The Observer and the Guardian v.
United Kingdom, (15) p. 178, and p. 191; The Sunday Times v. United Kingdom
(No. 2) (16) at p. 235 and p. 241; Castells v. Spain, (17) at p. 476;
Thorgeirson v. Iceland, (18) at p. 865; Brind and Others v. United Kingdom,
(19) at p. C. D. 82; Jersild v. Denmark, (20) at p. 25; Otto Preminger
Institute v. Austria, (21) at p. 57; Oberschlick v. Austria, (22) at p. 421;
Piermont v. France, (23) at p. 341; Goodwin v. United Kingdom, (24) at p. 143;
Adams and Benn v. United Kingdom, (25) at p. C. D. 164; Wingrove v. United
Kingdom, (26) at p. 52.  
  
The Inter-American Court of Human Rights in Re compulsory membership of
journalists' association, (2) at pp. 183-184, has expressed similar views. It
stated: "Freedom of expression is a cornerstone upon which the very existence
of a democratic society rests. It is indispensable for the formation of public
opinion. It is a conditio sine qua non for the development of political
parties, trade unions, scientific and cultural societies and, in general,
those who wish to influence the public. It represents, in short, the means
that enable the community, when exercising its options, to be sufficiently
informed. Consequently, it can be said that a society that is not well
informed is not a society that is truly free."

**335**

Various important international bodies have, from time to time, also endorsed
the value of free speech and expression in a democracy. For instance, on the
29th of April 1982, the Committee of Ministers of the Member States of the
Council of Europe, in their Declaration on the Freedom of Expression and
Information", among other things, reiterated "their firm attachment to the,
principles of freedom of expression and information as a basic element of
democratic and pluralist society." (1983) 5 E. H. R. R. 311.  
  
The Supreme Court of Sri Lanka too has stated that "freedom of speech and
expression is not only a valuable freedom in itself but is basic to a
democratic form of Government." Joseph Perera's case, (1), at p. 223. The
Supreme Court stated in Channa Pieris's case, (3), at p. 132: "Freedom of
thought and expression is an indispensable condition if Sri Lanka is to be
more than a nominally representative democracy."  
  
In Visuvalingam and Others v. Liyanage and Others (27) at pp. 320-323,
Wanasundera, J. referred to the submissions made to the Constitutional Court
on the Sri Lanka Press Council Bill which, inter alia, provided "the
background for the drafting of the present constitutional provisions relating
to fundamental rights," and at p. 548 said: "I am in agreement with Mr.
Nadesan when he says that the freedom of the press embraces the freedom to
propagate a diversity of views. and ideas and the right of free and general
discussions of all public matters . . ." See also the observations of
Wimalaratne, J. accepted by Colin Thome, J., Ranasinghe, J., Abdul Cader, J.
and in a separate judgment by Rodrigo, J., in Visuvalingam and Others v.
Liyanage (28) at p. 131.  
  
In Ratnasara Thero v. Udugampola (29), the Court held that the seizure by the
Police of copies of pamphlets that had been printed on a question of interest
to voters violated the petitioner's freedom of speech and expression including
publication and awarded him compensation and costs. In Mohottige and Others v.
Gunatillake and Others (30), at p.255,

**336**

a prohibition imposed by the Police on persons seeking to criticize the
government and its activities was said to "nullify democratic government as is
understood in this country". In Amaratunga v. Sirimal and Others, (31), at p.
271, and in Deshapriya and Another v. Municipal Council, Nuwara Eliya and
Others, (32), at p. 370, Fernando, J. said: "The right to support or to
criticize Governments and political parties, policies and programmes, is
fundamental to the democratic way of life, and the freedom of speech and
expression is one which cannot be denied without violating those fundamental
principles of liberty and justice which lie at the base of all civil and
political institutions. Dejonge v. Oregon (23)." Cf. Marian and Another v.
Upasena, (34). In awarding compensation for the violation of freedom of
speech, the Court has taken account of its numerous decisions stressing the
importance of that fundamental right. Gunawardena and Another v. Pathirana,
0.I. C., Police Station, Elpitiya and Others, (35), at p. 274. And if has been
held that the Constitutional guarantee of free speech must be interpreted in
the light of the "fundamental principles of democracy and the Rule of Law
which are the bedrock of the Constitution.": Karunathilake and Another v.
Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of Elections and Others, (36) at p. 173.  
  
Speech concerning public affairs is more than self expression; it is the
essence of self-government. To make an informed and educated decision in
choosing his or her elected. representative, in deciding to vote for one group
of persons rather than another, a voter must necessarily have the opportunity
of being informed with regard to proposed policies. The election of
representatives is based on an appeal to reason and not to emotions; a system
of government based on representative democracy assumes it to be so. In the
formation of opinions and the mobilization of such ideas offered for
acceptance in the competition for the right to represent the people, there can
be no appeal to reason without the freedom to express and propagate and
discuss ideas, based on adequate and reliable information.

**337**

In its social dimension, freedom of expression is a means for the interchange
of ideas and information among human beings and for mass communication. It
includes the right of each person to seek to communicate his or her own views
to others, as well as the right to receive opinions and information from
others. Open Door Counselling and Dublin Well Woman v. Ireland (37) at p.261;
Informationsvere in Lentia v. Austria(38), at p. 113. Freedom of speech
necessarily protects the right to receive information, regardless of the
social worth of such information. The right is fundamental to a free society.
Martin v. City of Struthers, (39); Winters v. New York, (40); Griswold v.
Connecticut, (41); Lamont v. Postmaster-General, (42), Stanley v. Georgia,
(7); Cf. Pierce v. Society of Sisters, (43). For the average citizen, it is
just as important to know the opinions of others or to have access to
information generally as the very right to impart his or her opinions. Re
Compulsory membership of journalists' association, (2) at pp. 171-172.  
  
In this connection the "dual aspect" of freedom of expression needs to be
stressed. It requires, on the one hand, that no one be arbitrarily limited or
impeded in expressing his or her own thoughts. In that sense, it is a right
that belongs to each individual. Its second aspect, on the other hand, in
general, implies a collective right to receive information and have access to
the thoughts expressed by others. The right to receive information is an
important aspect of free speech and expression. Visuvalingam and Others v.
Liyanage and Others, (28) at pp. 131-133.  
  
Since the petitioners complaint is concerned with political matters and
freedom to use the print media, I have focussed attention on those aspects.
However, the impugned regulations extend to all forms of expression and
communication. Therefore it must be stressed that the principles relating to
freedom of speech and expression do not apply solely to certain types of
information or ideas or forms of expression. Freedom of speech and expression
protects not only the substance of the ideas and information expressed, but
also the form in

**338**

which they are conveyed. Oberschlick v. Austria, (22) at p. 422. In its
individual dimension, although formulated primarily with regard to speech and
the print media, freedom of speech and expression includes "all forms of
freedom of speech and expression", Karunathilaka and Another u. Dayananda
Dissanayake, Commissioner of Elections and Others, (36) at p. 173, including
the right to use audio-visual media, Jersild u. Denmark, (20) at p. 26, and
indeed whatever medium is deemed appropriate to impart ideas and to have them
reach as wide an audience as possible, and it includes artistic expression.
See Article 19(2) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights;
Muller v. Switzerland, (supra), (14) at p. 225. It also encompasses
information of a commercial nature and even music, and commercials transmitted
by cable. Casado Coca u. Spain, (44) at p. 20.  
  
In Amaratunga v. Sirimal and Others, (31), disapproval of the policies and
actions of government on a range of issues was expressed by a fifteen minute,
noisy cacophany of public protests - Jana Ghosha - which included the ringing
of bells, tooting of motor vehicle horns, the banging of saucepans and the
beating of drums. It was held at p. 270, citing several opinions of the U. S.
Supreme Court, that "speech and expression" extended to forms of symbolic
speech and expression and that Jana Ghosha could be regarded . as "speech and
expression". In Abeyratne v. Gunatilake and Others, (45) at p. 295 it was held
that the guarantee of freedom of speech and expression and freedom of peaceful
assembly "could be rendered meaningless if permission for the use of
amplifying mechanical devices in furtherance of free speech is unreasonably
withheld."  
  
It is only by informed discussion that proposals adduced can be modified so
that the political, social and economic measures desired by voters can be
brought about. And, in between elections, it is only through free and informed
debate and exchange of ideas that the elected majority can be made to remain
responsive to and reflect the will of the people.

**339**

The fact that people have elected representatives does not imply that such
representatives may always do as they will; members of the public must, in
matters affecting them, be free to influence intelligently the decisions of
those persons for the time being empowered to act for them. Every legitimate
interest of the people or a section of them should have the opportunity of
being made known and felt in the political process. Moreover, in a
representative democracy there must be a continuing public interest in the
workings of government which should be open to scrutiny and well-founded
constructive criticism. Indeed, a central value of free speech, and the
concomitant rights of freedom of association and assembly, lies in checking
the abuse of power by those in authority. The free press has a legitimate
interest in reporting on and drawing the public's attention to deficiencies in
the operation of Government services, including possible illegal activities.
It is incumbent on the press to impart information and ideas about such
matters and the public has a right to receive them. The Observer and the
Guardian v. United Kingdom, (15) at p. 178; The Sunday Times v. United
Kingdom, (No. 2), (16) at p. 235.  
  
Journalism, it has been held, "is the primary and principal manifestation of
freedom of expression of thought." Re Compulsory membership of journalists'
association, (2) at p. 184. With regard to the press, it has been stated that
it has a pre-eminent role in a State governed by the rule of law and, that
whilst it must not overstep the bounds set, it is nevertheless incumbent on
the press, in away consistent with its duties and responsibilities, to
disseminate information and ideas and stimulate debate on political issues and
on other matters of public interest. Castells v. Spain, (17) at 476; Prager
and Obserschlick v. Austria, (46) at p. 19-20. Not only does the press have
the task of imparting such information and ideas, the public also have a right
to receive them. Sunday Times v. U. K., (10) at p. 280; Lingens v. Austria,
(47) at p. 418; Worm v. Austria, (48) at p. C. D. 39. Were it otherwise, the
press would be unable to play its vital role of `public watchdog'.

**340**

The Observer and the Guardian, v. U. K., (15) at p. 191; Tborgeirson v.
Iceland, (18), at p. 865, Brind and Others v. U. K., (19) at p. 82; Jersild v.
Denmark, (20) at p. 14, Goodwin v. U. K., (24) at p. 136. Freedom of the press
affords the public one of the best means of discovering and forming an opinion
of the ideas and attitudes of their political leaders. In particular, it gives
politicians the opportunity to reflect and comment on the preoccupations of
public opinion; it thus enables everyone to participate in political debate
which is at the very core of the concept of a democratic society. Lingens v.
Austria, (47) at pp. 418-419; Castells v. Spain, (17) at p. 476; Brind and
Others v. U. K., (19) at p. 82; McLaughlin v. United Kingdom, (49) at p. C. D.
92; Oberschlick v. Austria, (22) at p. 422.  
  
Freedom of speech and expression protects not only information or ideas that
are favourably received or regarded as inoffensive or as a matter of
indifference, but also those that offend, shock or disturb the State or any
sector of the population. See Channa Pieris, (3) at p. 134, cited in
Gunawardena and Another v. Pathirana, O. I. C., Police Station Elpitiya and
Others, (35) at p. 278. Such are the demands of that pluralism, tolerance and
broadmindedness without which there is no `democratic society'. Handyside v.
U. K., (9) at p. 754; The Sunday Times v. U. K., (10) at p. 280; Appl No.
11508/85 v. Denmark, (13) at pp. 560-561; Lingens v. Austria (47), at p. 418;
Muller v. Switzerland, (14) at p. 228; Castells v. Spain (17) at p. 476;
Thorgeirson v. Iceland, (18) at p. 865; Brind and Others v. U. K., (19) at p.
82; Jersild v. Denmark, (20) at p. 14; Otto Preminger Institute v. Austria,
(21) at p. 57; Obserschlick v. Austria, (22) at p. 421; Vereinigung
Democratischer Soldaten Osterreichs and Gubi v. Austria, (50) at p. 83;
Piermont v. France, (23) at p. 341; Goodwin v. U. K. (24) at p. 136;
Vereniging Radio 100 et al. v. Netherlands, (51) at p. C. D. 204.  
  
Justice Holmes in Abrams v. United States, (52) quoted in Channa Pieris, (3)
at p. 136, said:

**341**

"Persecution for the expression of opinions seems to me perfectly logical. If
you have no doubt of your premises or your power and want a result with all
your heart you naturally express your wishes in law and sweep away all
opposition. To allow opposition by speech seems to indicate that you think the
speech impotent, as when a man says that he has squared the circle, or that
you do not care wholeheartedly for the result, or that you doubt either your
power or your premises. But when men have realised that time has upset many
fighting faiths, they may come to believe even more than they believe the very
foundations of their conduct that the ultimate good desired is better reached
by free trade in ideas - that the best test of truth is the power of the
thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market, and that
truth is the only ground upon which their wishes can be carried out. That at
any rate is the theory of our Constitution . . ."  
  
There is a vital societal interest in preserving an uninhibited market place
of ideas in which truth will ultimately prevail. Red Lion Broadcasting Co. v.
FCC, (53). We are committed to the principle that debate on public issues
should be uninhibited, robust and wide open. Channa Pieris, (3) at p. 36. An
assumption underlying Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution is that speech can
rebut speech, propaganda will answer propaganda and that free debate of ideas
will result in the wisest policies, at least for the time being. Channa
Pieris, (3) at p. 135.  
  
Attempts to secure uniformity of ideas is fraught with danger. "Those who
begin coercive elimination of dissent soon find themselves eliminating
dissenters. Compulsory unification of opinion achieves only the unanimity of
the graveyard. It seems trite that [the Constitutional guarantee of freedom of
expression] was designed to avoid these ends by avoiding beginnings.- West
Virginia Board of Education v. Barnette, (54), followed in Shantha Wijeratne
v. Vijitha Perera and Others, (55), Channa Pieris, (3) at pp. 42-43, and in
Gunawardena and Another v. Pathirana, O. I. C., Police Station,

**342**

Elpitiya and Others, (35) at p. 277\. As we have seen, Justice Brandeis
pointed out in Whitney v. California, (8) repression breeds hate and hate
menaces stable government. Nowak, Rotunda and Young, Constitutional Law, pp.
836-7), cited with approval in Channa Pieris, (3) at p. 43, pointed out:  
  
"Just as the ancient Roman eventually learned that executing Christians did
not suppress Christianity, modern governments should realize that forbidding
people to talk about certain topics does not encourage public stability. It
only creates martyrs. Punishing people for speech does not discourage speech;
it only drives it underground and encourages conspiracy. In the battle for
public order, free speech is the ally, not the enemy."  
  
**RESTRICTIONS ON FREEDOM OF SPEECH IN GENERAL  
**  
Although one may think what one may wish, no intelligent person articulates or
ought to articulate every thought that happens to pass through his or her
mind, anywhere at any time.  
  
In the exercise and operation of a persons freedom of thought, . conscience
and beliefs, and the right to impart opinions, one might be restrained by the
Buddha's advice to be watchful of one's speech, recalling the fate of the ever
hungry spirit (peta), with the head of a pig and the body of a human being,
with its mouth swarming with maggots, who ignored the Buddha's admonition.
Dhammathha Vagga, xx. 6.  
  
Those who cannot restrain themselves for moral reasons are in many ways
prevented by taw from speaking as they think, for the societal value of speech
must on occasion be subordinate to other values and considerations. Article
28(e) of the Constitution draws our attention to the fact that - "the exercise
and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is inseparable from the performance of
duties and obligations" and reminds us that "accordingly it is the duty of
every person in Sri Lanka

**343**

to respect the rights and freedoms of other." Article 15(2) states that "the
exercise and operation of the fundamental right declared and recognized by
Article 14(1) (a)", namely, freedom of speech and expression, including
publication, "shall be subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by
law in the interests of racial and religious harmony or in relation to
Parliamentary privilege, contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an
offence." Article 15(7) states that the exercise and operation of the
fundamental rights declared and recognized by Article 14 "shall be subject to
such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of national
security, public order, and the protection of public health or morality, or
for the purpose of securing due recognition and respect for the rights and
freedoms of others, or of meeting the just requirements of the general
requirements of the general welfare of a democratic society. . ."  
  
Laws restraining speech to ensure that the rights of others are safeguarded
and that people shall exercise their right of free speech with responsibility
are commonplace. Laws relating to official secrets, defamation, obscenity,
contempt of court, perjury, fraud, extortion, and licensing of radio and
television broadcasters, readily come to mind. As Justice Sanford, delivering
the opinion of the United States Supreme Court, observed in Gitlow v. New
York, (56), cited in Channa Pieris and Others v. Attorney-General and Others,
(3) at pp. 137-138, "It is a fundamental principle, long established, that
freedom of speech and the press which is secured by the Constitution, does not
confer an absolute right to speak or publish without responsibility, whatever
one may choose." See also the observations of Sharvananda, C. J. in
Dissanayake v. Sri Jayawardenapura University, (57) at pp. 263-264 and at p.
270\. Nor is there an absolute right to receive information as an element of
the right of free speech and expression. Gaskin v. United Kingdom, (58) at p.
285; Gas kin v. United Kingdom, (59) at p. 411: Leander v. Sweden, (60) at p.
452 and p. 456: Wallen v. Sweden, (61) at p. 322.

**344**

The Constitutional provision relating to free speech, as Meikljohn observed in
his work Free Speech and its Relation to Self Government, "is not the guardian
of unregulated talkativeness." Geoffrey Robertson, Q. C., and Andrew Nicol,
Media Law, 3rd ed., p. 1., observed: "By and large, Parliament and the
judiciary have taken the view that free speech is a very good thing so long as
it does not cause trouble. Then it may become expensive speech - speech . . .
with costly court actions, fines, damages and occasionally imprisonment. 'Free
speech', in fact, means no more than speech from which illegal utterances are
subtracted."  
  
In addition to restrictions prescribed by law, there may be utterances that
are no essential part of any exposure of ideas and are of such social value as
a step in truth that any benefit that may be derived from them is outweighed
by the social interest in order and morality. Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire,
(62). Thus, it has been said that resort to rude epithets or personal abuse is
not in any proper sense communication of information or opinion safeguarded by
the Constitution. Cantwell v. Connecticut, (63).  
  
Likewise, although, as Lord Denning in an address before the High Court
Journalists' Association observed in 1964 (The Times, 03 December 1964),
"justice has no place in darkness and secrecy. When a judge sits on a case, he
himself is on trial ... If there is any misconduct on his part, any bias or
prejudice, there is a reporter to keep an eye on him,'' and although justice
is not a "cloistered virtue", yet, wanton and irresponsible criticism of
democratic institutions like the judiciary, can hardly claim to be an use of
freedom of speech that deserves constitutional protection. Thus in Prager and
Obserschlick v. Austria (46), at p. 20, the European Court of Human Rights
stated that it is incumbent on the press in a way consistent with its duties
and responsibilities to impart information and ideas on matters of public
interest including "questions concerning the functioning of the system of
justice, an institution that is essential for any democratic society.

**345**

The press is one of the means by which politicians and public opinion can
verify that judges are discharging their heavy responsibilities in a manner
that is in conformity with the aim which is the basis of the task entrusted to
them." The Court added: "Regard must, however, be had to the special role of
the judiciary in society. As the guarantor of justice, a fundamental value in
a law-governed State, it must enjoy public confidence if it is to be
successful in carrying out its duties. It may therefore prove necessary to
protect such confidence against destructive attacks that are essentially
unfounded, especially in view of the fact that judges who have been criticised
are subject to a duty of discretion that precludes them from replying."  
  
Free speech has its limits. In his famous aphorism in Schenck v. United
States, (64) cited with approval in several cases including Mallawarachchi v.
Seneviratne, (65) Bernard Soysa and Two Others v. The A. G. and Two Others,
(66) at p. 58 and in Channa Pieris, (3) at p. 138, Justice Holmes said, "The
most stringent protection of free speech would not protect a man in falsely
shouting fire in a theatre and causing panic." Moreover, as Fernando, J.
observed in Bernard Soysa (66) at p. 58, "What may be said or done in the
exercise of the freedom of speech, expression or peaceful assembly would also
depend on the place." See also Saranapala v. Solanga Arachchi, (67) at pp.
172-173, on the use of public places. Moreover, the right to speak must be
tailored to the occasion. Mahinda Rajapakse v. Kudahetti and Others, (68), at
p. 229. See also the observations of Sharvananda, C. J. in Joseph Perera v. A.
G. (1) at p. 226 - p. 227.  
  
Referring to `other countries', extravagant claims are sometimes made by
journalists. Even the Republic of Iceland, which in Artice 72 of its
Constitution states that "Every person has the right to express his thoughts
in print ... Censorship or other limitations on the freedom of the press may
never be imposed," (The emphasis is mine,) provides in that very same Article
that a person expressing his thoughts "may be held

**346**

responsible for them in courts. "An author, or if the publication is not in
his or her name, then the publisher, editor, seller or distributor may, under
section 15 of the Right of Publication Act 1956 of Iceland, be held both
criminally and civilly liable. Moreover, a. defamatory publication constitutes
a criminal offence under the Penal Code of Iceland. Thorgeirson v. Iceland
(18), at p. 857. Admittedly, in the law relating to defamation in Iceland,
there is no prior restraint on the exercise of free speech, Yet, where the
governing instrument, be it a Constitution or international convention, does
not prohibit prior restraints on publication, the imposition of such
restraints, e. g. by injunctions obtained under a prescribed law, is not per
se impermissible. In Sri Lanka, pre-censorship is not necessarily
unconstitutional and can be justified, if brought within the ambit of Article
15. Joseph Perera's case, (1) at p. 229. Dissanayake v. Sri Jayewardenepura
University, (57) at p. 270. However, the dangers inherent in prior restraints
are such that they call for the most careful scrutiny on the part of a Court
that is called upon to consider the validity of such restraints. Wingrove v.
U. K., (26) at p. 31. But that is another matter.  
  
As far as prior restraints are concerned, a person may seek judicial review of
a censor's acts. Yet, if a person must pursue his or her judicial remedy
before he or she may exercise his or her right of freedom of speech, the
occasion might have become history and later speech may. be futile or
pointless. See per Justice Douglas in Walker v. City of Birmingham, (69). This
is especially so as far as the press is concerned, for news is a perishable
commodity and to delay its publication, even for a short period, for instance,
while the Competent Authority makes up his mind under the impugned
regulations, may well deprive it of all its value and interest. Cf. The
Observer and the Guardian v. U. K., (15) at p. 191; The Sunday Times v. U. K.,
(16) at p. 242. See also Markt Intern Verlag and Beemann v. Germany (70) at p.
175. On the other hand if prior restraint was not possible, irreparable harm
could be caused in certain instances. As Justice Douglas observed in Dennis v.
United

**347**

States, (71) see also Channa Pieris, (3) at pp. 47-48: "There comes a time
when even free speech loses its constitutional immunity. . . When conditions
are so critical that there will be no time to avoid the evil that the speech
threatens, it is time to cry a halt. Otherwise free speech which is the
strength of the nation will be the cause of its destruction."  
  
In Abrams v. United States, (52) even Holmes J., despite his off-quoted words
in support of free Speech in the opinion he expressed in that case, recognized
the danger of waiting before taking action against a person exercising the
right of free speech, although he did stress the need to limit restraint. He
said: "I think that we should be eternally vigilant against attempts to check
the expression of opinions we loathe and believe to be fraught with death,
unless they so imminently threaten immediate interference with the lawful and
pressing purposes of the law that an immediate check is required to save the
country. [Only] the emergency that makes it immediately dangerous to leave the
correction of evil counsels to time warrants making any exception to the
sweeping command, Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech."  
  
**THE RELEVANCE OF OTHER LAW, INCLUDING DECISIONS OF OTHER COURTS AND
TRIBUNALS  
**  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner, relied on dicta in the opinions of the
United States Supreme Court in Schenck v. U. S., (51); Abrams v. U. S., (52)
Gitlow v. New York, (47), New York Times Company v. U. S., and United States
v. The Washington Post Company et al., (72), usually referred to as New York
Times v. U. S., and particularly on the decisions of the European Court of
Human Rights in The Observer and Guardian v. U. K., (15) and The Sunday Times
v. U. K. (No. 2) (16), in submitting that the conditions for the imposition of
restrictions stated in Article 15(7) had not been satisfied in the making of
the impugned regulations and that such regulations were therefore
unconstitutional.

**348**

The Additional Solicitor-General submitted that the dicta in the American
opinions were unhelpful, since the First Amendment of the American
Constitution did not provide for restrictions and that the restrictions had
been judge-made. On the other hand, he submitted, the restrictions in the Sri
Lanka Constitution are to be found in the Constitution itself, as it was the
case with the Indian Constitution, which provided for restrictions in Article
19(2).  
  
The relevant words of Article 19 of the Indian Constitution are as follows:  
  
"(1) All citizens shall have the right (a) to freedom of speech and expression
... (2) Nothing in sub-clause (a) of Clause (1) shall affect the operation of
any existing law, or prevent the State from making any law, in so far as such
law imposes reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by
the said sub-clause in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of
India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States,
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court,
defamation or incitement to an offence."  
  
The learned Additional Solicitor General cited H. M. Seervai who, in
Constitutional Law of India, 4th Ed., p. 710, drew attention to the warning
given by the Indian Supreme Court in Travancore-cochin v. Bombay Co. Ltd.,
(73) at p. 1120, and in Bombay v. R. M. D. Chamarabagawalla, (74) at p. 918,
about the use of American decisions, and stated as follows:  
  
"In Express Newspapers (Private) Ltd. v. Union, (75) [pp. 121-122), Bhagwati
J. said that there was a paucity of authority in India on the nature, scope
and extent of the fundamental right to the freedom of speech and expression
and he added: ". . . the fundamental right to the freedom of speech and
expression enshrined in . . . our Constitution is based on the provisions in
Amendment I of the Constitution of the United States ... and it would be
therefore legitimate and

**349**

proper to refer to those decisions of the U. S. Supreme Court to appreciate
the true nature, scope and extent of this right in spite of the warning
administered by this Court against the use of American and other cases."  
  
It is submitted that the provisions of the two Constitutions as to freedom of
speech and expression are essentially different, the difference being
accentuated by provisions in our Constitution for preventive detention which
have no counterpart in the U. S. Constitution. The First Amendment enacts an
absolute prohibition, so that a heavy burden lies on anyone transgressing it
to justify such a transgression. Again, since the Amendment contains no
exceptions, it is not surprising that exceptions have had to be evolved by
judicial decisions which have limited the scope of such exceptions with
increasing stringency. The position in India is different. The right to the
freedom of speech and expression, and the limitations on that right are
contained in Article 19(1) (a) read with sub-Art. (2). Laws which fall under
sub-Art. (2) are expressly permitted by our Constitution and the problem in
India is to determine whether an impugned law falls within Article 19(2), and
that is essentially a problem of construction. No doubt Article 19(2)
authorises the imposition of "reasonable restrictions", and in the end, the
question of reasonableness is a question for the Court to decide. However, a
law made in respect of the matters referred to in Article 19(2) must prima
facie be presumed to be constitutionally valid and due weight must be given to
the legislative judgment on the question of reasonableness, though that
judgment is subject to judicial review. It is difficult, if not impossible, to
read into the words "reasonable restrictions" the test of "clear and present
danger" evolved by the U. S. Supreme Court in dealing with the freedom of
speech and the press. The difference between the First Amendment and Article
19(1)(a) was noted by Douglas J. in Kingsley [International Pictures]
Corporation v. Regents of the University of New York, (76). In holding that
all pre-censorship of cinema films was constitutionally void, he said: "If we
had a provision in our Constitution for -reasonable"

**350**

regulation of the press, such as India has included in hers, there would be
room for argument that censorship in the interest of morality would be
permissible."  
  
The above submission is reinforced by the fact that preventive detention for
reasons connected with the security of a State, the maintenance of public
order and the maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community
is a subject of concurrent legislative power ... and Article 22(3) ...
provides safeguards of a very limited nature in respect of such detention. .
."  
  
Admittedly, no restrictions on the exercise of the freedom of speech were
specified in the First Amendment. However, the U. S. Supreme Court, from the
now famous "footnote 4" of the opinion of Chief Justice Stone in United States
v. Carotene Products Co., (77) through Brandenberg v. Ohio, (78), and Hess v.
Indiana, (79) has interpreted the First Amendment in numerous cases and
evolved guidelines, on the one hand, to protect free speech, and, on the
other, to ensure the safety of the State and protect other interests.
Admittedly, due regard must be had to the fact that an inquiry as to the
exercise of the permissible restrictions under the law of Sri Lanka involves
essentially a matter of construction by our own courts. Nevertheless, although
we are not bound by the opinions of the U. S. Supreme Court, yet in the
interpretation of our own Constitutional provisions, especially those that
impinge and impact on the value of free speech in a democratic State, and
concepts relating to matters expressly referred to in our own Constitution, e.
g. "national security", "public order", the protection of public health or
morality", "securing due recognition for the rights and freedoms of others",
and "meeting the just requirements and the general welfare of a democratic
society", some of the opinions expressed by the U. S. Supreme Court are of
great usefulness and of persuasive authority, for they are concepts
essentially developed over many years by the U. S. Supreme Court, although
more recently, and not less importantly, by other domestic courts,

**351**

including the Supreme Courts of Sri Lanka and India, and. by international
bodies like the European Commission for Human Rights and Courts like the
European Court for Human Rights. Divergent approaches must be expected, and we
should proceed with caution, although, in my view, that is not a good ground
for looking at one's own Constitution wearing blinkers.  
  
Jeremy McBride, Widening Case Law Horizons, Vol. I No. 4, Interights Bulletin,
1986, at pp. 8 - 10, dealt with the question of the use of precedents from
other systems in the interpretation of international instruments. However, his
observations with regard to interpretation deserve repetition even with regard
to the interpretation of Constitutional provisions and domestic legislation.
McBride said,  
  
"Differences of this kind are not necessarily undesirable or impermissible
even though the treaties involved -seek to protect many of the same basic
rights and freedoms and subject them to similar restrictions. After all the
framework, language and political background of the various instruments is not
the same. The universality of human rights is, therefore, out of the question,
at least as far as the detailed understanding of individual rights and
freedoms is concerned. However, although uniformity in interpretation may be
precluded by the terms of the treaties themselves, this cannot be true of the
major concepts underlying them since all share a common acknowledged lineage
back to the Universal Declaration. While therefore the autonomous meaning of
each instrument can be insisted upon, it does not follow that the case law
emanating from one system should be regarded as irrelevant to another."  
  
I agree that the universality of human rights is "out of the question, at
least as far as the detailed understanding of individual rights and freedoms
is concerned." Universality is aspirational. However, we might cooperate in
the ongoing effort to make universality a reality, although we ought to be

**352**

vigilant in preserving our own values, despite attempts by specious promises
or plain bullying to jetisson those things we in our communities hold to be of
intrinsic worth. We might, if we proceed cautiously, derive assistance from
the decisions of other Courts elsewhere, in appropriate cases, the Court being
circumspect and attentive to all the circumstances affecting its decision.  
  
I should like to make reference to some of the Bangalore Principles declared
by Commonwealth Jurists on 26 February 1988, at the end of a colloquium on The
Domestic Application of Human Rights Norms. Interights Bulletin, Vol. 3, 1988,
No. 1 p. 2.  
  
I must emphatically state that I do not subscribe to any of the other views
stated in the Bangalore Principles.  
  
"2.... international human rights instruments provide important guidance in
cases concerning fundamental rights and freedoms.  
  
3\. There is an impressive body of jurisprudence, both international and
national, concerning the interpretation of particular human rights and
freedoms and their application. This body of jurisprudence is of practical
relevance to judges and lawyers generally.  
  
4\. In most countries whose legal systems are based upon the common law,
international conventions are not directly enforceable in national courts
unless their provisions have been incorporated by legislation into domestic
law.  
  
5.However; there is a growing tendency for national courts to have regard to
these international norms for the purpose of deciding cases where the domestic
law - whether constitutional, statute or common law - is incomplete.  
  
6\. While it is desireable for the norms contained in the international human
rights instruments to be still more widely recognized and applied by national
courts, this

**353**

process must take into full account local laws, traditions, circumstances and
needs.  
  
7\. It is within the proper nature of the judicial process and well-
established judicial functions for national courts to have regard to
international obligations which a country undertakes - whether or not they
have been incorporated into domestic law - for the purpose of removing
ambiguity or uncertainly from national constitutions, regulation or common
law.  
  
8\. However, where national law is clear and inconsistent with the
international obligations of the State concerned, in common law countries, the
national court is obliged to give effect to national law. In such cases the
court should draw such inconsistency to the attention of the appropriate
authorities since the supremacy of national law in no way mitigates a breach
of an international legal obligation which is undertaken by a country.  
  
9\. These views are expressed in recognition of the fact that judges and
lawyers have a special contribution to make in the administration of justice
in fostering universal respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms."  
  
Decisions from elsewhere are, in my view, of most value where the right or
freedom or limiting concept is expressed in broadly similar terms. Even when a
formulation is different, the omissions, additions and drafting may shed light
on the result to be reached. To take account of the case law of another system
should, however, never be a back-door attempt to achieve universality at the
expense of the will of States parties to a convention, or the will of
Sovereign Peoples in the case of domestic Constitutions.  
  
Despite his submissions against the usefulness of looking at the opinions of
the U. S. Supreme Court, the learned Additional Solicitor-General himself
placed reliance on the following decisions of the U. S. Supreme Court: New
York

**354**

Times Company v. United States, (72); Schenck v. United States, (64); Frohwerk
v. United States, (80); United States v. David Paul O'Brien, (81); and
Kingsley International Pictures Corporation v. Regents of the University of
the State of New York, (76).  
  
Learned Counsel for the respondents submitted that the dicta in two judgments
of the European Court of Human Rights cited by learned Counsel for the
petitioner were inapplicable, since they were concerned with the
interpretation of Article 10 of the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms which was not in terms identical with
Article 15(2) and Article 15(7) of the Sri Lanka Constitution.  
  
Article 10 of the European Convention states as follows:  
  
"Everyone has the right to freedom of expression. This right shall include
freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas
without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers. This
Article shall not prevent States from requiring the licensing of broadcasting,
television or cinema enterprises.  
  
2\. The exercise of these freedoms, since it carries with it duties and
responsibilities, may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions
or penalties as are prescribed by law and are necessary in a democratic
society, in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or
public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of
health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others,
for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for
maintaining the authority and impartiality of the judiciary."  
  
Admittedly, there are differences in the manner of expression, and we should,
therefore, be cautious in applying decisions concerned with the interpretation
of Article 10 of

**355**

the European Convention. At the same time, as we shall see, there is much
assistance to be derived from them in deciding whether the impugned
regulations were in contravention of the Constitution, for some of the
differences, in my view, relate more to form than substance.  
  
**ALLEGED UNCONSTITUTIONALITY OF THE IMPUGNED REGULATIONS  
**  
There was no dispute that the impugned regulation caused an interference with
the petitioner :s ability to receive and impart information, and therefore, ex
facie, there was a transgression of her freedom of speech and expression
guaranteed by Article 14(1) of the Constitution. However, the respondents
maintained that the petitioner's rights were not absolute, and that the
exercise and operation of the petitioner's rights were subject to restrictions
imposed in terms of Article 15(7) of the Constitution, and therefore there was
no violation of Article 14(1)(a) of the Constitution.  
  
In paragraph 14 of her petition, the petitioner admits that the right of free
speech could be restricted, but submitted that in the circumstances of this
case the regulations of 6 November 1999 were unconstitutional, having regard
to the provisions of Article 15(7) read with Article 155(2), and should be
struck down.  
  
Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the burden of justifying
restrictions imposed under Article 15(7) is heavy. I find myself in agreement
with him. Seervai, as we have seen, said, "The First Amendment enacts an
absolute prohibition, so that a heavy burden lies on anyone transgressing it
to justify such transgression." The burden, in my view, continues to be heavy
even where freedom of speech is expressed in more or less absolute terms, as
it is in Article 14(1)(a), but where specific provision is made elsewhere for
exceptions. Exceptions must be narrowly and strictly construed for the reason
that. freedom of speech constitutes one of the

**356**

essential foundations of a democratic society which, as we have seen, the
Constitution, in no uncertain terms, declares Sri Lanka to be.  
  
**PRESCRIBED BY LAW  
**  
In order to justify the imposition of restrictions on the operation and
exercise of a citizen's freedom of speech, Article 15(7), like Article 15(2),
requires that such restrictions shall be "prescribed by law". I will be
referring to some of the decisions of the European Commission of Human Rights,
and the European Court of Human Rights because I consider them to be apposite,
for Article 10(2) of the European Convention also has the requirement that
restrictions must be "prescribed by law". It has been held that "prescribed by
law" in Article 10(2) must be given the same interpretation as the phrase "in
accordance with law", and that accessibility and foreseeability are two of the
requirements inherent in the phrase "prescribed by law" and relate to the
quality of law. Brind and Others v. United Kingdom, (19) at p. C. D. 81; Hins
and Hugenholtz v. Netherlands, (82) at p. 126; Vereniging Radio 100 et al. v.
Netherlands, (51) at p. C. D. 203.  
  
The impugned "emergency" regulations were made by the President under section
5 of the Public Security Ordinance. Section 5(1), enables the President to
make such regulations as appear to the President "to be necessary or expedient
in the interests of public security and the preservation of public order and
the suppression of mutiny, riot or civil commotion, or for the maintenance of
supplies and services essential to the community." Section 5(2)(d) enables the
President to make emergency regulations that appear to the President to be
"necessary or expedient", inter alia, in the interests of public security,
"amending any law, for suspending the operation of any law and for applying
any law with or without modification." The phrase "any law" does not empower
the President in terms of section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance to amend
or suspend a provision of the Constitution, such as the guarantee

**357**

under Article 14(1)(a) relating to freedom of speech, on the ground of public
security. This is evident from Article 155(2). The power to do so is derived
from Article 15(7) of the Constitution which enables the President to impose
restrictions on the operation and exercise of the fundamental right of freedom
of speech by regulations made under the law relating to public security.  
  
The restrictions complained of were set out in a regulation made by the
President of the Republic under section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance,
Cap. 51 of the Legislative Enactments. The Ordinance was enacted prior to the
Constitution. Article 170 of the Constitution states that "law" means any Act
of Parliament, and any law enacted by any legislature at any time prior to the
commencement of the Constitution and includes an Order in Council.- Article
168(1) of the Constitution states that "Unless Parliament otherwise provides,
all written laws and unwritten laws in force immediately before the
commencement of the Constitution, shall, mutatis mutandis, and except as
otherwise expressly provided in the Constitution, continue in force." Article
155 of the Constitution states that 'The Public Security Ordinance as amended
and in force, immediately prior to the commencement of the Constitution shall
be deemed to be a law enacted by Parliament." Article 155 further provides
that "The power to make emergency regulations under the Public Security
Ordinance or the law for the time being in force relating to public security
shall include the power to make regulations having the legal effect of over-
riding amending or suspending the operation of the provisions of any law
except the provisions of the Constitution." Freedom of speech is protected by
Article 14(1) (a) of the Constitution. However, the Constitution provides in
Article 15(7) that the exercise and operation of that Article "shall be
subject to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law in the interests of
national security. . ." Article 15(7) states that "For the purposes of this
paragraph "law" includes regulations made under the law for the time being
relating to public security."

**358**

Ex facie, the restrictions complained of which were contained in regulations
made under section 5 of the Public Security Ordinance, had a basis in law and
were in accordance with law.  
  
The petititoner, however, maintained that the impugned regulations were
imprecise and vague. She stated in her petition that "any law which confers
unguided and unfettered discretion without narrow objectives and definite
standards to guide such authority is unconstitutional." She added that "it is
of fundamental importance that such a law should not be incomplete and should
contain within itself all the vital and necessary components relating to its
operation, including precise restrictions that it seeks to impose." The
impugned regulations, the petitioner stated, were "not subject to any rational
guidelines and hence permits the authorities to apply the said regulations
arbitrarily and discriminately". There was, she said, a discrepancy between
the Sinhala and English versions, "thus facilitating an arbitrary and
incoherent application of the said regulations."  
  
In The Sunday Times v. The United Kingdom, (10) at p. 271, (see also Gay News
v. United Kingdom, (83) at pp. 127-128; G v. Germany, (84) at p. 503; Markt
Intern and Beerman v. Germany, (85) at p. 231; Times Newspapers Ltd and Neil
v. United Kingdom, (86) at p. C. D. 55: Hinz and Hugenholtz v. Netherlands,
(82) at p. (26), the European Court of Human Rights stated as follows:  
  
"In the Court's opinion, the following are two of the requirements that flow
from the expression 'prescribed by law'. First, the law must be accesible: the
citizen must be able to have an indication in the circumstances of the legal
rules applicable to a given case. Secondly, a norm cannot be regarded as a
'law unless it is formulated with sufficient precision to enable the citizen
to regulate his conduct: he must be able - if need be with appropriate advice
- to foresee, to a degree that is reasonable in the circumstances,

**359**

the consequences which a given action may entail. Those consequences need not
be foreseeable with absolute certainty: experience shows this to be
unattainable. Again, whilst certainty is highly desirable, it may bring in its
train excessive rigidity and the law must be able to keep pace with changing
circumstances. Accordingly, many laws are inevitably couched in terms which,
to a greater or lesser extent, are vague and whose interpretation and
application are questions of practice."  
  
The European Court of Human Rights has had occasion to recognize the
difficulty or impossibility of attaining absolute precision in the framing of
laws, especially in spheres in which the situation governed by the law in
question is constantly changing. Barthold v. Germany, (11) at p. 399; Markt
Intern and Beerman v. Germany, (70) at p. 173; Muller v. Switzerland (14) at
p. 226. Indeed, in certain areas flexibility might be desirable. Goodwin v.
United Kingdom, (24) at p. 140. The provisions in question should afford
sufficient protection against arbitrariness and make it possible for the
persons concerned to foresee the consequences of their actions. However, the
level of precision depends to a considerable degree on the content of the
instrument in issue, the field it is designed to cover and the number and
status of those to whom it is addressed. Groppera Radio AG v. Switzerland,
(87) at p. 341; Vereinigung Demokratischer Soldaten Osterreichs and Gubi v.
Austria, (50) at p. 81 .  
  
It appears from the words of the regulations that the impugned regulations
were primarily intended for editors, publishers of newspapers and persons
authorised to establish and operate Broadcasting or Television Stations. It
could be expected that such persons, if necessary, with the help of legal
advisers, could inform themselves about the regulations applicable to them.
The regulations imposed restrictions on the publication and transmission of
certain specified sensitive information relating to what the petitioner
described as "the

**360**

ethnic conflict and the war ... in the North and East." The need for
regulations of the sort in question to be framed without excessive rigidity to
take account of changing circumstances is, in my view, inevitable. Indeed, as
experience has shown, it has been necessary to amend even broadly framed
regulations, such as the Emergency (Prohibition on Publication and
Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations, from time to time
to take account of changing circumstances. The regulations in question were
not so vague as to exclude any predicability, if need be with appropriate
advice, as to what act on the petitioners part might give rise to the adverse
consequences referred to in paragraphs 3 and 5 of the Emergency (Prohibition
on Publication of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations 1 of 1996\. Cf.
Arrow smith v. United Kingdom, (88) at p. 231. Moreover, the impugned
regulations were accessible, for they were published in the Government Gazette
No: 1104/28 of 06 November, 1999, and, as the petitioner states, they were
"announced publicly in the government media." She submitted a newspaper
article in support of the averment that the law had received publicity in the
press.  
  
The petitioner complained that the authority was clothed with wide powers of
discretion by reason of the formulation of the regulation and by differences
in the English and Sinhala versions. The broadly worded nature of the impugned
regulations and the differences in the Sinhala and English versions might have
caused difficulties in interpretation. However, the mere fact that a provision
may give rise to problems of interpretation does not mean it is so vague and
imprecise as to lack the quality of 'law'. Hodgson, Woolf Productions and
National Union of Journalists and Channel Four Television v. United Kingdom,
(12) at p. 508. Nor is the quality of law necessarily diminished by the
conferment of discretion. A law conferring a discretion is not in itself
inconsistent with the requirement of foreseeability, provided that the scope
of the discretion and the manner of its exercise

**361**

are indicated with sufficient clarity, having regard to the legitimate aim in
question, so as to give the individual adequate protection against arbitrary
interference. Brind and Others v. United Kingdom, (19) at p. C. D. 81; Tolstoy
Miloslavsky v. United Kingdom, (89) at p. 468, Hins and HugenhoLtz v.
Netherlands, (82) at p. C. D. 126; Goodwin v. U. K. (24) at p. 140; Vereniging
Radio 100 et al. v. Netherlands, (51) at p. C. D. 203; Wingrove v. U. K. (26)
at pp. 26-27.  
  
Against the foregoing background, I hold that the impugned restrictions had a
basis in law, and that as far as the quality of law was concerned, it was
accessible to the petitioner and formulated with sufficient precision to
enable her - if need be, with appropriate legal advice - to foresee, to a
degree that was reasonable in the circumstances, the consequences which a
given action may entail. Admittedly, the first respondent, the 'Competent
Authority' was given a wide discretion; yet, as we shall see later in
considering the question of necessity, the scope of the discretion and the
manner of its exercise were indicated with sufficient clarity, having regard
to the purported aim in question, to make the decisions of the Competent
Authority reviewable and to give her adequate protection against arbitrary
interference. I therefore conclude that the impugned restrictions were
"prescribed by law" for the purposes of Article 15(7) of the Constitution.  
  
**LEGITIMATE AIM  
**  
In addition to being "prescribed by law'", restrictions on the Constitutional
right of freedom of speech, in order to be valid, must have a legitimate aim
recognized by the Constitution. No doubt after balancing interests, albeit at
a very general, wholesale level, the makers of our Constitution have in
Article 15 made a threshold categorization, inter alia, of the varieties of
speech that are not protected absolutely, but which may be limited by law.
Channa Pieris, (3), at p. 140. Speech and expression concerning "the interests
of national security" is one of them. (Article 15(7)).

**362**

The petitioner suggested that the aim of the President in making the impugned
regulations was not the interests of national security. In paragraphs 15, 16,
17 of her affidavit, she stated that, although censorship had been relaxed at
a certain time and "media personnel were also taken on conducted tours of the
Northern and Eastern provinces on the initiative of the 1st Respondent on
every occasion that the Government claimed to have won a significant military
victory in those areas", yet the impugned regulations "tightening the
censorship" were made "following renewed fighting in the Wanni area leading to
heavy loss of life, loss of territorial gains previously held by the Army and
State military equipment." The petitioner's submission was that the aim of the
impugned regulations was to prohibit the publication of information that was
embarrassing to the Government, rather than to protect national security. As
such, the regulations offended "the established principle in international law
that restrictions on freedom of expression based on national security
interests would not be legitimate if their genuine purpose or demonstrable
effect is to protect interests unrelated to national security, such as to
protect a Government from embarrassment or wrongdoing or to entrench a
particular ideology." (Vide paragraph 24 of the petitioner's affidavit.) In
paragraph 10 of her petition, the petitioner stated that "it is of extreme
importance that the pretext of national security is not used to place
unjustified restrictions on the exercise of these freedoms."  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioner cited the following dicta from New York
Times v. U. S. (72): ". . . the Founding fathers gave the free press the
protection it must have to fulfill its essential role in our democracy. The
press was to serve the governed, not the governors ... only a free and
unrestrained press can effectively expose deception in government." (Justice
Black). "The dominant purpose of the 1st Amendment was to prohibit the
widespread practice of governmental suppression of embarrassing information .
. . secrecy in government is fundamentally anti democratic, perpetuating

**363**

bureaucratic errors. Open debate and discussion of public issues are vital to
our national security." (Justice Douglas)  
  
Justices Black and Douglas argued that no system of prior restraint was ever
justified. Yet, the fragmented Court, which decided the case in nine separate
opinions by a six to three majority, agreed on only two general themes - any
system of prior restraint of expression bears a heavy presumption against its
constitutional validity, and the Government carries a "heavy burden" to
justify enforcing any system of prior restraint. As we have seen, prior
restraint is not per se impermissible. Even Near u. Minnesota, (90), which
firmly embedded the prior restraint doctrine in American jurisprudence, did
recognize three "exceptional cases" justifying prior restraint.  
  
The Times case was considered by this Court in Wickremasinghe u. Edmund
Jayasinghe, (91). In that case, the petitioner, the Chief Editor and publisher
of a newspaper, alleged that his fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 12
and 14(1) (1) had been infringed by the application of the Emergency
(Restriction of Publication of and Transmission of Sensitive Military
Information) Regulation No. 1 of 1995. I have already reproduced those
regulations in my judgment. Justice Kulatunga (with whom G. P. S. de Silva, C.
J., and Ramanathan, J. agreed) at pp. 307-308 said that the New York Times
case:  
  
". . . involved a restraint on newspapers against a publication which appears
to relate to a war situation. . . That case is clearly distinguishable for the
reason that the policy under discussion there was the involvement of the
United States of America in the affairs of a foreign state.  
  
In the instant case, it cannot be said that the occasion and manner of pre-
censorship is arbitrary. The Government is faced with a serious civil war. The
matters in respect of which censorship is imposed are specified. The
restriction is

**364**

against the publication of matters which could be classified as `sensitive
information'. All such matters relate to the prosecution of the war. Hence,
the impugned censorship cannot be described as a blanket censorship; clearer
guidelines may not be demanded in the present circumstances."  
  
Learned counsel for the petitioner was critical of the judgment in
Wickremasinghe's case. He said, "The Court was clearly influenced by the
assumption that there was a 'war situation' and there must be some curtailment
of the freedom to publish ... Kulatunga, J. only saw that the situation was
different without considering the underlying reasons which consequently apply
even when a "Government is faced with a serious. civil war", as the learned
judge put it. It is respectfully submitted that pre-censorship by the
Emergency Regulations was not properly addressed for over-breadth and
vagueness by the intrusion of "serious civil war" into the picture."  
  
I am unable to agree with the submissions of learned counsel for the
petitioner. I shall later in my judgment deal with the question of over-
breadth, but for the present I should like to observe that the question of
over-breadth was not overlooked by Kulatunga, J. At p. 304, His Lordship did
say that "The Court will no doubt consider whether the regulations are bad for
over-breadth." His Lordship also, at p. 308, rejected the demand for "clearer
guidelines" and therefore had addressed his mind to the question of
"vagueness". I have in this judgment dealt with the question of vagueness at
some length, and hold that the authorities amply justify the conclusion
reached by Kulatunga, J. Yes, indeed Kulatunga, J. was clearly influenced not
only by "the assumption" that there was a "war situation" but, as acknowledged
by the petitioner herself, that there was indeed such a situation. It was a
matter of central importance.  
  
The importance of freedom of speech in a democracy cannot be overstated.
Nevertheless, there are occasions where that importance must give way to other
considerations.

**365**

National security is one such consideration. Notwithstanding the dicta of
Justices Black and Douglas in the New York Times case (72), cited by learned
counsel for the petitioner, there is, as we shall see, abundant judicial
support in the opinions of the United States Supreme Court and internationally
for the proposition that when a nation's security and integrity is at stake,
all else, including the cherished, constitutionally assured, freedom of speech
must take second place. We must not lose sight of priorities. Indeed, at
paragraph 04 of the written submissions of learned counsel for the petitioner,
citing Donna Gomien, David Harris and Leo Zwak, Law and Practice of the
European Convention on Human Rights and the European Social Charter, it is
quite properly acknowledged that international human rights jurisprudence
permits "derogations from human/ fundamental rights in times of war or public
emergency." This is the case not only where national constitutions or
international conventions permit such derogations, but even in countries, such
as the United States, where no express constitutional. provision is made for
the imposition of restrictions in times of war or national emergency. E. g.
see Schenck v. United States, (64); Frohwerk v. United States, (80); Debs v.
United States, (92).  
  
It has never been doubted that when a government is in the throes of a
struggle for the very existence of the state, the security of the community
may be protected. Justice Brandeis observed in Whitney v. California (8),
(followed in Ekanayake v. Herath Banda, (93), Amaratunga v. Sirimal, (94) and
Channa Pieris v. Attorney-General, (3) at p. (138), ". . . But although the
rights of free speech and assembly are fundamental, they are not absolute.
Their exercise is subject to restriction, if the particular restriction
proposed is required in order to protect the state from destruction or from
serious

**366**

injury, political, economic or moral." In Dennis v. United States, (71), Chief
Justice Vinson said, ". . . Overthrow of the government by force and violence
is certainly a substantial enough interest for the government to limit
speech". In Schenck u. United States, (64), Holmes, J. - one of the most
eloquent and enthusiastic advocates of free speech - said, "When a nation is
at war many things that may be said in times of peace are such a hindrance to
its effort that their utterance will not be endured so long as men fight and
that no Court could regard them as protected by any Constitutional right."  
  
The petitioner furnished the Court with a copy of a document entitled "The
Johannesburg Principles on National Security, Freedom of Expression and Access
to Information," and placed great reliance on that document. According to the
"Introduction" to that document, the "Principles were adopted on 1st October
1995 by a group of experts in international law, national security, and human
rights convened by Article 19, the International Centre Against Censorship, in
collaboration with the Centre for Applied Legal Studies of the University of
the Witwatersrand, in Johannesburg." The preamble to the document, inter alia,
states that the 'principles' are meant to "discourage governments from using
the pretext of national security, to place unjustified restrictions on the
exercise of "freedom of speech and expression". While recognizing that
restrictions may be placed in the interests of national security, the
'principles' state that they should be prescribed by law, and have "the
genuine purpose and demonstrable effect of protecting" "a country's existence
or its territorial integrity against the use or threat of force, or its
capacity to respond to the use or threat of force". A restriction sought to be
justified on the ground of national security is not legitimate if its genuine
purpose or demonstrable effect is to protect interests unrelated to national
security, including for example, to protect

**367**

a government from embarrassment or exposure of wrongdoing, or to conceal
information about the functioning of its public institutions, or to entrench a
particular ideology or to suppress industrial unrest."  
  
In paragraphs 28 and 29 of the petition, it is stated that any citizen or
political party was entitled to seek, receive and impart information on the
"policy of the Government on the ethnic conflict and the war and has the
concomitant right to seek, receive and impart information on the military
strategies and drawbacks in the conduct of the military operations in the
North and East." In paragraph 29, the petitioner states that "as a
social/human rights activist concerned about the ethnic conflict and the war
in the North and East, she has actively taken part in debates to resolve the
said conflict and hence she is required to know the correct position with
regard to the long drawn out war between the Armed Forces and the LTTE . . ."  
  
There is an acknowledgment by the petitioner of the existence of a violent
conflict in the North and East between the Armed Forces and the LTTE. The
regulations are called the "Emergency (Prohibition on Publication and
Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) regulations." The text of the
impugned regulations makes it abundantly clear that the material that has to
be published with the approval of the Competent Authority relates to matters
pertaining to the Forces engaged in the Northern and Eastern provinces and
their operations in those areas. Admittedly, the impugned regulation followed
soon after what the petitioner described as "renewed fighting in the Wanni
area leading to heavy loss of life, loss of territorial gains previously held
by the Army and State military equipment." The petitioner submitted newspaper
reports of what was described as "a humiliating

**368**

debacle", and suggesting that it was caused, by the negligence of "the top
brass." The petitioner pointed to the fact that, whereas the earlier
regulation contained the words "or any statement pertaining to the official
conduct or the performance of the Head or any member of any of the Armed
Forces or the Police Force", the impugned regulations had the words, "or any
statement pertaining to the official conduct, morale or the performance of the
Head or of any member of the Armed Forces or the Police Force or of any person
authorised by the Commander - in - Chief of the Armed Forces for the rendering
of assistance in the preservation of national security." The reasons for the
changes were explained by the Competent Authority in a statement published in
the press and submitted to us by the petitioner. He said that "some media
institutions distorted news relating to the war in the North-East (sic.) which
has led to pain of mind to the soldiers and their parents and the morale of
the troops." The petitioner does not dispute that. Her irrelevant response was
that the Competent Authority failed to identify the "irresponsible media
institutions."  
  
The petitioner, in my view, has failed to show, in terms of Principle 2(b) of
the "Johannesburg Principles" that "the genuine purpose or demonstrable
effect" of the regulation was "to protect (the) government from embarrassment
or exposure or wrongdoing". Nor has she shown that the protection of national
security was a "pretext". It was observed in United States v. O'Brien, (81) at
para. 15, that  
  
"It is a familiar principle of constitutional law that this Court will not
strike down an otherwise constitutional statute on the basis of an alleged
illicit legislative motive. As the Court long ago stated: "The decisions of
this Court

**369**

from the beginning lend no support whatever to the assumption that the
judiciary may restrain the exercise of lawful power on the assumption that a
wrongful purpose or motive has caused the power to be exerted. "McCray a.
United States, (95). This fundamental principle of constitutional adjudication
was reaffirmed and the many cases were collected for the Court in State of
Arizona u. State of California, 283 U. S. 423, 455, 51 S. Ct. 522, 526, 75 L.
Ed. 1154 (1931)."  
  
**NECESSARY IN A DEMOCRATIC STATE  
**  
Mr. Goonesekera submitted that the regulation had to be shown to be necessary
in a democratic state. On the other hand, Mr. Marsoof argued that, although
the phrase "necessary in a democratic state" was found in Article 10(2) of the
European Convention, it was not a requirement stipulated in Article 15 of our
Constitution, and therefore ought not to be read into the Constitution.  
  
On this matter, I find the submission of the Additional Solicitor-General to
be unpersuasive. Admittedly, the phrase "necessary in a democratic society" is
not to be found in Article 15 of the Constitution. Nevertheless the ideas
encapsulated in that phrase, and therefore the opinions of the European
Commission and the judgments of the European Court in construing that phrase,
are relevant as sustaining the logic of our own Constitution with regard to
the imposition of restrictions on the operation and exercise of the
fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression guaranteed by Article
14(1)(a).  
  
Sri Lanka, as we have seen is a representative democracy in which freedom of
speech and expression is a cornerstone.

**370**

That is the defining context for the interpretation of restrictions imposed by
Article 15 on the fundamental right of freedom of speech guaranteed to
citizens in our representative democracy by Article 14(1)(a). Cf. per Fernando
J., in Karunathilaka and Another v. Dayananda Dissanayake, Commissioner of
Elections and Others, (36) at p. 173; Re Compulsory membership of journalists'
association, (2) at p. 174.  
  
In Malalgoda v. A. G. & Another, (97) at pp. 784-785 Soza, J., having referred
to the observations of Seervai on the differences between the Indian and
American Constitutions, and noting that the 'clear and present danger' test
had been rejected by the Indian Supreme Court, since the Indian Constitution
had provided instead for the test of 'reasonableness', went on to state that
"the limitations to the right of freedom of speech are in Sri Lanka prescribed
in more absolute terms than in India. In Sri Lanka, the operation and exercise
of the right to freedom of speech are made subject to restrictions of law not
qualified by any test of reasonableness. Neither the validity nor the
reasonableness of the law imposing restrictions is open to question unlike in
America or India. This is not to say of course that the Court should not be
reasonable in applying the law imposing restrictions. Freedom of speech in Sri
Lanka therefore is subject to such restrictions as the law may impose under
the heads mentioned in Article 15(2)." In that case, the petitioner had
complained that the Police had seized a book published by him. It was
defamatory, but the petitioner contended that his fundamental right of freedom
of speech and expression had been violated. The court held that "so far as
concerns the case before us freedom of publication means that the applicant
may publish whatever will not expose him to a prosecution or a civil action
for defamation. In exercising his fundamental

**371**

right of freedom of publication he cannot shake off the constraints imposed by
law. The freedom of publication does not include the licence to defame and
vilify others."  
  
Article 28(e) states that the exercise and enjoyment of rights and freedoms is
inseparable from the performance of duties and obligations, and accordingly it
is the duty of every person in Sri Lanka to respect the rights and freedoms of
others. Article 15(2) states that the exercise and operation of the
fundamental right of freedom of speech and expression declared and recognized
by Article 14(1) (a) shall be subject to such restrictions as may be
prescribed by law, inter alia, in relation to defamation. In terms of Article
15(7) the exercise and operation of the right of freedom of speech is "subject
to such restrictions as may be prescribed by law ... for the purpose of
securing due recognition and respect for the rights and freedoms of others."
However, with great respect, "subject to" not only means subject to a
restriction set out in Articles 15(2) and 15(7) but includes, in my view, an
assessment of a restriction purported to be imposed under Article 15(2) or
15(7) from the point of view of necessity, unless the law is an "existing law"
within the meaning of Article 16(1) of the Constitution. In the case of
defamation, this would require an examination of the law imposing the
interference with a person's freedom of speech, if it is not an "existing
law", as well as the application of the law in the particular circumstances of
a case. Cf. Lingens and Leitgens v. Austria, (98) at pp. 393-394. In some
cases, it may be found that the law of defamation or conviction for defamation
or some measure taken to protect the reputation of others may be
disproportionate to the aim pursued, and therefore an unnecessary interference
with freedom of speech. E. g. see App. No. 11508/85 v. Denmark, (13);
Thorgeirson v. Iceland,

**372**

(18); Oberschlick v. Austria, (22); Tolstoy Miloslavsky v. U. K., (89); Cf.
Castells v. Spain, (17) at p. 478 where the prosecution was for insulting the
government. In others, it may be found that the measures taken were necessary
to protect the reputations of others. E. g. see App. No. 12230/86 v. Germany,
(99); Barfod v. Denmark (100); Praeger and Oberschlick v. Austria, (46).
However, in deciding on the constitutional validity of a restriction imposed
on freedom of expression, otherwise than by an "existing law", there must be
an examination of its need.  
  
"Necessity" is inherent in Article 15(7) read with Article 155(2). The Supreme
Court has already recognized the concept of necessity in deciding whether
regulations restricting freedom of speech and expression are Constitutionally
valid. In Joseph Perera v. The Attorney General and Others, (1), at pp.
216-217 Sharvananda, C. J. said:  
  
"The Regulation to be valid must satisfy the objective test. Though the Court
may give due weight to the opinion of the President that the regulation is
necessary or expedient in the interests of public security and order, it is
competent to the Court to question the necessity of the Emergency Regulation
and whether there is a proximate or rational nexus between the restriction
imposed on a citizen's fundamental right by emergency regulation and the
object sought to be achieved by the regulation. If the Court does not find any
such nexus or finds the activities which are not pernicious have been included
within the sweep of the restriction, the Court is not barred from declaring
such regulation void as infringing Article 155(2) of the Constitution."  
  
It was held that the impugned Emergency Regulation in that case, requiring
police permission for publication,

**373**

imposed a form of prior restraint abridging the freedom of expression that was
invalid and incapable of forming the basis of any law. See especially the
observations of Sharvananda, C. J. at pp. 216-217. The Court's reasoning was
that the power to make emergency regulations did not include the power to
over-ride, amend or suspend the operation of the provisions of the
Constitution, except in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.
Constitutionally valid restrictions on the fundamental right of freedom of
speech and expression in the interests of national security and public order
could only be imposed in terms of Article 15(7). Since, in its view, there was
no proximate or rational nexus between the restriction imposed and the object
sought to be achieved by the regulation namely, the interests of national
security and public order, and since the regulation conferred an unfettered
discretion on a public authority in enforcing the regulation, the regulation
was, as the Chief Justice said at p. 230, "unconstitutionally over-broad". The
regulation was held to be unconstitutional, since it violated Article 155(2)
of the Constitution which prohibited the amendment or suspension of the
operation of Article 14(1)(a) except in accordance with the provisions of
Article 15(7).  
  
In Wickramasinghe v. Edmund Jayasinghe, (91), Kulatunga, J. at p. 304, after
stating that regulations made by the President under the Public Security
Ordinance will not be struck down by the Court "unless there are good grounds
for doing so", added: "The Court will no doubt consider whether the
regulations are bad for over-breadth and impinge upon fundamental rights."  
  
In The Sunday Times v. U. K., (10) the European Court of Human Rights observed
at p. 268 that the applicants complained of continuing restraints "as a result
of over-breadth

**374**

and lack of precision of the law of contempt of court. In Open Door Counseling
and Dublin Well Woman v. Ireland, (10) at p. 266, that Court, in considering
the question of proportionality, held that "the sweeping nature of the
restriction" made it "over-broad and disproportionate."  
  
In Wickremabandu v. Herath and Others, (101) at p. 358, H. A. G. de Silva, J.
(Fernando J. agreeing) said: "Article 15(7) permits, inter alia, restrictions
in the interests of national security and public order. The learned Attorney-
General contends that the Court could not interpolate "reasonable" into that
provision, and hence could not inquire into the reasonableness of a
restriction. It is not a matter of interpolation, but of interpretation: can
we assume that the power conferred by the Constitution was intended to be used
unreasonably, by imposing the reasonable restrictions on fundamental rights?
The State may not have any burden of establishing the reasonableness of the
restrictions placed by law or Emergency Regulations, but if the Court is
satisfied that the restrictions are clearly unreasonable, they cannot be
regarded as being within the intended scope of the power under Article 15(7)."  
  
It has been held that ''necessary", while not synonymous with `indispensable',
implies a `pressing social need', Re Compulsory membership of journalists'
association, (2) at p. 176; Lingens v. Austria, (47) at p. 418; Leander v.
Sweden, (60) at p. 452; Hodgson and Others v. U. K., (12) at p. 508; Markt
Intern and Beerman v. Germany, (85) at p. 232; Muller v. Switzerland, (14) at
p. 227, The Sunday Times v. U. K. (No. 2), (16) at p. 234; Castells v. Spain,
(17) at p. 461; Jersild v. Denmark, (20) at p. 14, Hins and Hugenholtz v.
Netherlands, (82) at p. C. D. 126; Goodwin v. U. K., (24) at p. 143; Bowman v.
U. K. (103) at p. C. D. 17; and, therefore, for a restriction

**375**

to be 'necessary it is not enough to show that a restriction was 'useful'
'reasonable' or 'desirable'. The Sunday limes v. U. K., (1979 (10) at p. 275;
G. v. Germany, (84) at p. 504; Barthold v. Germany, (11) at p. 402. Necessity
must be convincingly established. Thorgeirson v. Iceland (18) at p. 865; Brind
and Others v. U. K., (19) at p. C. D. 82; Autronic AG v. Switzerland, (104) at
p. 503; Weber v. Switzerland, (105) at p. 523; Hins and Hugenholtz v.
Netherlands, (82) at p. C. D. 126, Goodwin v. U. K., (103) at p. C. D. 17;
Adams and Benn v. U. K. (25) at p. C. D. 164.  
  
The 'necessity' requirement involves a review of whether the restrictions are
proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued. G. v. Germany, (84) at p. 504;
Leander v. Sweden, (60) at p. 452; Rohr v. Switzerland, (102); The Sunday
limes v. U. K. (No. 2),(16) at 234. Proportionality is, in my view, inherent
in Article 15(7) read with Article 155(2) of the Constitution. Cf. Joseph
Perera, (1) at pp. 215-217; and Wickramasinghe (91) at p. 304, just as it is
inherent in Article 10(2) of the European Convention. Gay News U. K., (83) at
p. 130. A restriction, even if justified by compelling governmental interests,
such as the interests of national security, must be so framed as not to limit
the right protected by Article 14(1)(a) more than is necessary. That is, the
restriction must be proportionate and closely tailored to the accomplishment
of the legitimate governmental objective necessitating it. Re Compulsory
membership of journalists' association, (2) at p. 176.  
  
"Necessity" and, hence, the legality of restrictions imposed under Article
15(7) on freedom of expression, depend upon a showing that the restrictions
are required by a compelling governmental interest. If there are various
options to achieve this objective, that which least restricts the right
protected

**376**

must be selected. Even though the governmental purpose be legitimate and
substantial, that purpose cannot be pursued by means that broadly stifle
fundamental liberties of citizens when that end can be narrowly achieved. The
breadth of legislative abridgement must be viewed in the light of less drastic
means for achieving the same basic purpose. Shelton v. Tucker, (106) (U. S.)
at p. 488 (S. Ct.) at p. 252. Given this standard, it is not enough to
demonstrate, for example, that a regulation performs a useful or desirable
purpose; to be compatible with the Constitution, the restrictions must be
justified by reference to governmental objectives which, because of their
importance, clearly outweigh the social need for the full enjoyment of the
right Article 14(1)(a) guarantees. Cf. Re Compulsory membership of
journalists' association, (2) at p. 176.  
  
In Joseph Perera's case, (1) at pp. 228-229, Sharvananda, C. J. stressed the
need for regulations restricting freedom of speech to be drawn with "narrow
specificity". His Lordship said: "There can be no doubt of the Government's
interest in protecting the State from subversion. But 'even though the
Government's purpose be legitimate and substantial, that purpose cannot be
pursued by means that broadly stifle fundamental personal liberties when the
end can be more narrowly achieved.' Shelton v. Tucker, (106) at p. 488." The
difficulty, however, is striking a fair balance when making such regulations.
Thus in Brind and Others v. U. K., (19) at pp. C. D. 83-84, the European Court
of Human Rights had adverted to the special problems involved in combating
terrorism, and observed that -the Commission has no doubt as to the
difficulties involved in striking a fair balance between the requirements of
freedom of information - especially the free flow of information from the
media - and the need to protect the State and the public against armed
conspiracies seeking

**377**

to overthrow the democratic order which guarantees this freedom and other
human rights." In the instant case, attention should be drawn to the fact that
the regulations have been amended from time to time. The petitioner points out
that this may have been in response to public and international criticism. On
the other hand, the respondents maintain that the regulations have been
amended from time to time to take account of changing circumstances and as a
response to the needs of the time. In the instant case, given the difficulties
involved, I am of the view that the impugned regulation succeeded in striking
a fair balance between the free flow of information and the legitimate aim of
protecting national security and that the restrictions were proportionate and
tailored with sufficient closeness to the accomplishment of the governmental
aim necessitating them.  
  
The Court is not required to deal with the question of necessity in a general
and abstract manner, but only in so far as the facts in a particular case are
concerned. Markt Intern and Beerman v. Germany, (85) at p. 232. The criterion
of "necessity" cannot be applied in absolute terms but calls for the
assessment of various factors. These include the nature of the right in
question, the degree of interference, the nature of the public interest and
the extent to which it needed to be protected in the particular circumstances.
App. No. 12230/86 v. Germany, (99) at p. 102.  
  
I have explained the importance of the right in question: In sum, freedom of
speech and expression is the cornerstone of our representative democracy.  
  
At the same time, due account must be taken of the fact that the aim of the
regulation was the protection of national

**378**

security within the meaning of Article 15(7). In order to verify that the
interference was not excessive in the instant case, a fair balance between
competing interests must be struck: the requirement of protecting national
security must be weighed against the petitioner's right of free speech and
expression. Cf. Groppera Radio AG v. Switzerland, (87) at p. 343; Barfod v.
Denmark (100) at p. 499. In matters of this nature, the interests of society
as a whole must be considered. Otto Preminger Institute v. Austria, (21) at p.
59. The notion "necessary", as we have seen, implies" a pressing social need".
This may include the "clear and present danger" test, as developed by the
American Supreme Court, pace Seervai, and the question "pressing social need",
must be addressed in the light of the circumstances of a given case.
Arrowsmith v. U. K., (88) at p. 233. On the three phases in the development of
the clear and present danger' doctrine, see Nowak, Rotunda and Young,
Constitutional Law, 3rd Ed., pp. 853-874.  
  
In the instant case, there is, as the petitioner herself states a "war"
between the LTTE and the Government Forces. Judicial notice of the fact that
"the Government is faced with a serious civil war" was taken by this Court in
Wickramasinghe v. Edmund Jayasinghe, (91) at p. 307. Terrorism is a tactic
that is resorted to by the LTTE in that "war". That is a matter that is well
and widely known, and of which judges of this Court have taken cognizance. See
Visuvalingam & Others v. Liyanage, (28) at p. 333. Terrorism not only hurts,
but tends to destroy democracy and. democratic institutions. There are
imminent dangers threatening the free, democratic constitutional order of the
Republic of Sri Lanka. In such a situation, national security must take
precedence over the right of free speech, for, as Chief Justice Vinson
observed in Dennis v. U. S., (71), the safety of the nation is "the ultimate
value of society. For if

**379**

a society cannot protect its very structure from armed internal attack, it
must follow that no subordinate value can be protected."  
  
In Visuvalingam & Others v. Liyanage, (27) at p. 375, Soza, J. said:  
  
"The. Government, too, undoubtedly values the freedom of the Press and
believes that democracy will sustain itself best, as it has been said, in the
free market of ideas ... But at times of national crisis, the safety of the
nation becomes paramount and some inroads have of necessity to be made into
the freedom of the Press . . ." In Siriwardene and Others v. Liyanage (107) at
p. 187 Wimalaratne, J. (Ratwatte, Colin-Thome, Abdul Cader, Rodrigo, JJ.,
agreeing) said: "In .a word, there are essential limits on the rights to
publish. The limitations are greater when a nation is at war or under a state
of emergency. . ."  
  
In Klass and Others v. Federal Republic of Germany, (108) the complaint to the
European Court of Human Rights related to legislation granting powers of
secret surveillance. The Court, at p. 232, said that it could not "but take
judicial notice of two important facts. The first consists of the technical
advances made in the means of espionage and, correspondingly, of surveillance,
the second is the development of terrorism in Europe in recent years.
Democratic societies nowadays find themselves threatened by highly
sophisticated forms of espionage and by terrorism, with the result that the
State must be able, in order to effectively counter such threats, to undertake
the secret surveillance of subversive elements operating within its
jurisdiction. The Court has therefore to accept that the existence of some
legislation granting powers of secret surveillance over the mail, post and
like

**380**

communications, is under exceptional conditions, necessary in a democratic
society in the interests of national security and/or for the prevention of
disorder or crime." The Court, having examined the contested legislation and
the manner of its application concluded at p. 237 that the interference
resulting from that legislation was "necessary in a democratic society in the
interests of national security and for the prevention of disorder". The
decision was followed in G. v. Germany (84) at p. 504; and in App. No.
10628/83 v. Switzerland, (109) at p. 109.  
  
The impugned regulations were stated to be "Emergency (Prohibition on
Publication and Transmission of Sensitive Military Information) Regulations.
They applied to information pertaining to specified matters, namely, "military
operations in the North and East, including any operation carried out or being
carried out or proposed to be carried out by the Armed Forces or by the Police
Force (including the Special Task Force), the deployment of troops or
personnel or the deployment or use of equipment including aircraft in naval
vessel by any such forces, or any statement pertaining to the official
conduct, morale or the performance of the Head or of any member of the Armed
Forces or the Police Force or of any person authorised by the Commander-in-
Chief of the Armed Forces for the purpose of rendering assistance in the
preservation of national security."  
  
The emphasis is mine. One of the petitioner's principal concerns was with the
provision protecting the conduct and performance of the persons referred to in
the words emphasised. As we have seen, the explanation given for the
protection of the persons designated was to prevent a recurrence of attacks of
the nature that had been made leading to the demoralization of the Armed
Forces. While the preservation of

**381**

the morale of the Armed Forces is an important matter, yet, as we have seen,
in a democracy, freedom of speech performs a vital role in keeping in check
persons holding public office. For a citizen to keep a critical control of the
exercise of public power, it is essential that particularly strict limits be
imposed on the publication of information which refers to the activities of
public authorities. App. No. 11508/85 v. Denmark, (110) at p. 561. Relying on
the decision of this Court in Joseph Perera's case, (1), and particularly on
the dicta of Sharvananda, C. J. at p. 217 and p. 230, learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that the impugned regulation was "over-broad" and
"disproportionate" for two reasons. First, if the aim of the regulation was,
as explained by the first respondent in his affidavit, inter alia, to ensure
that the morale of government forces in the North and East was sustained, the
manner in which the regulation was framed did not confine the restrictions to
the conduct of the persons in the North and East. The restrictions were
applicable to the conduct of the persons in the other parts of the State as
well and there was therefore no nexus between the stated aim and the
regulation framed. Secondly, citing examples from newspapers, learned counsel
submitted that the Competent Authority in practice arbitrarily censored
information that was not covered by the terms of the regulations.  
  
With regard to the first matter, I agree there was ambiguity. However, where
there is ambiguity, such provisions, since they impinge on Constitutionally
guaranteed rights, must be interpreted restrictively. Therefore, the meaning
to be ascribed to the words objected to must be that they applied to
information concerning such persons with regard to their activities in the
North and the East. This interpretation is reinforced by the Sinhala version
which

**382**

leaves no doubt as to the intention of the maker of the regulations.  
  
I agree that where laws, including regulations, vest in administrative
officials a power of censorship over communications not confined within
standards designed to curb the dangers of arbitrary or discriminatory action,
such laws, being unnecessary to achieve even a legitimate aim may be struck
down as being over-broad. Lovell v. Griffin, (I11); Cantwell v. Connecticut,
(112), Saia v. New York, (113); Kunz v. New York, (114). The "breadth" with
which those cases were concerned was the breadth of unrestricted discretion
left to a censor, which permitted him to make his own subjective opinions the
practically unbelievable measure of permissible speech. That is not so in the
instant case. Unlike in Joseph Perera's case (1) at p. 230, the authority was
not given a "naked and arbitrary power. . . without any guiding principle to
regulate the exercise of the Competent Authority's discretion. There was no
mention in the impugned regulation in that case of the reasons for which an
application to publish may have been refused. In the instant case, however,
the matters falling within the Competent Authority's purview are, in my view,
set out with sufficient clarity to make the decisions reviewable.  
  
The petitioner's case is that the examples cited from the newspaper articles
showed that there had been an improper exercise of the powers of the Competent
Authority. H. A. G. de Silva, J. (Fernando. agreeing) observed in
Wickramabandu v. Herath and Others, (101) at p. 358, that the fact that `a
power may be abused does not render the regulation invalid; such abuse of
power is by no means beyond challenge." In the same case Kulatunga, J. at p.
378 (Ramanathan, J. agreeing) said:

**383**

"I cannot agree that the possibility of abuse is a ground for declaring [the
regulation] ultra wires: the remedy against abuse is judicial review." The
observations of the European Court of Human Rights in Klass and Others v.
Federal Republic of Germany (108) at p. 237, are also worth recalling: "While
the possibility of improper action by a dishonest, negligent or overzealous
official can never be ruled out, whatever the system, the considerations that
matter for the Court's present review are the likelihood of such action and
the safeguards provided to protect against it."  
  
If it turns out that the regulations are abused, we would have a different
kind of case than that presently before us. All that is now here is the
validity of the regulations ex facie, not the review of particular actions of
the Competent Authority, and I am unable to agree that in this posture of
things the regulations can be said to be unconstitutional. Shelton v. Tucker,
(106) at (U. S.) p. 499 and (S. Ct.) p. 258.  
  
Moreover, in matters of this nature, although this Court has the power to
decide whether a regulation made under section 5 of the Public Security
Ordinance is "necessary", see Channa Pieris's case, (3) at pp. 140-141;
Siriwardene v. Liyanage, (107) at p. 329; or 'expedient' in the sense of being
a timely measure, neither too early nor too late, having regard to prevailing
circumstances, yet "due weight" ought to be given to "the opinion of the
President that the regulation is necessary or expedient in the interests of
public security and order." Per Sharvananda, C. J., in Joseph Perera's case,
(1) at pp. 216-217.  
  
Although the Government in Brind's case, (19) did not contend that the
interference with the applicant's rights

**384**

was a prime element in the struggle against terrorism, the European Commission
of Human Rights found that it could be regarded as "one aspect of a very
important area of domestic policy." Vide pp. C. D. 83-84. Having regard to the
extensive experience of the executive and legislature on terrorist matters,
and "bearing in mind the margin of appreciation permitted to States," the
limited extent of the interference with the applicant's rights and the
"importance of measures to combat terrorism", the Commission found that it
could not be said that the interference with the applicant's freedom of
expression was disproportionate to the aim sought to be pursued. Vide p. C. D.
84. Similar views were expressed by the Commission in McLaughlin v. U. K, (49)
at p. C. D. 92. The margin of appreciation in assessing the pressing social
need, and in choosing the means, and fixing the conditions for achieving the
legitimate aim of protecting national security is a wide one. Klass and Others
v. Federal Republic of Germany, (108) at p. 232; Leander v. Sweden, (60) at p.
453; The Observer and the Guardian v. U. K., (15) at p. 178. See also Yasapala
v. Wickramasinghe, (115). In Visuvalingam & Others v. Liyanage, (27) at p.
375, Soza, J. said: "It would be difficult for anyone but the repository of
power to form an opinion as to the occasion for its exercise. He is entrusted
with the maintenance of public security. He has a better "feel" of the crisis
with the intelligence services at his command than anyone else. . ."  
  
The petitioner contended that "the imposing of censorship in this manner has,
in any event, been rendered an obsolete exercise by the advent of the
communication revolution with its laptop publishing facilities, satellite
telephones, portable scanners and TV transmission equipment that

**385**

transmit news at the speed of light." I agree that if information has been
already made public or had ceased to be confidential, it would be unnecessary
to prevent disclosure. Weber v. Switzerland, (105) at p. 524; The Observer and
the Guardian v. U. K., (15) paras 67-70; The Sunday Times v. U. K., (16) at
pp. 243-244, Vereninging Weekblad Bluf v. The Netherlands, (116) at p. 203.
However, there was no evidence in the instant case that information that had
in fact been disclosed or ceased to be confidential was being suppressed by
the regulations. The possibility that prohibited information may be
transmitted always exists, but that does not carry with it the corollary that
such information should not, in the interests of national security, be
classified as confidential.  
  
Having regard to all the circumstances, I am of the view that the restrictions
imposed were not disproportionate to the legitimate aim of the regulation,
namely, the furtherance of the interests of national security within the
meaning of Article 15(7) of the Constitution, and that a fair balance between
competing interests has been struck. The restrictions complained of correspond
to a countervailing social need sufficiently pressing to outweigh and overbear
the petitioner's; (and having regard to the societal value of Article
14(1)(a), as well as the public's) interest in freedom of speech and
expression, within the meaning of the Constitution.  
  
**ORDER  
**  
For the reasons set out in my judgment, I declare that the petitioner's
fundamental rights guaranteed by Articles 10, 12(1) and 14(1) (a) have not
been violated, and dismiss the petition.

**386**

In all the circumstances, I make no order as to costs.  
  
**WADUGODAPITIYA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
**WEERASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.  
  
_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2000/31.html_  

