##  Rajapakse v. Tissa Devendra, Chairman, Public Service Commission and
Others - SLR - 331, Vol 2 of 1999 [1999] LKSC 31; (1999) 2 Sri LR 331 (23 June
1999)

**331**

**RAJAPAKSE  
v.  
TISSA DEVENDRA,  
CHAIRMAN, PUBLIC SERVICE COMMISSION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
FERNANDO, J.,  
AMERASINGHE, J. AND  
GUNASEKERA, J.  
S.C. APPLICATION NO. (FR) 310/96  
MAY 28, 1999.

_Fundamental Rights - Interdiction of an officer - Appropriate procedure for
taking disciplinary action - Article 12 (1) of the Constitution._

The petitioner who was a Director of Customs was interdicted from service by
the Public Service Commission and a charge-sheet containing five allegations
was served on him. The petitioner was required to show cause within a month
why he should not be dismissed or otherwise punished. The petitioner did not
respond to that communication but instead, filed an application before the
Supreme Court. He complained that no statement was recorded from him: nor was
he asked to explain before he was interdicted; and no preliminary
investigation was conducted before serving the charge-sheet.

**Held :**

The allegation that there was no preliminary investigation prior to the
interdiction of the petitioner was without foundation. There was no
discrimination; and there was no need for the petitioner's statement to be
recorded for that was not a prescribed requirement.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_Romesh de Silva,_ PC with _Palitha Kumarasinghe_ for the petitioner.

_R. K. W. Goonesekera_ with _J. C. Weliamuna_ for the 10th respondent.

_S. Marsoof,_ PC, Addl. Solicitor-General for the 1st to 9th and 11th and 12th
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult.  
  
_**332**

June 23, 1999  
  
**AMERASINGHE, J.**

The petitioner joined the Customs Department as a casual clerk in 1965 and was
promoted to the posts of Class I Customs Officer, Superintendent of Customs,
Assistant Director of Customs and Deputy Director of Customs. On the 20th of
April, 1993, the petitioner was informed that he had been allowed one year's
extension of service until the 2nd of May, 1994, when he would reach the age
of fifty-eight. The then Director-General of Customs, Mr. L. A. Heengama, by a
publication dated the 28th of January, 1993, called for applications for four
posts of Director of Customs from Deputy-Directors who satisfied certain
specified requirements. There were eleven applicants, of whom ten presented
themselves for interview. The Interview Board made the following
recommendations:

" **. . .** We found that [the petitioner] had an exemplary performance after
his promotion to the grade of Deputy Director. None of the other candidates
had any record equal to that of [the petitioner). However, we find that there
is a requirement that the applicants should have a service of five years in
the Staff Grade. [The petitioner] has only 3 years of such service. If the
Appointing Authority feels that he should be promoted in view of his excellent
service record and waive the service requirement, we recommend that he be
promoted above the others."

By letter dated the 27th of May, 1993, the Secretary to the Public Service
Commission informed the Secretary to the Ministry of Finance, and the
Director-General of Customs of the appointment of four persons, as Directors
of Customs. The petitioner was not one of them. In SC Application No. 274/94,
the petitioner challenged the decision of the Public Service Commission.

My brother Fernando, J. for the reasons set out in his Lordship's judgment,
held that the petitioner had been denied equal treatment in violation of
Article 12 (1) of the Constitution in insisting on a service qualification in
excess of what was stipulated in the publication of the

333

28th of January, 1993, calling for applications for the posts of Director of
Customs, and by denying him the opportunity of establishing that he had the
qualifications to be appointed Director of Customs. The Public Service
Commission was directed, among other things, to issue the petitioner a letter
appointing or promoting him as Director of Customs (with effect from the same
date as the four officers referred to in the Commission's letter dated the
27th of May, 1993. The petitioner was declared entitled to resume work
forthwith, as Director of Customs, and to continue to work as if he had
received two annual extensions of service up to the 2nd of May, 1996. My
brother, Dheeraratne, J. and I concurred with the opinion of our brother
Fernando, J.

Pursuant to the decision of this Court, by a letter dated the 8th of November,
1995, the petitioner was appointed a Director of Customs. He was appointed as
Director of Customs (Air Cargo), Katunayake.

The petitioner alleged that he requested the 10th respondent, Mr. P.
Weerasekera, the Director-General of Customs, not to transfer him to
Katunayake "since there were numerous threats on the petitioner's life **. .
.** but he did not pay any heed to this request". The petitioner was attacked
by certain persons and suffered severe physical injuries.

After recovering from the injuries he had sustained, the petitioner reported
for duties on the 4th of January, 1996. On the 15th of February, 1996, he was
served with a charge-sheet alleging the commission of five offences. On the
16th of February, 1996, the petitioner received a letter from the Secretary of
the Public Service Commission together with a covering letter from the
Director-General of Customs, the tenth respondent, interdicting him from
further service. The correspondence stated, among other things, that a charge-
sheet would be served on the petitioner in due course.

A charge-sheet dated the 14th of February, 1996, was served on the petitioner
containing five allegations of misconduct. The petitioner was required to
submit an explanation within a month why he should not be dismissed from
service or otherwise punished. The petitioner

334

did not respond to that communication but, instead, filed the application
before me.

Learned counsel for the petitioner endeavoured in a most persuasive manner to
explain away each of the five charges against the petitioner. Such
explanations ought, in my view, to be submitted to the Public Service
Commission, for it is that body that was empowered to issue the charge-sheet,
consider the explanations of the petitioner and decide what further action it
should take. It is my considered opinion that I should refrain from commenting
on matters referred to in the charge-sheet, lest I should either encroach on
the functions of the Public Service Commission or even unwittingly prejudice
the disciplinary inquiry.

Article 55 of the Constitution, among other things, states as follows:

(1) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the appointment, transfer,
dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers is hereby vested in the
Cabinet of Ministers, and all public officers shall hold office at pleasure.

(2) The Cabinet of Ministers shall not delegate its powers of appointment,
transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control in respect of Heads of
Departments.

(3) The Cabinet of Ministers may, from time to time, delegate its powers of
appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of other public
officers to the Public Service Commission **. . .**

(4) Subject to the provisions of the Constitution, the Cabinet of Ministers
shall provide for and determine all matters relating to public officers,
including the formulation of schemes of recruitment and codes of conduct for
public officers, the principles to be followed in making promotions and
transfers, and the procedure for the exercise and the delegation of the powers
of appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of public
officers **. . .** "

335

Vol. 11, ch. XLVIII, section 2 of the Establishments Code issued by the
Secretary to the Ministry of Public Administration under the authority of the
Cabinet of Ministers in 1981 states as follows:

"2 : 1 The power of dismissal and disciplinary control of public officers is
vested in the Cabinet of Ministers, who will directly exercise these powers in
respect of -

Additional Secretaries to Ministries, Heads of Departments, Government Agents
and Senior Assistant Secretaries.

2 : 2 The Cabinet of Ministers has delegated its powers of dismissal and
disciplinary control in respect of all other categories of officers to the
Commission.

2 : 2 : 1 The Commission has delegated its powers of dismissal and
disciplinary control in respect of all other such categories of officers in
Staff Grades to Secretaries to Ministries, except **. . .** "

On the 26th of February, 1992, the Public Service Commission in a circular
letter (No. 01/92) addressed to all Secretaries, Heads of Departments and
Government Agents stated:

"The Cabinet of Ministers has vested the Public Service Commission (PSC) with
the powers of appointment, transfer, dismissal and disciplinary control of all
public officers other than the Heads of Departments and above in terms of
Article 55 (3) of the Constitution."

Circular No. E. 01/92 lays down certain "guidelines" in order to implement the
decision of the Cabinet with effect from the 1st of March, 1992. On the face
of it, the "guidelines" were intended to apply to "All Island Services"
specified in the Circular; "Combined Services (Non-Staff)" and "Officers other
than those in the All Island Services and the Combined Services".

336

The petitioner filed Circular No. E. 01/92 and Circular No. 03/92 as part and
parcel of his petition and stated that "in terms of the said circulars of the
Public Service Commission a preliminary investigation must be conducted by the
11th respondent (Sic) and notes and report of such investigations must be
forwarded to the Public Service Commission". The petitioner stated that "No
preliminary inquiry has been conducted in respect of the alleged offences by
the 10th respondent and/or the 11th respondent and/or the Public Service
Commission; as such there was no report and/or notes of preliminary
investigation by the 11th respondent (sic) in respect of the alleged
offences".

It was not, as supposed by the petitioner, incumbent on the 11th respondent,
the Secretary to the Ministry of Finance, or the Public Service Commission
itself, to make any preliminary investigation prior to the issue of the
charge-sheet.

The petitioner's case is based on the assumption that Circular No. E. 01/92
and Circular No. 03/92 on the question of "Disciplinary Control" were
applicable to his case. Circular No. E. 01/92 stated as follows:

"3 : 5 : 1 Secretaries to Ministries should conduct preliminary investigations
and interdict officers where necessary. The draft charge sheet together with
the connected papers should be forwarded to the PSC. As the PSC is the
Disciplinary Authority in respect of the aforementioned services, the PSC will
issue a charge-sheet."

Circular No. 03/92 stated as follows :

"Following clarifications are made on instructions given under para. 3 : 5 of
the Public Service Commission Circular No. E. 01/92:

3 : 1 Where disciplinary action is contemplated against an officer it is
incumbent on the Secretary to the Ministry to cause preliminary investigations
to be carried out and completed with the least possible delay **. . .**

**337**

3 : 2 All draft charge-sheets should conform substantially to Form A appended
hereto, and when forwarded for Public Service Commission approval should bear
the certificate of the staff officer who drafted it to the effect that they
are correct and in order. Certified copies of notes and the report of the
preliminary investigations, along with any other relevant documents should be
forwarded together with the draft charge-sheet STRICTLY (sic) under
confidential cover **. . .** "

It will be seen that there was no duty on the Secretary, the 11th respondent,
himself to hold the preliminary investigation; he was required to "cause
preliminary investigations to be carried out". As we have seen, the Cabinet of
Ministers retained disciplinary powers over certain categories of officers and
delegated their powers in respect of other officers to the Public Service
Commission.

Sections 3 - 5, ch. XLVIII, vol. 11 of the Establishments Code separately set
out (a) the procedure for disciplinary action by the Cabinet of Ministers; (b)
the procedure for disciplinary action by a Secretary to a Ministry; and (c)
the procedure for disciplinary action by a Head of Department/ Public Officer
holding delegated authority. What would be relevant in the case of a person
like the petitioner would be the "Procedure for Disciplinary Action by the
Secretary to a Ministry". With regard to the matter under consideration,
namely, whether there was compliance with the relevant provisions governing
disciplinary action by the Secretary, section 4 states as follows :

"4 : 1 Where the disciplinary action is contemplated against an officer **. .
.** the Head of Department will cause to be made such preliminary
investigations as are necessary.

4 : 2 If a prima facie case against the officer is disclosed the disciplinary
authority will furnish the officer with a statement of the charges against
him, and call for his explanation to the charges within the stipulated period
**. . .** "

As we have seen, the relevant disciplinary authority, namely, the Public
Service Commission, furnished the petitioner with a statement of the charges
against him. The petitioner's complaint is that this was done without a
preliminary investigation. The Additional Solicitor-General,

338

Mr. Marsoof, assisted us by drawing attention to the fact that the subject of
"Preliminary Investigations into Alleged Offences" is dealt with in section 9,
ch. XLVIII, vol. It of the Establishments Code. It states as follows :

"9 : 1 Investigations of the type referred to in section **. . .** 4 :

1 **. . .** are purely a fact finding process and do not constitute a
preliminary inquiry. They are meant to be a search for material that may
disclose an offence and provide evidence for the charges that may be framed
against an officer under suspicion. This may involve the recording of
statements of witnesses and the search for an examination of documents. The
suspect officer or any other person on his behalf need not be present when any
statements are recorded **. . .** "

The tenth respondent, the Director-General of Customs, who was the
petitioner's Head of Department, stated in his affidavit that the "correct
procedure was followed in the disciplinary matter and forwarding the charge-
sheet." The first respondent, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission,
in his affidavit stated that the charge sheet was issued "in accordance with
the recommendations made in pursuance of the preliminary investigations made
in respect of aforesaid charges".

It is evident from the statement of charges that the charges were based on the
evidence of the witnesses and the documents mentioned therein. The petitioner
was expressly invited to examine the documents mentioned in the charge-sheet.
The petitioner in the circumstances cannot be heard to complain that there was
no preliminary investigation before the statement of charges was issued. I am
unable to accept the petitioner's averment that the charge-sheet was merely
"the end result of several malicious and mala fide acts of the 10th
respondent".

The Public Service Commission issued the petitioner a letter of interdiction.
Section 3 of Public Service Commission Circular No. 03/92 states that a
preliminary investigation should be carried out with the least possible delay.
It is further stated as follows : "Where it is considered undesirable that an
officer should continue to exercise

339

the functions of his office he may forthwith be interdicted by the Secretary
and covering approval of the Public Service Commission obtained there for
promptly, after reporting the full circumstances that led to such
interdiction". Section 21 : 1 of ch. XLVIII, vol. 11, of the Establishments
Code states as follows :  
  
"Where it is considered undesirable that an officer should continue to
exercise the functions of his office, he may forthwith be interdicted from
office by the disciplinary authority provided that disciplinary proceedings or
criminal proceedings have been initiated or are about to be initiated on
charges which if established are sufficiently serious to warrant his dismissal
**. . .** "

The petitioner prayed that this Court directs the 1st to 10th respondents "to
withdraw the letter of interdiction dated 14th February, 1996, marked "A18"
and/or to set aside the said letter of interdiction **. . .** " The petitioner
alleged that "no statement was recorded from the petitioner nor was he asked
to explain either by the 10th respondent or 11th respondent or by the Public
Service Commission before serving the letter of interdiction on him. No
preliminary, investigation whatsoever was conducted by the 1st to 10th
respondents before serving the charge-sheet". He stated that "no officer in
the Customs Service has ever been interdicted without preliminary inquiries".
The petitioner stated that the letter of interdiction was "illegal and/or
ultra vires in that provisions in para (3) (Disciplinary Proceedings) of
Public Service Commission Circular No. 3/92 **. . .** have not been adhered to
by the Secretary in this instance". The petitioner stated that the letter of
interdiction was "discriminatory, mala fide, arbitrary and capricious".

The 10th respondent in his affidavit stated that "there was an inquiry to the
satisfaction of the Department before the interdiction of the petitioner". The
first respondent, the Chairman of the Public Service Commission, in his
affidavit stated as follows :

6 (a) **. . .** in pursuance of preliminary investigations conducted by the
10th respondent in respect of allegations of irregularities and misconduct
levelled against the petitioner, recommendations were made finding the
petitioner guilty of the charges submitted along with

340

the letter of the 10th respondent dated 6. 2. 96. I annex marked 1R1 the said
recommendations made in consequence of the said preliminary investigations
conducted in this regard.

(b) **. . .** upon receipt of the said proceedings relating to the
investigations and the recommendations made thereon and upon being satisfied
with the evidence adduced in support of the said charge, an order was made
interdicting the petitioner with effect from 14\. 02. 96. I annex marked I R2
the said letter of interdiction issued to the petitioner **. . .** "

The procedures laid down in the Public Service Commission Circulars and in the
Establishments Code have been followed in interdicting the petitioner : his
allegation that there was no preliminary investigation, as we have seen, is
without foundation, and therefore his allegation that he was the only officer
in the Customs Service who had been interdicted without a preliminary
investigation, must be rejected. There was no discrimination. There was no
need for the petitioner's statement to be recorded, for that was not a
prescribed requirement. The letter of interdiction was issued by the Public
Service Commission, and it did so on the basis of the investigations and
recommendations of the Head of the petitioner's Department, and was not
arbitrary or capricious.  
  
For the reasons stated in my judgment, I hold that the petitioner's
fundamental rights guaranteed by Article 12 (1) of the Constitution have not
been violated and I dismiss the application.

The petitioner has made very serious charges against the 10th respondent
personally, more for the purpose of generating heat than for shedding light on
matters relevant to his application. Consequently, the 10th respondent has
been compelled to have his interests watched by learned counsel. I, therefore,
make further order that the petitioner shall pay the tenth respondent a sum of
Rs. 25,000 as costs.

**FERNANDO, J.** \- I agree.

**GUNASEKERA, J.** \- I agree.

_Application dismissed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1999/31.html_  

