##  Dissanayake, Attorney At Law On Behalf of Lal, K.M. v. Sujeewa, Sub
Inspector of Police, Meetiyagoda Police Station and Others - SLR - 413, Vol 2
of 1998 [1998] LKSC 31; (1998) 2 Sri LR 413 (16 December 1998)

**413**

**DISSANAYAKE, ATTORNEY-AT-LAW**

**ON BEHALF OF K. M. LAL  
v.  
SUJEEWA, SUB INSPECTOR OF POLICE, **

**MEETIYAGODA POLICE STATION AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
G.P.S. DE SILVA, C.J.  
WIJETUNGA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J. S.C.  
APPLICATION NO. 524/96  
OCTOBER 1ST AND DECEMBER 17TH 1998

_Fundamental Rights - Violation of rights by the Police - Articles 11, 13(1)
and 13(2) of the Constitution._

At the time this application was filed the victim Lal was unconscious.
Subsequently he tendered an affidavit. It was alleged that close to midnight
on 02. 06. 1996 when he was sleeping in his house, the 1st respondent and
other police officers arrived and arrested him. He was taken to the
Meetiyagoda Police station. In the early hours 03. 06. 1996 the 1st respondent
assaulted him with hands and feet and a club when he lost consciousness. Later
that day the police admitted the victim to Batapola hospital. As per hospital
record, the patient was unconscious. On 04\. 06. 1996 he was transferred to
the National Hospital Colombo at which stage also he was unconscious, with
paralysis of the right side of the body. A CT scan disclosed an extra-dural
haemorrage in the left parietal area of the Victim's head. That injury was
fatal in the ordinary course of nature but he recovered after surgery and the
removal of the extra-dural haemorrage. Even thereafter he + had a weakness of
the right side of the body. The respondents averred that the victim was
arrested at 12. 15. p.m. on 03. 06. 1996 on a complaint that he with others
had threatened to cause bodily harm to one Yasawathie and that after the
arrest, he told the police that one Tillakaratne had struck him on the head
with a club.

**Held:**

The respondents' version was incredible and the injury sustained by the victim
had been caused by the police in violation of the victim's rights under
Article 11 of the Constitution. The victim's version that he had been

414

arrested whilst he was sleeping in his house was credible. In the
circumstance, the arrest and detention of the victim violated his rights under
Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights.

_A. A. de Silva, PC with Kithsiri Jayalath for the petitioner.  
  
Mohan Peiris with Nuwathi Dias for 1st, 2nd and 3rd respondents.  
  
P. D. Ratnayake SC for 4th and 5th respondent._

_Cur. adv. vult._

December 16, 1998,  
**  
SHIRANI BANDARANAYAKE, J.**

This application was filed by Neetha Dissanayake, an Attorney-at-Law on behalf
of the petitioner who was unconscious at the time of the filing of this
application. The petitioner alleges that his fundamental rights guaranteed
under Articles 11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) were violated by the respondents.

According to the petitioner, on 02. 06. 1996, while the petitioner was asleep,
the 1st respondent along with some other police officers from the Police
Station, Meetiyagoda had entered the petitioner's house. The 1st respondent
had assaulted the petitioner who was sleeping. Thereafter the respondents had
brought the petitioner in a three wheeler to the Meetiyagoda Police Station.
The following morning, the petitioner's mother had taken breakfast for the
petitioner, but she was not allowed to see him. When the petitioner's lunch
was sent through his brother-in-law, he was informed that the petitioner was
not in the Police Station, but had been taken to Batapola Hospital and from
there to Karapitiya Hospital. From Karapitiya the petitioner was transferred
to the National Hospital, Colombo, on 04. 06. 1996 and he was sent back to
Karapitiya Hospital on 09. 06. 1996.

This court granted leave to proceed in respect of the alleged infringement of
Articles 11, 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

415

According to the respondents, on 02. 06. 1996, one Kariyawasam Vidanage
Yasawathie had come to the Meetiyagoda Police Station around 11.15. p.m. and
complained that the petitioner and several others who were armed were
threatening the said Yasawathie and her family with serious bodily harm (1R1).
On the said complaint, the 1st and 2nd respondents with several other police
officers proceeded to the complainant's house where an unlawful assembly was
said to have gathered. On arrival, the 1st and 2nd respondents observed a
crowd of about 25-30 people gathered near the complainant's house armed with
swords and blunt weapons. On seeing the police party, the crowed had dispersed
and the 1st and 2nd respondents had given chase. One of the persons threw some
object which he had in his hand to a nearby shrub and started running. He fell
several times in the process of running towards his house and the 1st and 2nd
respondents were able to apprehend him as he entered the house. Upon inquiry,
the person revealed that his name was M. G. Lai (the petitioner). The
respondents had observed that he was under the influence of liquor. The
petitioner had told the respondents that one Kariyawasam Vithanage
Tillakaratne had hit him on the head with a club. The respondents thereafter
arrested the petitioner after informing him as to why he was being arrested. A
statement was recorded from the petitioner on 03. 06. 1996 around 1.30 a.m.
wherein he categorically stated that he was hit on the head with a club by
Tillakaratne. He had further stated that the two parties, viz, the
complainant's family and the persons who were together with him, came to blows
before the arrival of the police at the scene (1 R2). According to the
respondents the petitioner was taken to the Batapola Hospital on the 3rd
around 9.45 a.m. and since his condition was serious he was warded. On the
same day, on the instructions of the Officer in Charge, the petitioner was
released on bail.

The respondents further submit that on the information supplied by the
petitioner, the respondents arrested Tillakaratne for assault on 04. 06. 1996
and in his statement to the Police he had admitted that he hit the petitioner
on the head (1R4). On this statement, the respondents were able to recover the
club with which the petitioner

416

was hit, as evidenced by the notes of the 1st respondent (1R5). Tillakaratne
was prosecuted in the Magistrate's Court for assault.

The Judicial Medical Officer, Colombo in his report has classified the injury
the petitioner had sustained as fatal in the ordinary course of nature. He has
given the history, clinical findings and the medicolegal opinion, which are as
follows:

B. History

Transferred to ward No 72 (Accident Service) of the National Hospital, Sri
Lanka, Colombo from ward No. 12 of the Teaching Hospital, Karapitiya on 04.
06. 1996 for investigation and treatment of a head injury following an assault
on 04. 06. 1996 (details of the assailant/s, weapons and time of assault not
available in the bed head ticket notes).

C. Clinical findings, investigations and treatment

1\. Patient unconscious with paralysis of the right side of the body at the
time of transfer from the Teaching Hospital, Karapitiya to the Accident
Service of the National Hospital, Sri Lanka, Colombo;

2\. patient unconscious with weakness of the right side of the body at the
time of admission to ward 72 (Accident Service) of the National Hospital, Sri
Lanka at 4.10 p.m. on 04.06.1996;

3\. no external injuries have been observed by the medical officers treating
the patient at the Accident Service (ward 72);

4\. a CT scan done on 04. 06\. 1996 (same day) has indicated an extra- dural-
haemorrhage in the left parietal area of the head intracranially;

5\. patient was subjected to neuro-surgery under general anaesthesia on the
same day. A left parietal craniotomy was performed for the removal of the
extra-dural haemorrhage;

417

6\. the patient had an uneventful recovery from the surgery and anaesthesia
and regained consciousness;

7\. on 05. 06. 1996, the next day, the patient was transferred to ward No. 64
of the Neurology Unit of the National Hospital, Sri Lanka. At the time of
transfer to ward 64, the patient was conscious but confused with a weakness of
the right side of the body;

8\. On 06. 06. 1996 and 07. 06\. 1996 the patient was conscious, rational,
obeying commands but with a weakness of the right side of the body;

9\. on 08. 06. 1996, the patient was still in ward 64;

10\. no entries available in the bed head ticket after 08. 06. 1996.

D. Medico-legal opinion (based on the notes available on the bed head ticket)

1\. The extra-durel haemorrhage is due to rupture of the middle meningeal
vessels on the inner table of the skull following blunt trauma to the left
side of the head;

2\. blunt trauma to the skull may at times not leave any visible external
injury as the head is covered by the hair which will conceal injuries like
contusions;

3\. an extra-dural haemorrhage will definitely result in death if not
evacuated surgically. Therefore it is classified as an injury fatal in the
ordinary course of nature.

Admittedly the petitioner walked with the 1st and 2nd respondents to the
private vehicle which was parked some distance away and travelled to the
Police Station with them (1R3, pg. 4). The 1st respondent in his notes had
noted that there were no wounds to be seen on the petitioner but that there
was an abrasion on his head (1 R3).

418

There are 7 affidavits filed on behalf of the petitioner. Out of these, 3
affidavits (P1, P3 and P4) refer to an incident where the affirmants had seen
the petitioner walking with the 1st respondent, the 1st respondent carrying a
club in his hand and assaulting the petitioner with that club, from time to
time. One affirmant (P2) averred that, while taking the petitioner towards the
parked vehicle, the 2nd respondent was assaulting the petitioner. There is no
denial from the respondents that the petitioner had no difficulty in walking
on his own to the vehicle in the early hours of 03. 06. 1996. The 1st
respondent in his notes has stated that a statement of the petitioner was
recorded at 1.30 a.m. on 03. 06. 1996 (1R2). He further states that the
petitioner was taken to the District Medical Officer, Batapola at 9.45 a.m. on
03. 06. 1996. On his instructions the petitioner was admitted to the
Government Hospital, Batapola, around noon on 03\. 06. 1996.

The petitioner's mother went to the Police Station around 8.00 a.m. on 03. 06.
1996, but could not meet the petitioner. On her way to the Police Station she
has met one Sarath, who was a relation of hers, who had said that, although
the petitioner was inside the cell, he did not speak (P1). In his affidavit,
the said Sarath averred in the following terms:

Subsequently, the petitioner tendered an affidavit. In that, he has averred
that, after taking him to the Police Station in the early hours on 03. 06.
1996, the 1st and 2nd respondents assaulted him with their hands and feet and
a club. At that point he had lost consciousness.

The Admission Form of the District Hospital, Batapola stated that at the time
of admission, the petitioner was unconscious. It is significant to note that
at the time of admission the hospital authorities had

419

noted that there were no external injuries on the petitioner, whereas, as
mentioned earlier, the 1st respondent in his notes had stated that he had
noticed an abrasion on the petitioner's head (1 R3). Furthermore, on the Form
on Transfer of Patients from one institution to another, the officer
transferring patient at the Government Hospital, Batapola had made the
following remarks:  
  
admitted at 12.30 p.m. (03. 06\. 1996)  
  
no proper history available

brought by the police  
  
. . .? assault  
  
pt. unconscious  
  
. . . . . .  
  
no external injuries

It is conceded that the Police Officers admitted the petitioner to the
Government Hospital, Batapola. The position of the 1st and 2nd respondents is
that one Tillakaratne assaulted the petitioner with a club and that the
petitioner had an abrasion on his head. If this was the situation, it is
difficult to comprehend as to why the Police Officers refrained from informing
the hospital authorities as to the background of the petitioner's injuries.
Furthermore, it is to be noted that both the Batapola Hospital as well as the
National Hospital, Colombo had noted that there were no external injuries
whereas the Police Officers, in the early hours on 03. 06\. 1996, had noted
that the petitioner had an abrasion on the head.

On a consideration of all the material placed before us, I reject the version
of the respondents. I hold that the 1st respondent had violated the
petitioner's fundamental right guaranteed under Article 11 of the
Constitution.

The respondent averred that one Kariyawasam Vithanage Yasawathie had made a
complaint against the petitioner (1 R1) and the petitioner was arrested on
that complaint. Further it was averred that the petitioner was released on
bail on 03. 06. 1996 around 12.45 p.m.,

420

soon after admitting the petitioner to the Government Hospital, Batapola.
According to the respondents, the petitioner was taken into custody on the
complaint made by one Yasawathie on 02. 06. 1996 at 11.15 p.m. (1 R1). The
notes produced by the 1 st respondent disclose that within 15 minutes, he had
left the police station and had taken the petitioner into custody by 12.15
a.m. on 03. 06. 1996, while he was in the premises of the complainant (1113).
The petitioner on the other hand, has averred that the 1 st respondent took
him into custody on 02. 06. 1996, close to midnight, while he was sleeping in
his house. This position is supported by the affidavit of the petitioner's
mother (P1). On a consideration of the material placed before us, I am
satisfied that the petitioner's version is credible and therefore I hold that
the arrest and the detention of the petitioner by the 1 st respondent are
unlawful and violative of the petitioner's fundamental rights guaranteed under
Articles 13 (1) and 13 (2) of the Constitution.

I award the petitioner compensation in a sum of Rs. 50,000 payable by the
State. The petitioner will also be entitled to a sum of Rs. 5,000 as costs
from the State. The 1st respondent will pay Rs. 5,000 personally, as
compensation to the petitioner. In all the petitioner will be entitled to Rs.
60,000 as compensation and costs. This amount must be paid within three months
from today.

The Registrar of the Supreme Court is directed to send a copy of this judgment
to the Inspector General of Police.

**G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.** \- I agree.  
**  
WIJETUNGA, J.** \- I agree.

**_Relief granted._**

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1998/31.html_  

