##  Lakshman De Silva v. Vivekanandan - SLR - 335, Vol 3 of 1994 [1994] LKSC
31; (1994) 3 Sri LR 335 (5 May 1994)

335

  
LAKSHMAN DE SILVA  

**V.**

**VIVEKANANDAN**



SUPREME COURT.

G. P S. DE SILVA, C.J.

KULATUNGA, J. AND

RAMANATHAN, J. S.C. NO. 50/93

C.A. NO. 638/83(F)

D.C. COLOMBO NO. 4016/RE 21 AND 23

MARCH, 1994.



Landlord and tenant - Conduct which is a nuisance - Section 22(2) (d) of Rent
Act - Damages - Mode of calculation.

_ _

**Held:**

** **

Nuisance in the law of landlord and tenant is no different from nuisance in
the law of delict. The acts constituting nuisance must contain an element of
gravity.



The test is 'Ought this inconvenience to be considered in fact as more than
fanciful, more than one of mere delicacy or fastidiousness, as an
inconvenience materially interfering with the ordinary comfort physically of
human existence, not merely according to elegant or dainty modes and habits of
living, but according to plain and sober and simple notions". Abuse and
intimidation, parking of cars and vans constantly blocking the access to
plaintiff's premises, assaulting plaintiff's brother-in-law, constant
harassment by throwing crackers at plaintiff's dogs and generally using
threatening and insulting language directed at the plaintiff were rightly held
to constitute conduct which is a nuisance justifying ejectment.



Damages however must be ascertained with reference to the authorized rent.



# Cases referred to

** **

1 _. Burns v. D and G (_ Pvt) Ltd. 1949 (4) SALR 135, 137.

  
2 _. Ferreira v. Grant_ 1941 WLD 186.

  
3 _. Walter v. Selfe_ (1851) 4 De G and SM 315.

_ _

**APPEAL** from judgment of the Court of Appeal.

_ _

_R. K. W. Gunasekera_ for defendant-appellant.



A. K. Premadasa, P.C. with Brito Mutunayagam for plaintiff-respondent. _  
 _

_Cur. adv. vult._  


May 05, 1994.

**  
G. P. S. DE SILVA, C.J.**

** **

The plaintiff who is the landlord of premises No. 24 1/1, Torrington Avenue,
Colombo 7, instituted these proceedings in April 1980 for the ejectment of his
tenant, the defendant. She claimed a sum of

**336**



Rs. 5417/25 as rent for February and damages for March 1980; she further
claimed damages at Rs. 5000/- per month from 1st April 1980 until she is
restored to possession of the premises. After trial, the Additional District
Judge entered judgment for the plaintiff as prayed for. The defendant
preferred an appeal to the Court of Appeal but without success. Hence the
appeal to this court by the defendant.



The ground of ejectment relied on by the plaintiff is set out in section 22(2)
(d) of the Rent Act. The material part of the section reads thus:- "the tenant
or any person residing or lodging with him or being his sub-tenant has, in the
opinion the court, been guilty of conduct which is a nuisance to adjoining
occupiers ...". The acts constituting a "nuisance" have been pleaded in
paragraph 4(d) of the plaint in the following terms:- (i) The defendant in or
about 22nd December 1979 abused and intimidated the plaintiff (who resides in
premises No. 24, Torrington Avenue, Colombo 7); (ii) The defendant on or about
22nd December 1979 assaulted Gilbert Dahanayake, Attorney-at-Law and brother-
in-law of the plaintiff in the presence of the plaintiff near the said
premises No. 24 Torrington Avenue, Colombo 7, causing thereby fear, pain of
mind, and humiliation to the plaintiff; (iii) The defendant parks, cars and
vans constantly blocking the access to the plaintiff's said premises No. 24;
(iv) The defendant keeps machinery in the said premises No. 24 1/1, the moving
and the fitting of the said machinery cause noise and disturbance to the
plaintiff; (v) The defendant and his employees... constantly harass the
plaintiff by ... throwing crackers at the plaintiff's dogs and generally using
threatening and insulting language directed at the plaintiff.



It is to be noted that while the defendant occupied the upstairs portion of
the premises, the plaintiff resided on the ground floor. In her testimony at
the trial, the plaintiff complained of certain other "acts" on the part of the
defendant in support of the allegation of a "nuisance". She stated (a) that on
28.1.80 the defendant caused the outside wall of the ground floor portion of
the premises to be broken without her permission. Her oral evidence on this
matter was supported by her complaint to the police (P3); (b) she heard a bang
on the glass portion which separated the ground floor from the staircase
leading to the upper floor. This too was supported by her complaint to the
police (P2); (C) that the defendant had allowed the water from the air
conditioner to escape into the plaintiff's bed room and kitchen.

**337**



At this point it is right to state that this court granted special leave to
appeal, not in relation to the findings of fact by the trial Judge, but on the
following two questions only: (1) whether the acts found by the trial Judge to
have been committed by the defendant constitute a nuisance to the adjoining
occupiers within the meaning of section 22(2) (d) of the Rent Act; (2) whether
that part of the judgment of the District Court awarding damages in the sum of
Rs. 5000/- per month can stand in view of the positive finding of the trial
Judge that the premises were protected premises under the Rent Act and the
authorized rent was less than Rs. 500/-.



The first matter that arises for consideration is the meaning of the
expression "a nuisance" in section 22 (2) (d) of the Rent Act, Mr. R. K. W.
Goonesekera, for the defendant appellant has, in my view, succinctly and
correctly stated in his written submissions \- "nuisance in the law of
landlord and tenant is no different from nuisance in the law of delict." In
his oral submissions before us, he added, that since the impugned conduct of
the tenant forms the basis for an action in ejectment, the acts constituting
"a nuisance" must contain an element of gravity. With this submission too, I
agree. The relevant test was lucidly set out by Millin, J. in Burns v. D and G
(Pty) Ltd.,(1)"A nuisance is created in the sense of conduct materially
interfering with the ordinary physical comfort of human existence, not merely
according to dainty modes of living but plain simple notions among ordinary
people. In some such terms as these a nuisance in the present context is
defined in English cases which have been followed in our courts, e.g. in
Ferreira v. Grant (2) ... "Walter v. Selfe (3) is the well known English case
where Knight-Bruce, V.C. laid down the test that is usually applied:- "And
both on principle and authority the important point next for decision may
properly, I conceive, be thus put ought this inconvenience to be considered in
fact as more than fanciful, more than one of mere delicacy or fastidiousness,
as an inconvenience materially interfering with the ordinary comfort
physically of human existence, not merely according to elegant or dainty modes
and habits of living, but according to plain and sober and simple notions
among the English people." (at page 322).



Now apart from item (iv) in paragraph 4(b) of the plaint (set out. above), the
other acts pleaded and those in respect of which  the  


**338**



plaintiff testified at the trial were found to have been established by the
trial Judge.



In a well considered judgment the trial Judge has carefully evaluated the
evidence, both oral and documentary, and rightly reached the finding that the
cumulative effect of the acts complained of constitutes a nuisance which would
ground an action for ejectment. The evidence clearly establishes that the
parking of cars and vans which obstruct the access to the plaintiff's
residence and the abuse and intimidation directed at the plaintiff are
certainly not isolated incidents. This has taken place over a period of about
three months, inevitably causing considerable inconvenience and discomfort to
the plaintiff. I accordingly hold that the claim for ejectment from the
premises in suit is well founded, as submitted by Mr. Premadasa, counsel for
the plaintiff-respondent.



There remains for me to consider the second question on which special leave to
appeal was granted by this Court. Mr. Goonesekera is correct in his submission
that the trial judge had erred in granting damages as prayed for in the
plaint. The damages must be ascertained with reference to the authorized rent
which is Rs. 417/25 per month (vide paragraph 2 of the plaint). The plaintiff
is therefore entitled only to a sum of Rs. 417/25 per month from 1st February
1980 until she is restored to vacant possession of the premises and not the
amount prayed for in paragraph (b) of the prayer to the plaint. Subject to the
aforesaid variation in the judgment and decree of the District Court, the
appeal is dismissed with costs fixed at Rs.1000/



**KULATUNGA, J.** \- I agree.



**RAMANATHAN, J.** \- I agree.



Decree varied.

And appeal dismissed.

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/1994/31.html_  

