##  Jayasinghe v. The National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical Engineering
(Nifne) and Others - SLR - 277, Vol 1 of 2002 [2002] LKSC 31; (2002) 1 Sri LR
277 (20 March 2002)

**277**

**JAYASINGHE  
v.  
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FISHERIES AND NAUTICAL  
ENGINEERING (NIFNE) AND OTHERS**

SUPREME COURT  
GUNASEKERA, J.,  
EDUSSURIYA, J. AND  
YAPA, J.  
SC APPLICATION NO. 692/2000  
NOVEMBER 23, 2001 AND  
DECEMBER 11, 2001  
  
_Fundamental rights - Article 126 (2) of the Constitution - Time bar -
Knowledge of the wrong complained of may determine whether the claim is time-
barred -Lack of uberima fides a ground for rejecting a claim.  
  
_In his application filed on 15. 12. 2000 the petitioner complained that his
right to equality under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution had been infringed
by the appointment of the 18th respondent as the Director-General of the
National Institute of Fisheries and Nautical Engineering (the NIFNE). The 2nd
respondent (Minister of Fisheries and Aquatic Resource Development) made the
impunged appointment t>y his letter dated 14. 01. 2000. The 18th respondent
assumed duties and signed the attendance register as Director-General NIFNE
whilst the petitioner signed the same register immediately next to the 18th
respondent in the capacity of Director NIFNE. There was also a letter dated
10. 07. 2000 written by the petitioner to the 2nd respondent (Minister) which
shows that the petitioner was aware of the 18th respondent's appointment as
DGM; a letter dated 30\. 10. 2000 addressed to the petitioner by the 18th
respondent signing as DGM - NIFNE; and the reply dated 01. 11. 2000 addressed
to the 18th respondent as DGM \- NIFNE by the petitioner. The respondents also
produced evidence of CA application No. 1569/ 2000 made to the Court of Appeal
by the petitioner seeking relief in the same motion. Except for the letter
dated 01. 11. 2000 addressed by the petitioner to the 18th respondent all the
other documents were produced by the respondents.  
  
**Held :  
**  
(1.) The documentary evidence showed that several months prior to 15. 12. 2000
the date of the petitioner's application, he was aware of the appointment of
the 18th respondent as the DGM of NIFNE. Hence, the petitioner's application
was time-barred.

**278**

(2) All the documents on which the respondents relied to support their
pre­liminary objection to the application, except one, were produced by the
respondents. The petitioner suppressed those documents and the fact that he
had made an application to the Court of Appeal seeking relief in the same
matter and thereby misled the Court. The petitioner's conduct lacked uberrima
tides. The application has to be rejected in limine on this ground as well.
This is a principle which applies to cases coming up before the Court in writ
cases as well as in injunction applications and even in admiralty cases. In
such cases relief will be refused in limine without hearing the case on the
merits even where the decision is alleged to have been made without
jurisdiction. The same principle applies to applications under Article 126
(2).  
  
**Cases referred to :  
**  
1. _Gamaethige v. Siriwardena and Others -_ (1980) 1 Sri LR 384 at 397.  
  
2. _Blanca Diamonds (Pvt) Limited v. Wilfred Van Els and Two Others -_ (1997) 1 Sri LR 360.  
  
3. _Rex v. Kensington Income Tax Commissioners; Princess Edmond De Polignac Ex Parte_ \- (1917) 1 KB 486.  
  
4 _. Castelli v. Cook -_ (1948) 7 HARE 89 at 94.  
  
**APPLICATION** for relief for infringement of fundamental rights -
Preliminary objection  
  
_Elmo Perera_ for petitioner.  
  
_D. S. Wijesinghe, PC_ for 1st, 4th and 18th respondents.  
  
S. Rajaratnam, Senior State Counsel for 2nd, 3rd, 12th, 13th, 14th and 15th
respondents.

_Cur. adv. vult._

March 20, 2002  
  
**HECTOR YAPA, J.  
**  
The petitioner in this application has sought a declaration that, his
fundamental right to equality under Article 12 (1) of the Constitution has
been infringed by some of the respondents, in appointing the 18th respondent
as the Director-General of the National Institute of Fish­eries and Nautical
Engineering (hereinafter referred to as the NIFNE).

**279**

Hence, the petitioner has moved this Court to set aside the said appointment
of the 18th respondent, and further for a direction on the respondents to
appoint the petitioner to the post of Director-General of NIFNE. The
petitioner presently is the Director of NIFNE. The 1st respondent to this
application is the NIFNE established by Act, No. 36 of 1999. The 2nd and 3rd
respondents are the Minister and the Secretary respectively, of the Ministry
of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Development (hereinafter referred to as
Ministry of Fish­eries). The 4th to 17th respondents are the Chairman and
Members respectively, of the Council of NIFNE. The 18th respondent is the
Director-General of NIFNE, whose appointment has been challenged by the
petitioner in this application.  
  
At the commencement of the hearing, learned Senior State Counsel raised two
preliminary objections :  
  
(a) That this application was out of time in terms of article 20 126 (2) of
the Constitution, in that it had been filed more than one month after the
infringement complained of;  
  
(b) That the petitioner was guilty of suppressing material facts from Court.  
  
Learned Senior State Counsel therefore contended that the petitioner's
application should be dismissed without going into the merits of the case.
Learned President's Counsel who appeared for the 01st, 04th and 18th
respondents associated himself in supporting the said preliminary objections.
Accordingly, counsel were permitted to make oral and written submissions on
the preliminary objections,  and it is proposed to make a ruling on them in
this judgment.  
  
After hearing Counsel on both sides, it became clear that the question of
compliance with Article 126 (2) depended on whether the infringement
complained of occurred within one month prior to 15. 12. 2000, which is the
date of filing this application or whether the infringement took place several
months before 15\. 12. 2000.

**280**

As submitted by counsel for the respondents, on 14. 01. 2000 the Governing
Council of NIFNE decided to recommend to the 2nd respondent (Minister of
Fisheries) the appointment of the 18th respond­ent as Director-General of
NIFNE. (vide 1 R5 and 1 R5A). By letter dated 14\. 01. 2000 the 2nd respondent
acting in terms of section 14 of the National Institute of Fisheries and
Nautical Engineering Act, No. 36 of 1999, appointed the 18th respondent as the
Director-General of NIFNE (vide 1 R6). As referred to above the petitioner's
application to this Court was filed on 15. 12. 2000. In support of the
contention that the petitioner was aware of the appointment of the18th
respondent as Director-General NIFNE several months before this application
was filed, learned Counsel for the respondents referred to the following
documents :  
  
(a) The document marked 1 R10 is a certificate issued by  NIFNE, to a
candidate who had successfully completed a course of training in Fibre Glass
Technology during the period 09. 08. 2000 to 22. 08. 2000. The petitioner had
signed this certificate in his capacity as the Director NIFNE, while the 18th
respondent had signed it in his capacity as the Director-General NIFNE.
Assuming that this certificate came to be signed shortly after the course of
training, then it is very likely that the petitioner was aware that the 18th
respondent was functioning as the Director-General NIFNE, at least three
months before the filing of this application,  
  
(b) A page from the attendance register (copy) maintained at the NIFNE had
been produced marked 1R 10A. This docu­ment reveals the fact that the 18th
respondent had signed the attendance register in his capacity as the Director-
General, whereas the petitioner had signed it immediately thereafter in his
capacity as the Director NIFNE. Even though this page from the attendance
register does not disclose the date of signing, it would be useful to show
that the 18th respondent and the petitioner had been functioning as Director-
General and Director of NIFNE, respectively.

**281**

(c) The document marked 3 R5, was a letter dated 30. 10. 2000, written by the
18 respondent to the petitioner.  
  
This letter had drawn the attention of the petitioner to the 3rd respondent's
letter of 23. 10. 2000, (vide 3 R4) sent to the 18th respondent requesting the
release of the petitioner to the Ministry of Fisheries with effect from 01.
11. 2000\. It is important to note that the 18th respondent had written 3 R5
to the petitioner in his capacity as Director-General NIFNE on 30. 10. 2000,
which is about 45 days before the petitioner filed this application.  
  
(d) The document produced by the petitioner marked P33, was so a letter dated
01\. 11. 2000 written by the petitioner in his capacity as Director, which had
been sent to the 18th respondent in his capacity as Director-General NIFNE. In
P33, the petitioner had expressed his unwillingness to be attached to the
Ministry of Fisheries. It would appear that P33 was in response to the earlier
letter of the 18th respond­ent dated 30. 10. 2000 (3 R5). Mention must be made
here that the petitioner had addressed P33 to the 18th respondent in his
capacity as Director-General NIFNE, one and a half months before he filed this
application challenging the 18th  respondent's appointment as Director-General
NIFNE.  
  
(e) Another important document that was referred to by counsel was a letter
marked 1 R8. It was a letter dated 10. 07. 2000, written by the petitioner to
the 2nd respondent, (Minister) requesting him to consider appointing him
(petitioner) to a post of Director or any other suitable post in the Ministry
of Fisheries. The petitioner had advisedly withheld this letter from Court as
it would operate adversely to his interest. As submitted by learned counsel
for the respondents, some of the matters referred to in this letter clearly
showed that the petitioner was aware at the time he wrote 1 R8, that the 18th
respondent was functioning as the Director-General

**282**

NIFNE. To explain this point counsel referred to the following passage from 1
R8, wherein he states,-infer alia : "It is evident from the fact that the
present Director-General of the new institute is held responsible for all the
financial and administrative duties that I carried out before . . ." (vide 1
R8 page 2 para 3). We now know, that the 18th respondent had been functioning
as the Director-General NIFNE since 14. 01. 2000\. Therefore, when the
petitioner referred to the no "present Director-General of the new institute"
in his letter 1 R8, he was clearly referring to the 18th respondent and no
other. Thus, it was a fact within the knowledge of the petitioner, when he
wrote 1 R8 on 10. 07. 2000, which is five months prior to the filing of this
application.  
  
Therefore, several supporting documents referred to by counsel for the
respondents, clearly establish the fact that the 18th respondent had been
appointed Director-General in terms of the National Institute of Fisheries and
Nautical Engineering Act, and that he had been functioning in that capacity.
It would appear that a large number of official letters including some of the
letters sent to the petitioner, had been signed by the 18th respondent in his
capacity as Director-General NIFNE. It is difficult to believe as the
petitioner tried to make out, that the 18th respondent would have signed such
letters as Director-General NIFNE without a proper appointment. It is to be
observed that the 18th respondent had written the letter marked 1 R9 to the
petitioner, as the Director-General NIFNE, as far back as 17. 01. 2000. The
two documents marked 1 R10 (certificate) and 1 R 10A (Attendance Register)
support the position that the petitioner and the 18th respondent had placed
their signatures on them, as 130 Director and Director-General NIFNE,
respectively. Besides the petitioner had admitted in his petition that he
received the 18th respondent's letter of 30\. 10. 2000, (3 R5) which he had
marked as P32. (vide para 29 of his petition). He had also admitted writing
the letter dated 01. 11. 2000 marked P33, addressed to the Director-General
NIFNE who is the 18th respondent in this application, (vide __

**283**

para 31 of his petition). Further, in para 27 of his petition, he had stated
that the 18th respondent purported to function as Director-General and he
(petitioner) sought clarification from the 3rd respond­ent. Therefore, on his
own admission, it would appear that the petitioner's  cause of complaint arose
several months prior to 15. 12. 2000.  
  
In these circumstances, the contention of learned Counsel for the petitioner,
that he (petitioner) was not aware of the appointment of the 18th respondent
as Director-General NIFNE is untenable. Further, his submission that in any
event, 18th respondent's appointment as Director-General could not have been
made, since cadre provisions (P29) and salary scales (P30) for NIFNE were
approved very much later is not an acceptable proposition, for the reason that
such approval can always be obtained later. Besides, petitioner's own conduct
supports the position that he knew or should have known, that the 18th
respondent had been functioning as Director-General NIFNE since 14. 01. 2000.  
  
Article 126 (1) of the Constitution makes provision for a person to obtain
redress from the Supreme Court not only when there is an infringement but also
when there is an imminent infringement of any fundamental right. As Fernando,
J. stated in the case of Gamaethige v. Siriwardena and Others (1) . . ." the
remedy under Article 126 must be availed of at the earliest possible
opportunity, within the prescribed time, and if not so availed of, the remedy
ceases to be available". Besides, it has been held in several cases that the
provisions of Article 126 (2) are mandatory. Vide Gamaethige v. Siriwardena
and Others (supra). In the same case Fernando, J. further expressed the view
that . . ." While the time is mandatory, in exceptional cases, on the
application of the principle lex non cogit ad impossibilia, if there is no
lapse, fault or delay on the part of the petitioner, this Court has a
discretion to entertain an application made out of time". However, in the
present case, the petitioner had no such reasons for any delay. In fact, when
the petitioner wrote 1 R8 to the 2nd respondent on 10. 07. 2000, he knew that
18th respondent was functioning as

**284**

Director-General NIFNE. Further, he knew very well that he could not 170 make
a claim to be the Director-General NIFNE. It is made clear from his letter 1
R8, when he stated as follows : . . . "The cadre proposed for the new
institute does not include a post corresponding to my services as the Director
of the National Institute of Fisheries Training" . . . Hence, it is abundantly
clear that the petitioner's application is out of time.  
  
The preliminary objection must therefore be upheld, and the petition has to be
dismissed on this ground.  
  
The allegation that the petitioner was guilty of suppressing material facts
from Court is two-fold. Firstly, the petitioner had withheld from Court the
letter written by him to the 2nd respondent on 10. 07. 2000 marked 1 R8,
seeking a post of Director in the Ministry of Fisheries. Secondly, the
petitioner had withheld from Court the fact that he had filed an application
in the Court of Appeal seeking identical relief. Some of the contents in the
letter 1 R8, explain very clearly that the petitioner had no intention of
making a claim to be the Director-General NIFNE. He also knew that the
Director-General (18th respondent) was functioning. It was, therefore,
understandable, why the petitioner in his letter 1 R8 had stated as follows :  
  
". . . If not for the fact that I had to go on compulsory retirement on 20th
December, 1999, as a result of establishing the National Institute of
Fisheries and Nautical Engineering. I would have continued in a senior
management position in the Government services for a further period of 16
years prior to my legitimate retirement age.  
  
The Act No. 36 of 1999 provides to obtain a post in the newly established
Institute and it also emphasizes that the post in the Institute should not be
at a lower level to the then incumbent post. Unfortunately, such a vacant post
is not available in the new institute where the institute can appoint me to
perform such duties

**285**

 which I carried out earlier. The cadre proposed for the new institute does
not include a post corresponding to my services as the Director of the
National Institute of Fisheries Training. It is evident from the fact that the
present Director-General of the new institute is held responsible for all the
financial and administrative duties that I carried out before ... As mentioned
previously, had I been able to function as a Director in the Ministry, my
chances to carry on for another 18 years until my retirement would have
contributed much to my professional and personal life. This would have helped
me much in economic terms in addition to my privilege to buy the official
vehicle that I had been using. ... I kindly request you to consider appointing
me to your Ministry as a Director relevant to my field of study or any other
suitable post to provide for my seniority and job satisfaction."  
  
It was consequent to the request made in 1 R8, that steps were taken to
release the petitioner from NIFNE to the Ministry of Fisheries. The two
letters marked 3 R4 and 3 R5 were written to accommodate the request made in 1
R8. In fact, the 2nd respondent (Minister) in his affidavit had confirmed the
position that on receiving such a request from the petitioner, arrangements
were made to have him  released to the Ministry of Fisheries. It would appear
that some time later, the petitioner had changed his mind and refused to be
attached to the Ministry of Fisheries by writing his letter dated 01. 11. 2000
(P33). As submitted by counsel for the respondents. It would appear that the
petitioner sought to suppress 1 R8 to mislead Court. Firstly, by withholding 1
R8 from Court, the petitioner had tried to show that his transfer to the
Ministry of Fisheries was the work of some of the respondents to harass him
and to keep him out of NIFNE. Secondly, by withholding 1 R8 from Court, the
petitioner had attempted to avoid his application to this Court being declared
out of time.  
  
Similarly, the petitioner's failure to disclose to this Court, the fact that
he had filed an application in the Court of Appeal seeking identical

**286**

relief (a fact known to him when he supported this application in the Supreme
Court) is a serious suppression of a material fact. The 4th respondent had
annexed to his affidavit a copy of the objections filed in the Court of Appeal
case No. CA 1569/2000 to prove this point. Thus, it is manifestly clear that
the petitioner had failed to carry out an imperative legal duty and obligation
to Court.  
  
Therefore, the conduct of the petitioner in withholding these material facts
from Court shows a lack of uberrima fides on the part of the petitioner. When
a litigant makes an application to this Court seeking relief, he enters into a
contractual obligation with the Court. This contractual relationship requires
the petitioner to disclose all material facts correctly and frankly. This is a
duty cast on any litigant seeking relief from Court. In the case of Blanca
Diamonds (Pvt) Limited v. Wilfred Van Els and Two Others (2) the Court
highlighted this contractual obligation which a party enters into with the
Court, requiring the need to disclose uberrima fides and disclose all material
facts fully and frankly to Court. Any party who misleads Court, misrepresents
facts to Court or utters falsehood in Court will not be entitled to obtain
redress from Court. It is a well-established proposition of law, since Courts
expect a party seeking relief to be frank and open with the Court. This
principle has been applied even in an application that has been made to
challenge a decision made without jurisdiction. Further, Court will not go
into the merits of the case in such situations. Vide Rex v. Kensington Income
Tax Commissioners; Princess Edmond De Polignac.(3) This principle of uberrima
fides has been applied not only in writ cases where discretionary relief is
sought from Court, but even in Admiralty cases involving the grant of
injunctions. In the case of Castelli v. Cook,(4) the Vice-Chancellor Sir this
proposition and stated as follows :  
  
"The rule, as I understand it, is this : that a plaintiff applying ex parte
comes under a contract with the Court. He will state the whole case fully and
fairly to the Court. If he fails to do that, and the Court finds, when the
other party applies to dissolve the

**287**

injunction that any material fact has been suppressed or not properly brought
forward, the plaintiff is told that the Court will not decide on the merits,
and that, as he has broken faith with the Court, the injunction must go."  
  
It would appear, therefore, that the petitioner in this application had
wilfully suppressed material facts from Court by withholding his own letter 1
R8 dated 10\. 07. 2000 and by non-disciosure of his application to the Court
of Appeal seeking identical relief.  
  
In the result,1 on both these aforesaid points, I hold that the petitioner has
failed to make a full and frank disclosure of all material facts. Hence, by
this conduct the petitioner had violated his contractual obligation to Court
to disclose uberrima fides.  
  
In the circumstances, I uphold the two preliminary objections raised in this
application. Accordingly, I proceed to dismiss and reject the 280 application
in limine with costs fixed at Rs. 10,000.  
  
  
**GUNASEKERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
**EDUSSURIYA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_**Application rejected.  
 **_

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2002/31.html_  

