##  Nadarajah v. Ghani - SLR - 301, Vol 1 of 2001 [2001] LKSC 32; (2001) 1 Sri
LR 301 (24 May 2001)

**301**

**NADARAJAH  
v.  
GHANI**

SUPREME COURT  
S.N. SILVA, C.J.  
P.R.P. PERERA, J. AND  
BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
SC APPEAL NO. 25/98  
SC (SPL) LA NO. 138/97  
C.A. NO. 509/92(F)  
D.C. COLOMBO NO. 15045/L  
15TH JANUARY, 2001  
  
_Vindicatory suit - Lex Commissoria and Pactum Commissorium - Conditional
transfer or mortgage.  
  
_The plaintiff - respondent ("the plaintiff") instituted action in the
District Court for declaration of title and ejectment of the defendant-
appellant ("The defendant") from the property in question. The District Judge
dismissed the action. The Court of Appeal allowed the plaintiff's appeal.  
  
The original owner of the property, one Gamini Perera, transferred the
property to Ghani, the plaintiff by Deed of Transfer No. 2087 dated 17.08.1979
attested by M.Y.M. Nizar, Notary Public (P1), the plaintiff's Notary, for the
consideration of Rs. 300,000/- out of which only Rs.50,000was paid. By Deed
No. 2088 of 17.08.1979 attested by M.Y.M. Nizar, Notary Public (P2), it was
stipulated that if the balance sum of Rs.250,000was not paid to the vendor on
or before 31.10.1979, title would revert to the vendor, and the sum of Rs.
50,000% paid on P1 would be forfeited by the vendor and the plaintiff shall
not be entitled to claim the same.  
  
The plaintiff also executed a Mortgage Bond No. 788 dated 17.8.1979 in favour
of the vendor attested by D.J.B. Fernando, Notary Public (P3), the vendor's
Notary, to secure payment of the balance consideration on P1.  
  
The plaintiff failed to pay the balance sum of Rs. 250,000% before 31.10.1979.
Thereafter the vendor transferred the property to one D.H.R de Silva by Deed
of Transfer No. 438 dated 7.12.1982, attested by S. Kumarasinghe, Notary
Public (D1). The said D.H.R. de Silva died. His estate was adminstered in D.C.
Colombo case No. 3047/T and the property was transferred to the defendant by
the widow by Deed of Transfer No. 92 dated 28.10.1987 attested by T.
Kanagasabai, Notary Public (D2).

**302**

It was argued for the plaintiff before the Supreme Court that P2 cannot be
regarded as a lex commissoria added to P1 but it was the mortgagee under P3
who could become the owner if the mortgagor (the plaintiff) failed to pay the
debt secured by P3.  
  
**Held :  
  
**P1 and P2 should be read together; and the stipulations in P2 would operate
as to the payment of the balance consideration and the consequence of the
default be valid as lex commissoria.  
  
_Per_ Bandaranayake, J.  
  
"it appears that P3 was attested by the seller's notary out of an abundance of
caution to strengthen the position of the seller. It certainly cannot detract
from the reversion of the title to the seller upon the failure to pay the
balance consideration as stated above."  
  
**Cases referred to :  
  
**1\. _Dingiri Naide v. Kirimenike_ (1955) 57 NLR 559  
  
2\. _Manks v. Whiteley_ (1912) 1 Ch. 735  
  
3\. _W.D. Baiya v. K.D.A. Karunasekera_ (1954) 56 NLR 265  
  
4\. _Macedo v. Strand_ (1922) AC 330 at 337  
  
5\. _Thambipillai v. Muthucumarasamy_ (1955) 58 NLR 387  
  
**APPEAL** from the judgement of the Court of Appeal.  
  
_P.A.D. Samarasekera, PC_ with _Dr. Jayantha de Almeida Gunaratne_ for
appellant  
  
_Faisz Musthapha, PC_ with _G. Jayakody_ for respondent.

_Cur. adv. vult._

**Editor's Note  
  
**Vide Weeramantry (1967) Vol. 11 p. 727 foot note 65 where the author defines
"pactum commissorium" as an agreement, annexed to a mortgage, for forfeiture
in the event of non-payment.

**303**

May 24, 2001  
  
**SHIRANI  A.  BANDARANAYAKE, J.  
  
**The Plaintiff-Appellant-Respondent (hereinafter referred to as respondent)
instituted action in the District Court, Colombo for a declaration of title
and to eject the Defendant-Respondent Appellant (hereinafter referred to as
the appellant) from the property in question. The Additional District Judge,
Colombo by his order dated 12.10.1992 dismissed the respondent's action. The
respondent appealed to the Court of Appeal and by judgment dated 14.03.1997,
the Court of Appeal allowed the respondent's appeal. The appellant appealed to
this Court and Special Leave to Appeal was granted on the question "whether
the Court of Appeal erred in holding that the agreement 'P2' was illegal."  
  
The facts of this case are briefly as follows:  
  
The original owner of the property, one Gamini Perera Abeywardene, transferred
the property to the respondent by Deed of Transfer No. 2087 dated 17.08.1979,
attested by M.YM.N. Nizar, Notary Public, for the consideration of Rs.
300,000/- (P1). The respondent paid a sum of Rs. 50,000/and executed a
Mortgage Bond No. 788 dated 17.08.1979 attested by D.J.B. Fernando, Notary
Public (P3). The parties also entered into a notarial agreement No. 2088 dated
17.08.1979 attested N.S.M. Nizar, Notary Public which contained the following
stipulations (P2) :  
  
1\. if the respondent fails to pay the said balance sum of Rs. 250,000/- due
to the vendor on P1 on or before 31.10.1979, the said transfer effected by P1
would be invalidated and title would revert to the vendor ;  
  
ii. the sum of Rs. 50,000% paid by the respondent to the vendor would be
forfeited by the vendor and the purchaser shall not be entitled to claim and
recover same.

**304**

The respondent failed to pay the said sum of Rs.250,000/before 31.10.1979 as
stipulated in P2. Thereafter the vendor transferred the property to one D.H.R.
de Silva by Deed of Transfer No. 438 dated 07.12.1982 attested by S.
Kumarasinghe, Notary Public (D1). The said D.H.R de Silva died thereafter. His
Estate was administered in the District Court, Colombo (Testamentary Case No.
3047) and the property was transferred to the appellant by the widow, by Deed
of Transfer No. 92 dated 28.10.1987 attested by T Kanagasabai, Notary Public
(D2).  
  
The only question that arises in this matter is whether the Court of Appeal
erred in law in not considering or failing to consider, the principle of lex
commissoria, when it applied the principle of pactum commisorium.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the respondent contended that the Deed of
Transfer marked P I is an absolute and an unconditional sale which transferred
the title of the property by the seller to the buyer. He took up the position
that P 1 was attested by the buyer's Notary whereas P3 was attested by the
seller's Notary. In these circumstances, learned President's Counsel contended
that the agreement P2 cannot in law be regarded as a lex commissoria, as the
pact was not added to or included in the contract of sale (P1). His position
is that P1 does not make any reference to P2 or any intention of entering into
an agreement in the nature of P2. Further, learned President's Counsel
submitted that the attestation clause of P 1 refers to P3 by which the balance
purchase price was secured and the stipulations in P2 provide that the
mortgagee could become the owner of the mortgaged property if the mortgagor
fails to pay the debt mentioned in P3. Therefore the position of the
respondent is that, P2 is a separate agreement which has no status in law as
It is illegal and the principle of lex commissoria does not apply in this
situation. Learned President's Counsel for the respondent relied on Sir J. W
Wessels, (The Law of Contract in South Africa, Edited by A.A. Roberts,

**305**

2nd edition, Butter worth (Africa) pp. 432-433) who had stated that, "The lex
commissoria is a pact added to a contract of sale, to the effect that unless
the price is paid within a certain time, it is to be considered as if there
had been no sale."  
  
He also cited Wille in Principles of South African Law, (5th edition, p. 377)
where it was stated that,  
  
"Where the time for performance has been fixed in the contract, the debtor in
mora if he fails to perform his obligation by such time, but the creditor is
not entitled to cancellation of the contract unless-  
  
i. there was an express agreement between the parties that default of
performance by the day fixed would entitle the other party to cancel the
contract. Such an agreement when annexed to a contract of sale or of lease is
known as the lex commissoria."  
  
Based on the above authorities, learned President's Counsel for the respondent
contended that the essence of the principle lex commissoria is that the
'commissary pact should be a term in the agreement of sale or annexed
thereto.' His position is that deed No. 2088 (P2) is a separate agreement
which has no status in law as it is illegal and therefore the principle of lex
commissoria does not apply.  
  
Learned President's Counsel for the appellant submitted that P1, P2 and P3
must be regarded as one transaction in order to ascertain its true nature.
According to him all three (3) deeds were executed with the full knowledge of
parties and in terms of the requirements of law. He cited _Dingiri Naide v.
Kirimenike_ (1) where it was held, quoting _Fletcher-Moulton, L.J_. in _Manks
v. Whiteley_ (2) that,

**306**

"Where several deeds form part of one transaction and are contemporaneously
executed they have the same effect for all purposes such as are relevant to
this case as if they were one deed. Each is executed on the faith of all
others being executed also and is intended to speak only as part of the one
transaction and if one is seeking to make equities apply to the parties, they
must be equities arising out of the transaction as a whole."  
  
Lex commissoria is 'a pact annexed to a purchase at the time it is contracted
to the effect that, unless the price be paid at a certain time, the thing
shall be considered as unbought **. . . .** [It] is valid even though it
provides that the seller may keep any portion of the purchase price received
as a penalty for the buyer's default' (C.G. Weeramantry, The Law of Contracts,
Volume II, 1967, p. 918).  
  
Deeds No. 2087 (P1) and No. 2088 (P2) were attested by M.Y.M. Nizar, Notary
Public on 17.08.1979. The Mortgage Bond No. 788 (P3) was also executed on the
same day, but by M.D. J.P. Fernando, Notary Public. Deed No. 2087 (P 1)
contains elements of a sale, but it cannot be contended that title was
absolutely and unconditionally transferred thereby from the seller to the
buyer, since only Rs. 50,000/- of the total consideration of Rs. 300,000/- was
paid at the time of its execution. Consideration is the vital element in the
sale and the omission in P1 to provide for the terms and conditions for the
payment of the balance consideration is supplied by Deed P2, executed on the
same day. Hence, Deeds P1 and P2 should be read together. Stipulations (1) and
(ii) contained in P2, set out above, would be operative as to the payment of
the balance consideration and the consequence of default be valid as Iex
commissoria. The mortgage P3 only creates a security for the discharge of the
obligation to pay the balance consideration. It has no bearing on the title to
the property. When P 1 becomes invalidated in terms of P2, upon the failure to
pay the balance consideration, title would revert to the vendor and the
mortgage P3 would ipso

**307**

facto cease to be operative as security. It appears that P3 was attested by
the seller's Notary out of an abundance of caution to strengthen the position
of the seller. It certainly cannot detract from the reversion of the title to
the seller upon the failure to pay the balance consideration as stated above.  
  
In _W.D. Baiya v. K.D.A. Karunasekera_ (3) it was held, quoting _Macedo v.
Strand_ (4) that,  
  
"A deed may be delivered on a condition that it is not to be operative until
some event happens or some condition is performed. In such a case it is until
then an escrow only."  
  
In _Thambipillai v. Muthucumarasamy_ (5) referring to a sale subject to
conditions, it was stated that,  
  
"Neither of these conditions is in any way inconsistent with the incidence of
a contract of sale (as opposed to a contract of mortgage). The first condition
constituted a pactum de retrovendendo' which is well recognised in Roman-Dutch
Law. Voet 18-3-7. The second condition represents an agreed and perfectly
permissible departure from the normal right of a purchaser to obtain immediate
possession of the property sold to him."  
  
Explaining the meaning of 'lex commissoria' Wille stated that,  
  
" **. . .** the creditor may cancel the contract if 'time was of the essence
of the contract', or was made so by a notice of rescission. Time is of the
essence when the parties expressly or impliedly agreed that default of
performance by the day fixed would entitle the other party to cancel the
contract. An express clause to this effect is known as a lex commissoria."
(Principles of South African Law, 8th edition, p. 506)

**308**

When the respondent failed to pay the balance purchase sum of Rs. 250,000% on
or before 31.10.1979 as stipulated in PI, the transfer became invalid and the
title reverted to the vendor. The vendor sold it to D.H.R. de Silva (D 1) and
upon his death his Estate was administered and the property in question, was
transferred to the appellant by D.H.R. de Silva's widow (D2), who is now
vested with title.  
  
The deed marked P2 stipulated that the sum of Rs.50,000paid by the respondent
to the vendor would be forfeited by the vendor in the event the respondent
failed to pay the balance purchase price of Rs. 250,000% on or before
31.10.1979. As mentioned earlier the respondent failed to pay the balance
purchase price as stipulated. In this kind of a situation, Wille has pointed
out that,  
  
A lex commissoria is valid even though it provides that the seller may keep
any portion of the purchase price that he has received as a penalty for the
purchaser's default, in which case, however, the latter may retain the fruits
of the property in the intervening period. The fact that a forfeiture clause
contains penal claims in addition to a lex commissoria does not prevent the
seller from enforcing the claims under the lex only." (Principles of South
African Law, 5th edition, 316)  
  
In the circumstances, the respondent is not entitled to recover the said sum
of Rs. 50,000% and the clause regarding the forfeiture of the money is valid.
The appeal is accordingly allowed, the judgment of the Court of Appeal dated
14.03.1997 is set aside and the judgment of the District Court, Colombo dated
12.10.1992 is affirmed. There will be no costs.  
  
**S.N. SILVA, C.J. -** I  agree.  
  
**PERERA, J. -** I agree.  
  
_Appeal allowed._

* * *

**CommonLII:** [Copyright Policy](/commonlii/copyright.html) **|**
[Disclaimers](/commonlii/disclaimers.html) **|** [Privacy
Policy](/commonlii/privacy.html) **|** [Feedback](/commonlii/feedback.html)  
URL: _http://www.commonlii.org/lk/cases/LKSC/2001/32.html_  

